FOUR SERMONS WHEREIN IS MADE A FOVRE-FOLD DISCOVERY:

viz. of Ecclesiastical selfe-seeking. A Wisemans carriage in evil times. The
benefit of Christian patience. The right nature and temper of the spirit of the
Gospel.

By EDWARD SYMONS, Minister of Ray^e in Essex.

1 COR. 4. 2. It is required in Stewards, that a man be found faithful.

ROMANS 14. 12. Every one of us shall give account of himself to God.

LONDON, Printed by R. C. for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at his shop, at
the sign of the Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard. 1642.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND TRVLY LOYAL ARTHVR LORD CAPEL, Baron of HADDAM,
my singular good Lord and Patron.
My Lord,
I Confess it might cause wonder that so weak, and worthless a creature as I
am, should expose any thing to public view, did not the custom of the present
tim^^, plead a certain liberty of the Press, even for weakness it self.

Three special reasons are usually given of div^^lging Sermons in this kind:
First, to help and benefit Gods Church and people: Secondly, to manifest that
inward respect, which the publishers owe to those Honorable or Worshipful
persons to whom they are dedicated and presented. Thirdly, to vindicate the
truth against the mistakes and traducements of ignorant or ill-affected
hearers: and truly (my Lord) these are the reasons that have imboldened my
weakness thus to discover it self, in thrusting these following Sermons from
my private Cell.

1. I know that the wise God does sometime surther the greatest affairs of his
Church, by the poor endeavors of his meanest servants; and at this time, one
of the great matters in hand, is to reform the Clergy, and to constitute such
a Ministry, as should only seek the things of Jesus Christ; and he that knows
all hearts can witness, that mine aim when I preached the first of these, did
tend to that thing, and I now conceived that (with Gods providence and
blessing) the samemight (happily) at this present, afford some under service
toward that so pious and necessary a work.

And mine endeavors in the second of these were, by persuasions out of Gods
book, to tie peoples tongues to their good behaviors, (as I apprehended did
become a Minister of Christ to do) in those evil and barking days, and the
conditions of many are still the same, they take and keep to themselves, I
know not what strange liberty of bold speaking, whereby these unsettled times
are likely to prove exceeding miserable; for evil tongues as they discover
evil men, so they do make evil times, and therefore I conceived that that
Sermon also, if it come into some hands (and God please to say Amen to my
prayers with it) may not altogether at this present prove unprofitable, or
unseasonable

And in third, mine aims were, when I first uttered it, to move my
fellow members and sufferers in the cause of Christ, to make use of that
sovereign preservative of patience, which experience has always found to be
so truly effectual against the heavy blows of potent hands, and the smarting
wounds of poisonous tongues: And I dare boldly say, that while sin and sorrow
has a being upon earth, it will never be improper to hear or read a discourse
of that subject; for we have all, at all times, yea, at this time, need of
patience; nay, I dare add further, that even your Lordship in the midst of your
Honors, (since you have resolved to follow only the dictate of Gods word, and
conscience, in your walk, and way) while men's tongues run at liberty, will
have occasions sometimes to think upon it.

And in the last of these, I have (though briefly) handled a matter, most
needful also (I am sure) for this present age to be acquainted with: it is the
right temper and nature of the spirit of the Gospel: I preached of it only to
mine own Parish, but I pray for the enlargement of it in all places, and I
know your Honor and all others, that have religious and loyal hearts, truly
aiming at the Gospels glory, and the Kingdoms peace, do in like sort desire
the same: to the end therefore that I might be a mean to awaken others more
able, of my profession, to make more ample discoveries of it, as their duty to
God, and their Prince commands, and these times require, I have been here bold
to publish my notes upon that subject also: And this (my Lord) is my first
reason.

2. My second is, to manifect by this occasion to the worlds eye, that true
inward respect, which I acknowledge of long time, to have duly owed unto your
Lordship; your Noble Grandfather of pious memory, being quickened by your most
friendly solicitation, did freely bestow upon m^, that place of maintenance,
wherein (as yet) I have my dwelling, upon this sole condition and charge, that I
should truly labor to win souls to Christ: which godly care of his, as it
spoke him a true friend of Christ, so it may expose him for a pattern to all
Patrons, and your Lordship herein is his true successor: so that if these my
first fruits of this nature, were of any worth, I am bound by a double tie to
Dedicate them only to your self, as to mine ancient Noble friend, as to my
present Honorable Patron.

But (my Lord) there is yet another reason that does challenge this duty from
me of manifesting my self unto the world to be your servant, and that is this,

When I was questioned, and much menaced for the first of these Sermons, and
did upon that occasion (to the end you might not be mistaken in the cause of my
troubles) present a copy of it to your view: you were pleased upon the reading
thereof, to proffer your self like a true Patron, to be my defender in that
business; and you would also make use of all the friends you had in England,
(that was your own expression) in my behalf, rather then I for that matter
should suffer damage.

Truly (my Lord) the consideration of that your Nobleness, in being so freely
ready to engage your self in the cause of Christ, for me so m^ane a person,
the times being then so conflicting, has more deeply captivated my heart to
your Lordships service, then my hand or tongue is able to express: yea, should
some crafty Zibaes (unhappily) so far prevail (as I hope they never shall)
against your poor Mephibosheth, as to move my Lord, in aftertimes, to think
amiss of his servant, and as David did, to judge him unworthy of former
favor, yet I would have all men know, that of necessity I am bound, and
therefore must, and shall, from the remembrance of that your goodness, for
ever honor you.

And (my Lord) whither now should that poor wounded Sermon retire her self,
at this her second and more public appearance? whither should she fly for
shelter? but only to that wing which did not disdain of its own accord, at
her first flight, to open it self unto her in the midst of dangers: And
behold (my Lord) she comes unto you, and your free bounty has made her bold,
to bring three of her sisters with her, who have all in their measure tasted of
her sorrows, and desire now to partake of that rest, which she begges to enjoy
under your shade, your protection is large enough to defend them all four,
wherefore be pleased my Honorable Lord to give them all leave together with
their Author to boast themselves still and for ever, in your Noble Pat^onage.

3. And my last reason of publishing these Sermons, was and is, to rectify (if
it may be) those misapprehensions, which some hearers had of certain passages
in them, and still have of me for the same: I do not intend to Apologize for
my self, I am a man, and may transgress, and do so daily against my will,
(the Lord be merciful unto his servant;) And I know besides, that it is
tedious even to good men sometimes, to hear wronged innocence begin to
speak in her own behalf, when themselves have had a hand in afflicting of
her, as appears by David's words to Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel, 19. 29. Why speak
thou any more of thine own matters? but the Lord commands us to endeavor the
reformation of those that err, and therefore for the sake of such as did not
at first rightly hear what J spoke, J have now so spoken as they may see:
Seneca says, that people do give better credit to their eyes then to their
ears, and therefore here is Audibile turned to Visibile, what was transient,
is become more constant, that (if they please) they may consider by seeing,
whether they did not before mistake in hearing.

I hope in your Lordships judgment, an equal eye may herein discern such an
impartial spirit, as becomes a Minister of Christ to exercise in the discharge
of his office: I bless the Lord for it, I can say (with Elihu Job 32. 21, 22.
in Job) J know not how to give slattering titles, J know not how to accept any
man's person in speaking for God, or from him: He that will seek to please
Christ, must not seek to please men, and he that will shoot at both extreanes,
must look to be shot at by both them: but peace at the last, will make amends
for all, that crown of righteonsnesse which God the 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.
righteous Judge shall give to him, that from the testimony of a good
conscience can say at his death, I have fought a good fight, I have kept the
faith, will more then recompense all sorrows.

And (my Lord) although I will not attribute to your Hono^r Gods due, who alone
does frame and govern spirits, yet this I must truly confess, that your
Lordships judgment, and the temper of your spirit, ^ath afforded much support
and encouragement to mine, in that even, upright, and hated way: your constant
dislike of the too much formality, and superstitious encroachments of late
times, did secretly animate my heart against that extreme, and strengthen me
under the pressures of it; And your fearful tenderness of walking in men's
crypticke ways, of setting your foot among painted Sepulchers, has on the
other side given me much boldness in the discovering and opening them, and
has been as a special Antidote to preserve me from being over-daunted with
the damp and paysonous infection which from thence has sumed out upon me.

Thus (my Lord) it pleases God to make the goodness of great persons
(sometimes perhaps unwitting to themselves) to be as life and cordials to his
Ministers.

I know your Lordship had rather be, then seem religious; to do good in
secret, and then forget it, was your custom long ago; I remember o^t the times
past, (being a servant in your Grandfathers family, and an under Minister in
that Parish) when I knew of any in want or misery, that were sick, or lacked
bread, for them and theirs, and did but go in secret and tell you, the least
intimation stirred your bowels, you appeared to my thoughts, a^glad of an
occasion to show your pity and bounty, as those afflicted were, in tasting of
it; which was to me the language, not only of a generous, but also of a
gracious spirit, for such kind of crypticke ways does God allow, herein his
hidden ones delight to walk: And let the blessing of that God ever attend your
Honor in them, and let the blessing of him that was ready to perish come upon
you daily, Job 29. 13.
let your goodness always outshine your greatness, for the comfort and
encouragement of Gods servants, let sincerity and loyalty still remain your
constant supporters, let them make you exemplary to all men here, and fit you
fully at length, to wear the Robe and Diadem of perfect honor; so prays

Your Honors most humble and faithful servant EDWARD SYMONDS.
From Rain, May 4. 1642.
Errataes.
Courteous Reader, be pleased to amend these faults before you read these
following Sermons; and the rest which your judgment shall observe in the
reading, let your gentleness pardon.

PAge 3. l. 5. blot out these, p. 4 l. 1. fet a collation 1. a (...), l. 14 r.
must p. 8. l. 26. for quam r. quem, p. 9. l. 31. for the r. their, p. 39. l.
27. for wiser, r. wise, p. 40. l. 12. r. as to pay, l. 19. r. putses, l 21. r.
doing, p. 42. l 29. for in r. it, p. 50. l. 32. put out the last in, p. 54 l.
27. for I^^n r leb, p. 57 l. 33. 1. better endure, p. 62. l. 4. for the r.
your, p. 65. l. 25. for it self, r. himself, p. 66 l. 18 r. opens, p. 67.
l. 13. for two r. too, p. 70. l. 15. for one r. own, p. 71. l. 17 r. of David
in Shemeies case, p, 73. l. 4. for the r. that, l. 10. for more r. most. l. 31.
r. that which belongs, p. 81. l. 13. r. pr^monitions, p. 85. l. 30. for
crossely r. grossly, p. 86. l. 31. for your soul r. the soul, p. 88. l. 5.
for goes r gee, l 6 r. abide, l. 28. for sensible r. fensible, p. 92. l. 8 r.
unwise p. 96. l. 8. for set r. sets p. 98. l. 14. make the po^nt at is. p. 107.
l, 14. for first his, r. first for his, p. 112. l. 8. r. counterseit, l. 16.
make the point at then, l. 28. for are both r. both are, p. 114. l. 8. for now
r. enough, p 122. l 28. r. withal, p. 123. l 18. for be last, r. be the last, p.
152. l. 7. for are much r. are as much, p. 169. l. 2. for if the spirits r. if
your spirits, p. 175. l. 8. for as I have heard, r. as you have heand, p. 181.
l. 29. for Christ's r. Christ. p. 184. l. 31. for the pity r. your pity.

Read the running title of the first Sermon, thus, The discovery of the sin of
Ecclesiastical selfeseeking.

THE FIRST SERMON: PREACHED AT A VISITATION AT HALSTEAD IN ESSEX, April 12.
1632. Wherein is Discovered the sin of Ecclesiastical Selfe-seeking.

By EDWARD SYMONDS Minister of Rain in Essex.

COL. 3. 11. Christ is All in all.

ROMANS 11. 36. For of him, through him, and for him, are all things, to him be
glory for ever, Amen.

LONDON, Printed by R. Cotes, for Andrew Crooke^ 1642.

(...) loving, faithful, and selfe-denying man: one Timotheus, a young man
with whom himself was well acquainted, and whose conditions he so well knew,
that he durst give his word for him, and pawn his credit that he would be most
sincere in the work of Christ, and most loving unto them, nay the truth was,
he did not know where to find his fellow, he was the best in the whole pack:
for (says he) I have no man like-minded who will naturally care for your
state, for all seek their own, and not the things that are Jesus Christ's.

Now (Brethren) as we go along we may note by the way these few things.

First, that there was an Order of Superiors and Inferiors in the Church in
the Apostles days, Paul had power over Timothy, for to send him, verse. 19. and
Timothy was ready to obey Paul, as a Son the Father, verse. 22.

Secondly, we may observe, that it did (as may seem) chiefly belong to the
Bishop or Supervisor, to appoint Pastors for particular Churches and
Congregations: Paul sends and appoints Timothy to be a Preacher to the
Philippians.

Thirdly, we may observe what kind of men were preferred by them to such
places: why such as themselves by experience knew to be learned, loving,
faithful, and selfe-denying; yea, and such of whose condition the people
themselves were not altogether ignorant, for such a one was Timothy in all
these respects as shall appear.

First, he was a learned man, and that not in the Rabbis or Schoolmen only,
but in the Scriptures, he was a good Textuary, as may be seen, 2 Timothy 3. 15.
instructed in the Scriptures from a child.

Secondly, he was a loving man, one that would naturally care for their state,
even as though they were allied to him by nature, verse. 20.

Thirdly, he was one that was no self-seeker, but faithful for Christ, as
appears by the text, with that which goes before: I have no man like-minded,
for all these seek their own, and not the things that are Jesus Christ's, as
(who say) Timothy is a man per se, one that seeks not himself in any thing,
but only the glory of God in every thing.

Fourthly, he was one of whose honesty and sincerity the Philippians themselves
had proof as well as the Apostle (or else it might be questioned whether he
would have placed him over them:) ye know (says he) ye know the proof of him,
that like as a son with the father, he se^ved with me in the Gospel (verse.
22.) It seems he had dwelt with the Apostle (not like a trencher Chaplain to
say Grace and so forth, till a Living fell) but (says he) he served with me in
the Gospel: that is, he and I went preaching the word of God up and down
together; as if some good Bishop and his Chaplain should go up and down to
every Church in the Diocese (as both their duty and custom of old was) and
preach the word of God together, the one in the forenoone, and the other in the
afternoon.

Now the Philippians by these means had some proof and knowledge of Timothy,
they had heard him preach, and had seen his faithfulness, his zeal, and his
schollership, and therefore the Apostle knew they could not disallow of him,
especially too, being commended to them upon his approbation: I leave the
application of these things to your selves and fall upon the text: for (says
the Apostle) all seek their own, and not the things that are Jesus Christ's.

The words are an AEtiologia, or rendering of a reason, why he sent Timothy unto
them, and it is a collation, from the comparing of him with others, wherein he
prefers him before them, none were altogether of so perfect a stamp, nor of so
pure a metal, so wholly sincere in the work of Christ as Timothy was, they
were a little more tainted with selfe-infection, somewhat more selfeseeking
then he.

Whence we may observe who amongst many is to be preferred ad Curam Animarum,
by them that have power thereunto, even such as they think in conscience, upon
good experience, will aim most directly at Gods glory, and at the salvation of
men: favor, friendship, base Simony, flattery, affection, and the like, must
bear no sway, but naked sincerity alone m^st poyse the Balance.

All seek their own:] there be diverse degrees of sincerity amongst Gods
servants, no doubt but Saint Paul had many more under him, that were sincere
too, for the glory of Christ: but Timothy he was sincere in the highest degree,
he went beyond them all, and therefore shall be preferred before them all.

Or it may be, this universal proposition is but Hyperbolicall, and taken for
the most part, as that place, Joh. 3. 22. speaking of Christ: it is said, No
man received his John 3. 22.
testimony: that is, no body to speak on; Why, the Discipies did, and some few
others did, that were his followers; yea, but they were no body to speak on,
in respect of them that received it not: So here, no body but Timothy seeks
that which is Jesus Christ's, yes Epaphroditus did, of whom mention is made
(verse. 25.) and some others doubtless; yea, but alas they are no body to
speak on, in respect of the rest, that are more Christ's in show then they are
in substance; and (if you please) let us take the words in that sense, which is
indeed the most favorable interpretation.

And I pray you observe in them the Apostles secret complaint, how in that
first and golden age of the Church (as we may so call it) wherein Christian
virtues did more then ever since flourish in the Clergy; for they were all then
either of Christ's own, or of his Apostles own ordination, who sure were
careful what they did in matters of this nature, they did not ignorantly (as
in these later days) or rashly lay their hands upon every body, but only on
such, as by the spirit of discerning they foresaw were likely to prove the
best: Now I say, if in those golden days, we hear and see by the Apostles
complaint, in Clero tam raros fuisse vere cordatos and sinceros homines, that
in respect of the others, they were as no body to speak on: then doubtless in
these leaden, these clayey, and corrupt days of ours, wherein there are more
men and less virtue, the condition is still the same, if not in a degree
worse; at least we may (rebus sic stantibus as they do) conclude from the
words now, that which might have been concluded then: namely this: It is the
condition of the greater part of the Clergy to seek themselves more then
Christ. Doctr.


This is the Proposition: but if you please we will make three of it: thus.

1. Most Ecclesiastics seek their own. 2. Few seek Christ. 3. None can
seek both their own and Christ togegether: (for Christ and themselves in this
respect are always in competition, and Saint Paul here makes them Opposita.)
Reverendi Patres and Fratres, non mihi est cordi, auribus istius gentis Laicae
mores nostros hac in re nimis vere flebiles sermon divulgare; Ahutinam potius
mores ipsi eorum oculis non nimis divulgarent ipsos! Date copiam igitur obsecro
dicendi verbis, quae nimis nimis fact is dicta sunt, and oppugnandi parciter
quae strenue oppugnat Deus: vestrum fateor est, alias alios arguere, nunc vero
(ni fallor) huc advenistis, ut ipsi (re urgente) arguamini. Inire rem sane
fateor, and causam, and locum, utrumque gravem, hominem petere me multo
graviorem, and mallem equidem ut inpraesentiarum me imberbem discentem quam
docentem videritis: Sed cum aliter se res habet (auxiliante Deo) officio fungar
pro virili, ac eo modo, ut non qu^ mea sunt viderer quaerere, sed quae Jesu
Christi: favete igitur.

The first proposition is: Most Ecclesiastics seek their own: I give it in
these terms, because I desire to close 1. Propos.
with the Apostle as near as I can: and it is plain he here speaks of
Ecclesiastical persons.

But of these there are two sorts, which for want of other words I may call
Directi, and Collaterales; so directly, and so only by the bye: the first sort
I confess are principally here intended by the Apostle, though both sorts, as
will appear, are too much guilty of selfeseeking.

Concerning the first, they are the Ministers of the Gospel, ordained and
appointed, as Timothy and the rest were, to preach Jesus Christ unto the
people: now says the Apostle, these seek their own.

And there be three ownes which a Minister is said to seek, own ease, own
praise, own profit: All seek their own; that is, there be few Ministers but
are guilty of selfe-seeking in one of these three respects.

First, some seek their own ease, and of these in especial 1.
are three sorts: whereof the Own ease.


First are they that will spare no pains, and peradventure no charge till they
have got a Charge, and then cum 1.
pervenerint ad Curam vivunt sine cura (as Bernard speaks) when they have
obtained a Cure they live most void of care; they are like the Hawke, who when
she has got her prey, by filling her gorge is disabl^d to fly; or like the
Hetrurian I doll, which while it stood in the field, meanly apparelled, omni
crebra dedit populo responsa petenti, it played the Lecturer, it willingly
answered all demands; but when it was removed, and placed in the Temple, and
richly ado^ned, illico divitiis obmutuit ille repertis, it played the Parson,
wealth stopped its mouth, preferment was an obstacle to its Oracles: So they: It
may be, (if their bellies will give them leave) they will preach once a
fortnight, peradventure it is but once a month: nay, it may be they will give
it quite over, and turn wholly like Lay-Parishioners, and become their Curats
most judicious Auditors they find more ease to see others work then to work
themselves, so making the Ministry as a trade, and themselves as Mechanics,
who will take pains till they are free men, and then being set up, work only
by their Apprentices.

These I say are the first sort that seek their own ease, Ezekiel. 34. 3. ^say
56. 10, 11, 12.
your non-preaching-Ministers, the belly-gods of the Clergy, those idle Drones,
those dumb Dogs: these are harsh terms I confess (Brethren) but they are
Scripture phrase, else I durst not use them, therefore pray let them be taken
in the better part: they are the first.

The second sort and nearest a kin unto the former, 2.
are non-Residents, those vagabond Teachers, that love any place better then
their own home, (like some people in these parts, that affect any Church
better then that which belongs unto them.) These not only fail in Preaching,
but also in living as they ought to do, they are not only dumb, but also
invisible, neither seen nor heard of their people; peradventure their people
shall sometimes hear from them, by the Mediation of a Presentment, if they do
but conform to their practice, in leaving their own Parish Churches; if they
be not more conscionable then themselves, and love home better then they, if
they do not love his Curat at his command, better then he does them at Gods
command, the loving Shepherd will take order to have his own flock, pounded:
My Sheep know my voice (says Christ;) But so shall not my Sheep know my
voice, (says the non-Resident) John 10. 27.
for I will not preach unto them: My Sheep follow me (says Christ;) But so
shall not mine follow me, says the non-Resident, for if they do i will have them
pounded: Ah, what Wretches are these that will afford neither Doctrine nor
example to conform unto! doubtless by their own confessions, their lives at
least are not Canonical, in that their manners deserve no imitation: These are
they therefore that may be said also to mind themselves in the first rank,
non-Residents.

The third sort that seek themselves in their own ease, 3.
are the timorous and fearfull-hearted Preachers, that cry Peace, Peace, when
there is no Peace, that themselves might Ier, 6. 14.
live in peace: they love the name peaceable, better then conscionable, and
therefore they dare not disturb sin lest themselves should be disturbed,
they wisely foresee that it is as much as some men's tongues are worth; yea, and
their Livings too, to trench upon those evils that keep house with the best
men in the Parish: (as they are called) and themselves have learned long ago,
when they read the Accidence, that foelix quam faciunt aliena pericula cautum:
while the strong man keeps the house, all things are in peace, and therefore
let Saint James say Luke 11. 21.
what he will, they dare not resist the Devil, lest he should serve them as he
did those vagabond Jews, Acts 19. James 4. 7. Act. 19. 13. 16.
run upon them, overcome them, and prevail against them: well, but for all
that, it is no true Soldiers part, to plead, Good sleeping in a whole skin:
or not to dare to draw in a good cause, for fear of being beaten: for my part
(says the Apostle) if I should do so, If I should seek to please men, I were
not the servant of Christ: So Gal. 1. 10.
He, and so I, and I add this more, if it were not for the hurt of them, I
could always desire to have some perverse people in my Parish, for it is one
of the best means to put life into the Ministry: Well, but these are the third
sort: and so much briefly for them in the first rank, that seek their own
ease.

Those of the second rank, are they that seek themselves 2.
in praise, some seek their own praise, and of these also in special are
three sorts. Own praise.


First, They that show more eloquence then power, 1.
more learning then conscience in their teaching: as ye shall have some come
up with their Latin and their Losophy Philosophy.
(as the Countryman calls it) and with such divisions, distinctions, and
Metaphysicall quiddities, that scarce themselves can understand them: some
again will quote you twenty or thirty Fathers and Schoolmen in a Sermon, when
peradventure they have scarce set eye on two, but took them upon trust: others
again will have their Sermon half Greek and Latin, that the common people,
that love a-life (many of them) to hear gibberish, might admire them for their
profoundnesse; as they did him, that for want of Greek and Latin, spoke Welsh
and Irish in a Sermon; But (Brethren) let us think well upon it; Is to preach
so, think you in conscience, to preach Christ? Saint Paul accounted those
Corinthians 2 Cor. 10.
for vainglorious, that came up with so much coined eloquence, but what would
he judge of many in these days think you, if he should live now, and hear
men come up with their strong lines, the eloquent nonsense, or should hear
men martyring a piece of Scripture, into so many Logical needless divisions
as some will do, would he not say think you, they did aim to show the
strength of their own brains, the dexterity of their own wits, or if he
should have heard men come up with such a deal of unknown language, as Latin,
Greek, and the like, or with so many Quotations of Fathers and Schoolmen, do
you think he would have commended it? I do not speak (Brethren) but that
there is both time and place for men to speak learnedly, if they are able, as
in the University, or in such a place, or on such an occasion as this is. If I
were able to speak learnedly, I think here I should: and I suppose for some
reasons if a Sermon on such occasions were made all in Latin, it would not be
much amiss: But to speak so Scholler-like (as they call it) to a company of
ignorant people, it is for a man to discover himself to be a vainglorious
fool, even a plain selfe-seeker. I remember a word, and I hope I shall never
forget it, that my Noble Patron said Sir Arthur Capell.
once to me, when I had played the fool in that kind, he came and whispered in
mine ear; Truly (says he) I am persuaded, they that have most Latin in the
pulpit, have least in the Schools: which when I had considered upon, and
examined my self, truly thought I, he says true, they have indeed: Well,
these are the first sort in the second rank: I refer it to the judgment of
any one, if these seek not themselves.

The second sort that seek themselves in their own ^.
praise, are they that affect popularity, and would be famous in their
generation, eminent above all their neighbors, like Theudas, they would feign
be some body, and Act. 5. 36.
therefore glory much in seeing themselves followed: O it is a fine thing to be
tickled in the ear, to be carried as it were on the shoulders of the people,
digito demonstrari, and dicier hic est, Behold the man, that is he! yea, and if
the people will but follow them in this their humor, to requite them again,
they will follow them again in their humors, and that so far, till they are
led both out of themselves, and out of their Pulpits; and then would feign come
in again, but know not how, for losing their credit (forsooth) with the
people! Oh! it is a miserable thing, where the Sheep lead the Shepherd, it is
a true (...), and doub^lesse it is ten times better to live (as they call it)
under a Bishops bondage, then in this lamentable sort, to be set in the Stocks
by the Townsmen: Why (Brethren) Gods service is a perfect freedom; and without
all question, the nearer God the more free: wherefore in Gods name let us stand
fast in that liberty wherein we are made free, not intangling our selves in
such yoakes of bondage.

But indeed this path of selfe-seeking (or selfe-losing rather) is a beaten
path, more walk in it then think do; vainglory is a secret sin, it will
creep into the best heart, the best actions and will commonly attend the best
gifts: nay, let a man do well but once, suppose he preach a good Sermon or so,
and let him but examine his own heart, if it be not ^^eshed exceedingly with
the same, if the very credit of it does not strongly put him on to preach more
often: for my own part I have found it, when to my own thinking I have done
well, (though happily in another man's not so, for the Crows bird is always
fairest in her own eyes:) why, before the words have been scarce out of my
mouth, or I out of the Pulpit, I have felt vainglory within, suggesting
secretly what respect and commendation I have deserved to my self, when it may
be the next time, God Almighty by denying a like assistance, cuts my comb
again, that I might know my glorying to be but vaine-glorying, soon got soon
gone, having lost again in my own conceit, what before I thought I had
deserved: Well, but this shall serve to note out the second sort that seek
themselves in their own praise: they that affect a vulgar popularity.

Now the third sort that seek themselves in their own 3.
praise, are they that affect respect from the people too, but they go another
way to procure it: namely, by envying, maligning, despising, and enveighing
against those that are, (and it may be deservedly too) more eminent and popular
then themselves; the glory of their fellowlabourer is their disgrace, his
Candle dimmes theirs, his pains discovers theirs and their Curats lasinesse,
and they cannot abide it: Oh if he were obscured, then they should shine, if
his light were out, their negligence would not be seen, if he were not so much
followed, themselves (as themselves think) should be more regarded; they would
be famous too, but how shall they effect it? not by mending their own
diligence, but by endeavoring the others silence, not by prayer to God, not by
study, not by more painful, and frequent, and conscionable preaching, but by
slandering, by bitter enveighing, by privy persecuting, by secret writing to
superior powers, and the like.

And surely Brethren, so it is, they that are most often taxed of vainglory
by these men, do least affect it, and the taxers themselves are most guilty of
it; it may so appear from both sides. First, from the parties taxed, who (ad
plurimum) are men of more able gifts to whom God lends a greater power to
dispense his Word withal, which people perceiving cannot but more affect them,
and desire to hear them, (you know, where the carcass is, the Eagles will be
gathered) which for his part, it may be Matthew. 24. 28.
the Preacher desires not, but rather seeks to avoid, and (as some have done)
does happily forbear to preach at that present, when he has seen people
flocking to that purpose.

Nay, and further observe but the manner of such men's teaching, they seldom
press for respect to Preachers, they know they shall have it if they deserve
it without preaching for it: honor follows merit as the shadow does the body,
and flies from them that follow it, as appears from the other parties (the
taxers) who are ever and anon, calling for respect, for reverence, and love;
which (as the case may be) may lawfully be done, for the Apostle did it, 1 Cor.
4. Gal. 4. 17. yet ordinarily, doubtless, it is purchased by a better tenor
if as to the 1 Cor. 4. Gal. 4. 17.
other it comes by desert without asking.

And besides (as I said) it is their custom of whom I am speaking, to enveigh
bitterly against their neighbor Ministers that have more respect then
themselves, and to present their poor people that give it to them, and what
does this secretly infer but selfe-seeking? for if thou did truly seek
Christ, and did glory above all things, as thou ought in the prosperity of
his Kingdom, thou would be glad to see it thrive by whosoever is the
builder, and would rejoice in the fruit of another labors, as in thine
own, if thine with his did tend to the service of the same Lord.

Nay, and further, as it is observed, those Ministers that are most bitter in
complaining in that kind are such as are either utterly unable to teach
profitably themselves, or else are idle persons, and make no conscience to
stir up that gift which God has bestowed upon them: Why man, if thou would
keep thy people at home, do not fall a pounding, or presenting of them, nor
do thou fall to enveigh against those to whom they resort, for that course
will but drive that further from thee which thy soul gapes after: namely,
respect and love: No, but fall thou to work more diligently, study thou more
carefully, pray thou more fervently, and teach thou more conscionably and
profitably, and see what God will do for thee: but if thou followest thine
own courses still, men will say that thou (though covertly) seek thine own
praise, yea, and thou give people more just occasion to judge so of thee,
then thou can find to judge so of another: And thus you have seen as
briefly as may be the second way wherein Ministers seek themselves, namely in
their own praise.

Come we now to the third way wherein they seek their own, and that is in
profits, and of these as of the 3.
former are in like manner three sorts. Own profit.


The first are they that to express their more dislike of 1.
Singularity, do hunt after naught but Pluralities, Living upon Living, as many
as ye will with a D^spensation, it is not against the Canon, and it may be
suspected (as some have said) that would the same Canon as equally permit to
have as many wives, their stretching consciences would quickly submit to an
easy conformity: the Apostle says, Let the Minister be the husband of one
wife: 1 Timothy 3. 2.
some indeed take it literal^y, and some mystically for one Church or
Congregation, whereunto, as to a wife, he is betrothed: O but Paul, Paul, if
that be thy meaning, thou never knew the mystery of a Dispensation; What
man? if we can but be qualified, we may hold as many Livings (if we can get
them) as we have fingers and toes: yea, and I pray thee what good do thy many
Livings do thee? speak conscience, speak practice, do they make thee seek
Christ more earnestly, do they make thee preach more diligently? surely they
ought to do, but observe it when you will, the more bountifully God deals
with many of them in this kind, the less work they do him: and should any
day-labourer deal so with them they would never endure it: Christ says, my
Kingdom is not of this world, and it is to be feared, that they that receive
such profits and rewards here, shall be put off when time comes with [Yee have
your reward:] If thou be Christ's Matthew. 6. 2.
Disciple, take up as many Crosses as thou will, thou have good warrant for it;
but take not up too many Churches, Luke 9 23.
thou will find no Scripture for that: Cro^^es I confess are heavy things, but
Churches are far heavier; and besides, Heaven gate is a low gate, a gate with
a low roof, and Churches you know have high steeples, and they hinder men from
stooping: (they make men proud) remember that.

But so much for them, the first ^ort that stand in the third ran^^, that seek
themselves in profit.

The second ^ort are opposite to the former in the way, but they meet in the
end, for they seek themselves too 2.
and their own profits, but it is in shunning of Pluralities, for they will
preach against a double benefice, even to the end they may get a double Living,
one from the Church, and another from the Country: for like the Snake on the
Hearth, when in their somewhat too small a being, they have got some pretty
warmth by the better benevolence of the people, then they begin to st^rre and
hiss to the detriment of them that put this heat into them: and like those
unconscionable Pharisees in the Matthew. 23. 4.
Gospel, they lay unsupportable burdens upon some of their too too ^nable
shoulders.

A good Benence (as goes the repo^t) is propounded to them, and it lies a great
way off, (it may be in the Confines of U^opia) and it goes against their
consciences to hold two livings in that nature; (for you must under stand their
consciences stand crooked the clean contrary way) wherefore if they accept of
this proffer, (as the want of temporal sufficiencies does persuade them) then
they must leave their dear and loving people, (which they are loath to do)
wherefore their advise is craved against such a day, and the matter is referred
to their weighty considerations, (which proves too too weighty to many of them)
and a long Sermon without blushing is made to that purpose, which like Hoseas
empty H^s. 10. 1.
Vine, brings forth fruit only to it self; for at the time appointed, advice
desired is returned, with that which was more expected, the promise of a larger
contribution, upon condition he will not leave them, whereunto they that have
more need to receive, must not refuse to give, however against their power and
will, (as with grief in secret they are forced to confess) lest they should
be counted enemies to the Gospel, slighters of their Minister, and live like
neglected, suspected persons all their days: now certainly, this is the most
base, ungodly, and hypocritical kind of selfe-seeking, that is, and without
all question, of the two, it is far less offensive in the sight of God to
hold two Benefices, if one be not sufficient, then in this base manner to grind
the faces of the poor: Well, these are the second sort that stand in the third
rank guilty of selfe-seeking in regard of profit.

The third sort are they that load themselves with thick 3.
clay, as the Prophet speaks, I mean, that plunge themselves H^^. 2. 6.
in multitude of worldly affairs, unbeseeming their profession, as farming,
ploughing, or the like, wherein for their own gain they are so painful,
that Gods work must needs be done but slightly, if it be done ad formam,
whether well or no they pass not: when they have sought themselves in the dirt
all the week, on Saturday in the afternoon, they begin to think of seeking
Christ, or to speak in their own profane phrase, then they begin to
provide fodder for their cattle: or it may be it is Sunday morning before they
go about their Sermon; Peradventure some of their wits deserves commendation,
but to be sure their custom deserves no imitation, for make the best of it, it
is to do Gods work negligently, and cursed be he that does so, Jer. 48. Ier.
48. 10.


Yea, and mark it, such men too, as their heart on the week days runs
wholly after their covetousness, so for the most part, does their tongues upon
the Sabbath, for what are the mainest points that such men beat most upon in
the Pulpit; but payment of Tithes, Church duties? and plenty of arguments they
can produce for the pressure of this point, which though a modest man happily
has more cause to use, yet he dares not allege, lest he should give his
people occasion to think that contrary to Saint Paul's practice, he sought
theirs more then Cor. 12. 14.
them.

It is very true, peoples conscience in tything even every where, is like some
Ministers conscience in preaching, it always comes short of duty, and yet
(Brethren) let us observe it, of all sins, preaching is least prevailing
against this sin, for whatsoever the Minister speaks in this case, they will
judge to be spoken in his own case, what ever he intends, they will tax him
of selfe-seeking, for it is a point called Nolime tangere, the very touch will
infect, but to glance in the Pulpit upon the unconscionablenesse of people in
this kind is the very next way to spread the contagion, such are their natures
and constitutions.

And yet (Brethren) this is a common place, and therefore I may the better
speak it, and where there is one Layman here I would there were a hundred for
to hear me: but here are the Churchwardens, that for the most part are the
ringleaders to dishonesty in this kind, the Proverb holding true in them, The
nearer the Church the farther from God, so soon as they have taken the Oath of
Relation to the Church, then will they show themselves injurious one way or
other to the chief Churchman, and the Devil perhaps persuades them they may
do it that year by authority: But as I was saying, (and I pray you be pleased
to mark it, you of the Laity, and tell your neighbors of it when you come at
home) A Minister may and ought to seek that which God and the Law has allotted
him for his maintenance, and yet be no selfe-seeker, but may seek Christ in
it, and the souls of you his people in it: I warrant you will not believe
this, but i will make it plain unto you.

First, he seeks Christ in it, for Tithes are called Gods portion, Mal. 3. 8.
the Ministers are but Gods Rent-gatherers, Mal. 3. 8.
and should they fail in their duty in this kind, we may well foresee by the
unconscionable conditions of men (who above all things love to cheat God of
his due) that by the next generation, Christ would have cause to take up his
old complaint, The Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the air have nests, but
the Son of man Matthew. 8. 20.
(Christ Jesus) has not where to hide his head: therefore in seeking their
own dues, you see they may be said to seek Christ, even to keep him in the
Land amongst you.

Then secondly, they in this seek not so much themselves, as they do you
their people, for (mark it) would not thou say that that man did chiefly
aim at thy good, that should bestow all his pains and endeavor to save thee
from the Gallows, although he should get to himself there by the price for
the Halter? Why, I tell thee, of all thefts, this is the most dangerous and
dunnable, when thou do withold or diminish that which is due to the
Ministers of God: Now, that the curse which God threatens, Mal. 3. might not
fall upon Mal. 3. 8, 9.
thee, thy Minister looks more narrowly to receive his dues, and it is a part
of his duty to thee, lest, I say, thou by his remissness should pull the
curle upon thine own head: And I pray thee what does he get by it? even the
price of a two penny halter, for thy Tithes and thy dues which thou payest to
him, are but as of that value in respect of thy soul, the whole world is
nothing in comparison of that, says Christ, and I hope thou will not deny it
if thou love thy soul: But indeed Brethren, Matthew. 16. 26.
this is the truth of it, people do not love their own souls, it appears in
this, of all men, they do not care for him that has the charge of their
souls, it goes most against the stomachs of many of them to do him a common
courtesy. Any Layman shall have better dealings with them, and shall receive
better Tithes from them (where Laymen do receive them) then he that has the
charge of their souls; yea, any other Minister, any Lecturer, shall have their
affections, and it may be sometimes their moneys too, but their own Pastor
that has the charge of their souls, though he be never so careful and
painful for their good, shall not get so much as his dues of them: Nay, which
is more strange yet, if a Lecturer does but turn Pastor, and take the charge
of souls upon him, it is the very next way to lose many of the peoples loves,
which happily before he did enjoy, and this some Lecturers foresee well enough,
and therefore refuse to take any such charge upon them?

But what is the reason that people in this sort, affect not him that has the
charge over their souls, when as the Apostle also commands it so expressly,
but even because These. 5. 12.
they do not love their own souls.

But (Brethren) I would you would but seriously in your retired thoughts,
think upon that charge of the Apostle, Heb. 13. 17. and read over with due
consideration Heb. 13. 17.
that place in the third of Malachi, where Tithes are called Gods portion, and
where the curse is threatened to light upon those that retain them: and a
gracious blessing is promised to all the rest of their substance, to the free,
willing, and liberal payers of them: I say, if you would but consider well of
those two places, it would never go so against your stomachs to do your
Minister a common courtesy, nor would you ever think ill of him, for looking
after that which belongs unto him, nor would you ever put him off with the
riffe-raffe of your things, as the worst fleece, the least sheafe, and the
like, nor in your bargaining with him for your Tithes, would you desire to get
a drinking penny as (you call it) by him, which according to the balance of
your own consciences (if you can) shall be at least half in half: no nor
would you ever think you did wrong the Country in giving God his due in this
or that particular: (what will they say, does he think i will wrong the Country,
pay him Tithes of that or that? no, never while I live) so they set God and the
Country at odds: yea, but woe be to thee and thy Country too if God be
against thee: I say (Brethren) if you would but seriously, when you are alone,
think well of the matter, these things would not be so taxable in you as they
are.

But this is only by the way: the third sort of Ministers I say, that seek
themselves in this rank of profits, are they that plunge themselves overmuch
in worldly affairs, in respect of their temporal demeanes, and regard
specially the fat and the fleece, that look so over-scrapingly to their Tithes
and Offerings, (as too too many there are that exceed the mean both of
discretion and honesty too in that kind) I say these are the third sort that
seek themselves in their own profits.

So that (Brethren) consider all these kinds of men, all these sorts of
Ministers, they that seek their own ease, in not preaching, not residing, in
preaching plausibly; they that seek their own praise, in ostentation of their
learning and eloquence, in affecting popularity, in maligning them that are
more eminent then themselves; they that seek their own profits in hunting
after Pluralities, in basely begging contributions, in giving up themselves
more openly to worldly mindedness: I say join all these together, and
substract them out of the general number of the Clergy throughout the Land,
and no doubt but the first proposition will be found true, that the greater
part of the Clergy seek their own: Here are nine parts you see, happily I might
name more, but I would gladly show my self as charitable, as I would have my
neighbors conscionable, and leave God the Tenth.

But these be only the Clergy primi ordini^, of the first and principal sort,
now if the chief be such, Haec si Domini faciunt, if they that should be most
conscionable do thus transgress, audent non talia fures think you? will not
those of the inferior sort be found as guilty: those that we call
Ecclesiastici collaterales, because they do Ecclesiam concomitari, they depend
upon the Church as necessary evils; though evil, yet in some sort necessary: I
mean your Ecclesiastical Courtiers, your Procters, Apparitours, Registers, and
the rest (as they are deemed) of that infamous rank that are (date verbo
veniam) Daemoni Comedones, Fellow-commoners with the Devil, for like him, they
live only upon the sins of the people, joying (as he does) in the number of
sins, in the multitude of presentiments.

What shall I say of these, that they seek their own? (sure I should wrong
them then) No, they seek more then their own, for some of their Courts (in
regard of some of their consciences) are as unsatiable as Hell, wherein
themselves play the Devil, and if they get a man in, they will hold him fast,
either by right or wrong, till in their kind they have devoured him.

Had these kind of Harpies appeared in the world in Saint Paul's days, he
needed not to have delivered the incestuous Corinthian unto Satan, for had he
but put him 1 Cor. 5. 5.
into their hands, it had been to^^ent sufficient; yea, and like Satan too,
they are not only executioners in their kind, but accusers also, for to get a
man into their circles, they will either find faults or coin them; as it was
said of him, Aut viam invent^^ aut faciet, so may it of them, they will either
find ways to bring men into Haniball.
trouble, or invent them, by raising false fla^^ders, rumors, or the like, and
then forsooth, cite them into their own Courts for a scandal: Surely if eve^
it might lawfully be said of any, that they are greater sinners then other men,
it may be spoken of these, for the^e are those hellish Hagges, or Lamiae, that
have eyes only to look abroad, to pry out other men's faults, and make no use
of them at their own home, they feed, as was said, of the Devils diet, they
are even according to his own tooth, he feeds upon sin, and so do they, and
in this respect they must needs be the greatest sinners, for as he that lives
upon poison, must needs have a poisoned body (and it is Gellius (I take it)
that mentions such a one, who in this respect poisoned all the Fleas that bit
him:) so they that in this sort live all upon sin, must needs be the greatest
sinners, they must needs be the most poisonous creatures. But these, as I said,
are but Ecclesiastict collaterales, the hangbies of the Church, not principally
here intended by the Apostle, and therefore indeed (as not worth the naming)
let it suffice only thus far by the way to mention them.

And so now I have done with the first Proposition, I have showed you that most
Ecclesiastickes seek themselves. 2. Propos.
I come now to the second, which is a necessary consequent of the former: for
if most seek themselves, if nine parts in ten seek their own, then few
seek Christ, or the things of Christ, this follows o^ necessity; and that is
the point: few seek Christ: I Will only show you in a word what it is to seek
Christ, or the things of Christ, and so come to the next.

The things of Christ, what are they? why, surely in a word, they are nothing
else but the Sheep of Christ, the souls of men and women, these are the
things of Christ, which he purchased you know with the price of his blood: Now,
the Ministers of the Gospel are Ambassadors 2 Cor. 5. 20.
for Christ and from Christ: to look to these his Sheep, to gather them
together into his fold, to acquaint them with his voice, to keep them within
his pastures, to give all possible care and tendance to them for their good: so
that to seek the things that are Christ's, is (...), hoc agere, whatsoever
becomes of our selves, or our own matters, to look to this, it is to preach
the Word, to be instant in the same, in season and out of season, 2 Timothy 4. v.
2. ad 5.
to improve, to rebuke when we see cause, to exhort with all long-suffering,
and doctrine, it is to watch in all things, for the spiritual good of our
people, yea, to suffer adversity for their sakes and the Gospels, every way
making Christ known unto them by the work of the Ministry; thus to do, is
to seek Christ, and the things of Christ, for thus did Timothy seek them, for
thus had Paul instructed him, as ye may see, 2 Timothy 4. 2. and 5. v. (they are
the very words of the Apostle there) and ye may see it in the verse following
this of the text, that Timothy had been obedient to the Apostles instructions,
as a son to the father, so says he of him, (as who say) he even sought
Christ, as I taught him; which (says he) none else do, that is, none to
speak on (as has been said) none in comparison, and the reason is, for all
seek their own.

I, but may not men seek their own and Christ's too? O no, Christ and
themselves in this respect are always in competition, and Saint Paul here
makes them Opposita which is the last Proposition of the three to be considered.

None can seek both their own things and Christ's together; not their own
ease, nor their own praise, 3. Propos.
nor their own profits, together with the things that are Jesus Christ's; I Will
give you a proof of each particular, and so hasten.

First, we cannot seek Christ and our own ease together, the Prophet Ezekiel
(as you know) in the 34. 1.
chap. 2. verse. has these words; Woe to the Shepherds Ezekiel. 34. 2.
that feed themselves (that is, that seek their own ease) Should not the
Shepherds feed the flock? (says he) intimating by the word (should) that
these two did not, could not stand together, feeding themselves and the flock:
and the Apostle, Gal. 1. 10. says expressly, If I should go about to please
men, (my self, or any other, in seeking my Call. 1. 10.
own ease and carnal quiet) absolutely, I were not the servant of Christ.

Secondly, we cannot seek our own praise and Christ together, see John 5. 44.
How can ye believe that receive 2.
honor one of another, and seek not the honor that comes John 5. 44.
of God? whence we learn, that they can neither believe nor seek Gods glory,
that receive honor to themselves, much less (sure) can they that seek it.

Thirdly, we cannot seek our own profits and Christ 3.
together; (you know the place) Ye cannot serve God and Mammon; and yet more
plainly, speaking of a Soldier Matthew. 6. 24.
of Christ, 2 Timothy 2. 4. No man that warreth, intangleth himself with the
affairs of this life, because he would ^ Tim. 2. 4.
please him that has chosen him for a Soldier, (as who say) he that does
entangle himself, cannot please God, nay does not desire it; and so briefly
you see the point proved: now for the Use.

Application; as it is sometimes the death of Sin, so it is the life of
doctrine: give me leave therefore to add some of this killing life to that
which has been spoken.

And (Brethren) I beseech you all by that holy Communion and fellowship that we
have with one another in the work of Christ, that you would seriously consider
of these things, and as you desire that your people should apply unto
themselves, such doctrines as you propound unto them, and take unto themselves
such reproves, as come from your mouths, and does concern them; So do you
apply and take to your selves, that which I shall speak, and may concern your
particular persons. Nay, be you well assured, that as your selves shall receive
the Word, so shall the Word from your selves be received.

You are all strangers to me, I scarce know your faces, much less your natures
and conditions, and therefore I neither have aimed, nor can aim at any your
particular persons: to hit some I confess I desire, as (no doubt) but he did
that drew the Bow at a venture, (1 Kings the last 1 King. 22. 2^.
chap.) and it was a hundred to one, if shooting among the crowd, (the Army) he
hit not some, though who he knew not, it was Gods providence to direct the
Arrow into Ahabs breast; so it is twenty to one if in this so great Assembly I
hit not some, yea, if I hit not many; the Lord direct my Arrows as he did his,
into the bosoms of the most guilty: for undoubtedly, if among the Clergy,
there be so many sorts of selfe-seekers, as has been said, then who dares
affirm with Corah, that the whole Congregation is holy, that this whole
Congregation is Numb. 16. 3.
holy?

You therefore in the first place (pray give me leave to 1.
speak in the second person) you I say that seek your selves in your own
ease, whose strength is to sit still, (as Esaias speaks in another sense) that
feed not the flock, but only upon the flock; in the fear of God think Es.
30. 7. Ezekiel. 34. 2.
upon it, How can you without terror read all those threatenings against idle
Shepherds denounced against you by the Prophet Ezekiel? How can you without
Ezekiel. 13. Ezekiel. 34.
trembling, hear that woe to them that be at ease in Sion, proclaimed by Amos?
How dare you by your practice say after him in the Gospel, Soul take thine
ease, or body Amos 6. 1.
take thine ease, when he is gone to Hell before you? will Luke 12. 19.
not ease slay you in the end? then Solomon is no man of Prove. 1. 32.
his word; did not ease fit Moab for destruction? does not Jeremy say that that
was the cause she settled upon her Ier. 48. 11.
Lees? Is not to be given up to ones own ease, to be given up to ones own
self, to ones own hearts lust? and did you ever read of any such a one, that
was freed from himself again, till the Devil freed him? we read of some
that were delivered up to Satan, that were freed again, as was Job in one
kind, and the incestuous Corinthian in another, their spirits were saved
notwithstanding Job 2. 6.
in the day of the Lord Jesus: but you never read of 1. Cor. 5. 2 Cor. 2.
a man that was delivered to himself but went to Hell: Now for a man to be
given up to his own ease, I say, is to be given up to his own self, even
over to the very highest kind of impiety, to sit in the seat of the
scornful, which of three degrees is the highest, as we gather from Psalm. 1.
1. for you may see what the Prophet says in another place, Psalm. 123. 4.
(says he) Our soul is exceedingly Psalm. 1. 1. Psalm. 123. 4.
filled with the scorning (of whom?) of them that be at ease: And (Brethren) is
it not so? have ye any such scorners, flouters, and gibers, of painful
Preachers, and of Sermon-hunting (as they scoffingly term them) or rather more
truly of Heaven-hunting people, as those idle, lasie, non-preaching Ministers?
But derisores Deus ipse deridet, (says the Wiseman) yea, he will laugh Prove.
3. 34. Prove. 1. 2^.
at their calamity, and mock when their fear comes.

Be wise now therefore O ye Ministers, be painful O ye Beneficed men, lest
by taking to your selves too much liberty, you be given up to your own
liberty, and so become in the end the objects of Gods derision: O I beseech you
by those mercies of God which your selves have tasted above other men, (I Will put
my self into your number, as I have good cause) I beseech you I say let us be
careful that these received mercies breed not our future miseries, but while
our wages is greater then our fellow laborers, let us (if it may be) exceed
them in our paines-taking, lest it fare with us, as it did sometime with the
Israelites, (Psalm. 106. 15.) God having granted our request Psalm. 106. 15.
for our bellies, we have leanness therewithal sent into our souls: If we
remember well the Apostles words, 2 These. 3. 10.
He that will not labor, must not eat, we would never conceit that God gives
us food to lie still: or if he does, it is to that end, as men feed their
swine, to fit them for the slaughter: O while we may therefore, let ut think
upon it; Is not well done good and faithful servant, a Matthew. 25. 21. and v.
30.
more pleasing word then you idle and unprofitable? will not enter thou into
the joy of thy Lord, sound more sweet, then throw him into ^^ter darkness?
Will it not be a heavy hearing, when Christ shall urge, Why stood ye all the
dayidle? when he shall bid remember how thou in thy Matthew. 29. 6. Luke 16. 25.
life time receivedst thy pleasure? Well (Brethren) for the love of Christ, let
us think on these things, and drive ease betime from our luskish sinful
bodies, that we may partake of that promise, Psalm. 25. 13. His soul shall live
Psalm. 25. 13.
at ease, that we may have cause to say at the last day with the son of
Sirack, Modicum laboravi and inveni mihi multam requiem. Ecclus. 51. 37.


And you that have not yet these occasions to be idle, I mean Lecturers,
Curats, and the like, that (it may be) more through the idleness of the
Pastors, then out of your own due worth, do gleane away the affections of the
people, take you heed that hereafter when your table is set, it does not in
like sort prove a snare unto you, as it does to many others: you may happily for
the present, inveigh bitterly against them that are guilty in this kind, and
hereafter be condemned your selves, de eodem crimine, Let him that thinks he
stands take heed lest he fall; 1 Cor. 10. 12.
for it is not poverty (as the common vote goes) but rather plenty that proves
the man: As the fining pot to the gold, and the furnace to the silver, so is a
man according to his dignity (says wise Solomon) Prove. 27. But so Prove. 27. 21.
much for the first.

Now for the second sort: you that are non-Residents, that neither feed your
flock, nor know your flock, 2.
what shall I say to you? you are like the good Shepherd in no respect, for
you neither know yours, nor are known of yours: the Thief comes not but for to
steal, says Christ, (John 10.) speaking of the false Shepherds: so John 10.
10.
you come not but to take that wages you never earned; Again he speaks in the
same Chapter, of some that came before him, that were Thieves and Robbers, and
Verse. 8.
he adds, the Sheep did not hear them, it may be said of you that come after
him, your Sheep do not hear you: verily you are worse then the hireling
there mentioned, for he flees not till he sees the Wolf come, but Verse. 12. 13.
you flee beforehand, to give occasion to his coming; it was the hirelings
fault in Christ's time, not to care for the Sheep, but now it is the fault of
our chief Shepherds, he cares not for the Sheep (says Christ) because he is
an hireling, but if Christ were here now, he must turn his note, and say, he
cares not for them because he is their Shepherd.

Sure you know [Shepheard] is a Relative word, and must confess his
Correlatum, and so no doubt but you will do, you will not deny that you have a
Living, but withal, you have a rule, which you learned when you were freshmen,
and make more use of it now then you did then, and that is this: Distantianon
tollit Relationem: But by your favor that rule is not (...), for Non tenet in
Sacris; But however, what say you to [Pastor] then? that inferres a presence,
and for the word [Watchman, to be sure] that forbids non-Residence.

Well (Brethren) the day will come, when you shall hear the voice, Reddite
rationem villicationis vestrae, How Luke 16. 2.
you will be able to say, Of them thou have given us in John 17. 12.
charge, we have lost none, I know not; Nay, see you to it, if ye shall not
rather have cause to say, Of them thou have given us in charge we have looked
to none: Certainly of all men, you have cause to fear a Nescio vos, as a due
reward to a Nescio Oves; wherefore for your own Matthew. 7. 23.
sakes, while you have time, do as the Apostle bids, feed the flock of Christ
that depends upon you, 1 Pet. 5. 2. 1 Pet. 5. 2.
Nay, remember but what Christ said to Peter: Peter (says he) Love thou me?
then feed my Sheep. Probatie John 21. 17.
dilectionis est exhibitio oper^s.

And for you in the third place, that preach plausibly 3.
to live peaceably, that seek ease by soothing, you faithless, unfaithful,
faint-hearted Preachers, you are in the esteem of Gods Spirit a Generation of
the vilest men, for you are called, Es. 9. 15. the tail of the people: the Es
9. 15.
Prophet that teaches lies is the tail, and you teach lies, when you dawbe
with your untempered mortar; when you promise to the rotten and unhumbled
souls of men Ezekiel. 13. 10.
life and peace, when terrible things are at hand, even Es. 9. 5. Es. 33. 14.
garments rolled in blood, devo^ting flames, and everlasting burnings:
Assuredly it will little avail you at the last day to say, Have not we
preached in thy Name; for you are (if not enemies) at least disdainers of the
Cross Matthew. 7. 22. Phil. 3. 18. Gal. 6. 12.
of Christ: your preaching in his Name is to little purpose, unless it be
sometime with his Cross upon your shoulders, they preach best in Christ's name,
that preach by sufferings.

I pray (Brethren) let us lay it to our hearts, we in a special manner have
taken the Lords presse-money, when we were ordained into the Ministry, and
therefore bound to go to war; yea, and to bid defiance to the whole world,
in as much as Saint John says it lies all in 1 John 5. 19.
wickedness. Bellum (you know) in Latin signifies both war and good, and
sure in this they go both together, no war without, no good within, free
from opposition, void of goodness; we can never play the parts of right
Soldiers or valiant Captains, but when the enemy is about our ears: we are
never to any purpose laying siege to Heaven, but when we are suffering
violence, and the violent take it by force, says our Savior, not the Matthew.
11. 12.
plausible: No, we cannot upon sufficient grounds think that we are rightly
sowing Gods Pearls, unless some Dogs turn again and rend us; that we are
of Jeremies perfect stamp, unless we be accounted contentious; Matthew. 7. 6.
Ier. 15. 10. Ezekiel. 2. 6.
that we are true Ezekiels, unless the Scorpions bite us; or like David, men
after Gods own heart, unless the Lions roar upon us; that we are any of God
Almighties Psalm. 57. 4. Matthew. 10. 16.
Lambs, unless our habitation be among the Wolves; What? Christ's Sheep must
bear Christ's marks, I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus, (says
the Apostle) Gal. 6. 17.
and what are they, but railings, revilings, oppositions, chains (if need be)
and imprisonments? for the hope of Isreal's sake (says the Apostle) I am bound
with this chain; yea, and he was as proud (if we may use that word) Act. 28.
of that his Iron chain, as the best Alderman in London Col. 1. 24.
of his chain of gold, and more ^eason he had for it; and the Apostle commends
Onesiphorus for this, that he was 2 Timothy 1. 16.
not ashamed of his chain; and does it become us to be afraid of its
chinking? We read of John the Baptist, how he preached his head off, he
preached so long against the sins of the great ones, til his head was sent in
for a second Matthew. 14. 11.
course; And our Savior himself preached so long and so plainly against their
sins, till they stoned him out of the Pulpit, John 8. yea, he spoke so home
into the bosoms of the Scribes and Pharisees, that were (as you John 8. 59.
are) the teachers of others, that the text says in another place, they
perceived that he meaned them: And he that is truly Christ's, must follow him:
Ye have me for an example, Matthew. 21. 45. Luke 20. 19. John 13. 15.
says he; yea, and God promises us, Jer. 1. He will make us as iron pillars,
and walls of brass, that though men oppose, they shall not prevail against us:
Ier. 1. 18. 19.
Nay, there is no better way to get respect and esteem to our persons, then
faithfulness and unpartialnesse in this kind, He that rebukes a man shall
find more favor in the end, then he that flattereth (says wise Solomon;) and
Prove. 28. 23.
the Apostle charge Titus to look to it, that no man despise him, prescribes
him this course amongst the rest, to rebuke with all authority: Nay, the Lord
says to the Tit. 2. 15.
soothing Priests, Mal. 2. 9. I have made you despised, and vile before all the
people, because you have not kept my ways, Mal. 2. 9.
but have been partial in the Law: and look about you, what Preachers are
most affected and followed, what do people go out of their Parishes for to
see? Reeds shaken Matthew. 11. 7.
with the wind, to hear those that are timorous and fearful? No, but such as
like John the Baptist, come in Luke 1. 17.
the spirit of Elias, as resolute as he was when he came to Ahab in the second
person, It is thou and thy Fathers 1 King. 18. ^1 Matthew. 14. 4.
house that troubles Israel: so John to Herod, It is not lawful for thee to
have thy brothers wife* Therefore (Brethren) (as the Apostle advises) let us
be careful to quit our selves like men, like Captains, and not like cowards,
Cor. 16. 13.
among the people over whom God has set us: for as concerning others that are
beyond our reach, Kings, Magistrates, Bishops, Governors, or the like, to
meddle with them or their sins, (unless we are called to speak before them)
for ought I know it is beyond our Commission.) But I say toward them that are
under our charge, let us prove our selves to be of the truth, (as Christ did)
by not regarding their persons in our preaching: Master (say they) we know that
thou art of the truth, Matthew. 22. 16.
and teach the way of God truly: (how did they know it?) why, thou carest
not for man (say they) neither considerest the person of men (namely in thy
teaching:) Let us bear in mind, the fearful are in as bad a case as the
unbeleevers: yea, as Murderers, Whoremongers, Sorcerers, and Idolaters, for all
shall have a part together in the Lake, Revel. 21. 8. In a word, remember but
that woe Rev. 21. 8.
to them that sow pillowes under men's elbowes, Ezekiel. 13. 18. that woe of God
is more unsupportable then the Ezekiel 13. 18.
malice of all men.

And now in the fourth place, you that seek your selves in praise, by a
learned and unintelligible kind of 4.
preaching, that by your Cookishnesse in your Sermons, as by forced sawces, do
take away the wholesome relish from the good word of God, when you follow these
courses you do in a special manner lay open your selves not only to be
vainglorious, but also very foolish, if you think your gawish flourishes can
add any more excellency to the Majesty of Gods word, then a painted face can
add commendation to an honest woman; No Brethren, the Word of God, when it is
most naked in it self, is then most mighty in operation, most keen and
cutting, and our Art does but take away its edge: and this the Apostle was well
aware of, when he came to the Corinthians not with the enticing speech of man's
eloquence, 1 Cor. 2. 4.
but with the plain evidence of the spirit and of power; the Word of God you
know is said to be as a two-edged sword; now if you would have your sword Heb.
4. 12.
cut, you must unscabberd it, not put it into a sheath, but make it naked and
bare, for then it will be most sharp and piercing.

Brethren I confess it is a hard thing for a man to deny himself in this, our
Religion for the most part lies more in the head then it does in the heart, and
that is the reason that our preaching for the most part is more heady then
hearty: yea, but if we would have it go to the heart, we must have it come
from the heart: if we sincerely covet to make our people good Christians, we
must not mind to show our selves great Scholars, for then God will not bless
our labors. It was said of our Savior, Mar. 4. 33.
that he preached, not as himself was able to speak, but as they were able to
hear, and therefore is it said in another place, the common people heard him
gladly: Mar. 12. 37.
So must we (Brethren) if we will be like Christ, and seek the good of our
people, descend to their capacities, be plain, that we may be profitable, and
always pray, that we may have the evidence of the spirit, that we may be
powerful, for this will bring a man peace at the last: this course shall be
rewarded with a well done good and Matthew. 25. 21.
faithful servant. In a word, remember what is said, 2 Cor. 10. the last verse.
not he that commends himself, 2 Cor. 10. 18.
is approved, but he whom the Lord commends.

Well, in the fifth place, you that seek your selves in 5.
popularity, in affecting to be followed, you Rural Gods, you Pans of the
Country, that Pope-like do covet to overtop all your Brethren: what have you
above others, 1 Cor. 4. 7.
that you have not received? why then do you glory as if you received it not?
as if you by your own power and authority had made these o^ these men whole,
had converted Act. 3. 12.
such or such? Why should Great is Diana of the Ephesians, sound so sweetly in
your ears? What will vox Act. 19. 2^.
populi do you good, when you are raked up in the dust? it may lift you up for
the present, and yet clap you under hatches in the end: if you take, commonly
(with the fish) you are also taken, nor do you more rob your fellow Ministers
of love, then you do your selves of liberty: your humor of all others is a
most dangerous humor, and so much the more dangerous, because so pleasing to
nature; it puffs up, it causes you to despise your fellow laborers, and to
be to them-ward too too full of domineering; yea, and it occasioneth neglect to
them from others, and much ill will from them unto your selves; nay, it
oft-times takes away the authority from the Word of God, for (with the people)
that relisheth well from no man's mouth, but such as yours, to whom they are
devoted, what you say is their Scripture, ipse dixit, he holds it, that is
enough, and he must needs err from the truth (in their deem) that contradicts
it.

Ah (Brethren) that we had but hearts to consider these inconveniences, and to
remember that we are not for our selves, but are all fellow laborers, for one
and the same Master, and therefore for the work sake we should strive to
maintain the credit of one another, especially with their own people, and be
more afflicted to see our neighbor Minister forsaken, then affected to see our
selves followed; for when he is forsaken, there is afault either in him or
them, and we should grieve at the faults of all: if we mark but the Apostles
custom, we shall see how careful every where he was to maintain the credit
of his fellow Ministers, though they were inferior to him in gifts, yet he did
not affect to bear away the Bell from them, we may see in the Epistle to the
Colossians, how he calls Tychicus and Epaphras, faithful Col. 4. v. 7. and. 12.
Pa^tors, and commends them exceedingly to their own people, (for indeed a man
may be faithful in the exercise of two Talents, as well as in the exercise of
five) and so Matthew. 25. v. 2^ and 23.
in this Chapter of the text, how does he commend Timothy and Epaphroditus to
the Philippians, to whom they Phil. 2. v. 20. etc. Ve^s. 25. ad 30.
were appointed Preachers? O (Brethren) if we would but do so too, I dare say
God Almighty would conne us thank for it, for so should we further one another
in his work, and not hinder one another as we do.

And I would also that you in the sixth place would in 6.
a special manner consider this, you black-mouthed Ministers, that are so
brim-full to the very mouth of envy and pride, that to empty your selves, you
are feign to go a backbiting in secret of them, that are more worthily famous
then your selves, to spit out your filthy venom against their harmless, and
well-deserving persons, when you see the people resorting to them. I say I
would you would think upon this: for I pray, how do you rejoice at the good
they do, when you so malign them? how do you seek Christ when you fret at
the faithfulness and painfulness that is used in his service? you would like
Magus, be famous too, but with him you reap naught Act. 8. 18.
but disgrace by these courses, and a further possibility of Hell to come: Have
ye not marked the story of the Viper? Acts 28. Why? that is the very emblem
of one of Act. 28. 3, 4, 5, etc.
you; The text says, verse. 3. there came a Viper out of the heat and leaped
upon Saint Paul's hand, (now you must understand by the way that Saint Paul was
the honestest man in all the company;) Now, when the Barbarians saw this, they
presently concluded Saint Paul was a murderer, one whom Vengeance would not
suffer to live but after a while Saint Paul shakes the Viper into the fire, and
himself remained whole and sound, which when the people saw, they presently
changed their note, and said Saint Paul was a God: So these venome-mouthed
wretches, like that Viper, out of the heat of their malice, lay hold on the
best and honestest men, endeavoring to kill them with their empoysoned
tongues; now when the Bishops and others that be not acquainted with the true
conditions of these men, hear these things of them, they presently censure
them, as the Barbarians did Paul, to be naughty and wicked men: yea, but let
them stay awhile, and they shall see the Vipers only to fall into Hellfire,
and the other remaining harmless and innocent, shall be known to all, to be
good men, and men of God: You that be guilty of these things, I pray you take
them to your selves, and see unto them.

In the next place, you that seek your selves in your own 7. 8. 9.
profits, there be three sorts of you, I will shut you up altogether, (because I
begin to grow tedious to my self, and I fear much more to some of you:) In a
word, you plainly discover that your pains for Christ is little worth, in
that you look for a reward in this world; True virtue (says a Heathen man)
scorns to expect, or look after an earthly Crown; our Savior tells us that
his Kingdom is not of this world, and why? that his Disciples John 18. 36.
might not (as you do) think of greatness or riches here: I pray, what
became of your forefather Demas that forsook Paul, to embrace this present
world? the ^ Ti^. 4. 10.
text says he went to Thessalonica, and Dorotheus says, he became an Idol
Priest there, and no marvel if he proves the Devils Priest, that was Mammons
C^aplaine: Covetousness, says the Apostle, is the root of evil, which 1 Timothy 6. 10.
while some lusted after, they erred from the faith, and pierced themselves
through with many sorrows; But thou O man of God (says he) shun these
things: So say I to you, O men of God, shun these things, you above all men,
because you are men of God; because Christ (in a special manner) has chosen
you out of the world, therefore it beseemes not you above all, to mind the John
15. 19.
things of this world; because you are the Salt to season others, above all it
becomes not you to be unsavory; Matthew. 5. 13.
because you must preach against covetousness, of all others it becomes not
you to be covetous; you must help to draw up other men's affections to the
things above, therefore it beseemes not you to have your affections entangled
upon the things below: With what face can you preach the doctrine of faith,
when you your selves are so incredulous as not to trust God for the matters of
this life, when as himself has so expressly said, He will be Levies portion?
Deuteronomy. 10. 9. Doubtless the cause that many Ministers children come to penury
and misery, Deuteronomy. 10. 9.
is not for that their Parents left them so little, but because they left them
so much: (namely) besides the Lord, if not rather without the Lord, they were
not so careful to leave the Lord their portion, as to leave them a portion of
wealth: Ah (says Christ) seek the Kingdom Matthew. 6. 33.
of Heaven, and all things necessary shall be supplied, (namely to thee and
thine) preach the Word diligently and impartially, and God will provide for
thee; the Ravens shall feed thee, as they did Elias, that is, the very 1 King.
27. 4.
carrionly wretches of the world shall help to sustain thee; God has their
hearts in his hand, and he shall make them do it. Ah (Brethren) that we would
but all resolve to be at the Lords finding, and to take only that which God
shall work for us, and cast upon us, without our seeking or suing for, by any
other means then by following our callings, though we have but a little, we
shall have more content in it, then others have in a great deal: A little that
the righteous has, is better then great Psalm. 37. 16.
riches of the ungodly: O Brethren, how the Lords hand does sweeten a blessing,
over any hand does whatsoever! I praise my God (I can say it) I take not so
much comfort in what I have, as I do in this that God gave it, it was his
only working, Deus nobis haec otia fecit.

Or howsoever (Brethren) howsoever, should God defer our pay till our day be
done, yet then we shall have it heaped up and running over, we shall be the
first of all that shall receive our reward, Rev. 11. 18. and our wages Rev. 11.
18.
shall be great too, Matthew. 5. 12. Great is your reward in Matthew. 5. 12.
Heaven, and they that turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the Stars
for ever and ever, says the Prophet Daniel, and doubtless let us think this,
the more reward Dan. 12. 3.
we have beforehand, the less shall we have hereafter.

Wherefore (Brethren) I beseech you, let us not show our selves to be of the
number of them, that Saint Paul speaks of, that make merchandise of the word
of God, 2 Cor. 2. 17.
take heed of Aurum, lest it prove Tholossanum, remember how Juda^ bag burst
him, and Dives wealth damned him: to seek after wealth and promotion in this
kind, is to follow the error of Balaam, as Saint Peter and Saint Jude say,
and riches in this kind are called the wages of 2 Pet. 2. 15. Jude 11.
unrighteousness: and if you mark it in a Clergy man, to the word Lucre is
always ^ilthy annexed, Feed the flock of Christ, not for filthy luere, 1 Pet.
5. 2. etc. ^ Pet. 5. 2. 1 Timothy 3. 3. Ti^^^. 11.


And away with that damned usury, that gets so much strength by the practice of
some of the Clergy; nay, some amongst us have got a trick, but it is of the
Devils teaching, to go beyond God Almighties reach (as they think) in putting
out their moneys, they have invented a new way, which he never thought on, they
will put out 20. li. to have 30. or 40. li. paid them for it, by equal
payments in six or seven years space, (or aft^r that fashion, I know not the
particulars.) But if usury it self be a sin) when God will endure to be
mocked, then this trick will hold bottom.

And you of the Clergy that are Landlords, and have Grounds or Houses to let, I
would you would be ashamed of your selves for your unconscionable griping and
handling of people in this kind; to be sure others are ashamed of you, when
they hear poor folk putting it into their private Letany, from being a
Clergy man's Tenant, good Lord deliver us.

And you my Brethren that have where withal to keep 1 Timothy 3. 2.
houses, be liberal, be hospital, the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3. 2. says, it is part
of the office of a Minister, to be given to hospitality: Nay, think this
without question, whatsoever we have from the Church, more then is sufficient
for our selves and families, of ^ight belongs to the poor, yea, and fu^ther,
if we have where withal, and do (...) preach with our hands as well as with
our tongues, w^ shall make but a poor wo^k on it: and let me add this,
assuredly, there neither is nor can be any such inward pleasure or sweet
content to the mind, as to see a poor man cry for joy, at the ^eceit of an
unexpected two pence, or three pence, when he begs but for an half penny.

And you of the Clergy that are so politic in the affairs of this world, as
many of you be, pray remember that saying, the wisdom of this world is
foolishness with 1 Cor. 1. 20.
God: and therefore the more wiser you grow in worldly matters, the more
foolish you grow to God-wa^d; and indeed if you mark it, these Ministers for
the most part, that are most able to give advice in worldly matters, are
commonly the easiest P^eachers, and the poorest Divines; and on the otherside,
the Proverb holds true, the greatest Scholars are none of the wisest men.

B^t verily I am persuaded this sin of worldliness in many Ministers shall
be required at the Parishioners hands, for if they were not so full of fraud,
and couzenage, and unjust dealing, but would pay the Ministers their dues
honestly and quietly, they would never be driven so to look after them, or to
study the law to know their own.

And therefore (my Brethren of the Laity) pray let me lose a few more words
among you before I go: you complain that your Ministers are covetous, and
close, and nigh and shrewd men for the world, you may thank your selves for
it, you make them so, for if you had but so much honesty to pay unto God the
things that are Gods, that they are entrusted to look unto, they would mind
their books more and the world less.

But you would have your Minister keep a good house, and feast you all over
from one end of the town to the other, and in requital of his kindness, you
will cast all the burden of the poor upon his neck if you can, and very
mannerly spare your own purse, and cozen him of half his dues beside, and when
your consciences begin to croke, and to grumble at your so dong, you can stop
their mouths with your new found distinction, that you allow him as much as the
tenth of the ground comes too, that is according to the rent you pay for the
Land: but he shall not have the tenth of your labors: and therefore you will
pay your selves for them, you will steal from him so much as shall pay for the
tenth of plowing, and harrowing, and reaping, and mowing, for horse and man and
all: and this you think you may do, and with this cheating distinction, for
the present you stop the mouths of your consciences: But (by your favor) if
this were honest dealing, then God Almighty was much to blame, when he
commanded the people, not only to pay, but also to bring their tithes unto
Jerusalem, in that he did not withal command the Priests to allow them
somewhat back again for their labors; no, no, but your wisdom comes from a
deeper bottom, then God, Almighties did, it comes from Hell, and to Hell it
will carry you.

But you (my Brethren of my Clergy) when you hear any of your Parishioners
nibling upon this distinction, cross him in your books for a cheating knave,
for I warrant you he has cozened you already, or he means to cozen you.

And (my Brethren) we shall do well to look unto it, and prevent a danger
before it comes, for doubtless these inconscionabiles coloni, do intend to
bring Ministers to take their Tithes according to the Rents of their Lands, and
not according to the fruits of their Lands; yea, and let a man but for
quietness sake yield unto them once, you shall have them come the next year
and complain they have a hard bargain, and then you shall not get so much,
and so in the conclusion it will come to this pass, we shall get nothing at
all.

Ah, but my Brethren (you of the Laity) have a care of your souls for all that
you had best, and express the same in loving your Ministers, and in paying
them their dues, that they may be encouraged to have a care of your souls too,
as of the things of Jesus Christ, you have a condition among you, but it is a
very ill-favored one, you will not above all do your Minister a courtesy,
for fear of raising a custom, no, you will scarce be conscionable some of
you, for fear of bringing it into a a custom, and you think it a great
credit unto your selves to be the maintainers of a Towne-faction against your
Pastors: O no, doubt but it will be very sweet and comfortable unto you, when
you lie upon your deathbeds, yea, and if you have never a foot of Land in the
Town of your own, so much the more comfortable: O but (Brethren) in sober
sadness, let me tell you it will be but poor comfort when sad death shall lay
his cold claws upon you, to summon you to the Judgment seat of him whose
servants and stewards you have opposed: No, no, but believe it, it will be more
comfortable, if y^u can remember, that you have always been in love and
peace, and friendship with your Minister, and have never been failing to do
him any courtesy, because he is the messenger of God, for your good, nor did
you ever desire to get any thing from him but grace and knowledge; surely
(Brethren) these thoughts will be more comfortable then the other, wherefore
if you desire peace upon your deathbeds, think on these things before hand,
and so I have done also with you.

And now in the last place of all: you Courtiers, you will one day lie upon
your deathbeds too, (for Lawyers also die,) and you will hear a reddite
rationem vi^^tatis vestrae, render an account of all your dishonest doings: you
look (I warrant you) to see a great many Presentiments to day, yea but when you
see them, and look upon them, I would have you but think thus with your
selves, the time will come, when we our selves shall be presented, our own
conferences shall make the Bill, and the Devil shall play the Churchwarden to
put it in: I would you would think thus, I say, when you are taking and
looking upon your Presentiments, for it may be the thought of it may do you
some good, in may make you careful in some sort to punish sin (as your place
requires) and not so altogether (as may be noted) to take money: for if an
Adulterer, or an unclean person be put into your Court, if he has money you
will (...) to loo^^ upon him; if he has enough, Popelike, you will sell him a
Pardon; if but a little, yet for that little sake, you will deigne him an Order
of Penance: but if he has none (I speak upon some grounds) then he comes off
(for ought we see) clearly, not a word more as we hear is spoken to him, and
we that are his Ministers (in the mean time) dare not admit him to the
Sacrament, lest our selves should come into danger, lest you should lie to get
us into your lurches: Now is this right? is this honesty? is this according to
the will of God think you? nay, is this the mind of our Governors that permit
you in your offices? no, I believe it is not, but you wrong them, you abuse us,
and you offend God, and injure and defame our Church most of all: And I am
persuaded, did they (I mean our Bishops and the rest) that have put you in
your places, but know as much of you in matters of this nature, as God knows,
they would not be so long-suffering as he.

Nay, let me add this, I think verily, if you were but as conscionable in
punishing sin and evil (as your place requires) as you seem to be be
unconscionable in taking moneys, your gain would be much more then it is, and
where you have one Presentment, you would have three or four, for I am
persuaded many Ministers had ^^her suffer some wrong at their peoples hands,
then put them into your hands, you are so tedious and griping in your dealings
with them, for my own part it was in my mind to have presented some two or
three matters, but partly upon these considerations I have forborne, and I
believe some of my Brethren have bin sometime of the same mind, so that if you
would but do, as you ought to do, you should get more by us then you are like
to get, and besides your gettings would be attended with Gods blessings, and
your souls might happily go to Heaven in the conclusion, wherefore be requested
for your own sakes, to look sometimes upon your own selves, and think
sometimes upon your own dealings, and present sometimes your own sins, with
sorrow, tears, and confession before the Lords eyes, you may save the Devil a
labor at the last day.

Thus (Brethren) I have held you longer then I thought I should, but if you
well consider: I had many sorts to speak unto, and to speak to every one a
little, I could speak no less; and now I make no question, but with Sampson,
I have pulled a house upon mine own head; I mean much secret dislike and
evil will, from every body for my plainness, but if I have, it is no more
then I fore-expected, and as Sampson did, if with my self I slay or wound the
guilty, I care not: I say with him, let me lose my life, (my credit, my
esteem, or what you will) Jude 16. 30.
with the Philistims, I am contented; and if my conscience could but tell me,
that in every action I ever did, in every Sermon I ever preached, I had as
truly sought Christ, as it suggests unto me I have desired to do in this, I
would boldly conclude with that Simeon in the Gospel: Lord now let thy servant
depart in peace: and so (...) 2. 29.
farewell.

Gratia and gloria, Deo and Christo, Jesu and adjutori meo,

Amen.
FINIS
THE SECOND SERMON PREACHED AT THE PVBLIKE LECTVRE AT STORTFORD, August 3. 1637.

Wherein is discovered the carriage of a wise man in evil times.

By EDWARD SYMONS, Minister of Rain in Essex.

PROVE. 29. 11. A fool utters all his mind, but a wise man keeps it in till
afterward.

LONDON, Printed by R. C. for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at his shop, at
the sign of the Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard. 1642.

A WISE MAN'S CARRIAGE IN EVIL TIMES.
AMOS 5. 13. Therefore the prudent shall keep silence in that time, for it is
an evil time.


THese words do teach how godly and wise men shall behave themselves in
sinful and dangerous times, (for such are eviltimes) they shall keep silence,
says the text, they shall say but little whatsoever they think, God shall
enable them with that gift, by enlarging unto them wisdom and prudence, for in
Christ he abounds toward all his, in wisdom and prudence, Ephesians. 1. 8. in so
much that what is said of Christ, Es. 52. 13. Behold my servant shall deal
prudently; may and shall in some sort be said of each of them, behold they
shall deal prudently, which prudence of theirs, they shall one way express,
by keeping silence in evil times, as the text infers.

Many talk, that these times wherein we live are evil times, if they be, (as
they say) it were well if they would show themselves prudent by this mark, and
keep silence in them; some think it their wisdom to speak much and to write
much, and to inveigh and exclaim much, and to find much fault whersoere they
come, and to cast much blame upon them, that perhaps deserve it not, this they
think their best wisdom, by this appears their deep insight: yea, but the
Prophet here is of a clean contrary opinion, he thinks that prudence in such
times does best appear by keeping silence.

Well, but whether the times are evil or no: it is not undertaken to be any
part of my office at this time to determine, only this I am sure, it were good
that some people would keep a little more silence then they do, and therefore
this text cannot be unseasonable or unsuitable for these times, especially if
they be (as some cry out and do suppose) to teach people good behavior.

From the words we note these following particulars.

1. Some times are worse then others, for the Prophet does particularize in
that time, which he calls an evil time.

2. Wise and godly men do know these times, they are able to discern them,
and to distinguish of them, to behave themselves accordingly in them.

3. It is the property of wise and godly men, and their custom in evil times
to keep silence, to say little, to bind their tongues to their good behaviors.

4. And lastly, because wise men do so, we may conclude that silence is best
and most safe in such times wherein prayers and tears are most needful, and
those are sinful and dangerous times: These be the observations, of which in
order.

1. Some times are worse then others: there be good days and bad, good times
and evil, the Scripture notes both; Acts 3. 19. 21. there is mention made of
times of refreshing, and of restitution, and Heb. 9. 10. of times of
reformation, and Luke 21. 28. of times of redemption, wherein we are bidden to
lift up our heads, that is, to be merry and joyful, and then indeed we may be
more free in our talking, for there is a time to speak as well as to keep
silence, and as evil times according to the text, are times to keep silence
in, so good times are times to speak in, for when things go well with us,
(unless we be worse then the brute Ox that lowes not over his fodder) we
will not murmr nor complain, nay, we will speak nothing but what is good,
praise and thankfulness, if we have any grace in us: thus you see there be
good times.

Yea, and so there be evil too, which the Scripture also notes, times when the
Bridegroom shall be taken away, Matthew. 9. 15. and those are times of mourning
says the text there, evil times indeed in respect of those forementioned,
when our joys, our comforts, and outward contentments, our spiritual
blessings are gone or diminished, when the face of Jesus Christ in his
ordinances is darkened or obscured, so Luke 12. 22. the days shall come, says
Christ, when ye shall desire to see one of the days of the son of man, and
shall not see them, one of the days of light and liberty which now you do
enjoy; sure those are evil days and times whensoere they come, and Luke 23.
29. the days are coming in which they shall say, Blessed are the barren that
bear not, etc. when to have children shall be a grief, and to behold them a
cause of sorrow, when the very sight of sucking babes, and helpless, harmless
infants shall cause the parent to shed tears, when the loving husband and wife
shall wish themselves b^rren, and shall count it a blessedness to have no
children, sure those times must needs be evil, great evils are hanging (at
least) over head that causes such sad thoughts, such desires, indeed such
days and times are called the days of vengeance, Luke 21. 22. days wherein
sin reigns and judgment rages: thus you see some times are worse then
others.

Now the reason is not, that one time, or part of time is better or worse then
other, but from the people, and Reason.
their conditions that live in them, 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3. and following verses,
the Apostle says, in the last days perilous times shall come, for says he
(showing the reason) men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters,
proud, etc. thus and thus conditioned: so Matthew. 24. 12. our Savior having
spoke of the evil of the last times, he adds the reason of the evil to be,
because iniquity shall abound, men shall be full of sin: and in the verses
before the text, the reason of the evil time mentioned in the text is the
plenty of evil men, verse. 7. men that cannot abide to be reproved, or
reclaimed, verse. 10. men that would oppress the poor to spare their own
purses, verse: 11. men of manifold transgressions, that would afflict the just,
take bribes, turn the poor from their right, verse. 12. men that would do
whatsoever themselves pleased, rich men that scorned to be controuled, and such
kind of fellows indeed there be in many places and times, that make both place
and times naught wherein they live: such are those worldly chubs, that take
upon them to be as Lords and Kings in the places and Parishes wherein they
live, over their inferior neighbors, that turn judgment and equity into
wormwood, that hate to be rebuked, that tread upon the poor, laying their own
burdens upon their unable shoulders, that afflict the just, and take bribes,
such are they that bear sway in the Parishes where they live, and indeed these
are they that make the times bad whenever they be so, and experience tells us
that where the chief of the Parish be unjust, profane, wicked, or careless
to keep good rule, there is much evil and sin committed by all sorts, and
when and where such men have to do, the time and place is evil, such as are
the Masters, such will be the men, inferiors will conform to the examples of
them that go before them.

Now, if you ask why God who governes all things and times, permits evil
times to be, I answer among other reasons, it may be to try what benefit those
that be good have made of better times, what meekness, and patience, and
virtue they are furnished with, that they might have occasion to show
themselves prudent, and wise by their silence, as in good times they had, to
show the same by their speaking: and besides, all things in this world, and so
time the measure of all things is mutable and changeable, it never continues in
one stay: and thus briefly you have the Reasons.

Marvel not then at evil times, there has always been such, both in Church
and Commonwealth; Eccl. Use 1.
5. 8. If thou see the oppression of the poor, and violent perverting of
judgment and justice in a City, marvel not at the matter: for is there any
thing new under the Sun? Eccl. 1. 10. Has there not been evil times before?
yes sure, therefore as it is, Eccles. 7. 10. say not thou what is the cause the
former times were better then these? for thou do not wisely consider and
understand, that the former times have been in some respect as bad, if not
worse then those that thou complainest of: there have been evil men before,
and evil doings, there has been oppression, and injustice before, taking
bribes, and trampling upon the poor, and hating reproof, and opposing Gods
Prophets, all this this Chapter witnesses; yea, there has been persecution
in former times, even to the shedding of blood; Church and Commonwealth, both
are, and ever have been always like the Moon, they have had both their
increase and wane, and that in all places: In Jury once was God well known,
his name was great in Israel, and therein was that Lands happiness above all
others, and now it is most miserable of all others in regard of the want of
that happiness: the seven Churches of Asia, and also the Church of Greece once
did flourish and saw good days, now none but evil; Rome it self was once
famous over all the world for her faith, now as stinking; poor Germany now
wasted with misery, had once some good days as well as we, who must also look
for a change as well as she, (though as yet (God be thanked) the Sun shines
most comfortably amongst us;) yea, and so must America, New England too, where
now perhaps the Sun of comfort begins to appear, and the glorious
Day Star to show it self, sed venient annis secula seris, there will come
times in after ages, when the clouds will over-shadow and darken the sky
there, as well as elsewhere, though now perhaps many promise to themselves
nothing but successive happiness there, which for a time through Gods mercy
they may enjoy, and I pray God they may a long time: but in this world there is
no happiness perpetual: therefore never think it strange if some times be
worse then others: I confess indeed we are fallen into the fagge end of the
world, the last and old age thereof which therefore is most crasie and most
full of imperfections, the base and iron age, or rather (as was signified by
Nebuchadnezzars Image) the age that is partly iron, partly clay, that the
Apostle says should be most perilous, as being most sinful and most wicked, 2 Timothy 3. the sink indeed of all former times, and so in some respect worse than
they; yet Christ being given in these last days, 1 Pet. 1. 20. (for when he
came these last days did begin, 1 John 2. 18.) he being now revealed more
than ever, and still daily more and more clearly to the hearts of men, as the
times grow more and more old and evil: so in that respect the evilnesse of the
times may be the better borne with the less disturbance, as our comfort in
him is more.

Remember from what was said concerning the occasion of evil times, that it is
from the evil men that live in them, Use 2.
from that self-love, that covetousness, that pride, that treachery, that
high-mindednesse, that love of pleasure, that backbiting, that slandering, that
hypocrisy that raigns in the hearts of men, etc. as they are reckoned up, 2 Timothy 3. And when you censure these sins in others, look upon them also as
they are in your selves, and from thence know, that you are some of them that
make the times evil when they be so: when you note pride in others, note it
also in your selves, when you tax covetousness in others, see it also in your
selves, etc. and when you complain that others persecute you, see to it, if
you do not persecute others your selves, as they you (according as you cry)
with their power, so you them with your tongues; for there is a persecution
with the tongue, as well as with the hand, Ishmael persecu^ed with the one as
well as Cain did with the other, and the one is as grievous as the other in
every respect.

It is observed by some, and in my conscience if I should be put to swear I
cannot deny but the observation is true: that many who call themselves the
persecuted flock of Christ, because they are opposed and crossed in their way,
are the greatest slanderers, whisperers, and backbiters in the world again,
and do carry more hurtful venom upon their tongues th^n any others do; such
conditions I am sure the true Martyrs and persecuted flock of Christ in former
times were far from: for in very deed they that are tr^ly of Christ, are like
Christ, who had no evil found in his mouth, he never slandered, or railed, or
backbited any, he was holy, and harmless, Heb. 7. 26. and they that are truly
his, are so too, and so must be, Phil. 2. 15. And so we have done with our
first note: we come to the second.

Wise and godly men do know these evil times, they are able to discern them,
to distinguish of them, and to 2.
behave themselves accordingly in them.

I say, wise and godly men: for some are wise and not godly, and some are
godly, but not very wise; the first are not taught of God, the other are not
ripe enough to practice what they are taught, therefore I say, godly and wise.

Secondly I say, do know these evil times to behave themselves accordingly in
them: for there is (as was said before) a time for a wise man to speak, as
well as to hold his peace, there is a time for both, Eccles. 3. 7. now the time
to speak in, is the time of prosperity, good times, for when a man is in
prosperity, if he speaks, his words will be regarded, Joh. 29. 21. 22. but
when the times are evil with a man, when he is poor, and in adversity, though
he be never so godly, and speak never so wisely, yet his words are not heard,
Eccles. 9. 16. and this Job had experience of too, when he was in his
adversity: and therefore I say of these times, wise and godly men can
distinguish: for the proof of this, see Eccles. 8. 9. a wise man's heart
discerns both time and judgment; and Prove. 22. 3. A prudent man foreseeth
the evil and hides himself, and Heb. 5. 14. men of full age, that, is, (that
have got some growth in Christ, which are wise as well as godly,) have their
senses exercised to discern both good and evil, and Psalm. 107. 43. He that
is wise will observe and mark such things.

Indeed I confess others cannot do so, the brute creatures are more wise than
natural men in this: Jer. 8. 7. and therefore Solomon sends such a one, whom
he calls a fool, to the Pismire to learn this wisdom in discerning Prove. 6. 6.
of times, take the words in our sense, and they make for our purpose, I
confess in a literal sense there is many a natural man for worldly
commodities can foresee the Winter in Summer, and provide for it; discern of a
hard time when it is come, to advance the price of his commodities, and before
it comes to lay in against it, for the children of this world are wise in their
generation; but to discern of times as they are good or evil to the soul, is
beyond their skill, to discern of the vice of the times any farther then it
makes to the hindering of their outward commodities, or their corporal
affairs, is more than they are able; this our Savior notes of them, Luke 12.
54, 55, 56. they cannot discern the times (says he) that is, the danger of
them in respect of the soul, but they rather sing peace, peace to themselves,
being the servants of corruption, till sudden destruction comes upon them, 1
These. 5. 3.

For indeed evil times are most suitable to the humors Reason.
and tastes of evil men, they relish them best, sin is sweet to the sinner,
and sinful times are sweetest to sinful men, they think them the best times,
for they call evil good, and good evil, bitter sweet, and sweet bitter, Es.
5. 20. although there is a woe belonging unto them for their so doing: nor are
they endued with the spirit of discerning as the godly are, for these things
and times in this sense are spiritually discerned, and to this purpose God
bestows his Spirit upon his own: 1 Cor. 12. 10. there is mention made of the
gift of discerning which the Lord bestows; and then further they are taught of
God, John 6. 45. It is written in the Prophets and they shall be taught of God,
and James 1. 6. God gives them wisdom and prudence, and Ephesians. 1. 8. he
abounds toward them in all wisdom and prudence, so that their spirits can
discern perverse things, Job 6. 30. their ears are open to hear, and their
hearts to believe, what is threatened by Gods Prophets against sin; and if
sin goes before, they know that without repentance judgment will follow.

Whereas other men that are not godly, promise liberty and peace to themselves
and others, although they be the servants of corruption, 2 Pet. 2. 19. and
cannot abide to hear of judgments, or that the times are evil, when at any
time they so be: you may remember to this purpose the story of the old world,
when Noah (no doubt) did preach of the ensuing evil time that would come upon
them, but they believed it not: And the story of Sodom, when Lot preached of
the same point, and to as little purpose; you may remember also the times
wherein Jeremy lived, and into what troubles he came, for his foretelling and
speaking of the dangerous times that were to come upon the people, see Jer. 20.
1. and chap. 26. 8, 9. and chap. 38. 4. Thus you see that some men, though wise
enough in other matters, yet not to discern ill times, nor can they abide to
hear of them, they will not believe although they be told, but hate them that
speak of them: and indeed what was it they had to lay to Stephens charge, when
they put him to death? why see, Act. 6. 17. they pretended that he spoke
blasphemous words against the holy place and the Law; and what blasphemy do
you think it was? why, I warrant you, he said that for their sins God would
bring judgments upon that place, and take away the Law from them, and give it
to others, according to our Saviors doctrine in the Parable of the husbandmen,
Matthew. 21. 41, 43. which at that time also was very ill taken by them whom it
did concern, as ye may see, verse. 45. 46. of that chap.

But now with the godly and wise it is not so, they like Mary, lay up what they
see and hear to that purpose in their hearts, and wisely provide and fit
themselves against those evil and dangerous times, some one way and some
another, as it pleases the spirit of wisdom for to guide them: Jonadab the
son of Rechab, wisely weighing the sins of the times, and the judgments
threatened by the Prophets, and believing them to be true, that they should be
carried away captive into a strange country, where they were like to have but
course fare, small drink, and hard lodging, therefore does train up his
children accordingly beforehand, and sets them down rules to live by, which
they observed; they must drink no Wine, dwell in no Cities, but lodge in
Tents, etc. that so they might be fitted for the hardship which they and their
posterity in succeeding evil times were like to endure: so we read in the
book of Martyrs, of two women that hearing of Boners cruelty in Queen Mary's
days, how little food in the prison was allowed to the poor prifoners of
Jesus Christ, and expecting that ere long, themselves should be in that place,
did beforehand against that evil time accustom themselves to eat and drink
but the value of three farthings a day, whereby they did afterward endure his
hard usage.

So we read, Rev. 12. 14. the Church foreseeing the evil times did wisely
apprehend the occasion (having a way made) for her safety and security in the
Wilderness, to Pella in the days of Jerusalems sacking; and, as some will
have it, upon a like foresight many do fly to New England now: so the Spirit
taught Noah to provide an Arc for his own safety against the evil time that
was coming upon the world, and some by the same Spirit are enabled with faith
and patience to bear the brunt. Luke 21. 19. speaking of evil times, they
were bid to possess their souls with patience, inferring that by it as by a
safe armor they might be secured and kept safe, for as in dangerous times the
safety of some may consist in flying, so the safety of others may consist in
sitting still, Es. 30. 7. their strength is to sit still, speaking of some, and
verse. 15. of that chap. In rest shall ye be saved, in quietness and
confidence shall be your strength, that is, in a silent waiting upon God: if
God calls upon some to go, yet no doubt but he commands others to stay, Esa.
26. 20. and as we judge not but some may believe that make haste to be gone, so
let none censure but some may believe that make not such haste, for surely this
is Scripture phrase, He that believes makes not haste, Es. 28. 16. A believer
may with quietness sit still, were the times far worse then now they be, and
with confidence expect better days, he is well armed with faith, patience, and
prudence for his own safety and security, and so we come to the Use.

If the godly and wise are able to distinguish of evil times, enabled of God
thereunto, then we should not slight Use.
their judgments concerning these matters, we may repent us of it afterward if
we do, see Acts 27. 10, 11. compared with v. 21. where was an evil time
toward, a great tempest, and Paul warned them of it, but the Centurion believed
the owner of the Ship rather then Paul, (for commonly indeed of all men Gods
Ministers are least believed, least credit is given to what they say, for fear
of making them too proud, forsooth) but they had as good have heeded what Paul
said, for I believe they repented them afterward; for as Saint Paul tells them,
If you had harkened to me, you had not gained this harm and loss: and so the
Prophets, Esaias and Jeremy, were never believed when they spent their judgments
of those matters, and even so still for the most part, peace, peace, is best
music to the carnal ear, and they that sing that, even when dangers are at
the door, shall be applauded by many a one; so were Ahabs Prophets; but if a
man play Micaiah, and speak the truth, and tell the danger that is close by,
then cast him into the prisonhouse, lay him by the heels, feed him with the
bread and water of affliction: But how ever men take the thing, yet God likes
it well, for we may observe, though he often in his word finds fault with the
Prophets for preaching smooth things, for crying peace, yet never for preaching
his laws and judgments, never for foretelling dangers.

And yet here too, though the godly are able to distinguish of evil times, I
do not say, all that talk of evil times must needs be godly, for many are
always complaining of the badnesse of the times, wherein themselves live, and
never any saw such bad times as they, though indeed they will not be known,
that themselves, and such as they be, do make them so bad as they are, they
whisper and backbite, and slander, and persecute with all bitterness in their
way with their tongues, and so move and provoke others to cross their minds
another way with their power: they will speak evil of dignities, of men in
place and authority; And authority cannot abide to come under the lash of
inferior tongues, nor is it fit it should; if it does, it will make them smart
another way, and complain for somewhat, as the Master will the servant, and
the Father the child that speaks against him: Authority supposes (and well
may) if men murmr against it, that they dislike of it, that they would not it
should rule over them, and therefore it accounts such as enemies unto it, and
deals with them often as with such: you know the saying in the Gospel, Those
mine enemies that would not I should reign over them, bring them and slay them
before me; and so then comes evil times, but of men's own occasioning:
Authority cannot abide to be forced if things be amiss, it cannot endure to be
as it were compelled by the exclamations of any to amend them; it loves to be
free, and to show its own goodness, which it will rather do, through an
humble seeking of redress, th^n by a malepert finding of fault that things are
not redressed: Authority is suspicious, that men go about to get to themselves
those things which belongs to it, namely the hearts and affections of people,
and an opinion of singular prudence; yea, of more zeal and piety and care for
the safety of Church and Commonwealth, th^n Authority her self which sits at
the stern of both, thus I say Authority suspects, and well may, from those
bitter complaints and loud outcries, which many make of the evilnesse of the
present times: Now I say (Brethren) all that thus complain, are not the wisest
men in so doing, how ever they think themselves, nor perhaps the most truly
zealous, for true zeal is joined with prudence, and it is not bitter; and were
the times as bad as they pretend, why the prudent would be silent in them, and
not talkative, which is the third thing noted from the text, to which we now
come.

It is the property of wise and godly men, and their custom in evil times to
keep silence, to say little, to 3.
bind their tongues to their good behavior.

But before we prove the point, we must distinguish of wise and godly men, some
are public persons, and some are private, the public are Magistrates and
Ministers, I say not that it is their custom being godly and wise to keep
silence in evil times, especially when they are in the discarge of their
office, for the Magistrate, if he be right, will speak then in special, and
do too, for the removing of evil; and the Minister being a Watchman set as it
were on a hill to give warning will so do, both of the evil present, and of
the danger coming; if he be of the true stamp; he neither will nor must spare
to speak, though not his own words, yet the words of God, out of Gods book,
in a discreet way, with due respect to those above him, that no disaffection by
his means be wrought in men's hearts toward them, their persons or places:
this I say he will do, if wise and godly, when he is in place, I mean in the
discharge of his office; though at other times and seasons, he be as a private
man, and like such a one at such times demeanes himself; for indeed of such I
suppose the Prophet here speaks, of private men, underlings as I may so call
them, such as are liable to be afflicted by the mighty and turned from their
right; for if you mark the former verse he there speaks of such so abused,
the just afflicted, bribes taken against them, and the poor turned from their
right in the gate, then he adds this verse of the text, and brings it in with
an illative (therefore,) which notes a dependence, therefore shall the prudent
keep silence in that time, for it is an evil time, (id est) those just ones
so afflicted, those poor ones so oppressed, that have prudence in them, shall
keep silence in that time, that evil time, they shall pocket up the wrong,
they shall go their way and say nothing, binding their tongues to their good
behavior.

So you see the words are chiefly meant of private men, such as you here be,
of which rank and order no doubt but there be some that be godly and wise as
well as of others; I say it is their custom, nay it is the condition
(Brethren) if you be wise and godly, in evil times to keep silence.

That silence is a token of wisdom Solomon affirms in many places, take one
or two for many, Prove. 17. 27, 28. He that has knowledge is sparing in his
words; Et frigidus spiritu vir est intelligentiae, and a man of understanding
is of a cool spirit; in the midst of provocations he can temper himself: nay,
silence is such a token of wisdom, that even a fool when he holds his peace
is counted wise, and he that shuts his lips is a man of understanding, verse.
the next: so Prove. 11. 12. He that is void of wisdom despises his neighbor,
that is, when he sees any thing in him that dislikes him, he is full of his
despightfull words against him, but a man of understanding holds his peace, a
wise man is not clamorous, that is the meaning, and so Prove. 12. 16. A fools
wrath is presently known, if he sees any thing that he mislikes, either in
Church or Commonwealth, or among his neighbors, every body shall know it
presently, and his dislike thereof; but a prudent man covers shame, he sees
more then he would have others see, and rather hides, th^n reveals the same,
and therefore with Shem and Japhet shall heir the blessing, when the prating
fool like Cham, shall fall into the curse: so verse. 23. of that chap. A
prudent man concealeth knowledge, what himself knows, the knowledge of which
would do others no good, he concealeth, he loves not to teach or discover that
to others, which might breed any disaffections against others, but the heart of
fools proclaims foolishness, not only what a fool sees, but also what his
foolish heart conceives, and as it interprets, so he speaks, yea, Prove. 14.
16. he rages and is confident, he rages against those that himself dislikes,
and is confident that his raging will mend the matter, wherein he shows
himself but a stark fool, for as it is there in the verse, the prudent and
wise man fears, and departs from evil, he fears that his opposing will
do no good, while things be in their heat, and therefore departs from the
evil, quietly rests, and confidently expects an alteration from Gods hand.

Will you see examples of wisdom expressed by silence? it was the best point
of wisdom that ever King Saul showed, to hold his peace, 1 Samuel 10. 27. when
some despised him; things being at an uncertain stay, if he had vented his
distaste at that time, and given ill language, he had done himself and his
cause much hurt; but says the text, he held his peace: Yea, but you will say,
Saul was none of the best men, this might be but worldly policy in him; the
point is of those that be godly and wise.

Why then think upon David, he was both wise and good, you may see by his
expressions, Psalm. 38. 12. that the times were ill with him, and you may see
his silent behavior then, verse. 13. 14. So when Shimei railed at him, not a
word spoke he, but with patient silence put up all, the time for the present
was ill with him, he was forced to fly the Kingdom, and therefore no time as
he thought to revenge or right himself so much as by words. So Moses, that
meek, wise, and godly man, when he was among those mutinous people in the
Wilderness, in respect of whose conditions the times were evil with him, and
dangerous, for sometime they talk of stoning him, sometime of turning him out
of his office, it is noted that he was meek and silent, he said little, though
they urged him much: So in the days of Hezekiah, that good King, when times
were very evil in respect of the neerenesse of judgments, when Senacheribs
army compassed about the City, and Rabshakeh railed and blasphemed so
egregiously, that it made their very ears glow to hear him, 2 King. 18. yet
the text says, verse. 36. that the people held their peace, and the King had so
commanded: nay, the example of all examples, that of our Lord and Master Jesus
Christ confirms the same, he in the time of his sufferings, those evil times
when they urged him, and provoked him exceedingly, by their false accusations
for to speak, yet the text says,, Matthew. 26. 63. Jesus held his peace and
answered nothing, in so much that the high Priests and Judges wondered: if any
thing were asked him concerning the glory of his Father, or his own Divinity,
he would answer to that, lest by his silence Gods honor should be in danger
to be disparaged, lest they should say, he durst not confess that in his
bonds, which he professed in the time of his liberty: but in the wrongs and
injuries they offered to himself, he was dumb and silent, like the Sheep or
Lamb that opens not his mouth: when he was reviled, he reviled not again,
when he was persecuted, he threatened not; he did not write libels, nor send out
railing exclamations, nor use bitter invectives, as some in their sufferings
use to do, but the text says, Jesus held his peace: for it was an evil time
(to be sure) with him, and he would teach us thereby, that when we fall into
such times, times of sufferings, we must do as we had him for example, for
times of suffering are times of silence.

We come to the Reasons: why godly and wise men by gods grace and inablement
shall and do practice silence in evil times.

Because they are godly, and so look upon evil times, as punishments for their
own proper finnes, they are Reason. 1.
conscious that they have not walked so even with God in prosperous days as
they should have done, they did not make good use of their time of visitation,
and therefore these evil times are come over them, and they are fallen into
them, (as it is said to Jerusalem by our Savior, Luke 19. 44. They shall lay
thee even with the ground, and thy children within thee, etc. because thou
knew not the day of thy visitation:) And so they suffering as they conceive
for their sin, their own sin, (for they look not so much on others, as on
their own) are silent under Gods hand, as David, Psalm. 39. I was dumb and
opened not my mouth, because thou did it, and the Church, Mic. 7. 9. I will
bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, and that
is the first Reason, because they are godly.

The second is, because they are wise: and so see that 2.
speaking may do more hurt; when men are hot in their way, opposing words do
but increase the heat, and stir up the fire, and makes it burn the more; when
fire begins to kindle in a barn of straw, the way to extinguish it, is not
to kick the sparks about: the Pope has often since the time (I believe)
beshrewed himself for doing so: for when Luther began to kindle the good
sire in Germany, then he began to stir, to prate, to curse, to kick the
fire about, and that did but increase it against it self, as (God be thanked)
he has found since to his own cost: why so it is in this case, even with the
fire of evil, when once kindled, the more it is stirred by the tongue, and
blown with the blast and wind of words, the more it flames and burns to the
hurt of the good and godly: which the prudent considering, neither will nor
dare be otherwise th^n silent, for fear their consciences and God too, should
afterward accuse the^ for the increase of evil: this is the second Reason,
because they are wise.

The third is, because they are both wise and godly: and so know that by their
silence they shall the sooner 3.
move the Lord to their help, to remove the evil, and to amend the times; Did
not the Lord, think you, appear the sooner in the behalf of Moses, when they
so moyled against him, even for his meekness and silence? and so did not the
Lord presently appear for the help of his people in Hezekiahs time, when they
were silent, and Rabshakeh railed so? and so for Saul himself, did not God
reward his wisdom and patience, in holding his peace, by giving him occasion
to show his valor in the next chap. and by giving him glory in the sight of
them that despised him? and so David, did not he fare the better that very day,
for his patience and silence at Shimeies railing? and in Psalm. 38. when he had
said, verse. 13. 14. I was as a deaf man and hcard not (viz. the mischievous
things which some spoke against him, who laid wait for his life, verse. 12.) and
I was as a dumb man that opened not his mouth, etc. he adds in the 15. verse.
for in thee O Lord do I hope, thou will hear or answer for me O Lord my God;
as if he had said; my silence will make thee both hear and speak for me, my
not answering for my self, will move thee and set thee a work to answer for
me: for indeed none that are wise will speak, while another man is a speaking:
God is a wise God, and if we speak in our own cause, he will not, but when
we have done, when we are silent, then the Lord opens his mouth, or lifts up
his hand, or something he does for us: Thus you see the Reasons, we come to the
Use.

If this be true, then two sorts of people are here discovered to be not very
wise, nor very godly. Use.


1. They that are never more clamorous th^n in evil times, and upon every
flying report, not only their ears are open to hear, but also their tongues
to speak things that are not convenient, and that against those that are in
high places, which all (but the presumptuous) will tremble for to do, 2 Pet.
2. 10. the Apostle speaking of some men notoriously presumptuous says (...),
they tremble not to speak evil of Dignities: too too many, if things do not
go well, or as they would have them, do throw their dirt about, and make
matters more foul, and a great deal worse th^n else they would be, they
backbite, they slander, they whisper, they rail, and they think they show
their zeal and their wisdom, when it is rather their rashness and their
folly, (as the text infers) they think it their credit to be bold, but men may
be two saucy bold: and they in their wisdom think they do much good by
their talking, they thereby hinder the growth of wickedness, that it shall not
come so soon to its ripeness, their prattling resistance does keep somewhat
down, and out; that would else spring up and come in amongst us, if they
should be silent, and not exclaim so as they do: this is the opinion of some
wise Doctors, which they will well hammer into others heads, to set their
tongues agoing also in the same way: And yet all are not of that mind, here is
one Doctor in the text you see, they called him Doctor Amos, which t^ught
otherwise, he thought in evil times, that silence was better th^n talking, and
it should seem, that there were more wise men of his opinion, and that should
practice silence; the prudent, says he, (speaking in the plural number) shall
keep silence, etc.

For (Brethren) when the spirit of vexation is once raised, as it is always in
evil times, and has taken possession of men's minds, the best and speediest
way to charm it, and allay it again, is bearing and forbearing, silent
s^ffering, saying nothing, for indeed the spirits of men, specially of those
that are stronger th^n we, and superior unto us, are like that kind of
lightning which works the hurt only of that which is hard and resisting, as
of the bones in the body, of the sword in the skabberd, but spares the flesh,
and sheath which is soft and yielding.

If we look but into the face of that which is called the fools Mistress, I
mean experience, we shall see it true, for has not tonguing and talking,
ra^ling and slandering, libels and bitter pamphlets, in evil times been so
far from being bars to keep off that evil which they complain of, or
means to stint it, that rather they have been like dung and rain, to make
the weeds which stink so in their nostrils, to grow the faster: And when men's
own tongues have caused them to fall into the briars, and brought the other
parts of their bodies into fetters, yet those tongues of theirs, not submitting
yet to their good behavior, but running riot still with the foam and froth of
bitterness, not behaving themselves meekly and silently as Christ did, and as
the Martyrs of Christ did, but rather on the contrary, giving railings,
revilings, threatenings for sufferings: I say (my Brethren) let but experience
speak, whether this course has done themselves, or their cause, or the
Church, or State, which they pretend they stand for, any good at all.

But (Brethren) I know in these times to reprove these conditions, is for a man
to make himself liable to condemnation for speaking Paradoxes, contrary to the
minds and judgments, and practice of godly Professors. Indeed I know that
truths are often Paradoxes to vulgar ears, and that the tongues of some
Professors are the greatest travelers; as their words are most blasting, and
give the deepest and the deadliest wounds, so they are most founding in evil
times, and may often be farthest heard: yea, but I know it becomes Gods
ministers to be impartial, to reveal Gods whole counsel, and to tell Gods
children of their faults as well as others, although we fare the worser at
their hands for it; as Christ did for the same cause at the hands of some that
called themselves Gods children: to be sure God will not spare to punish his
children for their faults as well as others, nay, them in special, Amos 3. 2.
and his Ministers must be imitaters of him, and therefore must reprove his
children, when, or for wherein they do amiss, as well as they do others;
yea, them in special: but concerning this particular I say no more then I am
sure the text inferres: were the times as evil as some say, yet they do not
as they ought to do, for it is the part of wise and good men rather to be
silent then talkative in them: And for the sufficient confirmation of this
truth, I desire it may be remembered, that Christ overcame all evils, all evil
men, all his opposers by his sufferings, to teach sure, that God has ordained
silent and patient suffering, which is the natural effect of faith and
self-denial, to be the proper mean for Christians to overcome evil withal,
and to wade through evil times withal; in their patience they may possess
their souls; yea, and get possession of the souls of others too, when they
can no way else, God will bless this course with a good success when he will
no other: and so much for the first sort.

The second sort that are reproved, are they that go a degree further then the
former, and are so far from practicing 2.
silence themselves, or from being of the Prophets mind, to account them that
keep silence in evil times, to be wise and godly, that they think them the
only fools, time-servers, persons to be suspected to be rotten at the core,
that do it, or persuade unto it; if any man has more wisdom then themselves,
and walks more reservedly, and more silently, and has a better command of his
tongue then they, at such times as talking may do hurt, why he is naught
surely, one not to be trusted, a sider with the evils of the times, one that
wants zeal and mettle, not worthy of any account or regard: though perhaps in
the conclusion he may approve himself the wisest man.

We read in Livie of one Junius Brutus as wise and as valiant a man as the
world did then afford, yet living in evil times, in the Tarquius days, he
concealed his worth under the cloak of base contempt, and was content to be
accounted a fool for a season, till such due and convenient time as occasion
was offered, for his wisdom and courage to appear: it was that Brutus which
offered to the Oracle of Apollo, a golden rod in a wooden staff made hollow
for that purpose, which was a type of his one natural disposition: And no
doubt but even now, some that are of mean account among others might be
signified by a like resemblance, they are gold within, though wood without,
though counted fools, timorous, and timeservers, yet such in truth as are more
wise, and more courageous, and less corrupt then those that judge them, they
are content that what is in them, should lie hid till fitting and convenient
times: it is the Apostles word, 1 Cor. 3. 18. A man must become a fool (that
is) be content to be so accounted, that he may be wise, (viz.) in fit time, for
God and for himself: and says the same Apostle in the next chap. to those
vainglorious Corinthians that he speaks to: We (namely the Apostles) are
fools for Christ's sake, viz. so accounted; but you are wise, that is, you are
counted the wiser men; and I warrant you it was because they did talk more, for
these Corinthians were great talkers and great censurers of other men, and the
common sort do use to judge such the wisest, much wisdom and many words are
unseparable companions as they suppose.

Well, but let others think as they please, the Prophet here is of opinion,
that the greatest talkers are not the wisest men: yea, but shall not losers
have leave to speak (say some?) truly there were some reason they should, if
thereby they could mend themselves, but I never heard of any loser that by
bitter speeches recovered his losses: therefore to close this point, be you so
far from thinking evil of those that are sparing of speech in evil times,
that rather do you study to be like them, for according to the next point,
silence is best and most safe then, to which we are now come.

Silence is best and most safe when prayers and tears are most needful, and
that is in evil times. 4.


First it is best: because it is the practice of wise men, and they know what
is best.

Secondly, because it has been the practice of Saints, as has been showed, as
in David of Shimeies case, andof Joseph when he had that foul imputation laid
upon him in Egypt, by his Mistress, when it was an ill time to be sure with him,
but he was silent, he thought it best and most safe, he stood not upon his own
justification in a wording way, though he might have done, he knew the Lord
could do it better, as he did in the end, cause his righteousness to appear
as the light, and his innocence as the noone day for clearenesse: so the Church
in Babylon being in a lamentable condition, sat weeping silently and alone, by
the rivers there, Psalm. 127. not wording or taunting at those that carried her
away into captivity.

Thirdly, it is best, because hereby we imitate God and Christ, but Jesus held
his peace as was showed before, and Esaias 42. 14. I have a long time held my
peace (says God) I have been still and refrained my self.

Fourthly, it is best, because when we speak least to man, we have our spirit
in the best temper to speak to God by prayers and tears, when David was dumb
and opened not his mouth, to wicked men, or in their presen^e, Psalm. 39. 1. and
2. and 9. verses; he could pray best to God, and weep most, verse. 12. Hear my
prayer O Lord, give ear to my cry, hold not thy peace at my tears; and
experience tells us, when with silence we have put up a wrong, we can with more
enlargement of heart speak to God to right us.

Fifthly, it is best, because God has commanded in such times so to do, Psalm.
4. 4. Commune with your ^wne heart and be still, Psalm. 46. 10. Be you still,
and know t^^t I am God, and Exodus 14. 13. (when they began to mouth it) stand
still and behold the salvation of the Lord, and God has made a promise upon
it, Esaias 30. 15.

And sixthly, it is best, because it is a mean to work out the righteousness
of God, to make the same and his power manifest, for if the wrath of man, which
(for the most part) is expressed by wording works not the ^ighteousnesse of
God, as Saint James says, James 3. 6. then patient and silent bearing and
forbearing may be available to effect this by the rule of contraries.

Thus you see silence is best, and as it is best, or because so therefore it is
most safe: it will keep a man from wrath and from a greater measure thereof,
from wrath in his own breast, from a greater measure thereof upon his back (as
I may say) for grievous words stir up anger, namely on all sides, but silence
and softness of speech appeaseth strife.

Secondly, it is most safe, for it will not only ^helter a man from the
greater wrath of the enemy, but it will cause the enemy to stand in a kind of a
we and fear of a man, 1 Samuel 18. 14. 15. David walked wisely, he said or did
little no^withstanding so much was said and done against him and Saul was
afraid of him, it was a sign the Lord was with him.

Thirdly, it is most safe, for it is a mean to procure long life and many good
days; the spirit of God, 1 Pet. 3. 10. propounds silence and government of the
tongue as Physic for the purpose.

And fourthly, if a man be silent in evil times, fewer advantages will be
catched against him, then will be by speaking, and so it is safer: more reasons
might be alleged, but let these serve.

Now if you ask why I call evil times, times when prayers and tears are more
needful; I answer, because prayers and tears are most needful then for the
removing the evil of the times; and further, that which is called an evil
time in the text, is intimated to be a time of weeping and wailing, or a time
for weeping and wailing, verse. 16. so they are called then, by the Prophet.

And in the conclusion, if any would know what kind of sins in special make
the times more evil and more deplorable, I shall refer him to read over this
chap. of the text, and in it he shall find the Prophet noting three or four
in especial, which made him make this conclusion in the text, that the time
was evil, and no doubt but such sins whenever they reign do make the
time always so.

Shall I note them to you? why, one was Idolatry, as may appear verse. 5.
seeking to Idols which then were at Bethell, Gilgall, and Beersheba, and
neglecting God. The second was perversion of justice by them that should
practice and maintain it, verse. 7. The third was ha^red of reproof, and
contempt of those that speak uprightly, verse. 10. The fourth was violent
oppression of the poor, and taking from them that belongs unto them, verse. 12.
In the Prophets opinion, these are the sins that note evil times; to which
let me add but one more, and that is lying at the catch, lying in wait to
mistake words, to bring a man into trouble for a word speaking, let me speak
in the Prophet Esaies words, Esa. 29. 21. where he speaks indeed of the
judgment that was come upon such kind of sinners, the terrible one, the
scorner, and all that watch for iniquity are cut off; that make a man (says he)
an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproves in the gate, and
turn aside the just for a thing of naught: so it has been you see, and so it
is still sometimes; a man when he is oppressed shall not speak a word of his
own wrong, but he is liable to be brought into trouble for it; an honest
Minister shall not preach in any place, but he shall have one knave or other
lie in wait to catch him, and on purpose to mistake him, as they did our
Savior, Luke 11. 54. they were evil times our Savior lived in, and so sure
are all such as are like them: and therefore people had need be watchful over
their tongues in such times, and speak no more then needs must: for such times
are rather times for tears and prayers: yea, to be bewailed if possible with
tears of blood: Tears and wailing will move the Lord (who only is able) to
help his people that are afflicted. For indeed the Prophet having said in the
latter end of the 15. v. that the Lord of Hoasts it may be will be gracious to
the remnant of his people; he adds in the 16. verse. as a mean to move him;
therefore the Lord, the God of hoasts, the Lord says thus, Wailing shall be in
all streets, and they shall say in all highways, Alas, Alas; as if he should
say, if you would have me the Lord of Hoasts to appear gracious in your behalf,
you must use weeping and wailing, you must cry Alas, Alas; I am pitiful, and
that will move my pitiful nature; for the oppression of the poor, for the
sighing of the needy, I will up says the Lord, and set him at liberty from him
that puffs at him, Psalm. 12. 5.

Well, to make an end, you have seen (in brief) some of the signs of evil
times noted by the prophet: and as I said at first, so I say again; I will not
put my self to be a public Judge of those wherein we live, to say whether
they be evil or no: I say but this, if they be, or whenever they be, every
honest man (no doubt) shall find it by experience, he shall be catched at, he
shall be oppressed, he shall be wronged, he shall be hated for finding fault
at the evils committed, and he may to Gilgall, be an Idolater (at least) if he
will, he shall have leave given him, and so forth, but I pray God give every
honest man in such times, wisdom to hold his peace, and patience to suffer,
and gratiam Lachrymarum as the Fathers call it, the grace to weep, that his
heart may bleed, and his eyes may run faster then his tongue; and how evil
soever the times shall then be for the present, yet in the end they will be
good for him.

Laus and Gloria Deo and Christo, Jesu and adjutori meo,

Amen.
FINIS
THE THIRD SERMON PREACHED AT THE PVBLIKE LECTVRE AT STORTFORD, August 2. 1638.
Wherein is discovered the benefit of Christian patience.

By EDWARD SYMONS, Minister of Rain in Essex.

1 PET. 2. 20. 21. If when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it
patiently, this is acceptable with God, for even hereunto were ye called.

LONDON, Printed by R. C. for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at his shop, at
the sign of the Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard. 1642.

THE BENEFIT OF CHRISTIAN PATIENCE.
Luke 21. 19. By your patience possess you your souls.


IN my course here the last year, I discoursed of Silence, and commended that
to your observance. I shall now through Gods help speak of its mother grace,
namely of Patience, and commend that also unto your practice.

Methodus est duplex, there is a twofold method: one from the cause to the
effect, and another from the effect to the cause; you see we have followed the
latter, which as we count, is (quoad nos) more suitable to vulgar capacities:
though perhaps in a case or subject of this nature, the former first had been
the better: for can the stream be sweet, you will say, while the fountain is
bitter? you should first have cast the salt in here, endeavor to season the
heart with some grains of Patience, and then with hope of better success you
might have persuaded the tongue to silence: Well, be it so: yet now we are in,
we must proceed in our own way.

For the coherence of these words read: you may see in the preceding verses,
our Savior speaks of the succeeding times, which in his judgment would be
but evil, in respect both of the sins and sorrows which they would bring
forth.

The sins: or at least the maine one, which always brings many after it, he
notes verse. 8. of the chap. to be corruption of judgment; there should be
deceivers and false teachers who should teach erroneous things concerning
Christ and his presence: compare but that verse with its parallel in Matthew. 24.
23, 24. and it will be evident unto you: and this they shall do in his name;
taking upon them as if they were Christ himself, and had authority to command
the conscience, which is peculiar only to him to do.

Then the sorrows, they are of two kinds, National, and Personal; National
or more General, which should be common to people of all sorts, good and bad,
tagge and ragge (as they say) all should be sensible of them, and these are
verse. 9, 10, 11. wars, seditions, insurrections of Nation against Nation,
Kingdom against Kingdom, and Earthquakes in some Countries, hunger,
pestilence, and fe^rfull things in others.

The personal sorrows are they that would in particular befall the Church and
flock of Christ: which he mentions verse. 12. as causes of those general ones
forenamed, and they would be violent apprehensions, persecutions,
imprisonments, and arraignments before Kings and Rulers, for Christ's name sake,
that is, for his truth and religion sake: because they will not forsake that,
for the persuasions and compulsions of the forementioned deceivers, and then to
verse. 16. 17. he reckons up more of this sort, namely, treacheries of friends,
of kindred and acquaintance, and hatred at all men's hands for the same cause.

Now against these errors and erroneous men, and also against these troubles
and sorrows our Savior does fore-arme his people, by his fore-warning them of
the same, his promonitions he would have to be their premunitions: as John 16.
3, 4. These things have I told you, that when they come to pass, you may
remember that I told you: namely, to this end, that you might not then be much
moved at them; as the Apostle in a like case, 1 These. 3. 3, 4. I would not have
you moved by these afflictions, for you know we were appointed to them:
faithful Ministers it seems are appointed and ordained to suffer as well as
to preach, (even as faithful Christians are, as well as to believe) and this
ye know (says Phil. 1. 29.
he) how did they know? why, when we were with you, we told you before that we
should suffer tribulation: it was the manner of Christ and his Apostle you see
to foretell the sour as well as the sweet, the hardship as well as the comfort
of Christianity: yea, and the sweet as well as the sour, the comfort as well
as the dolor, John 16. 33. in the world ye shall have trouble, (there is the
sour) but in me ye shall have peace, (there is the sweet) and in this chap.
of the text he does not only tell them of the dolorous times, as has been
mentioned, but he does also strengthen them against the same with the sweet
promise of his assistance, verse. 14. 15. and of his protection and
preservation, verse. 18.

But withal he tells them in the text, of one thing that they must see unto,
and that is that they be patient, they must not be malicious or revengeful,
they must not plot or prate, they must not slander or provoke, they must not
vex nor trouble themselves in any sort, only let him alone to do all, be they
still, and say no more then he shall put into their mouths, when they are
called in coram, and he will keep them well enough from all harme-taking: when
they are judged or abused, not the value of a hairs damage shall their souls
sustain; let them only but rest in patience: In a word, as Moses the man of
God said to his people, Exodus 14. 13. Fear not, stand still, and see the
salvation of the Lord, so says Christ the son of God and our good Shepherd
unto us, Fear ye not, be but still, patient, and quiet, and you shall see
what salvation the Lord alone will work for you.

Nay, moreover you shall hereby keep your selves in possession of that which
all your enemies aim chiefly to deprive you of, and that is your souls: your
soul indeed is the prize they strive for, both by their cunning and by their
cruelty, that is the Helena of their aims, Satan and his servants desire above
all things to have men's souls and consciences at their command: but says
Christ, you shall keep them out of their hands by this one mean I tell you
of: namely, by your patience: and the truth is, the adversaries are in a wrong
box: the way to get souls is not that which they take; violence and
struggling, opposing and contesting, bearing down things with a strong hand,
is the way to get possession of goods and bodies, but not of hearts and
spirits, not of souls; it is the way to lose them, both their own and others:
the only way to get possession of hearts and souls is patience, bearing and
forbearing: this way indeed Christ kept possession of his own, and got the
possession of all ours: and this way the blessed Martyrs kept their own, and
got the hearts of many to their religion, where of Justin Martyr professes
himself to be one, the patience of the Christians wanne his heart to them and
their religion: yea, many persecutors themselves have been taken this way: to
be sure of this, every one may get and keep the possession of, and the command
over his own soul, by this virtue and grace of patience: and this chiefly
the text teaches: By your patience possess ye your souls: your own souls:
and so you have the context.

Now in the text it self confider two things. The purchase; the souls
possession. The price; patience.

We will first speak of the purchase, then of the price: first what you shall
have, then what you must pay; for in point of purchase, you will all know for
what, before you will part with your money.

Truly the purchase is exceeding great, specially if compared with the price,
it is as if the whole world should be compared to an halfe-peny: you have heard
of Merchants, that for glasses, pins, and small hooks, things of little value,
have bought of the Indians, gold, pearls, and precious stones: such a
bargain, nay, a better is here offered you; What are tribulations, and
afflictions, in which you must show your patience, but as brittle glasses for
short continuance, but as the prickings of a pin for pain, but as small
hooks, by which God pulls us to himself, with a little sma^ting? and what is
that you shall get by enduring the same? why, your souls possession here, and
a possession for your souls hereafter, the worth of either which does exceed
man's heart to conceive, or his tongue to express: our text speaks but of the
one, and of that only must we speak, though we can never speak the worth of
it: I mean of the soul, either in respect of its Author, its nature, or
resemblance: the truth is, as one says of Christ, the Redeemer of the soul,
that he had diverse names, as Jesus, Emanuel, Christ, Messiah, Lord, etc.
because no one name was enough to express all his perfections: so may it be
said of the soul which he redeemed, one name alone cannot intimate to us all
its excellencies, and therefore it has diverse names: as Isiodore well, dum
corpus vivificat anima est, dum vult animus, dum scit men's, dum recolit
memoria, dum judicat ratio, etc. in respect of its quickening power it is called
the life, in respect of its desire the will, of its knowledge the mind, of its
recordation the memory, of its judgment the reason, etc. Indeed (me thinks)
our Saviors monition here to look to that, and to that only does exceedingly
set forth the excellency of it, above all things else: and that shall be the
Doctrine from this first part, even in these words: The soul above all things
is to be cared for, to be looked after.

Doctr. 1.


For it is only possidete animas vestras: it is not villas vestras, as August.
notes: your villages, your houses and lands, your wealth and riches, for it had
been vain to have advised to this, in times of trouble and persecutions, when
such things are sure to go to wrack: nor indeed had it been worth the while
to have looked after such things, specially then; for what are they? nec vera,
nec vestra, says Bernard, neither true goods, for they bide not by you, nor
your own, for you cannot carry them away with you: and had he advised to the
keeping of these, he would not have prescribed patience as the mean: for that
is the way rather to lose all; he should have said rather, bestirre your
selves, put up no wrong, one injury will draw on another, talk and prate,
scold and rail, lie and swear, tugge and pull, (for this is the course that
men commonly take to get and keep riches.)

Nor does he say, possidete honores vestros: look to your Honors, your
Credits, your good esteem, see you lose not an inch of that, for he knew that
this was not in their own hands to keep, Honor est honorantis, non honorati;
it is in the mouth of the people, and what is Vox populi? Why, Hosanna to day,
and Crucifige to morrow? even honest men's credits are often forced to lodge
upon the tongue of Knaves: and beside our Savior knew also there was not so
much need to advise to be careful of this, for he foresaw that too too many,
that would profess his name, would be more careful of their credit, then they
would be of their Conscience, yea they would be religious to no other purpose,
and wear the Hood of Profession to no other end, but to get them a good
esteem among men.

Nor thirdly, it is not possidete amicos vestros, keep your Friends, lose not
the love of them however, for he knew that friends were slippery ware, and to
keep them, was more then could be done with a good conscience, as the world
was like to go with them, in those succeeding days, when one friend and
brother would betray another to death: unless they would resolve to humor
them at all turns, never contradict them, or reprove them, do they, or speak
they never so crossely: never speak against those faults which the world notes
them to be guilty of: for example, if they be noted to be railers, slanderers,
backe-biters, whisperers, censurers, evil speakers of Rulers, Governors, men
of place and authority; why, never find fault with them for these things, never
allege Scripture against these conditions, but rather animate them in their
way, commend their zeal, and against Gods word and conscience, be as they
be, and do as they do, or else no possibility of keeping them.

Nor fourthly, it is not possidete opiniones vestras, hold your opinions,
stick close to your own fancies what ever reasons shall be brought against
them, etiamsi suadent, non persuadent tamen, though you be convinced never so,
yet be sure you hold your own, be resolute, for he knew indeed that men
without bidding many of them, would hold faster their opinions then the faith
it self, yea rather then they should sink, they care not though religion and
peace and all go to wrack, they will turn every stone, but their own
conceits shall take place.

Nor fifthly it is not possidete delicias vestras, your delights, your
pleasures, see you abate not your selves of them, whatsoever plagues, and
judgments, and miseries and troubles come amongst you, follow your sports and
pastimes, your feasts and pleasures still. Nor lastly, it is not corpora
vestra, your bodies, look well to them that they pine not, see they lie soft,
and be well fed, drink good store of Sack and Sagar, that your bodies may
look plump and fair and fat, and be in good liking for all your troubles: No
(Brethren) here is not a word of any of all these things, here is only
possidete animas vestras, look to your souls, either because he foresaw men
were apt to be more careless of them then of other things, and so needed to be
called upon, or else to teach them according to the doctrine, that your soul
above all things is to be cared for, to be looked after.

And so it is, by reason of its excellency above all things which you may take
a glimpse of, from these three considerations I shall propou^d unto you, which
may serve for so many proofs and reasons of the point.

First, consider that the divine graces of Gods holy spirit, which of all
things that can be imagined are the most excellent, are appointed to adorn the
soul of man: now think, if the hangings are so excellent, what may you
conceive of the room for which they are appointed, of the soul that is to be
adorned? sure that is most excellent and regardable above all things.

Secondly, consider how he that best knew, yea that only knew the worth of a
soul: for the truth is, no mere man while he is in his mortal condition is
able to set a true value upon the soul, or to esteem of it according to its
worth; but he only that paid the price for it, the Lord Jesus; he alone knew
the worth of it: and consider how he preferres it above all the world, Matthew.
16. 16. What will it profit a man to ^inne the whole world, and lose his own
soul? the whole world it seems is not worth one soul, sure then it is to be
looked after above all things.

Thirdly, consider the price he gave for the souls redemption; not any
corruptible thing, but the very precious life blood of himself the son of
God: 1 Pet. 1. 19. any thing that is mortal may be valued by a mortal man,
and one earthly thing may be purchased by another, but man's soul, as appe^res,
is neither mortal nor earthly, for the Son of God only is able to value
that, and his blood only to make purchase of it: therefore sure to be esteemed
above all things.

But perhaps you will say, Does not the text tell us it may be purchased by
patience, and we thereby may be they that may make purchase of it?

I answer, True, but Christian patience is no corruptible thing, it is a
virtue, and post funera vivit, virtue never dies with the body, but lives for
ever. Jobs body is dead, but his virtue lives, James 5. 11. You have heard of
the patience of Job: Patience is a Grace, and Grace in the godly is never
extinct, as sin is not in the wicked, both grace and sin goes to Heaven or
Hell, as the foul does, and abides in it, and with it for ever, to beautify
or to torture it.

Besides, you must not conceive that by your patience you shall make such a
possession of your souls as Christ did by his blood, for he thereby purchased
the fee-simple of them, the full right, both title and tenure, from the hands
of Justice, and therefore they are wholly his, as we our selves are, all over,
1 Cor. 6. 19. 20. but we by our patience shall only become capable of the
benefits and blessings of Christ's purchase, we shall from the hand of mercy and
free grace, have the command over, and the free use of what he paid so dear
for: for the truth is, Christ did not enter upon this purchase, for his own
behoof, but for ours only, and therefore it was made in our name, because he
meant we should have the benefit of it; he would freely put us in possession,
and keep us in the same so long as we continue qualified with patience: which
also he bestows, though it be called ours (in your patience) for that is o^rs
as our souls are, we have it of his free gift, not of our selves: I Will make it
plain by an example.

A Prince has won or purchased a Castle, and made it ^ensible against the
enemy with his own munition, and then puts a servant in possession of it, and
tells him, So long as you continue faithful to me, and make use of this
munition for defense, so long shall you enjoy the benefits and privileges of
this Castle, you shall be defended in it, and have the command over it, and the
free use of it, and much honor by being Captain thereof. So our Lord Jesus
having purchased the Castles of our souls with his blood at the hands of his
Fathers justice, out of the power of sin and Satan, that before (under Gods
justice) had the power and keeping of them, and then fortifying them with his
divine power, and strengthening them with his grace, gives us command over them,
and tells us, so long as we continue faithful to him, and patient, that is,
make use of his Ammunition and Grace, we shall keep the possession of them,
and of all the comforts and privileges that do appertain unto them, which to
us both is and will be greater honor and more happiness, then if he should
have put us in possession, of a Kingdom: You have heard the saying, My mind to
me a Kingdom is: nay Solomon says, to have freedom of mind, and command over
ones own spirit, is better then to have command over a City, Prove. 16. 32. He
that is patient and slow to anger, is better then the mighty, and he that can
rule his own spirit, then he that can rule a City: what this freedom and rule
is, we shall in part show when we come to the next point: we will now come to
the Use of this.

Is the soul so excellent a commodity, that grace from Heaven is sent to
adorn it, that the blood of the Use.
Son of God only is able to redeem it, and that the whole world with all
its treasure, is not to be compared unto it? How far beside themselves then
are they that make but little or no account of it? some there are that will
scarce believe they have any souls at all, because they never saw them, for
they are resolved to believe no more then they see, and they have the same
opinion concerning God: indeed they thereby sufficiently declare, that their
souls serve them only in stead of Salt to keep their bodies from stinking.

Others there are that will often protest, as they have souls to save, but if you
look upon their ways of worldlines, drunkenness, malice, and opposition to
the means and messengers of the souls salvation, you may well be persuaded
that they believe no such matter.

And a third sort there is, that though perhaps they may believe that they have
souls, yet they think them not worthy above all things to be cared for, their
wealth shall have the upper hand, six whole days shall willingly be employed
about that, and not one without grudging about the soul: I warrant if I should
hold you two hours now in dispensing among you provisions for the soul, there
would be more maundering, and it would irk some more, then if they should spend
ten hours in some shop about their worldly employments: and I pray what
cheating, what couzening, what lying, what swearing, what injustice, what
oppressing to get wealth and riches is every where practiced? and (for Gods
sake) what does all this prove, but that men prefer the world before their
souls?

And so for friends, will not too too many hazard their souls to get or keep
the favor of them, of some rich worldly man, whom they hope may be a good
Master to them? will they not be ready to say what he would have them, yea, and
perhaps to swear to it too? And for credit, does not many stand more upon
that, then upon their souls safety: to have a name for great Preachers, great
professors; great gifted men, to be esteemed the holy ones (sans pere) without
parallel; then to be truly gracious, humble, sincere, and secretly upright
with God? I would they did not, for then we should not hear such vaunting
bragges, nor see such wilful uneven walkings, as sometime in private we do,
and in deed, are ashamed to name, because they would be thought incredible;
they being the conditions of some of them that are most famous for good.

Again, have we not many that love their opinions, better then they do their
souls, and study more to uphold them, then to preserve these? nay, alas how
many be there, that make their opinions the^r consciences, and have no other
conscience then their bare opinion? the truth is, they do not know, nor will
they learn to know the one from the other.

And for the body: alas, who almost regards not that in the first place? the
body, the body, they are all for the body: and I pray how does your body Sir,
and make much of your body: and so they will, without bidding; that shall be
clothed, and fed, and nourished, and Physicked; but the soul in the mean
time, shall be tattered, and torn, and ragged, and lean, never will they mind
its welfare, nor well endure those that persuade thereto: the bodily Physician
shall be welcome to them whensoere he comes, and if they be but sick of the
finger-ake, he shall be sent for with much entreaty, and well paid for his
pains in coming: but for the Physician of the soul, if he will come he may,
but he shall never be sent for, and when he does come, he shall have the
coursest and homelieft entertainment that can be imagined, scarce welcome,
scarce Godamercie for his pains in coming: if they be sick, when he has
asked them how they do, he had best take heed he go no further then the
outside; if he begins to speak any thing about the soul, why then, Sir, I
did not sleep well the last night, I pray spare me at this time, talking is
somewhat tedious unto me; some such paltry trick or other they will have to
rid the house of him.

Now alas, what simple men are these, that are thus all for the body, and (as I
may say) thus nothing for the soul? Should a man have two children, the eldest
a lusty, beautiful, hopeful, well-mannered child, likely to live many a
year: and the younger, a sickly, lame, crooked, unwholesome, leaprous, and ill
conditioned thing, and foolish withal, and not like to live a year to an end:
if the father should bestow all his care, to provide for the younger and sickly
child, tie all his estate upon that, and do only for it, and take no care for
the elder, which is the more lusty and lively, and likely to live, you would
count him very unvise and foolish: why, this is the case of these men, the body
is the sickly child, that shall die to morrow, which they take so much care
for, and the soul the healthful child that shall live for ever, which is not
regarded.

Nay further: what do I talk of riches, and friends, and credit, and
opinions, and bodies, how many are there in the world, that set their souls
below their sins? to satisfy a lust, suppose of malice, of pride, of
revenge, what care they if they damn their souls, nay even to vex and grieve
the spirit of another? we think them fools and mad, at least worthy of
scorn, that to vex another, will eat no victuals, or will hang or drown
themselves, as some sullen wives (to anger their husbands) will sometime offer
and threaten to do, though before they do it indeed, they will be better
advised: But more mad are they, that to vex and grieve another, will destroy
their own souls by running headlong into such and such courses, as are
unlawful, only because they are by their friends or Minister persuaded to the
contrary.

Nay, the Minister, let him speak against their sins in the behalf of their
souls, what will they say, but he speaks against them? and so make sin and
themselves all one, so dearly are they devoted to their sins: as Ahab said
of Micaiah, he speaks no good of me, I dare say the honest Prophet never spoke
word of ill against him all days of his life, he was his Prince and Ruler, and
his conscience would not suffer him to speak ill of the Ruler of the people:
He preached against his sins it may be sometime, when he preached before him:
why that is all one (says Ahab) touch my sin touch me.

Why, so it is with many now, let a man speak against their sins, suppose it
be the sins of slandering, railing, backbiting, whispering, or hypocrisy:
why, he preaches against us, will some say: nay, they will add further, he
preaches against Gods children, as if Gods children were all guilty of such
conditions, and as if they could not abide to be told of their faults any more
then the wicked; but like them, did make sin all one with themselves: (sweet
creatures do they make Gods children in the mean time, and an ill Father do
they make God, that can or will breed his children no better) doubtless they
that are truly Gods, are willingly or wittingly guilty of no such ^innes: but
what ever sins they are guilty of, they love to have them preached against:
they hold none of those absurd Paradoxes, that Gods children must not be told
of their faults in public, for fear carnal men should be confirmed in their
hard opinions of them; for in deed by the same reason Christ, and Mercy, and
the Gospel, must not be preached, for that carnal men will make an ill use of
the same, to be more bold in sinning.

Those that be truly godly conceive that it is not so much the Ministers
preaching against such and such sins, that makes carnal people judge so amiss
of Gods children as they do; but rather it is the lives of hypocrites that
call themselves Gods children, and their application of suchthings when they
are spoken to themselves* as unto Gods children, their pepper taking at them:
those that be truly godly conceive that of all others, Gods children are to be
told of their faults in public: for these reasons.

1. Because God will not spare publicly to punish and correct them for their
faults, yea, them in special, Hos. 3. 2. and his Ministers therefore must do
like him, and not spare to tell them of their faults, yea them in special.

2. Because the word of reproof will do good to them only, and to none else,
Does not my word do good Mi^. 2. 7.
to them that walk uprightly? (says the Lord) for others like those Dogs
our Savior speaks of, if such holy things as reproves be cast unto them,
will turn again and rend them that cast them, Matthew. 7. 6.

3. Because they by their meek taking of reproof, and their loving and humble
carriage to those that tell them of their faults, may give good example to
others of so doing, who usually do contrary.

4. That the Minister might show his impartiality that he spares them no more
in the ways of sin, then he does the debaucht drunkards, and disorderly
livers, who otherwise would be ready to say, We cannot so much as look into an
Alehouse to crack a Jugge, or be merry a little, or swear an oath, but we are
sure to have a Sermon made of it, and all the Parish must ring of it; but I
warrant you, he never meddles with the sins of Puritans, they are men of his
own stamp, and therefore such holy creatures as if they had no sin in them:
thus will they say: but if they see the Minister impartial, and like Christ in
the Gospel, not spare the persons of any men, not care for their faults or
frowns in cases of this nature, they will take that which concerns themselves
the better, and conceive the Minister to be a man of God.

Han is Sermon. Ep to the Reader before Samuels funeral.
It is written in the commendation of a religious Knight, that he loved those
Preachers best, that least favored his corruptions, and would bless God for
such teachers as would give him no rest in sin, and would often provoke them
with these words: Go on, spare us not, though corruption may busle a while,
yet God will give us hearts to come in at length, and to submit to the Scepter
of his word; how ever it shall be a Preachers Crown to be faithful and to
balke none: thus would he speak to the Minister in private, after that the
Minister had been (as the world thought) too sharp with him in public: and
doubtless the same mind is little or much in all those that be truly godly and
religious: those therefore that will own such matters and be offended and take
sins part, are doubtless a bastard brood, and such as God will never own for
his, at the great day: and they discover themselves by this condition: but as I
said before, this is the condition of many of the better sort of the world,
(for of the world I cannot but account them) and if such do so make themselves
all one with their sin, no marvel if the worser sort be so conditioned, if
those that are near us in respect of profession, our own Mothers sons, as
they account themselves, our brethren, if they be of this condition, how much
more then may others who are strangers to us? as 2 Samuel 16. 11. Behold, my son
(says David) that came out of my bowels, seeks my life, how much rather may
this Benjamite do it? or as Moses said, Exodus 6. 12. Behold, the children of
Israel have not hearkened unto me, how then shall Pharaoh hear me? so may we
say, Behold they that are professors will not hearken unto us, when we advise
them for their souls good, how then shall they that are open and profane
wretches hearken unto us? if they that call themselves Gods peoples, be enemies
to their own souls, and take sins part against them and us, and account us
their enemies for telling them the truth against their sin, how shall we hope
for better respect from others.

Truly (Brethren) your souls have enemies enough, you need not be enemies to
them your selves, the Devil and devilish minded men, seducers or what you
will, in all their oppositions aim only to mischief your souls: be wise
therefore and remember, God has set your souls at a high rate, as appears by
the price given for their redemption: and Christ set them at a high rate, in
preferring one of them before the whole world: and the Devil sets them at a
high rate, for rather then he would lose a soul, he would give the whole
world for it, if it were his own, as appears by those his words, Matthew. 4.
All these will I give thee: In deed the Devil is not such a fool, to give so
much when he may have it it for less, yea, for nothing, for so he has the
souls of many: Which of you will give a pound for that you may have for a penny?

For Gods sake therefore give not away your souls for nothing, part not with
them for trifles, sell them not away for sin: Skin for skin, and all that
a man has will he give for his life, the life of his body: the life of the
soul should be more dear.

O abstain from all things that may pollute your souls, or that war against
them, such are fleshly lusts, 1 Pet. 2. 11. that may choke your souls, or
drown them in perdition and destruction, such are worldly cares, 1 Timothy 6. 9.
that may poison your souls, such is false doctrine; you will not give to a
beloved child that which may choke or poison it, and will you give to your
divine souls that which will?

And we Ministers must be careful from consideration of the souls
excellency, not to starve souls, they are committed to us to feed, and
without vision the people perish, Prove. 29. 18. and then our life shall go for
theirs, if through our default, Ezekiel. 3. 18. and therefore the Apostle, 2 Timothy
4. 1, 2. charge us as we will answer it before God and Jesus Christ, that we
preach the word, and be instant in the same, not only in season, but also out
of season: if those words had but a good Canonical exposition, perhaps some of
us would preach oftener then we do.

But (friends) if we give you meat and you will not take it, or will throw it
away, and not eat it, your blood shall be upon your own heads for as we are
Shepherds over you, so are you every one over that one sheep that God has
entrusted you withal, viz. your soul: you are men and women that have reason
as well as weto look to your charge, and the less that is, the greater shall
the punishment be if you be careless of it; we may be faithful in our greater
charge, as he in the Gospel was that had ten talents, and you may be faithless
in your lesser, as he was that had but one: But so much for the Use of this
point, and for the first part of the text, the purchase.

We come to the other, and that is the price, (as we at first called it) which
is Patience. By your p^tience: If the soul be so excellent a commodity, as
has been said, and Patience be that which makes us capable of the possession
of it, then sure we may conclude that Patience is a virtue of great
consequence, a necessary grace for every Christian: and that shall be the point.

Patience is a virtue of great consequence, and a grace Doctr. 2.
most needful for every Christian.

It is a grace of the same rank with faith and love, for by faith we possess
God, by love we possess men, and by patience we possess our selves: we have
need of faith, for we have need of God: we have need of love, for we have need
of man: and we have need of patience, for the world is so bad we had need look
to our selves, to have our wits about us, and they are kept at home only by
patience: He that wants faith is (...), without the head, and he that wants
love is (...), not of the body, and he that wants patience, is not himself,
nor his own man: A Traveller says, He that will travel to Jerusalem had need
be endued with these three virtues or gifts: faith, patience, and money: faith
to believe what ere he sees or hears there, patience to endure the injuries of
the Infidels that shall be offered him there, and money to make him friends,
and to discharge all tributes and cost there; put but charity in the room of
money, and the same three virtues must he have that will travel to the new
Jerusalem that is in Heaven; and the truth is this, Trinity of graces consists
in a Unity of person, he that has one of them has all, and he has none of
them in any true measure, that has not every of them in some measure: you may
see how they are joined together, Titus 2. 2. sound in Faith, Charity, and
Patience.

For indeed as vices are linked together, so are virtues united, and Patience
is as the common Palace wherein all are preserved, or as the door of the soul
which keeps all the other virtues in it: and unless this door be opened,
there is no danger of losing any of them; but if it be, they are soon liable
to be gone, and we ready to commit any sin: experience will witness, that if
Patience b^ broken, the grace of prayer is lost for the present, and the gift
of hearing too, and of well-doing, we cannot in perturbation of spirit either
speak to God as we should, nor receive any wholesome counsel from any, nor
perform any duty of love, to whom it is due: nay, by impatience of delay we
make shipwreck of our faith, and distrust God: by impatience of wrongs and
words, we make breach of Charity, and fall a hating, a railing, a slandering, a
backbiting: by impatience of a sober estate we fall to be covetous, worldly,
and oppressing: and therefore Tertullian says, Patience is such a Governor in
our affairs, ut nullum opus Deo complacitum perpetrare extraneus a patientia
possit, that it is not possible for him that is a stranger to patience to do
any work acceptable to God: but on the other side, he that has patience in
his heart, and lets the same perfectly appear in his life and practice, is so
perfect and entire a man, that he wants nothing which may make him acceptable
either to God or man, James 1. 4.

But in handling the poin^, I shall tell you what kind of patience is here
meant, then I shall prove the necessity of it according to the doctrine, and
then we shall conclude only with an Use of exhortation thereunto.

First, what kind of Patience is here meant.

The coin patience is of two sorts, in the one is Caesar's Image, in the other
is the Image of Christ: the one was in use among the Merchants of Egypt, the
Heathens and Gentiles, but the other only among the Merchants of Israel: that
former which they had, was not of like value with this latter; it carried with
it the like poena, it was circa res adversas, but not the like price, it was
not seconded with the like hope, because not alike grounded upon precious
promises, nor exercised to a like end, in obedience to God, nor was it from the
same principle, for it was the fruit only of well-ordered nature, and not of
grace: as the Sooth sayers of Egypt could do the like miracles that Moses did,
but not by the same spirit and power as he; so the Heathens could suffer many
such afflictions as Christians do with a like strength, but not with the same
comfort, multa tulerunt animo forti, nulla tamen s^lida consolatione (says
one) they showed more valor then they found comfort in their sufferings;
miranda erat stupiditas, sed neganda patien^ia suis Aug. we admire their
stoutnesse, but do deny they had any patience at all.

For the patience which we intend, it is a divine grace wrought in man's heart
by Gods spirit, whereby a man in obedience to Gods command, in expectance of
his promise, and in consideration of his power and providence over all, his
wisdom and goodness in all, does meekly bear and quietly suffer all, the
bitter of sour, that does befall him, or that is unjustly offered him, how
grievous and har^h soever sensui and carni, to sense and reason, without any
hatred or heart-rising against any that are means of the same.

Every particular of this description, I durst undertake to make good by the
word of God, but that it would take up too much time, and I fear should I
press it home, many that take themselves for good Christ^ans, might find that
they are quite without this grace according to this description, and if without
this, I cannot warrant them that they have any more then a bare show of any
other, for the reason fore-alleadged.

But further you must note that patience in Scripture is also called
long-suffering, though some distinguish between these two, and say the one
signifies bearing, and the other for-bearing; bearing when we cannot revenge,
for-bearing when we can, but do not: Aretius also says, the one is circa
graviora pericula, about greater evils, and the other circa leviora, about
lesser: but I here understand Patience to signify both the one and the other,
bearing and for-bearing, both the greater and the less wrongs; even wrongs of
all sorts: and I say, this Patience is a virtue of great consequence, and a
grace most needful for a Christian.

1. It is a virtue of great consequence. 2. It is a grace most needful. 3. For
a Christian above all other.
1. That it is a virtue of great consequence, I prove thus:

First, that must needs be a virtue of great consequence, which to obtain, a
man should not only be content, but also exceeding glad to fall into many
miseries, into diverse temptations: But such is Patience, James 1. 2, 3. v.
Brethren, be exceeding glad when ye fall into diverse temptations, knowing that
such trials work patience: therefore it is a virtue of great consequence.

Secondly, that must needs be a ve^tue of great consequence, which being
obtained, makes a man perfect, entire, and to want nothing: But such is
Patience: James 1. 4. Let Patience have her perfect work, that you may be
perfect, entire, and wanting nothing: therefore it is a virtue of great
consequence.

Thirdly, That must needs be a virtue of great consequence, which preserves a
man from all shame: But such is patience, Romans 5. 4, 5. Patience brings forth
experience, and hope which ma^eth not ashamed: and he that has patience
discovers not his nakedness by his passions whereby he might be shamed:
therefore it is a virtue of great consequence.

2. That it is a grace most needful, it is plain from Heb. 10. 36. where it
is said, you have need of Patience, it is not said, it were well if you had it,
or it were a convenient thing; but you have need of it, you cannot be without
it, and why? see there;

First, that doing the will of God you may inherit the promises: it seems you
cannot do the will of God without it, indeed Gods will is done by patient
suffering; Not my will, but thine be done, says Christ, when he went to suffer;
nor as seems, can we receive the promises without it; see them and touch them
we may by faith, but by Patience we receive them, inherit and enjoy them, for
promises are not received so soon as they are apprehended, therefore patience
is needful, even as faith; indeed they stand together in the same rank, Heb.
6. 12. Be ye followers of them, that through faith and patience inherit the
promises.

Secondly, it is needful, because without it a man cannot be fruitful, though
his heart be honest and good: for even such a heart if it brings forth fruit
from the Word heard, it must be by patience, Luke 8. 15. they that receive the
word into an honest and good heart, keep it, and bring forth fruit with
patience.

Thirdly, it is needful, because our life is a race, and without patience we
cannot run it, Heb. 12. 1. Let us run with patience the race that is set
before us: nor without it, can we receive the reward at the end of it; for Rev.
2. and 3. chap. to him that overcommeth, to him that indureth to the end, to
him that is patient unto death, shall be given the things there promised, the
Crown, the new name, the white stone, the morning star.

Fourthly, it is needful, because our life, specially our Christianlife:
Christianity is a warfare, where the victory is gotten, non feriendo, sed
ferendo, not by giving, but by bearing blows by patience. In the Olympian, and
so in all worldly combats, the Champion gets the day, and winnes the Garland
that bestows most blows upon his Antagonist; but in the wars of the Lord,
whose ways and courses are always contrary unto man's, he bears away the
Crown, and gets the day, that receives most blows from the hands of his
adversaries, and in lieu thereof returns naught but good works and words.

In a word, shall I tell you what Tertullian says in the praise of patience,
in his book of that Subject, which does notably set forth the excellency and
necessity of it: fidem munit (says he) pacem gubernat, dilectionem adjuvat,
humilitatem instruit, etc. it preserves faith, it orders peace, it helps
love, it teaches humility, it rules the flesh, and serves the spirit, it
bridles the tongue, and holds the hands, it treads upon temptations, and
perfects martyrdom it self, (for it is not suffering, but patience in
suffering that pleases God) it comforts the poor, and tempers the rich, it
eases the sickly, and maintains the health, it delights the faithful, it
inviteth the unbeleever, it commends the servant to the Master, and the
Master to the Lord, it beautifies a woman, and purchases esteem to a man, it
is loved in a child, praised in a youth, and honored in the aged, in omni
sexu, in omni ^tate formosa cst, it is beautiful in every sex, in every age,
therefore a virtue of great consequence, and a grace most needful.

But of all arguments, this in the text must be observed: patience preserves
the soul, namely, from the hands of its enemies, and the peace of it from
being broken: and therefore must needs be of that consequence and so needful
as we say: for the soul is a thing of the greatest consequence in the world,
and of which a man has most need to be careful: now by patience this is
preserved and kept safe, for patience frustrates all the aims of Satan, and
the wicked against the same: and therefore most craftily do they endeavor to
deprive a man of patience, for if he lose this, they know he will lose God, and
so in conclusion the soul it self: for the enemy knows well, that as
patience keeps God in the soul, so impatience thrusts him out. God will not
dwell in perturbations: for as he came to Eliah in a soft still voice, so he
dwells only in a quiet and still spirit; In all Jobs afflictions, what was
aimed at, but to break his patience, Job 2. 9. to make him curse God in a mood
as many use to do; and so should he empty his soul of God and let the Devil
in, in his stead, as anger and impatience always does: and therefore note the
Apostles Caveat, Ephesians. 4. 26, 27. Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath,
not give place to the Devil: that is to say, if you grow wrathful and
impatient, you let the Devil in, and then farewell the souls possession: he
will not so soon give it up again.

And as Satan, so all his servants, in all their oppositions against Gods
people and Ministers, have the same aim to deprive the soul of patience; A
bad neighbor that comes to his Ministers house on Saturdayes in the
afternoon, and there stands barking at his door, and baying at his window,
what can he aim at thereby but to move him unto impatience, to distemper his
spirit, and so to unsute him for the doing Gods work on the morrow? And why
are your foul-mouthed people so luxurious of their malicious foame against any
Christian, but for the same cause to make a breach upon their patience? it
appears most plain, for if they cannot prevail therein, but see their words
and doings passed over with a careless neglect, how above measure are
themselves vexed? as I have read of one that hanged himself for very vexation
that he could not by his railing speeches move another unto impatience.

Patience indeed unto the soul, is as the lid unto the eye, or as a shield
unto the head, it breaks the stroke of every cross, and keeps the spirit
harme-free, it is as the balast of the ship, to make it stable, and therefore,
James 5. 8. be patient, stablish your hearts: a ship well balasted is not
easily ore-turned by waves or winds, whereas that which wants the same is tossed
every way: many will balast themselves with wealth, with riches, and friends,
but when winds, and storms, and blows come, these will not quiet the spirit,
and keep out fears so as patience will: for he that is balasted, with
patience how ever the world goes, though the wind blow and the storms come,
though his ears be loaded with revilings, threatenings, and reproaches, and his
body beaten with stripes and buffets, yet his soul is unwounded, he is not
dozed, nor at his wits end, his spirit is not straightened with grief or fear,
nor his faculties tied up, though his passions be; he has the free command of
himself and tongue, and looks and speaks as he was wont to do; his stomach
swells not, his mouth vapors not, his eyes sparkle not, his blood boyles not,
nor do his fingers itch, or his color change, he is still the same, only
perhaps looking to Heavenward, says in himself, Christus gravior a tulit,
Christ endured more then this: or, omnia possum confirmante me Christo, I
shall, or I can bear my burden, through the strength of Christ: or, meliora
spero, I hope better days are coming: or, dabit Deus his quoque finem, this
world will not last always.

Such is the temper of the soul wherein patience dwells, it is like Mount Sion
which cannot be moved, or like a rock on the Sea, on all sides disquieted with
assaults* yet still quiet in its situation: whereas he that wants patience,
does laniare animam suam furore suo, as it is, Job 18. 4. tear and butcher his
own soul in his rage: whose picture you may see, Mar. 5. 5, 6. for as he
there would not be tamed or bound with chains or fetters, but broak all, and
went raving about, and cutting himself with stones: so the impatent man being
not himself, will be kept in with no bonds or ties of God or man, but breaks
all to do himself mischief; and it is a true saying, Ne^^ laeditur nisi a
seipso, none can hurt a man till he has hurt himself by letting go his
patience: and so you see the benefit and need of Patience.

3. But there is one particular more in the Doctrine still to be further
proved: and that is (to a Christian) it is a grace so needful to none as to a
Christian.

For he of all others has most occasions of vexation: a Christian is a
Crucian, a man of sorrows, Christ's younger Brother, he does not only take up,
but also bear his cross daily; by faith he takes it up, but by patience he
bears it: The waters, yea, the bitter waters of afflictions come daily in upon
his soul, as David speaks, and patience is like the tree mentioned, Exodus 15.
25. which takes away their bitterness from them; and therefore of all others
to a Christian it is most needful: and a Christian also is apt to fret and
grieve at the occasions and sight of evil, as well as another man; and to be
troubled when he sees cause, which he is forbidden to do, as you may see,
Psalm. 37. 1. Fret not thy self because of the ungodly: and John 14. 1. Let not
your hearts be troubled: but how shall he forbear? only by patience.

But what are the occasions, you will say, that a Christian has more then
others of this nature? I answer, I cannot name them all, no more can any man,
only ^le mention two or thre^.

He has occasions ab intra, and he has oceasions ab extra, to use patience,
which none else has.

First, ab intra, from within himself: for with many terrors and fears is he
assaulted, with many temptations is he affronted, with many lusts is he
haunted, which he apprehends increasing daily, and incroaching further in upon
him, to his further pain of sense and feeling; which indeed is but only in
regard of the daily increase of life and light within him, so that his sight
and feeling is of more capacity daily: now what supports him under these
miseries? the Lord, in whom only is his help, perhaps hides his face for a
season, is as it were gone into a far Country, and of the time of his
return, he is uncertain; what has he to uphold him in the mean while, but
only patience? so that of all others he has need of patience. I know that
others are in a worser case, but because they feel not a like pain, they have
not so much need of patience, for where is no pain, there is little need of
patience.

Secondly, ab extra, from without himself, from abroad he meets with occasions
in the world more then others do, to try his patience: as

1. He is hated for that which none else is hated for: namely, for his
Christianity, and for his honesty.

First, his Christianity and Religion by some: Bonus homo Caius, tantummodo
malus, quod Christianus, Caius is an honest man, he has but one fault, he is a
Christian: and, I could love Seius with all my heart, setting aside his
Religion; such speeches Tertullian in his days did over-heare the Gentiles
use, concerning the innocent Lambs of Christ, that were daily sacrificed for
their Religion: and so now, Such a one I could like well, but that he is a
Puritan; and I could love such a one with all my heart, but for his
preciseness: thus some hate him on the one side for his Religion.

Secondly, on the other side, there be others that hate him as much for his
honesty, they like him well enough for his outward profession and precisenes,
for in that he is like themselves, but they hate him for another thing, he will
not juggle as they do, and play the Hypocrite, he is not altogether of their
opinions, he will not rail on whom they rail, nor slander whom they slander,
or speak evil on whom they do, but reprove these conditions rather, as our
Savior did in the Pharisees; and therefore they whisper him out of credit
whersoere they come, and shake their head when they hear him mentioned, and
say, Gods people know not what to make of him, meaning by Gods people, only
their own sweet selves: now I say none is thus hated for his Christianity and
for his honesty and sincerity, but the since^e Christian, therefore none has
so much need of patience as he.

2. He has more need of it then others, because he cannot side with the
factions of the world as others can: they go away with the wisdom, and he
stands still with patience: the world you know runs all upon factions, and he
that cannot side with one faction or other is counted a fool by both sides,
and an enemy: as a worldly friend said once to a Minister that had played the
madman as Paul once did when he preached before Festus, had without partiality
spared the corruptions of none, O says he you must be wise; and be sure
always you keep one side to your self to be your friend; if you preach
against the corruptions of these of our side, be sure you meddle not with the
corruptions of the Puritans, keep in with them, but if you preach against them,
be sure you keep us to be your friends, meddle not with any of our sins: But
such counsel as this, an upright Christian cannot follow: he that is truly
godly dares not turn to the right hand, nor to the left: his tender conscience
cannot yield to the powerful impositions of some on the one hand, nor can his
noble and upright spirit allow of the peevish humors and uneven carriages of
some on the other, he cannot fancy as their yellow fancies do, but looks
upon things without spectacles: and therefore he suffers on both sides, because
he will be in the extremes with neither: that side crushes him with their
power, this side rends him with their tongues, and each side encouraging other
in their way, both clap their hands at him, and cry he suffers justly for his
deservings; and to put his patience more upon it, they will add further, that
he desired to please both, and therefore it is Gods just judgment against him
that he should please neither: no man meets with such occasions as these are to
use his patience, but the true Christian, therefore patience is most needful
for him.

3. He has more need of it then others: because every one else is only for
himself, and so needs patience to bear only his own private wrongs, but a
true Christian is for God and for his Church, and their wrongs are his griefs,
as well as his own: to see some abuse the Church and Spouse of Christ, in
making their quarrels the Churches, and to see others as bold with God, to make
their causes his, is very grievous to an honest heart.

For example, when Demetrius or any of the craftsinen, or crafty men, has a
quarrel against Paul, or any faithful Minister, for preaching or any other
matter, though the Law be open, and the Lawyer ready to plead for them in their
names, yet they think it the furer way to interest Diana in the business, to
make it the Churches cause though it concerns her nothing at all, for they
know some are so devoted to their Goddess, that Aristarchus, Gaius, Paul and
all, are like to smart for it, if it be but suggested, though upon no grounds,
that they are disaffected unto her; now this is cause of grief to a Christian
heart to see the Church in this sort abused; and more specially if he shall see
Christ's spouse at any time so forgetful and unnatural, as through such
delusions to prostitute her self unto the pleasure of a base enemy upon his
malicious complaint to be an Executioner of his wrath upon her own true
Children and Ministers.

So on the other side, when Diotrephes, or any of his prating crew that love
preeminence, do please to take distaste against any man, why, God must be
interessed in their cause, and he that offends them must be whispered abroad to
be Gods enemy, and every one with whom they can prevail, shall be stirred up
to hate him as such a one; for those only with whom themselves are pleased,
must be the beloved of God; and so long as they are friends with them, God is
friends with them, and no longer; as if they were always of as unerring a
spirit, as the Pope conceits himself to be when he sits in Cathedra: for this
is the Popes course to a hair: Story tells us, when he has been at odds with
the French King; why, presently he has proclaimed him the enemy of Christ, and
all the Christian world must up in arms against him, as against Gods enemy:
and the Frenchmen for their Kings sake were all dogs upon the sudden, and
clean remission of sins should he have that should kill one of them; but so
soon as the Popes worship was pleased again, wars must cease forthwith, and
the Fiench King is the most Christian King again, and his subjects all good
Christian men, and great pity it were to shed their blood.

Now (as I was saying) to observe men that profess so much hatred to the Pope,
as some pretend they do, and yet be so like him in conditions, is matter of
much vexation to an honest heart.

4. He has more need of patience then others, because he sees more evil in
the world then others in regard of a more enlightened eye: for what the eye sees
not, the heart rues not, says the Proverb: but what the eye does see, the
heart does rue, if rufull: I Will name but one particular, which for Religion and
Gods childrens sake does much afflict his heart to see it: and that is a
notable trick of the Devil whereby he much prevails against Gods people: and
it is this. He puts upon some of his own servants the names and titles, which
the profane world by his means puts upon Gods children, that so by the evil
conditions of his own birds, he might make those that are truly godly to
become odious, that go under the same name and habit: Because the profane
world by his setting on, calls the godly, Puritans, and Precisians, therefore
shall some of his brats call themselves so too, and so for their advantage
another way, take upon them the reproach of Christ, whereof they are not
worthy: and bring disgrace upon Gods dearest ones.

For by the way (Brethren) you must always remember that though the world calls
all Gods children, Puritans: yet all that call themselves Puritans are not Gods
children: for then many of your railers, slanderers, whisperers, backbiters,
censurers of all others but themselves, would be Gods children; yea, and many
of the cheaters too: the couzening Merchants and Tradesmen; for a great many
do wear Christ's livery only to deceive, when all other shifts fail: some
will turn Alehouse-keepers, but some more vile will turn Professors, (as
Master Bolton notes) that under an Israelitish garment they may the better
cheat the Egyptians: and if they be convinced it is a sin (which will be hard
to do) why yet they can with a bold forehead maintain that it is the sin of
the trade then, and not the sin of the man: O how these stinkers do vex the
spirits of Gods faithful ones, and no one thing is more apt to break their
patience, then these very conditions of these men, for like the Angel of the
Church of Ephesus, they cannot bear or endure the sight of such things.

And indeed there is no way better to remove this object of offense from the
eyes of Gods faithful ones, then to take the course which the Angel there did,
Rev. 2. 2. He tried them that said they were Apostles, but were not, and found
them liars: so we should try them that say they are Gods children, but are not,
and find them liars; search them out, strip them and whip them, we Ministers
should do so in every Sermon: if Rogues be stripe and whipped in every town
they pass through, they would not be so bold and so brazen-faced, as to
coun^erfeit themselves to be whom they are not: so if these wretches were but
stripped and discovered by their marks in every Sermon, and well lashed by the
word of God, they would not be so bold as to take upon them to be whom they are
not.

But as it is not one man that can strip and whip a company of incorrigible
persons, they will quickly knock him down, then they will quickly stab him
with their secret weapons, many therefore must put to their helping hands. So
it is not for one or two Ministers to go about this business, it will not be
for their safety: they will soon have their credit knocked down or stabbed:
every one of those wretches carries a secret weapon in his mouth more sharp
then any sword, wherewith they can soon dispatch themselves of their single
opposites: No, it must be a combination therefore, the Ministers of Gods word
must join together, and resolve upon it, to separate the vile from the
precious, to strip them, and to whip them: and those Ministers they must be,
whose lives and doctrines are both consonant to Gods word, for if such only
that smell too rank of superstition, or that are notable for looseness of
life and carriage, speak against the vices of such persons, why, all shall be
taken to be but Gall and bitterness, and they will think but the better of
themselves for such men's invectives: therefore (I say) others that are of a
more allowed stamp, should for the credit of Gods poor children take the
matter in hand, and discover the Devils brood from the precious ones: it was
the maine of our Saviors labor in all his preaching, as we all know, to
discover hypocrites: Indeed they themselves will well and diligently inveigh
against the profane crew, and so they easing us of part of our labor we may
the better attend to them.

But truly friends, goodness is so rare and geason in these days, that honest
Ministers are glad to see the shadow of it in any body; which when they
discern, for to encourage such persons in a progress of good, they are
sparing of them, and preach only against others sins, till indeed they have
spoiled them (spare the rod, and spoil the child, says Solomon) for they
hereby grow so proud, so well conceited of themselves, so pure in their own
eyes, and so stiff-necked, that they often prove the only murderers of our
names and credits, if ever after we go about to deal with them.

But at leastwise, if we fear to be so venturous as to deal with them, to
discover the vile from the precious, yet let us at least distinguish the
precious from the vile, discover the properties of Gods true children: who are
always harmless, holy, well-spoken, humble, scarce daring oft-times to own
so high a title as the title of Gods child: yea, we Ministers find it, that it
is as hard sometimes to persuade one of them that they are so, as to persuade
one of the other that they are not.

But we must not run any further this way, we have gone too far already
some will say: you have seen now four reasons why a Christian has more need
of patience then other men; more might be alleged, but we must not be too
tedious: we descend to the Use which shall be only of exhortation to get
patience.

You see of what consequence patience is, and how needful, and for a Christian
in special; wherefore mind your own good, sirs, and store your selves with
it, that you may keep the possession of your souls, that you may be perfect,
and want nothing, that you may be fruitful, that you may do the will of God,
and inherit the promises that you might be armed against all occurrences, that
you might have a salve for every sore, an Antidote for every malady: these are
motives now: I need not give you any more then you have had already: only one,
and that is this; Patience can ease your mind when nothing else can.

There be many sorrows and griefs which something beside patience may happily
afford help and ease unto: but there be others, and such as Christians are
often liable to meet withal, that nothing but patience can ease: and for those
things sake, you should store your selves with patience: I will instance in a
case or two of this kind and nature.

Perhaps here you see one exalting a humane invention by his more diligent
observance, before a Divine command; there you see one that can swallow a
Camel without coughing, and stand straining at a Gnat; in one place you see
Pastors most unkindly hunting and scattering their own flock; in another you
see people most cruelly hunting and persecuting their own Shepherd; sometimes
you meet with men of such enlarged charity, that they can wish well to all
places, yea to Rome it self, though under Gods curse: excepting only to
New England: sometimes again perhaps you meet with others of such contracted
bowels, that they can wish well to no place but only that: now this grieves
your hearts, but what remedy have you, but only patience? it is not in your
powers to temper the differing spirits of men; no more then to rule the winds.

Again, perhaps you see men set upon vexing one the other, and to this end
they will prefer themselves and their opinions before Christ and peace, with
our power we will prevail (cry some on the one side) and make these Puritans
stoop, yea that we will: no, but with our tongues we will prevail, cry some
on the other, and mouth it against them, yea that we will: we have long
reaching hands (cry they) and we have loud sounding Cymbals cry these; and
would to God they were but as well tuned may you say, when with grief you
behold these passages, but no remedy can I tell you for your grief but only
patience.

So again, perhaps you see sin flourish and spread it self to the disgrace
of Christ and of his Church, in some of them that should suppress it, who are
more apt for money-sake to commit folly, Hermaphrodite like, with both sexes,
with all sorts, then to punish any; and then perhaps you observe further, some
of them that should look to these, to be Gallio like, quite regardlesse of any
complaint that is made to them, especially against such their own Beadsmen:
and this vexes the spirits, but what remedy, save only patience?

Or again, perhaps you see some that profess Paul's faith, and thereupon are
in the Briars as he was, but do clean contrary to what he did for
deliverance, not trust Christ with his own cause; but because corrupt Felix
looks for money, they will feed his appetite, and so flesh the greedy Hound with
the blood of their purses, that he will never leave hunting and sucking, till
he has undone many a poor Christian, that according to example must stretch
too, beyond the compass of ability, or else ab inferno nulla redemptio: and
this moves your minds, but where is your help? only in patience.

Again, perhaps you see Christ wounded in the house of his friends, as in the
precedent verses, brother betraying brother; one professor by the mediation of
a second, a third, or a fourth man, delivering up another for some private
spleen into the hands of the common enemy, as the Jews did Christ unto the
Romans, and when the mischief is done, the contrivers crying out (as they of
Christ) he is justly smitten of God, and Gods just judgment is fallen upon him
for his dissent with them and their humors, though in the mean time he has
done nothing amisseas, they are told by their own consciences; yet they feel
no remorse for their bringing him into trouble, their consciences are so
seared; for the blind Pharisee thinks, if he does but in form, give in false
reports, and suborne false witness, so he does not kill or draw blood, he is
no transgressour. And Judge Pilat, he conceives if he does but prosecute
according to presentment, and pass sentence according to information, though
false in the judgment of his own conscience; why, he may wash his hands, and
cry, I am free from the blood of this just person: and the soldiers, the
underofficers, they believe they do but their duty to inflict punishment
according unto sentence, though upon the most holy: and so betwixt them all,
Christ and his members go to wrack, and none of them will be a whit to blame,
such is their stupid blindness: these things are grievous to a Christan heart,
but what remedy? only patience.

Once again, when you see some under the names of Christians go up and down
rending and tearing the names and credits of their brethren, and taking all
occasions to speak evil, and to publish men's faults to the world when they
are not urged; nay, coining faults of them to make them odious to others, c^st
iniquity upon them that others might hate them, dealing with their brethren, as
the Heathens did with Christians in the Primitive times, to provoke the brute
beasts to rend and tear them, they would wrap them up in beasts skins, that so
the ravenous beasts might ignorantly (who otherwise would not) fasten upon them.

And thus do foam Christians deal with their brethren, wrap them up in beasts
skins, that is, in beastly vices by their false and criminous imputations, to
the end that worldly and carnal men might be provoked to abuse them, who
otherwise would deal more friendly with them: these call themselves
Christians, but these conditions prove them rather to be like Butchers dogs,
whose lips are always bloody with the slaughter of one thing or other: O how
it g^ieves the spirit of a holy man to see such courses and carriages among
those that wear the name of Christ, who should be altogether harmless and
undefiled, but no remedy save patience.

Last of al, sometime a Christian, some of you perhaps; see those whom you know
to be the best, to be most basely used, and the most unworthy, in most credit:
you see the most sincere accounted hypocrites, and the most hollowhearted, most
religious; the one goes away with the name, and the other with the thing; and
this offends you: you would have every one esteemed as he is: but what help
have you? only patience. And this will help you, for it suggests at such a
time, that some have their reward here, that which they chiefly look after,
namely the praise and esteem of men, and therefore all they do, is this end,
and to be seen of men, and Christ shall say to them one day, Ye have your
reward, namely already, as much as you are like to have: and then the first in
man's esteem, shall be the last in Gods; and the last in man's esteem, shall be
the first in Gods: and upon this suggestion, patience rests your mind in the
mean season.

A hundred such occasions might be reckoned up, but these may serve: therefore
I say, seeing patience is such a sovereign grace, with all your getting get
patience.

How, you will say? I Will propound but three means: and they briefly.

1. Accustom your selves to the reading of Gods blessed Book, which is called
the word of Patience, Rev. 3. 10. because it ingenders this grace first in the
heart, and then does nourish it with the promises: that sets forth to you the
Lord Jesus in all his sufferings as a president for you, that discovers the way
to Heaven, to lie through tribulations, that shows that all afflictions comes
from God, and for good ends: that discovers to you the natures ways and ends
of all the wicked, which being fore-known may make you patient, and that also
opens your eyes and gives you light to see into their dispositions to be such
as in the Word they are deciphered.

2. Acquaint your selves with bearing daily crosses, small wrongs, which will
be a mean to enable you with patience for the bearing of greater: you know the
Story of Milo, he by accustoming himself to carry a Calfe, became able to
carry an Ox; and of Mithridates, who by using to eat poison, made his body
unpoysonable; and you know the fable of the old and new Cart loaded with
sheaves, the old Cart which was accustomed to the burden, that alone went
without creaking, so by accustoming your selves to bear, you will be able to
bear without complaining.

3. Preserve your innocence: that you be not justly plagued for your
transgessions: however men will say [If I had deserved it, it would never have
grieved me,] yet I assure you, desert is the cause of grief always: Guiltnes
is the cause of impatience, both in crosses and in reproves, Exodus 2. 13, 14.
He that was guilty that did the wrong was the impatient man when Moses spoke
unto them, the gald Jade only kicks, the beggar only is offended to be called
bankrupt, not the rich man, and the deceiver to be called hypocrite, not the
sound Christian: those that are guilty of slandering, railing, reviling, evil
speaking of Rulers and Governors, these only are offended to hear these
sins reproved, these are they that on such occasions pelt and puff, and
chafe, and fig up and down as if they were nettled: and did you hear what
stuff we had to day (cry they) how bitter the Preacher was against Gods
people? their guiltiness does cause this impatience: whereas the innocent
Christian, should he be railed upon, and reviled never so, yet with a mild
spirit he can reply as the honest servant did to his passionate Master, calling
him knave, and couzening knave; Sir, says he, you may speak as you please,
but I believe not a word you say concerning this particular, for I know my
self to be an honest man: therefore I say preserve your innocence: so much for
the means.

Now in the close of all, that you might not think you have got the Grace when
you have it not: let me tell you, it is not patience to be quiet when none
offends you: nor when you are not able to right or revenge your selves: many
think themselves to be patient, because when no body angers them, they be
quiet; and so is the Devil: but let them be but touched with a small injury,
or any angry word, they are but briars and thorns, Mic. 7. 4. the very best of
them is a briar: and many bear injuries because they know not how to revenge;
they have a will, but they want power. But Christian patience is such as
Christ's was, who had power to revenge, but did not: therefore know you must
bear injuries, when you are able to revenge your selves, else you are not
patient, this was intimated in the words of our Savior the night before he
suffered: He that has no sword, let him sell his coat and buy one; Why Lord,
says Aug. what should thine do with swords? thou will not suffer them to draw
them; Peter must not use his sword in defense of thee, much less of himself;
why, they must have swords, that their patience might appear more fully, that
being wronged, and having swords, yet do not offer to draw them.

2. You must not only bear present, but also be prepared to endure future
wrongs, if you be truly patient; this was intimated in those words, Matthew. 5.
39. to have the other cheek ready for another blow, if the one be stricken,
for as Aug. well, it is to be understood not so much de part oper is, as de
praeparatione animi: a Christian must be a Crucian, till he is landed in
Heaven. I, but you will Objection.
say, if we put up abuses thus, and be so prepared for more, we shall have our
bellies full I warrant you he that makes himself a Sheep, shall be eaten of
the Wolf: Why, this is true, if thou be a Sheep of Christ's fold, a Sheep
thou must make thy self, not a Mastive, not a Answer.
Wolf, and the carrionly Crows of the world will use thee as the Crows use
Sheep, they will pull wool off of their backs, but not hair off the Mastives
or Wolves, because they know these will revenge. Yea, but they will think me a
fool if I be patient and say nothing: Objection. Answer.
Better they think thee so, then thou by impatience prove thy self so: for
impatience by Solomon is always esteemed folly: and to vex at others for the
wrongs they do us, is but to tutor them to vex us more: in a word, remember,
if you be of Christ, then a Sheep thou art, all his are so, and so called, and
for a silly Sheep thou must go, and like one used, and be content therewith.

3. You must not only bear and forbear, but also give and forgive, before
you can be truly patient: forgive the evil offered, and give blessing for
cursing, pray for those that slander, censure, persecute, and hate you: for
though Laban deal ill with Jacob, Jacob must deal well with him: though Saul
hunt for David's life, yet David must not lay hands on him: though Ahab be an
Idolater, and a naughty man, and one that had sold himself to work
wickedness, yet must not Obadiah plot treason against him: he did all the good
he could in so corrupt a time, and yet no ill to his Master: men commonly are
like those servants, Matthew. 13. 28. think they cannot deal badly enough with
ill men, pluck up the tares presently, do any thing to them that are none of
Gods, cousen, defraud, rob, steal from the Egyptians, these are but usurpers:
but what said the Master to these servants? no, let them alone till the
harvest: friend you must hold your hands, your time of commanding and adjudging
is not yet come, and in the mean time you must be commanded, ruled, and
adjudged your self; couzened, defrauded, and cheated, and have your goods
taken away, and you must be patient, and return good to those that offer these
things to you: O this is brave do^trine for some, whose practice is to offer
wrong, they hope it will tie honest men hands, and tongues and spirits, that
they may wrong them as they please: as the Usurer hoped that the Ministers
preaching against usury would make his neighbors give over the trade, and so
his money should never lie dead by him for want of customers: I wish Gods
people would make but as good benefit of it for their souls, as worldly men
will for their purses. I have known a Minister by preaching peace and patience,
preach many of his people thieves and cheaters, they would wrong him to his
face, and then tell him he must be patient and peaceable, else he would
contradict his own doctrine.

4. He that is truly patient, must not only return good for evil, and for
bear to revenge when he has power, but he must be content to have the
contrary reported of him: namely, that he returns evil for good, and is
patient perforce, because he cannot help himself. I tell you this is a hard
lesson, yet you must learn it before you can enter Heaven gate, whose motto is
this, Do good and hear ill; none but such enter there: it always was, and
ever will be the worlds custom; to father their own vile conditions upon Gods
people. Tacitus tells us, that when Nero had set Rome on fire, he laid it upon
the Christians.

5. You must also be content that men should believe your enemies so reporting:
for men will so do, whether you be content or no if the Viper leaps on Paul's
hand, though he be the honestest man, in the company, yet all will conclude him
to be the worst: so if a viperous slanderer, railer, or whisperer, lays hold
of any honest Christian, all hereby will conclude him to be according to what
they see or hear: the Psalmist says, every man is a lie: and like loves like:
they will therefore naturally believe lies before truths: and this vile people
know and will brag of, as one told his Minister to his face, that he could be
believed before him, by his betters: you know the Proverb, The more knave, the
better luck: well, this you must be content wi thll, if you be truly patient.

6. And lastly, you must be content that not only the worser and common sort
and strangers should believe of you, the contrary to truth, but that the better
sort also, even Christians, and friends should believe such lies as the wicked
raise and whisper against you, and that they should suspect you to be guilty of
all that is reported, and think amiss, and also speak amiss of yo: that
they should break your head with their precious balms, that their tongues
which should heal your grief should wound you, and make your grief bigger:
that they should also lay to your charge things you are not guilty of, and
interpret every thing at the worst, and charge iniquity upon you: thus Jobs
friends, good men, honest men did by him: and this you must be content to
suffer: it is more irksome to be ill thought of, or ill reported, by those that
are good, then by those that run into all excess of riot; it is matter of
comfort rather, that these like us not: but I say if you be Gods, he will try
your patience even by the others, by the best; and you must be content with
it: and wait with patience till the day come when he shall make your
righteousness appear as the light, and your just dealing as clear as the
noone day: and in the mean time you must be content to live neglected and
suspected: you must be last and the least in men's esteem, but then the last
will be first, and the first last.

And thus Brethren I have taught you patience, and I have tried your patience,
if I have done amiss, i will do so no more: for thus much shall serve for this
text, this time, and this place. Gratia and Gloria Deo and Christo, Jesu and
adjutori meo,



Amen.
FINIS
THE FOVRTH SERMON PREACHED IN ESSEX, Anno 1641.

Wherein is discovered the right spirit of the GOSPEL.

By EDWARD SYMONS, Minister of Rain in Essex.

MATTHEW. 21. 5. Tell the Daughters of Sion, Behold, thy King comes unto thee
meek.

1 PET. 3. 4. A meek and a quiet spirit is in the sight of God of great price.

LONDON, Printed by R. C. for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at his shop, at
the sign of the Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard. 1642.

THE RIGHT NATVRE AND Temper of the Spirit of the GOSPEL.
LUKE 9. 55, 56. But he turned and rebuked them, and said; Ye know not what
manner of Spirit ye are of; for the Son of man is not come to destroy men's
lives, but to save them.


THese words do note unto us, Christ's entertainment of a certain motion that
was made unto him by two of his Disciples in the former verse: it was we see
entertained with dislike, for he turned and rebuked them for it; and then he
tells them the reason why he did dislike it; because it proceeded from
ignorance, namely of themselves, and also of him: of themselves, or of their
own spirits, you know not what spirit ye are of: And of him, of the end of his
coming, for the Son of man came not to destroy men's lives (according to the
supposall of your motion) but to save them.

Before we fasten directly upon the Text, we must for our better proceeding, a
little consider of the motion, and of the occasion of it: The motion we have in
the foregoing words, Lord, will thou tha^ we command fire to come from Heaven,
and consume them, as Eli^s did; And the occasion which stirred their spirits,
to make such a cruel motion, was the sight of the churlishness of the
Samaritans; for as appears in ver. 52, 53. Christ was travailing toward
Jerusalem, and being benighted, he sent his servants before him to take up a
lodging in a village of the Samaritanes, but they would let him have no lodging
there, because he was going to Jerusalem; this was their churlishness.

And the root of it (as we may conceive) was a certain national hatred
between the Jews and the Samaritans, which did arise from difference in
opinion, for as you may read, Joh. 4. 20. The Samaritans faid, God must be
worshipped after their fashion, on their mountain, but the Jews said (and
they were in the right) that God must be worshipped at Jerusalem: And this same
difference was the ground of their quarrel, which was so great, that the Jews
in general, and the Samaritans in general, would have no dealings one with
another, as appears, Joh. 4. 9.

Now our Savior was a Jew, and he was going to Jerusalem to worship there,
according to the Law, the Passover was near at hand, and this these
Samaritans apprehended, by his habit, or his carriage, in some sort, they
perceived that his face was toward Jerusalem, and therefore no lodging should
he get among them: which when the Disciples saw, their blood began to rise, and
their spirits began to work, and they thought to show themselves Jews, as the
other had showed themselves Samaritans, and be as cruel, as those were
churlish, wherefore, says the Text, when the Disciples, James and John, saw
this, they said, Lord will thou that we command fire to come from Heaven, and
destroy them, as Elias did?

And here let us observe by the way, what Spirits difference in opinion will
make men of: how unkind Observe.
and cruel one to another: be they Jews, do they go to Jerusalem to
workship there? will they kneel at the Sacrament ^^out upon them, let them
have neither meat, drink, nor lodging, that is in plain terms, starve them:
On the other side, be they Samaritans, Sectaries, will they sit at the
Sacrament? O fie upon them, pity they should live, let us banish them out of
the world, put fire to them and burn them: O these be fine doings among people
that worship the same God; the devil happily may delight in them, but I am sure
Christ does not.

These be the fruits of difference in opinions, abuse of each others, mutual,
and mortal hatred, neglect of all Humanity and Divinity on both parts; thus it
was you see of old, and I wish from my soul, we had not cause to fay, thus it
is now: but where will these things end think you?

These two in the Text, the Samaritan, and the Jew, made not an end of this
their difference, until it had made an end of both them, for we read in the
Jewish stories, that such a like quarrel ^as this was, such a like
discourtesie as was here offered, made way to the Jews wars, whereby both
Jews and Samaritans were destroyed. And I pray God these differences of
opinion, in our Church does not bring a like destruction: The Apostle notes it
as a fearful omen, by way of caveat, Gal. 5. 15. if ye bite and devour one
another, ye are in danger to be consumed one of another.

Observe also from the Samaritans churlishness, and inhospitality to Christ,
and his Disciples: that where Observe.
hatred is, there is churlishness, and where churlishness is to any the
Messengers and servants of God, doubtless there is a hatred of them, they hate
them that will not receive them, or that deal uncivilly with them: And
remember what reward these Samaritans at last did get for this their
churlishness, in not receiving Christ, and his followers: God suffered the
devil to send Simon Magus amongst them, Act. 8. 9. that did most miserably
seduce the whole Nation, small and great adored him: And so God often punishes
such people, as receive not Christ and histrue Ministers, he lets Satan send
some paltry fellows, some wicked and worthless men with delusions among them,
whereby they are seduced, and perhaps brought to ruin: It were possible to
give you examples of this in these times, but I pass on.

When the Disciples James and John saw this, a common courtesy denied, a
nights lodging, and that to Christ Jesus their Master, whose wrong and abuse
they could not but lay to heart, more then if it had been offered only to
themselves: And to see him thus abused for his Religion sake, (because his face
was toward Jerusalem) and that a little while after they had seen him in his
glory, on the Mount of Transfiguration, honored by Heaven, to see him thus
despitefully used, by a company of S^maritan Heretics, in a base paltry.
Village, can you blame them if they were angry? surely they had reason for it,
and as they thought Scripture too, for say they, Master, Will thou that we
command fire to come from Heaven, and consume them, as Elias did?

In which motion of theirs, we see they take it for granted, that these
Samaritans deserve to be destroyed, and that in the sharpest manner, and in the
most remarkable way that might be, even by fire, only they take Christ's advise
about the matter, and ask his leave to do it, and they bring in the Example
of Elias to warrant their motion, although our Savior approves, neither of
their motion, nor yet of their warrant, as we shall see anon.

But first, Observe what a woeful thing it would be Observe.
if one man should sit in Judgment upon another, for the sins committed
against God; if the best men that are, should censure sinners, or if Christ
should be of the same mind as these his Disciples here were of, and presently
punish every indignity of this nature that is offered unto him, we might say
with David, O Lord, who could abide it.

Nay, we may conclude out of all question, if Christ should not be more
merciful then man, to sinful men, that entertain him not, the whole world
would long ere this have been burnt to ashes, not only these Samaritans here,
but the Jews of Jerusalem too, yea James and John among the rest, and the
whole universe, a great while ago had been like Sodom.

As for the Samaritans here, they had been burnt up presently, without more
ado, for denying Christ a lodging: and for Jerusalem, he was worse used there
then at Samaria, they shut him out of their City, and on the Mount without the
City gates, they murdered him; so then Jerusalem soon after had been burnt
to Ashes too, as being thoroughly guilty of Samariaes fault: And then for the
Disciples themselves, indeed we will do them no wrong, time was, that they had
received him, but then afterward, when most need was, they forsook him again,
they ran away from him, renounced him, denied him, and some of them swore too
they never knew him, then if Christ should have been of their minds, more
fire must have been fetched from Heaven to consume them, the Disciples, also
James and John, as well as the rest.

Nay, further yet, we read Joh. 1. 10, 11. that the whole world was made by
Christ, and yet it knew him not, nor received him, then also the whole world
had long ago been at an end, even turned into a heap of Ashes: And (I pray)
now adays who does receive Christ as he should, nay, who does not at one time
or other refuse to receive him? surely then, if Christ were of the same mind
with these his Disciples, he should not so much as leave himself one man to
save, but should destroy all.

Blessed therefore, and ever blessed be the Divine goodness, and blessed be
Christ, that he is a better friend to poor sinners, and more merciful then
we should ever be to our selves, or to one another: Christ invites them to
come to him, whose hearts suggest most evil against themselves, and promises
ease and help: Matthew. 11. 29.
O that this sweet goodness of Christ could make us better, and draw us to
repent, and to love him, as it ought to do, for it is shown to that end; but
wicked we are Romans 2. 14.
rather thereby encouraged to sin, because judgment is not speedily executed
upon the workers of iniquity, therefore the hearts of men are even set in them
to do evil (says the Preacher;) well, I am sure we have cause Eccles. 8. 11.
to praise God for his goodness, and to make better use of it.

But we return to the Disciples: Master (say they) Will thou that we command
fire to come from Heaven, and consume them, as Elias did? if we mark it,
herein they approve themselves Disciples indeed, they make their Masters will
their law, (Master, will thou) they will not do it on their own heads, what
they do shall be done on Gods name.

This indeed is the proper condition of Gods true servants, to take advise of
him, by Prayer, in all their doings, and this course keeps them from doing any
known evil, yea, it helps them to know the evil of their intentions when
they are ignorant of it.

First, It keeps them from doing any known evil, for their consciences will
not suffer them to crave his aid in any known sinful way, or work: the
Disciples here did not yet know that this their motion was evil, for if they
had, they would have been ashamed to have propounded it to Christ to approve
on.

Secondly, It helps them to know the evil of their desires, when they are
ignorant of it, thus the Disciples came here to discover their error by asking
Christ's advice about their conceived intentions, so we may come to see our
errors, whereof we are ignorant, if we consult with him by Prayer, about our
businesses, for Christ by his Spirit will one way or other discover the same,
if we advise with him, consult therefore with Christ in all things.

But then for the Scripture that is alleged, (as Elias did.)

Precepts are the proper rules for doings, but the Disciples allege no Precept
here, but only a President of Elias, taken out of 2 King. 1. 9. where he
called for fire from Heaven, to consume those mal^pert Cap aines with their
fifties that came to apprehend him, but this example they misapplyed too, as
appears by our Saviors rebuke of them, nor was it so fit for their purpose as
they ignorantly supposed, and as we shall see by and by: only in the mean
time, let us learn in general two things by the way. 1. That godly men are
not to be imitated in all things they do.

2. That good men may through ignorance, mis-apply Scripture.




First, That godly men are not to be imitated in all things they do. For godly
men have done many things that Observe.
were not good; scarce a godly man mentioned in all the Scripture, except Abel,
but is noted of some sin or other, for in many things we sin all, says Saint
James, Jam. 3. 2.
(nor was Abel without sin, but because he was the first and most express type
of innocent Christ, to show what a one Christ should be, namely without guile,
void of sin, an Innocent Lamb, a true Shepherd, a pure Martyr, therefore for
this cause is not Abel noted of sin; but I say he had sin in him, and did
commit it, for he was his Fathers Son, as well as all the other Saints) now
we must not imitate the godly in their sins, not Abraham in telling of an
untruth to escape a danger, nor David in his adultery, and in his making Uriah
drunk, as some wicked ones will do.

But perhaps the godly will say, We know this well, but we may imitate them in
all their good actions; I answer, no, not in all the good and commendable
things they did do, for they did do many things by an extraordinary instinct
of the Spirit, which is not common to all, what they did by special
inspiration, they had a particular commission, a privy seal for it; which
belonged only to them, and not to others.

Phineas by the special inspiration of God, did kill Zimri and Cosbi, when he
saw them in the act of sinning against God, shall any man therefore when he
sees others committing sin, fall upon them and kill them? And Ehud, by a
special warrant from God, killed Eglon, shall the Papists therefore conclude
from thence, that it is lawful for men to kill Kings? Elias here being moved
by the special Spirit of God, called for fire from Heaven, to consume the
Captains with their fifties, may the Disciples do so too against the
Samaritans? no, says our Savior, that they may not.

Therefore, I say, the examples of godly men must not simply in all things be
followed or imitated: but two things we must consider of in such a case.

First, Whether they whom we desire to imitate, did do well, or no, in the
thing that we would be like them.

Secondly, Whether our office is to imitate them; for in the Prophets of old,
we must always difference between what they did, by their general calling, and
therein, if we be in like office, we may imitate them; and what they did by
immediate warrant, and such acts pass not from the persons, no precedents are
to be made of them.

The use of this shall be only to inform us, that it is most safe to hold to
the rule, Legibus standum, non exemplis, we must live by precept, not by
example: we have many now adays that will neglect the obedience to good Laws,
to follow the example of such and such good men; verily I commend them not, in
thus making Popes of good men, as if such were not subject to err; the Laws
are, and ought to be our Masters, and they are fugitives that run from their
Masters: but we come to the second.

Secondly, Good men through ignorance may mis-apply Observe.
Scripture: These good men here in the Text did so, we will go no further,
they mis-applyed this example of Elias, for that act which Elias did, was not
like that which they would have done, and for which they alleged Elias
example; for the fire which Elias called for, was against none but delinquents,
who ungratiously, malepertly, and without all shame endeavored and intended,
to bring the holy Prophet bound to the wicked King, and one of them was as
deep in the fault as another, they were all alike guilty: But the Disciples
here would have called for fire to consume a whole Town, wherein were a great
many women and children that were (likely) no way accessory to this
churlishness offered unto our Savior: now it was never Gods mind or way to
punish the innocent with the guilty: Sodom it self had been saved, had but
ten innocent persons been found there; and Niniveh was spared, because there
were so many in it that knew not their right hand from their left: Therefore
you see the example of Elias was not rightly alleged, and good men may through
ignorance misapply Scripture.

And if good men may, then no doubt but evil men may and will too; indeed not
an Heretic or Schismatique that ever was, but they would allege Scripture
for their opinions, but it was Scripture mis-applyed and pe^verted, as the
Apostle says many do to their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3. 16.

We have many now adays of this rank, whom the Apostle describes by their
conditions, and by their followers, 2 Timothy 3. from the first to the tenth
verse: and among other their conditions, he says, ver. 5. That they have a
form of godliness: that is, they can allege Scripture to their own ends,
though they deny the power of it in their lives. Secondly, he says they are
men of corrupt minds, and reprobate concerning the true faith: and he compares
them to a couple of Conjurers, Jannes and Jambres, that withstood Moses, the
true called servant of the Lord. Thirdly, he says further, they are
housecreepers, they love to work in secret.

And then their followers, with whom they most prevail, are silly women, that
are not able to withstand them, that through their silliness do admire them,
these they take captive; and so they do some men too, that are as silly, and
as weak as those women, laden with sins, and diverse lusts: And Oh how fast
such corrupt hearers do drink in corrupt Doctrines! Indeed corrupt hearts
will always swallow down corruptions and errors, faster then truths: How many
years have many of Gods faithful Ministers been painefully Preaching truths
in public, as Christ did to some people, and yet they have not received the
same? but now of late we have had a brood of Sectaries, and they have whispered
up and down in corners, (men that have come in their own names,) and what
abundance of followers have they gotten upon the sudden? It was a true saying
of our Savior to such kind of followers, I am come in my Fathers name, and ye
receive me not, if another shall come in his own name, him ye will receive.
Joh. 5. 43.

And indeed, you may always know an error, by peoples readiness to receive
it, like will to like, a corrupt Doctrine will quickly take a corrupt heart:
and you may discover evil men and false teachers by this: they that cannot, or
do not apply Scriptures to themselves, for the humiliation of their own
hearts, and for the sanctification of their own tongues and lives (as many of
these do not) cannot rightly apply them for others instruction, at least, they
may be suspected in their allegations, for the Spirit of truth is the Spirit of
sanctification; good men may be mistaken in alleging Scriptures, therefore
much rather may evil.

But I will hold you no longer in the Context, I come to the carriage and words
of our Savior, in the Text it self, wherein we have two things,

1. Our Saviors dislike of their motion. 2. His confutation of it.
His dislike in the first words, He turned and rebuked them: His confutation in
the rest: And first of the first, He turned and rebuked them.

Doubtless, the Apostles expected another kind of Part 1.
turn then they here met withal, they looked he should have turned and
commended them for their zeal, and said, Well, I see yet some body loves me,
though others care not for me, yet you do, I see it grieves you that this
disgrace is offered me, you are worthy for this your tenderness toward me, to
sit, the one on my right hand, and the other on my left in my kingdom: Sure I
say, the Disciples did expect some such like words as these, with the
confirmation of their motion; but, says the Text, He turned and rebuked them:
They were zealous indeed, but they were rash withal, and therefore he turned
and rebuked them; from whence we learn that, Rash zeal deserves no
commendation, but rather to be ^^serv.
rebuked.



When men out of their private spirits, will go about to revenge Gods quarrel
upon sinners, they shall have no thank at his hand for their labors; here was
sin against God committed, and as great a dis-respect offered to Christ, as
almost could be, yet we see he does not approve of their desires to revenge it.

Men of blood that have cruelty in their hearts, and mouths, and hands too, if
they have advantage, against their own enemies that have used them ill, or
against Christ's enemies, that have used him ill, are to be rebuked, we
Ministers may, nay, we must rebuke such spirits, and such motions.

And a great many such spirits have we now adays, whom, if we should rebuke,
as Christ here did his Disciples, they would cry out upon us for no friends of
Christ, or of his cause; no, but friends of Publicans and sinners rather, as
the Pharisees said that Christ was when he rebuked them; The Pharisees indeed
would have had Christ rebuked none, but those that themselves called and
counted Publicans and sinners, and never to have meddled with them, though they
were never so hypocritical and vile, for if he did at any time, they would be
sure to defame him, and exclaim upon him: and miscall him: so now we have many
that would have us Ministers, Preach only against the sins of Drunkards, and
profane persons, and superstitious Papists, but by no means they would not
have us touch the sins of Professors, be they never so blameable, for they
cannot, they will not bear it at our hands; our good names at least, shall
surely smart for it, if we do; the least glaunce in a Sermon against their
hypocrisy, or headlong zeal, is a sufficient ground with many of them, to
make them whisper us about the Country, to be men of most bitter spirits,
against all goodness, and against Gods people: Indeed few men do we meet
withal, that will take rebuke as the Disciples here did, specially when they
are rebuked for their rash zeal, in the cause of God or Christ, for which they
expect commendation rather, and perhaps it is that only which many of them
aim at, but it shows that such are Professors rather of the Pharisees stamp,
then of the Disciples: However our S^viours example and action does here (...)
us, that rash (...) deserves no commendation, but rebuke rather.

Observe again that Christ does not bid his Disciples consider, whether the
good that might come by burning the Town would outweigh the loss thereof, as
the Powder Traitors, when the case was propounded among them, whether the
Popish Lords, and Knights, in the Parliament house, should be blown up among
the rest, they consulted whether the good that might come to the Catholic
cause by that deadly blow, would not outweigh the loss of them, and finding
in their hellish thoughts, that it would, they concluded to blow up them too.

No, our Savior Christ did not go that way to work here, with his Disciples;
for we grant that flesh and blood might have found reasons enough to burn the
Town, had they been consulted with: for,

First, Hereby there would such a fear have been struck into all the Towns
about, that Christ should have been the more respected ever after, he should
never have been denied a lodging more.

Secondly, Hereby Christ should have salved his reputation among his own
Countrymen, who thought very hardly of him for being so courteous to the
Samaritanes, they suspected him to love them too well, insomuch that they
called him Samaritan.

Thirdly, It might have been much to Christ's reputation, to have had Disciples
that could do as great things as Elias, and fetch fire from heaven with a
word, as well as he.

But none of these reasons could sway with our Savior, the act being evil of
it self, he would by no means allow of it, and thereby he teaches us, that
we must not do any evil that good may come thereon.

We must not mischi^fe a S^mari^a^^ nor do h^^t to Observe.
any sinner, to do any good to our selves, to further our own cause or
opinions, no, nor to get respect to Christ himself, or glory to God: It was
Jobs saying to his Job. 13. v. 7. 9.
friends, when they unjustly charged him with wickedness, because God had so
afflicted him, that they might (as they thought) justify the Lord in those his
dealings, says he to them, Will you speak wickedly for Gods defense? will you
speak deceitfully for his cause? will you make a lie for him, as one man uses
to tell a lie for another? surely he will reprove you; God needs not man's
lies to his glory, he can carry out his own work, and gain respect to
himself and cause without our indirect assistance.

But who do you think will believe this report? how long may we Preach before
this Doctrine will be credited? yet you see our Saviors carriage in this
business of the Text, does warrant it for good, he would not have any man hurt
by any of his servants for his sake; and so at another time, when Peter drew
his sword in his defense, and struck of Malchus ear, He bad Peter put up his
sword again, and he healed Malchus ear again, for says he, the end of my
coming was not to hurt men, but to do them good, to save and not to destroy,
Christ would have no man hurt for his sake.

No, no, But we, many of us, will rather approve of the Jesuits and Popish
way, as being more agreeing to our reasons, and to flesh and blood then this
is, and if by destroying and ruinating such and such, we may but further the
cause, (though not the Popish or Catholic cause, as they term it, but
perhaps the Puritan cause, Christ's cause, as we call it) why then we conclude
it lawful to do any thing, lie, slander, defa^e, vex and ^njustly grieve the
spirits of our opposites, do them what mischief we can possibly devise, and
be doing God and Christ good service all the while: But alas, alas, if
Christ were in the right, we in this are much mistaken: I know (friends) it is
not safe for a Minister, if he loves his credit, his safety, or his peace, to
say thus much in the hearing of some, because it is contrary to their opinions:
but I hope, though I dye for it, I shall ever say, Vivat Christus and pereat
Barrabbas, let Christ and his truth flourish and be known, and let Barrabbas
and every false heart and way perish, and be overthrown.

But yet again observe; this motion of the Disciples was a revengefull motion,
they would have paid the Samaritans their own again, and that with an
overplusse, they would have required churlishness with cruelty, and therefore
our Savior does utterly distaste their motion, and thereby does further teach
us, that, They that will return like for like (inpoint of wrong) or rather
worse then is offered them, ar^ not in that their way Observe.
allowed of God.

Such may happily like of themselves and their own ways, but Christ likes them
not you see: though in their relations they are never so near unto him: Love
Mat. 5. 44.
your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and
pray for them that despitefully use you, and persecute you, there Christ gives
the Precept, and here you see he gives you his own practice: And so,
recompense no man evil for evil, and see that Romans 12. 17. 1 These. 5. 15.
no man render evil for evil to any man, they are Evangelicall Lessons, and
must be learned by the professors of the Gospel; nor were these precepts in
the old law given to private men, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, (if they were,
they are out of date now, Matthew. 5. 38, 39. etc.) but to Magistrates, unto
whom, as being in Gods stead, we may upon sufficient occasion, declare our
wrongs; and what punishment is thereupon by them inflicted on our Enemies, is
done mediately by the hand of God, to whom alone vengeance belongs: And yet
neither must we make use of the Magistrates help purposely to revenge our
selves upon an adversary, for that were to make the Law, the Magistrate, and
God himself too, the instruments of our vile, and malicious spirits; no, but
only to have Justice in a case of wrong; as we must not rejoice De malo
inimici, in the hurt of an eneny when we see it done, so we must not aim
thereat beforehand, but only at the manifestation of Truth and Justice in our
complainings: But let me say this, I am confident, that at the great day, that
man shall have most honor, and most comfort, that has put up his complaints
immediately to God, and referred most wrongs to him.

This therefore in a word discovers unto us, that those Use.
spirits are not right and Christian, that resolve upon it concerning others,
to give them as good as they bring, and to deal with them, as themselves by
them have been dealt withal, and will be sure to endeavor it, to the
uttermost, so long as, or whenever, as power is in their hand: they will
persecute those that when time was, did persecute them; and be as merciless
now, as those were cruel when they were in place: surely it becomes not Gods
Children, to walk in condemned paths, to tread in those steps which themselves
formerly did truly censure as Antichristian; if cruelty and revenge be a sin
in any, then most of all in Christ's Disciples, in Gods children, whom it
beseemes to approve themselves by their carriage toward their enemies, to be of
a better spirit then other men: But I conclude this with Solomon's advice, Prove.
24. 29. Say not thou, I will do to him as he has done to me, I will render to
the man according to his works; and remember too, whoever thou be, that
there be with thee, even with thee, sins against the Lord thy God.

I proceed in the Text, to our Saviors confutation of Part 2.
their motion: and of their abuse of Elias example, which they brought to
warrant it: and this he does by a double Argument.

First, from the calling of the Apostlcs themselves, you know not what spirit
ye are of; as if he had said, desire of revenge is not suitable to men of your
spirits, or of your calling, you are Ministers of the Gospel, and you are my
Disciples, and you must do only that which suits with my spirit, which
becomes the Gospel.

Secondly, from the end of his own coming, who was their Master, which was to
save men's lives, and not to destnoy them, as if he had said, What do you tell
me of burning Towns, or of Elias example, in calling down fire from heaven to
do hurt? is there no difference between me and Elias? between the end of my
coming and his? if he came to destroy men, and to pray against Israel, yet I
came to save men, and to pray for Israel, therefore a very unfit motion this
is, which you propound unto me, and very impertinently do you propound the
example of him: But I know you do it ignorantly, Nescitis, you know not what
spirit ye are of, or of what spirit you ought to be, ignorance is the cause of
your Error, and your motion is naught, because it springs from ignorance;
ignorance of your selves and of me too, of your own spirits, and of the end of
my coming: Hence we gather these observations:

1. Motions that proceed from ignorance are evil motions.

2. Good men may be ignorant ant of their own spirits.

3. Ignorance of a man's own spirit, or of the distemper therein, is a cause of
that evil that comes from him.

4. All motions that are unsuitable to the end of Christ's coming, are sinful
motions.

And to these we shall add one lesson more, that falls naturally from the
former Argument of the two, as it has been opened, or rather from our
Saviors scope in the whole Text, and that shall be this:

5. Those that live under the Gospel, must mind, and speak, and do only that
which suites with the spirit of the Gospel.

These are the observations, or lessons, that we shall further d^scourse of,
briefly from the Text, and of them in their order.

1. Motions that proceed from ignorance are evil motions.

No good can come of ignorance; without knowledge Observe. 1
the mind is not good, says Solomon, and from amind Prove. 19. 2.
not good, no good can spring. In Matthew. 20. 23. there was a request or prayer
made to Christ, by the Mother of these two Apostles, James and John, but it
proceeded o^t of ignorance, and therefore our Savior conde^nes it as no good
request, You ask (says he) you know not what: And so that worship that
proceeds from ignorance, is no good worship; You worship you know not what,
says our Savior to the woman of Samaria, Joh. 4. 22. and so he disallowes
their worship as a sinful worship. And so Romans 10. 2. the Apostle speaks of a
zeal without knowledge, and disallowes of it as not good, ignorance is no
mother of devotion, or of goodnoffe (as the Papists teach, but rather of all
error,) of bloodshed, persecution, blasphemy, oppression, and of all filthy
lusts, of all ill motions, as I could make good by Mat. 22. 29. Act. 3. 15. 17.
1 Timothy 1. 13. 1 These. 4. 15.
diverse particular Scriptures.

O that this truth were believed, and remembered in these days, for then
perhaps people would not follow Use.
ignorant and unlearned teachers so fast as they do, of whom the Apostle
speaks, that they neither understand what they say, nor whereof they affirm:
none more bold then the blind, and none more ready to follow the 1 Timothy 1. 7.
blind, then those that are like them, but if the blind lead the blind, both
will fall into the ditch, says our Savior, Matthew. 15. 14.

But be it known from hence, that the zeal of ignorance is not good, nor the
prayer of ignorance, nor the preaching of ignorance, nor the worship or
devotion of ignorance, nor any motion that proceeds from ignorance, alisnaught
that comes from this root; ignorance is darkness, and darkness has relation
to Hell: these Apostles here (I warrant you) after they knew this, they were
but little taken with this their own motion, nor did they delight to start any
more of the like kind: I wish that all men were like the Apostles herein, to
take notice of their own ignorance, and to curb and keep in the fruits
thereof.

But we proceed; what ignorance was it that our Savior blames here in these
his Disciples? why, it was first the ignorance of their own spirits, You know
not what spirit you are of: and hence arises our second observation. Good men
may be ignorant of their own spirits.

Observe. 2.


That is, of that frame and disposition of heart, that temper ^f spirit which
themselves are of, or ought to be of, at such or such times and seasons, or
upon such occasions; The Apostles here were good men, yet they did not
understand themselves you see, nor what the nature of that spirit was, which
God at those times did give unto his servants.

God is the Father of Spirits, and the giver of all good Heb. 12. 9.
Spirits, and you must know that God gives to his servants spirits suitable to
the times and seasons: the same spirit may be good at one time, and not at
another, Elias spirit was good in his time, but the times being changed, his
spirit, or the temper of his spirit, may not be so good now, Jesus Christ the
Son of God being come, by his coming he made a change of the times, and so by
consequence of the spirits too, as we shall show anon: And indeed the Disciples
inconsideration, of the alteration of the times, was the occasion that they
were ignorant (in this fort) of their own spirits.

And so still ignorance of the times and seasons, and places where men live, is
often the cause that good men are ignorant of their own Spirits, or of what
spirit they ought to show, a spirit that may be good at one time, or in one
place, may not be so, at, or in another; for example.

Luthers spirit was good in Luthers time, God did fit him with a spirit
according to the time and place wherein he lived, and to the work he had to
do: but whether Luthers spirit be so good now, and in these Realms; or
whether all they that boast themselves to be of Luthers spirit, are so indeed,
and have it from God, as he had, many wise men, both do, and well may, make a
question.

But if we should grant that Luthers spirit were as good in these times, as it
was in his own; yet whether Carolostadius his spirit, that was never good in
Luthers time, be good now or no; is, and may be a further question.

This Carolostadius was an ignorant Doctor in Luthers time, that loved
popularity, and to be counted some body as well as Luther, in the great work
of Reformation: (He was indeed a pretty tolerable man, according to the
condition of those times, only he had two defects, and they were want of wit,
and want of sufficient learning,) and therefore he fell to Preach and stir up
the people, of their own heads and accords, to pull down Images and pictures
in Churches, and glass windows, in a most disorderly way, and not to stay
till they might be removed with quietness by Authority, whereupon Luther writ
against him, and called him ignorant dunce for his labor.

And by that very trick of the devil, in stirring up Carolostadius to do so,
Images stand to this day in the, Lutheran Churches, for Luther writing and
preaching against Carolostadius his folly and disorder, some have interpreted
him thereby to write in the defense of Images, and his followers do still
maintain them as approved by him, which surely is but a mistake, for had
Luther lived longer, no doubt but he would have used means to have had them
abolished too, as well as other Popery, but in an orderly way, by the hand of
the Magistrate, and not by popular fury and folly: but now I sa^, whether the
spirit that was never good, be good in these days, I think there is good
cause to question it.

Nay (my friends) if any man should act with Carolostadius his spirit, and
boast that he were of Luthers spirit, you would say here were ignorance indeed,
and injury too, thus grossly to abuse Luther, in attributing unto him such a
spirit, which (as all men of reading know) he did both write and speak
against, and sure, if Luther himself were now alive, he would say, that the
loome, or the shop board would better become such teachers then the Pulpit:
Luthers spirit, I am sure, was a peaceable spirit in the Common wealth, his
endeavors were, that reformation might be wrought orderly, by them that were
appointed thereunto, and not by the mad hare-brained, drunken multitude.

Well therefore we may conclude, that it is a matter of great consequence, to
know the times and seasons wherein we live, and to know what temper of spirit
does best suit the same; it was the Apostles error in the Text, they were
ignorant of the time and season, at least, inconsiderate of the same; and hence
it came to pass, that they were ignorant of their own spirits and the effect
of this their ignorance was, that evil or sinfulness in the motion that
proceeded from them, and that is our third observation. Ignorance of a man's
own spirit or distemper therein, is a Observe. 3.
cause of that evil that comes from him.



The Disciples ignorance of their own spirits, or their distemper in regard of
their present passion, at the sight of the Samaritans churlishness, was the
cause that they did not see the sinfulness of this their motion; when the eye
is yellow, it thinks all things to be of the same color; so when the mind is
evil, it app^ehends evil to be good; Indeed the wisest man that is, may
easily be deceived in an action or motion, if he knows not the spirit or
tempe^ from whence it proceeds.

There be diverse sorts of spirits in the world, or diverse tempers of spirit,
(if you will) and we are bidden to try them, whether they be of God or no; and
why? even to the end that we may know whether that which comes from them be
good or no; for one and the same act, proceeding from diverse spirits, or diverse
tempers of spirit may be good or bad, this act of Elias from him was good,
because he had a spirit inflamed only with divine zeal of Gods glory, at that
time much darkened in Israel, but if the Disciples had done the same, it had not
been good in them, for their spirits were some what too carnal, and did look
too much toward private revenge: so prayer is a good act from a sincere spirit,
but from a proud and Pharisaicall spirit, it is not so, for our Savior in the
Gospel condemns such prayers, for the spirits sake they proceeded from; so
Alms is a good act, from a tenderhearted selfe-denying spirit, but from a
selfe-seeking spirit, it is not so; fasting from an humble-broken spirit, is a
good duty, but not so from an high selfe-conceited spirit, as appears also
from our Saviors Mat. 6. v. 2. 5. 16.
rebuke of those duties from such spirits: zeal from a knowing spirit is good
and commendable, but not from an ignorant spirit, as the Text shows: and the
like may we say of all actions and motions, they are good or bad, according to
the temper of the spirit from which they proceed.

O that this were well weighed, and considered of in Use.
these times, for then I doubt not, but many of our now a day motions, much of
our fond zeal, and many of our furious expressions, against those we know not,
and against the things we are not acquainted with, and many of the mad
carriages of private men, in ordering, as they call it, or rather in
disordering of things in Church and Commonwealth, would be found not to be
very good or commendable, as not coming from such spirits, as becomes the
followers of Christ to be guided by, and to work withal.

Well, let us all be admonished to set a watch before our hearts, and to
examine all those actions, and motions that proceed from us, whence they come,
and whither they go, from what spirit they proceed, and to what end and
purpose they tend, even as a careful watchman that is set to watch at a door,
will examine all passengers, whence, and whither, and what about they come and
go; for by this we shall come to have some knowledge of our spirits, and when
we once know our spirits to be right, and good, we shall have a great deal
more comfort in our actions and motions then else we can have: And truly we
have great reason to endeavor after the knowledge of our own spirits, for we
shall never know our selves, nor God, nor Christ, as we ought to do, to aim
at Gods glory in all we do, till we know our own spirits. And so much the
rather too, should we study this point, because we see two great Apostles here
ready to precipitate themselves into a bloody act, from their ignorance of this
point, and if such as they did, then very easily may we, if they were ignorant
of their own spirits, then may we be ignorant of ours, notwithstanding that
great good conceit we have of our selves; but how we shall know our spirits to
be right indeed, I shall intimate to you anon, when I come to the Use of the
next point, which is this. All motions that are unsuitable to the end of Christ's
coming Observe. 4.
are sinful motions.



You may observe that our Savior does dislike the Disciples motion here,
because it did not suit with the end of his own coming, it did not look that
way, it was a destructive motion, and his coming was to a saving end, and had
saving effects, therefore I may conclude, what ever motion suits not herewith
is not good, but blameable.

And I may warrant my conclusion, by those faulty motions which have been
exemplified in already, as that which was about a place of temporal
preferment, Matthew. 20. 21.
a matter that suited not with the end of his coming, and therefore our Savior
rejects it as naught: so, when Peter Matthew. 26. 52.
began to move and stir with his sword, our Savior bade him put it up into
its place, for he came not to move that way, not to fight against, but to fight
for his enemies, not to kill them, but to save them: And so now adays, we see
the world is full of motions, and almost of commotions, many active stirring
spirits this age has brought forth, if their motions and stirrings do tend to
the destruction and hurt of others, and not to the good of men, if they look
not the way Christ looked, if they suit not with his end, they are naught and
sinful.

But in very deed, as in our Saviors time men were much mistaken in the end of
Christ's coming, they thought he came to destroy his enemies, and to restore
again the kingdom to Israel, and to advance his servants to temporal
honors, and therefore (as you heard) he had motions made to him tending to
that purpose: so in these our days men are much mistaken in the same, at least
they do not remember it as they ought to do, whereas it is a matter of the
greatest consequence to be known and thought upon, as appears by those many
inculcations thereof in Scripture: I shall therefore for the better remembrance
thereof, and comfort therein, a little enlarge my self in the discovery of it
from the Word of God.

The end of Christ's coming (says the text) was not to destroy men's lives, but
to save them; and says the spirit in another place, God sent his Son not to
condemn John 3. 17.
the world, but that the world by him might be saved; and again, The Son of
man came to seek and Luke 19. v. 10. 11.
save that which was lost; and the Apostle, It is a saying most faithful and
true, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to
save sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15. that was the end of his coming, that he aimed at:
And indeed there was nothing of Christ, or that Christ did, but did teach the
same.

His name Jesus, that signifies a Savior: his relative names of Shepherd,
Husband, and the like, do speak him a Helper, and a Defender: the similitudes
used to express him by, are of harmless and helpful creatures: He is called
a Lamb, not a Wolf that devoures, a Hen, not a bird of prey, a Vine, not a
Bramble, out of which came fire to consume the trees of the Forest, Judge. 9.
15.

The manner of his coming did also teach the end of it; he came not in thunder
and lightning (as the Law did) causing fear and trembling, but as rain on a
fleece of wool, or on the mowen grass, Psalm. 72. 6. that is, gently and with
out noise: and Matthew. 12. 19. it is said, He neither strived, nor cried, nor
was his voice heard in the streets: at his Baptism the holy Ghost sat on him
like a Dove, to show that he should be a Dove-like Mediator, and of Dove-like
conditions. In the execution of all his offices, he only aimed to further the
comfort and salvation of men: By his prophetical office, he taught us in the
way, and does so still by his word and spirit, he dictated a form of prayer
for us, he put words into our mouths, and his spirit into our hearts, and still
himself intercedes for us, and with us: by his Priestly office he died for us,
to heal our souls with a plaster of his blood, and to save us from that
death which our selves had procured: and by his Kingly office, he defends and
fights for his people, as a meek King he admits mourners to his presence, he
has both beams of Majesty, and bowels of mercy, he is the Prince of peace:
yea, all his actions from first to last does prove that he came only to do
good: How sweet, and helpful, and affable he was in all his carriages; How
willing to acquaint himself with these churlish Samaritans, to the end that he
might have occasion to do them good? He vouchafed to discourse with a mean
woman of that Country, to the admiration of his Disciples (John 4. 7.) and
sent his servants to buy meat of them, as it is shown in that Chapter; and
here he would have taken up his lodging amongst them; and after this
discourtesie was offered to him, he cured a Samaritan of his leprosy, Luke 17.
16. and was so courteous to that Nation, that the Jews called him Samaritan
for his labor: And how lovingly did he cure Malchus ear, that came to
apprehend him? and how fervently did he pray for them that put him to death? he
came with blessings in his mouth at his first public appearance and
manifestation, Matt. 5. 1, 2, etc. and he departed the world with prayers in
his mouth, Mat. 27. Father forgive them: In a word, Christ never did hurt or
mischief to any man, he never revenged himself on any, though he had more
power then any, and was more wronged and abused then any, but he was always,
and to all, meek, gentle, courteous, helpful: a man might even drown himself
in Divine pleasures by thinking and speaking of Christ's conditions, and of the
comfortable end of his coming.

But I come to the Use: which shall be to advise all men to acquaint
themselves well with the end of Christ's Use.
coming: it is worthy of all acceptance, says the Apostle (i. e.) of all men's
knowledge, to be acquainted with this, that Jesus Christ came into the world to
save sinners, to do good to unworthy and undeserving persons: it is a matter
of the greatest consequence that is, to know it, for thereby we shall come to
know Christ's spirit, we shall come to know our own spirits, and we shall come
to know other men's spirits.

1. We shall know Christ's spirit, which else we shall not do, as appears in
the Disciples here, for had they known and remembered the end of Christ's
coming, they would also have considered, that he had had a spirit only
driving thereunto, and so would never have made such an unsuitable motion as
here they did, they might easily have concluded that Christ would never so
far have allowed of Elias spirit, as to do, or to countenance to be done
that which did contradict the end of his own coming, they would never have
begged of the Prince of meekness a license to be cruel, for had he given way
to this he should have seemed to come rather to destroy then to save.

Now this our knowledge of Christ's spirit, of the nature and temper of it, may
be useful to us for consolation, and for instruction.

1. For consolation, we being all men and women of a sinful dye: when we be
apprehensive of our danger by sin, and how unkindly we have carried our
selves toward good Christ, how we have many a time denied him a lodging in our
hearts (as the Samaritans here did in their Village) when by his motions he
has sent unto us: I say, when with grief and sorrow we think of these
miscarriages; we cannot but be comforted to remember withal, that Christ's
spirit is clean contrary to the spirits of angry and revengefull men, as has
appeared by the end of his coming, and this passage with his Disciples: It was
a great comfort to the Syrian King and his Nobles, when they were in the King
of Isreal's danger, to remember that the Kings of Israel were merciful Kings;
so may it be to us being in Christ's danger, to consider that he is a Prince of
a merciful spirit: only let us be careful not to abuse his goodness in
after times, and doubt not but we shall taste of the sweetness of his spirit
not withstanding what is past.

2. For instruction and information; that we do not henceforth molest and
grieve the spirit of Christ with such unsuitable motions as the Disciples here
did, and as we sometimes use to do; you know it is the condition of many a
man, if he be but crossed in his way, and vexed by an enemy, especially
unjustly, presently he is ready to desire that ruin and destruction might fall
upon him, and perhaps by prayer or imprecations is bold to request Christ's aid
in the business; nay such is the weakness of some, that if any man or
creature, dog, or horse, or hawke, offends them, they will curse the same,
and call upon the name of God and Christ, to send some judgment from Heaven
upon it, to join with them in doing a mischief: well, I say we should never
do thus, never should we make any revengefull motions to Christ, to grieve his
sweet spirit, did we well know Christ's spirit and the end of his coming:
therefore I say, note well the nature and temper of Christ's spirit.

2. By being well acquainted with the end of Christ's coming, and with the
nature of his spirit, we shall come to know our own spirits, and whether the
motions that come from them be good or no: the Disciples here were ignorant of
the evil of that motion that came from themselves, because they considered not
the end of Christ's coming. It is a matter of great concernment for a man to
know himself: Nosce te^psum, is a necessary lesson, and a man's spirit is the
best part of himself, as is the spirit, such is the man, and we know the
spirit to be right and straight, if it concords with the rule, Christ's spirit
must be the rule to ours, and to what end Christ's spirit tended, to the same
must ours, the aims and endeavors of our spirits must be to save, and to
help men: no man does sufficiently know Christ's spirit, and the end of his
coming, but he that has a spirit tending the same way, for this knowledge is
influentiall into the soul or subject, and makes it suitable to the object or
thing known, so that when such a one is moved or tempted unto any thing, he
bethinkes himself, Is it suitable to the end of Christ's coming? does it tend
to the welfare of others: would Jesus Christ's spirit allow of it? would he if
he were here, and in my case, do it? and even as he thinks Christ would do
in such a case, so does he do and no otherwise: (but more of this in the next
point.)

3. We shall know the spirits of others, (by being acquainted with the end of
Christ's coming, and the nature of his spirit) which naturally we desire to
do, more then to know our own: nor indeed is it unlawful to desire, and
endeavor to discern them: we are bidden to try the spirits whether they be of
God o^ no, 1 John 4. 1. and no safer or quicker way to this then by knowing the
end of Christ's coming, and then by considering whether men's spirits tend the
same way, if they do, we may conclude of them to be good, and of God, if
otherwise, not: Christ's spirit is diffused into all his true members, and they
all reckon themselves to be sent into the world for the same end, as Christ
was; as Christ came not to hurt or mischiese any, but to do good to all, so
they: and they have received virtue and power to that very end and purpose from
Christ, as the Apostle ingenuously confesses, 2 Cor. 13. 10. The Lord (says
he) has given us power to edification, and not to destruction; and therefore in
another place, I became all things to all men, that I might win some: in a
word, the spirit of the Gospel is in all the children of the Gospel, and they
account it their duty to do nothing but what is suitable to the spirit of the
Gospel, which also is a matter that concerns all that live under the Gospel:
and that is our last point. 5. It is the duty of them that live in the times of
the Gospel, to mind, speak, and do only that which suits with Observe. 5.
the spirit of the Gospel.



This also is manifest from the text, by our Saviors dislike, and confutation
of his Disciples motion, because it did not savor of a Gospel-like spirit:
what do you tell me, says he, of Elias his spirit, now the Son of man is
come?

Now to inform you somewhat of the nature of the times of the Gospel, and of
the spirit thereof: I must tell you that there is a great difference between
the former times and these, not in respect of time it self, for that is
always the same, but in respect of a new spirit which Christ by his coming
brought with him: we have a phrase of speech, the Genius of the times, or the
spirit of the times: some times are turbulent, and then we say, a turbulent
spirit is in the times; some times are more placable, and then we say, a more
peaceable spirit rules; in some times the vulgar sort of men generally are
more bold and impudent with their betters and superiors, then is decent and
comely, and then some will say, the Genius of the times is a saucy fellow;
sometime the world travels with perverseness, sometime with envy and hatred,
sometime with one domineering sin, and sometime with another, and men in
their language will attribute it to the spirit of the times: But indeed such as
the spirits and conditions of men are, such are the times, for men denominate
times to be good or bad; plenty of good men, make good times, and abundance of
wicked men, do make the times abundantly wicked: But concerning the difference
between the former times and these.

The times before Christ, were times of ignorance and darkness, men were bad
and did not know it, but when Christ came, he brought with him a spirit of
light and knowledge, to discover sin, and to convince the world thereof, and
so the times were changed to be times of light and knowledge, and Christ
himself in this respect was called A light to lighten the Gentiles, and those
that Luke 2. 32. and ^. 79.
sat in darkness. Again, before Christ came, the times were times of terror
of the Law, which was called fiery, Deuteronomy. 33. 2. 2 Cor. 3. 7. ^.
and the ministration of death, and caused trembling, and Elias lived in those
times, and had a spirit suitable unto them, a fiery, and a destructive spirit,
which happily then was not amiss: but by the coming of Christ, the times were
altered into times of comfort of the Gospel, which is the ministration of life
and peace: it was prophesied long before his birth, that in his time abundance
of peace should flourish, and at his birth the Angels sang peace Luke 2. ^4.
with heaven and God, that before with earthly men had wars and difference.

And further yet, the times before Christ, were times of Justice and revenge,
Adam sinned, and he was presently cast out of Paradise; Sodom and Gomorrah
sinned, Genesis 3. 24. and 19. 24. Number. 16. (...).
and they were suddenly consumed with fire; Corah and his companions sinned,
and vengeance speedily laid hold upon them; and so forth in others, for Gods
name by which he was known in those days, was Deus ultionum, Psalm. 94. 1.
the God of Revenge, and as such a one he was pleased often to approve
himself, but by Christ's coming, the times were turned, to be times of mercy
and favor, times of grace, of patience and forbearance, acceptable times,
days of Salvation: for the Samaritans 2 Cor. 6. 2.
sinned here, yet they were spared, Paul (then Saul) went breathing out
threatenings against Gods Saints, yet mercy Acts. 9.
reached him, before Judgment overtooke him; Mary Magdalen, and the thief on
the cross, were great sinners, yet vengeance did not overwhelme them: yea many
of them that crucified Christ, were not taken away in that their sin, as they
deserved, but were afterward taken into savor, and tasted mercy, being
converted by Peter's Sermon, Act. 2. for by Christ's coming, God was pleased to
leave his old name, and be called by another not usual before, namely, Pater
misericordiarum, the father of mercies: then Deus ultionum, a revenging God:
but now Deus consolationum, the God of Consolation, 2 Cor. 1. 3. And thus you
see, Christ's coming made a great difference in the times: and so ought it to
do in men, in their thoughts, words, and carriages: in all which they must
conformeto the times: Are the times of the Gospel, times of light? then men in
them must walk as children of the light, (Ye were once darkness, but Ephesians. 5.
8.
now are light in the Lord, walk therefore as children of the light:) Are they
times of peace? then men must be men of peace, Romans 12. 18. If it be possible
have peace Romans 12. 18.
with all men: Are they times of mercy, patience, and forbearance? then men
that live in them, must be merciful and patient, not rendering evil for evil
unto any man, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 15. Does God in these times discover himself to be a
friend and a Father even to such as were his enemies? 1. These. 5. 15.
then men must show themselves to be his children right bred, by manifesting
his spirit: Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them
that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use you, and persecute you,
that you may be the children of your Father which is in Heaven, that is, that
you may approve your selves to be his children, Mat. 5. 44, 45.

Men that live under the Gospel, must believe that many of those things that
were tolerable before, are insufferable now: the revenger of blood was
permitted to pursue and kill the manslayer, if he found him out of the City
Number. 35. 19. Psalm. 94. 1.
of refuge; but now the date of that permission is expired; So the Prophets of
old (as may seem) might pray for revenge, O God to whom vengeance belongs,
show thy self: And, O Lord God, that tryest the Ie^. 11. 2.
reins, let me see thy vengeance upon them; and might curse them that abused
them, as Elisha did the children 2 Kings. 2. 24.
that mocked him; and might call for fi^e from heaven to fall on them that
intended their hurt, as Elias did, 2 King. 1.
but now they must do the clean contrary, the times are altered, and the
spirits of Gods Ministers must be suitable to the times: We must pray for our
Enemies, as Stephen did; we must beseech them to be reconciled, (2 Acts. 7. 60.
Cor. 5. 20.) and we must instruct them with meekness, so long as they are
contrary-minded unto us, (2 Timothy 2. 25.) Paul that lived under the Gospel, did
not do as Elias did, that lived under the Law, pray against Israel: but his
hearts desire to God for Israel, was, that they Romans 11. 2.
might be saved, Romans 10. 1. Yea, though they sought to take away his life, yet
he could have wished to have been accursed himself for their sakes, to have
done them good, Romans 9. 3. David was a right good man in his time, and had this
title from the Lord himself, that he was a man after Gods own heart, but he
lived in those days when God was called Deus ultionum, and therefore David is
no fit pattern for us now to imitate, in some of his ways, we must never
deal so cruelly with our enemies, if we have them under our power, as he did
with the Ammonites, 2 Samuel 13-31. He put them 2 Samuel 13. 3^.
under Sawes, and Harrowes of Iron, and made them pass through the Brickekill;
No, the Spirit of the Gospel is a Noble Spirit, and scorns to set a foot
upon the neck of a fallen foe: it takes advantage of his downfall, to discover
it self to have proceeded from Christ, and indevours at such a time to cause
an enemy to distaste and dis-relish his own spirit, by giving him to taste of
its sweetness, it labors to gain an adversary by unexpected compassion, even
as God and Christ did, to gain us, when we were in our blood, cast out, to the
loathing Ez^k. 16. 5.
of our persons: we must be people of Christ's spirit, and not of David's.

It is worth our noting (by the way, nor is it from the purpose) the difference
between David's manner of dying, and Christ's: David dyed, as we may say, with
revenge in his mouth, not only against Shimei, that had abused him; but also
against Joab, that had faithfully 1. Kings. 2. v. 5. 6. 7. etc.
served him, Let not his hoary head (says he) go down to the grave in peace:
but Christ dyed with mercy, and pardon in his mo^th, and prayer for his
enemies, Father forgive them (says he.) His Father was now the Father of
mercies, and he well approved himself Luke 23. 34.
his Son; and after the same sort must we approve our selves his servants.

Concerning David, I do confess his manne^ of dying might well have
scandalized us, in that he commands to take away men's lives, when as it had
been fitter for him to have been begging pardon for his own sins: but it
is to be thought he had consulted with God about the business, and God was
then Deus ulti^num, as I said before: and David was a good Magistrate, and so
just like God, as well as a good man: but I am sure Christ's manner of dying can
scandalize or offend none in this kind, his death spoke better things than the
death of David, as it is said, his blood spoke better things, then the blood of
Abel: Abel dyed in old time, and his blood ^eb. 12. 25.
cried Justice; Christ dyed in these later days, and his blood cried mercy.

Now by all this you may conclude what kind of spirit, the spirit of the
Gospel is, which he expected here his Disciples should rather have discovered
in themselves, and which all that live under the Gospel are bound to manifest
in all their ways: it is a spirit of peace and love, a spirit of meekness
and sweetness, of patience and forbearance, it is such a spirit as Christ
himself had, which was in no sort furious or revengefull, mischievous, or
harmefull, yea such a spirit, as now a days discovers it self in God our
Father: It is a spirit that will not suffer it self to be outgone by any in
ways of love, or goodness, it is a noble and a free spirit, no way niggardly
or unthankful, no way churlish or unkind, it delights in well-doing, it
speaks only glad ^ydings, it cannot abide to sad or grieve the hearts of any,
it joys not in wounding men's wounds, or in raking in their forrowes, it rather
weepeth to behold them, it is a healing spirit, it binds up the
brokenhearted, and truly compa^^ionates all men's miseries and afflictions, it
never brake the bruised reed, nor quenched the smoking flax, it never did
discourage any in the ways of goodness, by word or action of unkindnesse.

It is an affable and a courteous spirit, no way scornful or supercilious,
Stand further off, I am holyer than thou, is not its language; it was the
spirit of the Pha^^sees, that took offense at Christ's eating and drinking with
Publicans and sinners: It is a faithful spirit, that will not allow of any
man, in a sinful way, for any relation sake, or similitude of opinion, and yet
a wise and sweet carriaged spirit, that indevours to draw all opposites to
God, and to it self by fair means: it affects to deal with the chains of
Love, i^ cannot abide to use the ca^^-ropes of fear; it likes not of Satan's
way, to hold men in a slavish awe, to skare them by threatenings; it is not a
driving spirit, but a leading spirit, Let thy loving Spirit lead me in the way
everlasting, says the holy man; it knows how to beseech and persuade, it
cannot tell how to terrify or compel.

It is a spirit of a good language, it is no railing or slandering spirit, no
lying nor defaming spirit, it hates to invent blame, and to cast iniqu^ty upon
men, that are not of the same opinion, that so others might dislike them: it
loves not to make the worst of things, but the best rather, it is a charitable
spirit, and Charity thinks no evil, rejoices not in iniquity, inlargeth not
evil reports, but suppresseth them rather, it is kind-hearted, and
kind-spoken, it believes, hopes, and speaks the best of others, and is
suspicious only of it self.

It is a meek and a mild spirit, rather quietly passive, then vexatiously
active in dealing with opponents; it is an humble and a selfe-denying spirit,
rather suffering ten thousand wrongs, then willingly offering one; it is a
merciful and a pardoning spirit, no ways inclining to blood or cruelty, or to
take revenge; it is a prous and plain dealing spirit, it works not by policy,
craft, or guile; in a word, it is a dutiful and an obedient spirit; it was
never yet weary of the yoke of loyalty, it quakes with abhorment to see dirt
cast upon Gods image; it loathes the conditions, both of Shimei, Sheba, and
Achitophell. King James relates in the Preface to his Remonstrace against the
Cardinal of Perron, that France was once reduced to such miserable terms,
that it was counted and become a crime, for a Frenchman to stand for his King,
or perhaps to speak for him; it was a sign that the Spirit of the Gospel
swayed not there then, but the spirit of Popery, for it is Antichrists spirit,
and not Christ's, that rules in the children of disobedience; the true Spirit
of Christ, and of the Gospel, has never yet been wont to tread in the deadly
paths of rebellion, it never yet knew how to forsake, inf^nge, or break, in the
least degree, the sacred bond of Allegiance: this is that sweet and blessed
spirit of the Gospel. And indeed Christ by the Gospel does offer this very
spirit to all that live under the Gospel, if they be aware of it, yea, and he
does really dispense it to those that be his true servants: Even this
peaceable, meek, and merciful spirit; this loving, sweet, and affable spirit;
this noble, harmless, and helpefull spirit; this humble, selfe-denying, and
pitiful spirit; this faithful, patient, and well-spoken spirit; this loyal,
obedient, and dutiful spirit; this spirit, which was, and is, his own Spirit;
for he had it above measure, and every one of his members have it, according to
their measure; it was the same oil that was powered upon Aarons head, which ran
down to the skirts of his clothing.

And the truth is, if Christ should not bestow this spirit upon his People,
they would not be capable of that salvation, which he came to procure for them;
This very spirit, and none else, does fit them for that happiness: for you
must remember that we had lost both salvation, and a fitness to re-enjoy it:
Christ by his life and death has recovered our salvation; by his Gospel and
the spirit thereof, he works this fitness; and by no other means can it be
effected: the Law which was before Christ came, was never able to do it, the
spirit of that was a provoking spirit, it presented wrath to the soul, and so
made the sin therein more outrageous, more exceeding sinful, as the Apostle
speaks, Romans 7. 13. not by ingenerating rage therein, but by awaking the fury
thereof; the Law is as oil to the flame in respect of sin, it makes it more
violent, and therefore in this sense, it is said to be the strength ofsinne,
and the life of it, without which sin is dead, says the Apostle, viz. as
dead, in a natural man; it lies like a dead thing, and is neither felt in the
Conscience, nor so sensibly furious, till it be stirred by the Law.

But now the Gospel has an effect clean contrary, for its spirit is
contrary; that presents not wrath, bu^ mercy, and pardon to the sinful soul.
it offers Christ unto it, sweet Christ, loving Christ, patient Christ, dying
Christ, soule-saving, and soule-quickning Christ, and by a certain
energeticall influence that it has, it does calm the rage of sin, and
extinguish the heat ofit: it is as blood to the fire, and quenches the flame,
it takes away the strength of sin, and quite kills it by degrees: it so tames
the soul of the sinner, that he is clean of another temper, he has a new
frame put upon him, and a new spirit put into him: see the confirmation of this
in Esaias 11. from the sixth verse to the tenth, the Prophet having spoken of the
spirit of Christ, and of the Gospel, in the beginning of the Chapter, comes
there to show the fruits and effects thereof upon the sons of men, there
intimated under the names of other creatures: The Wolf shall dwell with the
Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, and the calfe, and the
young Lion, and the fatling together, and a little child shall lead them: And
the Cow and the Bear shall feed, their young ones shall lie down together,
and the Lion shall eat straw like an Ox: and the sucking child shall play on
the hole of the Aspe, and the weaned Child shall put his hand on the hole of
the Cockatrice den, they shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy Mountain.
The meaning in a word of all is this: Those that were as Wolves, Leopards,
Lions, Bears, and Aspes before, for their doing mischief, and cruelty, shall
by the sweet spirit of the Gospel be so wrought upon, be so altered, and so
changed, that they shall be in condition like those meek and harmless
creatures, that formerly were most hateful to them: they shall no more hurt as
before they did, but they shall be of a like disposition unto Christ himself,
who never did do hurt to any, and so shall they become fit inhabitants of Gods
holy Mountain: And thus we have seen what the times of the Gospel are, and
what the spirit of the Gospel is, and the natural effect thereof.

Now to draw to an end: our Use shall be only of examination and of
exhortation.

Frst, of examination: what times do you conceive these are that we now live
in, are they times of the Gospel, Use 1.
or no? and whose Disciples do we reckon our selves to be, Elias his
Disciples, or Christ's? Let us remember this, that the Disciple and the Master
must both have one spirit, if we be Christ's Disciples, we must show Christ's
spirit in all our ways, if we live in the times of the Gospel, it is our duty
to mind, speak, and do, only that which suits with the spirit thereof.

When we purpose any thing in our hearts, or ruminate of any thing in our
thoughts, we must ask our own consciences, Is this purpose, are these
cogitations suitable to the spirit of the Gospel? are they grateful to Christ's
spirit? would Jesus Christ, were he in my case, purpose the same thing? would
he ponder and meditate upon such thoughts as I now do? So for our words, we
must consider whether they do become the Gospel of Christ, whether they be
gracious and seasoned with the right salt, and do tend to the edification of
others, (for such words only become the Gospel) a man should ask himself,
Was it Christ Jesus his manner to speak thus, to use such words as I now do?
so when we act a thing, we must consider and ask our consciences, Whose work
is it? is it such a work as the Gospel allows of, or as Christ was wont to
exercise himself in? I live under the Gospel, and it is my duty to think,
speak, and do, only that which becomes the spirit thereof, I am a member and
a servant of Christ, and it is my duty to approve my self only such a one. I
have heard that in Venice, every one does so mind the public good, that if a
motion be propounded to any of them, the first thought and question about it,
is, how it may avail to the benefit and honor of the Commonwealth; so all we
should mind the honor of the Gospel in such sort, that we should consider of
every motion we have, and of every thing we do, how it may and does suit with
the same: O if every of us were but careful in this our duty, we should not
behave our selves, as some of us often do.

If when we are tempted to any sin, as to lie, to rail, to slander, to whisper
men out of credit, to get our selves in, to be churlish, to blow the coals of
contention amongst men, to be disobedient, to revenge, and the like, we would
seriously consider whether these be the fruits of the spirit of the Gospel we
profess, and whether by mani^esting them, we any whit credit and honor the
same, or cause men to speak well of it; and would we but ask our selves; Did
Christ use to do so and so? did he use to lie and dissemble? did he use to
rail upon any that disliked him? was it his custom to go up and down a
slandering of men, and aggravating their faults, backbiting and whispering them
out of credit to get himself in? did he use to bear malice in his heart, and
to take occasions to revenge himself? did he use to curse his enemies, and to
return like for like? was he churlish to any? did he p^actice to set men at
odds, and to make strife and contention where ere he came? did he ever by his
word or practice teach disobedience? and do I profess my self to be his
member, and to have his spirit, and shall I do these things? I say if we would
thus sift and examine all our thoughts, all our words and actions, whether they
are the thoughts, words, and actions of Christ, I dare say we should not do as
we often do.

Believe it, it is our duty to sift our selves in this sort; nay, if the
spirits be truly Gospel-like, it is your customs to do thus, and so from hence
all that ever proceeds from you, will savor of meekness and love, of
sweetness and goodness, all your endeavors will tend the same way as Christ's
did to save and help others, to do good to all, hurt to none, only your
labor will be to destroy sin, and the works of the Devil in all, for to
this end Christ came, 1 John 3. 8. lying, slandering, malice, divisions,
churlishness, unkindnesse, disobedience, and the like, these are the works of
the Devil, and these Christ labored to destroy, and of the same mind and
endeavors are all his servants.

Yea, if your spirits be right, you will always believe, that you were borne
into the world to this very end, to imitate Christ, to set forth his conditions
to others eyes by your life and carriage, to be an instrument of mercy, as he
was the author of it, to manifest your strength and power even as Christ did,
namely, in bearing wrongs, in pardoning offenses, and in praying for offenders:
I say, if your spirits be right indeed, this is their temper, for God does
frame a man's heart to the same end for which he sends him: even as he did
furnish Christ himself with a spirit su^able to the end of his coming, Luke
4. 18.

But be you assured, and let us all be assured, that if our spirits be contrary
to Christ's, if we be cruel, mischievous, spightfull, revengefull, if our aims
and endeavors be contrary to the end for which Christ came, doubtless though
we live under the Gospel, we have not yet received the right spirit of the
Gospel, we are still in the state of sin, however we think of our selves, or
however others think of us: for they that have received the spirit of the
Gospel, have the very mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 16. they have Christ in them,
and if Christ be in us, he has wrought the effects of his coming in us, to
be of his mind, of his conditions, and of his spirit, and to intend the same
things as he did: examine your selves by this.

We have many in these days, that think and say they have the spirit of
Christ, only because they are professors of Christ, although they discover
none of his conditions; nay, I wish they did not rather discover themselves to
be enemies unto them, as they are in others: shall I instance in a few
particulars?

We have some (even of those that profess Christ) if they see a man of a good
nature, of a patient and yielding spirit, that is for peace, and that
endeavors to gain them as Christ did, by love and suffering, and
selfe-denying; why, they will be sure to lay on load enough, like those
unreasonable men, that Saint Paul desires to be delivered from, they will never
leave burdening him with injuries and unkindnesses; that so, if possible, they
may turn his love into hatred, and his patience into passion, and so force him
to be weary of his good way, and to do something in a distemper, as may help
to confirm in men's minds their fore-vented slanders of him: Christ did not do
thus, nor do such doings savor of the Gospel; it is not our profession
therefore, or our pretensions, but our conditions that must prove us right.

Again, Christ found men bad, and made them good, and opened all the ways of
good for them to walk in; but we have many that say they are for Christ, who
if they do not find men bad, will take a course to make them so, at least in
others eyes; they will invent evil, and cast it upon them, as that holy King
complained they dealt with him, Psalm. 55. 3. They cast iniquity upon me (says
he) and in wrath they hate me: as the Heathens in the Primitive times first
clothed the Christians in skins of beasts, and then set dogs on them, so do
some that call themselves Christians, deal with their brethren now, and
because they shrewdly fear these abused ones will by their harmless carriages
confute their contrived slanders, they will endeavor, if they can, to bar up
all ways of good, and of discovery, and to force and drive them, if possible,
into ways of evil.

Again, Christ hides our blemishes, he covers our sins; yea, if we have once
truly with grief confessed them, he quite forgets them, and blots them out of
his remembrance for ever, this was his way of winning men: but we have some
that go for the best in their own esteems, who if they get a matter against
another that deserves blame (as what man lives and sins not?) they will be
sure to lay it up (as they say) till a rainy day, that is, they will remember
it, and upon all occasions, for their own conceived advantage, and the others
vexation, damage and disgrace, repeat and publish it, though perhaps it has
been confessed on the delinquents part, again and again, both to God and
them with sorrow: Sure this was not Christ's way, not is it a way of winning,
but rather of making an everlasting separation, although before there was never
so near a conjunction. Tegens praevaricationem persequitur charitatem, Prove.
17. 9.
says Solomon, he that covers a transgression, seeks love, sed iterans
rem, he that repeates a ma^ter, dis^ung it ducem, says Tremelius, but our
English translation is, separates very friends.

Christ was of a winning and gaining disposition, the young man in the Gospel,
that had but only a good nature (as they say) our Savior looked on him, and
loved Mark 10. (...).
him says the text, and said, Thou art not far from the Kingdom of Heaven;
so by his sweet carriage and language he endeavored to draw him nearer to it,
and he called Judas the traitor (when he came with a company Matthew. 26. 50.
to apprehend him) Friend, friend, wherefore art thou come? inferring thereby
his loving nature, and that though the bond of friendship was broke on Judas
his part, yet on his part it still remained entire, so that if Judas had but
then said, Master I have sinned, he would have replied, Friend Judas, I have
pardoned thee: in a word, he was not harsh to any, but courteous and affable to
all, wondrous lowly, he gave every man his due, he rather preferred all before
himself, then himself before any, though he was and is above all, yet he
always did, and still does yield first to every man: whereas we have many that
boast of his spirit, that are harsh, and rugged even to incivility, they are
unreconciliable if once offended, they are high spirited, they will stand upon
their terms, and will yield to none, no not a hairs breadth, though they are
never so much yielded unto; whereby they do only purchase disgrace to the
Gospel, which they pretend to profess, and loss to themselves; namely, in
men's opinions, the imputation of religious and wise, and of men's hearts and
love, which else they might gain: yea, and perhaps they are means hereby even
to destroy souls, for the neglect of due retributions has often driven men
into indirect courses: It is reported of Lucian and Porphirie, both Christians
at first, but being wronged by their brethren, one in words, and the other with
blows, and not receiving satisfaction, out of stomach they renounced their
religion, turned Atheists, and became enemies to their former profession; yea,
even to Christ, and God, and all; corruption crossed grows mad with rage,
the harshnesse of the Law makes sin violent, whereas the mildness of the
Gospel tames the same; nay, even a good nature by harshnesse is made often to do
contrary to its desire and disposition: Pressura nasi educit sanguinem, the
wringing of the nose brings forth blood. Prove. 30. 33.


Further yet, Christ took no pleasure in sadding men's spirits, but rather in
gladding the hearts of men, by telling them news of his Fathers love and
affection, and willingness to be reconciled, and by comforting those that were
contemned, abused, and slandered, chearing up their spirits against the worlds
malice: Blessed are ye (says he) when men shall revile you, and persecute Mat.
5. 11. 12.
you, and say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake, Rejoice and
be exceeding glad then, for your reward is great in Heaven, and thus they have
dealt with the Prophets: And again, Let not your hearts be troubled, John. 14.
1.
trust in God, and trust in me, thus have they used the Master, and thus will
they use his servants; and be of good comfort, in me you shall have peace,
though in 16. 33.
the world you have affliction; and in the ninth of John, when the man was
excommunicate and cast out from the society of men, Jesus sought him out for to
comfort him: This was Christ's delight, this was his Practice.

But we have many that bear Christ's name, whose practice is clean contrary,
whether it be out of weakness, or wickedness, I do not say; but they seem
to take a pleasure in troubling and vexing the spirits of their brethren, in
sadding their hearts; for with a kind of belief and delight, they love to
tell them only of those evil and false things, which are abroad conjectured
and spoken of them, which themselves perhaps did help to invent, or at least
by their hungry receipt, or greedy hearing them, did give encouragement to the
venters of them; and commonly too, this their news is edged with a sharp
reproof, to manifest their own belief of it, seldom do they second it with
a word of Consolation, for the parties better bearing of it; nor will these
Newes-mongers ever care to be the bringers of any such reports as may add to
the spirit, either life or chearefulness: Truly, I have often thought, that if
such persons as these are, had been by, when our Savior asked his Disciples
what men said of him, they would not have answered as those did, Some say thou
ar^ Mat. 16. 13, 14
Elias, some John Baptist, and some, one of the Prophets; but rather they would
have said, Some say you are a Samaritan, some say you have a Devil, and some
say you are a friend and companion of Publicans and sinners, as supposing that
the hearing of these kind of reports would have been more galling to his
harmless spirit.

But to conclude, in a word, Christ did not delight in trampling upon those
that were already down, he joyed not in the fall of any of his enemies, no, he
wept at the foresight of their ruin that sought his, he would take advantage
from men's miseries, and misfortunes, to show the graciousnesse of his spirit,
in doing them good; when his servant had cut off his enemies ear, he healed
again the ear of his enemy: he was to his last, of a most meek and peaceable
spirit; never was he turbulent in the Commonwealth, never outrageous, cruel,
or bloody, he never in all his life wished for bloody days, he never said,
Better Jerusalems streets run down with blood, then that these Pharisaicall
High Priests should still stand, or then one old tradition should still
continue; No, no, Christ wished the reformation of things as truly as any of
us can do, in such a case; and he could as little away with the manners of
those men, as any of we, and he did as much distaste humane, sinful Ceremonies
in Gods service; but he valued men's lives at a higher rate then to desire the
abolition of such things with so much humane blood, as that the streets should
swim therewith: Christ knew the price of men's lives, and it cost him more to
redeem them, then to have them destroyed so lightly, he knew that it was never
Gods mind, that his Sion should be built with the blood of Brethren, as Rome
was: Christ would rather hope and pray, that all offensive things might be
removed in a peaceable manner, for he came not to destroy, but to save men's
lives; and the same mind, (as I have heard) have all they that have the spirit
of Christ, the true spirit of the Gospel; of what manner spirit therefore
those are of, that are contrary-minded, and conditioned, I leave to you to
judge, from that which has been spoken, and come to the other use, which is
of Exhortation.

I will direct my Exhortation in the first place, to my Use 2.
Brethren of the Ministry in particular, and then with them, unto all
Christians in general.

First, My Reverend Brethren, you in special, whom God has restrained and
guided by his Spirit, from falling into those scandalous faults, and offensive
ways, which too too many of our Order are reported to have slipped into; you
who have been lately under burdens and pressures of troubles and molestations,
whom God has now delivered; you, to whom he has given favor in the eyes of
men; (if Providence shall ever bring these weak lines unto your Christian
view) I beseech you in the bowels of Jesus Christ, and by the virtue of the
true Spirit of the Gospel, which I hope is both in you and me, that you all
endeavor both by your teaching, and practice, to discover at large, that which
has here but in brief been discoursed upon: even the nature of this holy,
sweet, and gracious Spirit of the Gospel: and to persuade you hereunto, be
pleased to consider of these few particulars.

First, the times require this at your hands; how distracted and broken they
are, your eyes are able to see better then I am to express: and there is no
other mean to make up the breaches of our Sion, and to prevent the lamentable
ruins that are threatened unto our Israel, but only this Spirit of the
Gospel; and this yielding, pardoning, loving, humble selfe-denying, and
obedient Spirit, is able to set all right again, both betwixt God and us, and
amongst our selves were this spirit but well planted in every heart that we
Preach unto, and in every bosom we converse withal, there would be both a
general, and a particular fitness, both for divine Mercy, and for a mutual
closing.

Secondly, Your relation to God calls for these endeavors, the Lord has put
you in place to advance this Spirit, nay, he has entrusted you to dispense the
same, you are entitled Ministers of the Gospel, and your Ministration is
called the Ministration of the Spirit; and you are always beside your Text,
and out of your Office, when you are not laboring to plant the same, nay, you
should be, not friends, but enemies to God, and to the souls of men, if you
should not oppose and discover the seeds-men of schism, and the waterers of
sedition, if you are favorers of factions, you are makers of fractions, and
God in the end will neither bless you, nor reward you.

Thirdly, Your bounden duty, and sworn Allegiance to your Prince, and
Sovereign, under the wing of whose gracious government, you have already both
done and received much good, to the advancement of your present comfort and
future Crown, does challenge you to move with all your strength, to the
implanting the Spirit of the Gospel, in the hearts of all his subjects, that
their piety and loyalty, their obedience and love to God, to him, and to each
other, may speak him to all the world, to be the happyest King of the truest
and best Christians; yea, and his Majesty too, thus seeing his Saviors Spirit
and his own, in all his people, shall hereby with comfort amongst us prolong
his days, and the good pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand; I am
confident, and dare boldly say it, it is in your powers to compose and settle
all our distractions and divisions, if you would all work one way, and let
that one way be this way; it being Gods way, he would help you and bless you
in it, he has already given some of you the hearts of men, for an engagement
hereof, and he would doubtless incline them to go with you.

Fourthly, Pity may beg this favor at your hands, (if it be a favor, and
not a duty) pity to the poor spirit of the Gospel it self, which has of
late (as some of you have thought) been wounded, slandered, scandalized, yea,
almost banished the Land, for a rebellious, factious, and seditious spirit, and
some of you perhaps have been banished with it, by the enemies of it; but now
God has removed them, and remembered you, and why think you? surely that you
should be means to recall, and relieve that, to justify its Innocence, its
Humility, and its Loyalty, which was so much traduced that you might by your
Preaching, and by your Practice, raise up again (as it were) unto life, this
holy, sweet, and gracious spirit of the Lord: And know this, if you fail
herein, and do conceal the beauty of it, having now power to discover and
enlarge the same, God may, and will for this, bring you under hatches again,
and your latter condition shall be worse then your former.

Fifthly, Never had you the like occasion as now, to honor Gods Spirit in the
eyes of your enemies; and to put forth the virtue of it for their conversion;
what know you but that the sight and taste of the Spirit of the Gospel, in and
from you, may cause some of your enemies, (that happily now are in that
darkness and disgrace, wherein they would gladly have kept you) to look upon
their own spirits with indignation and shame; surely, (Brethren) as we should
always interpret an enemy his injury, to be Gods call to us, to pray for him;
so we should apprehend the sight of an enemies misery to be an indigitation of
God to us, to do him good; and to discover to his eyes (which at such a time
are at best leisure to see it) the nature and disposition of Christ's Spirit in
our selves; And thereby we may happily (as was said) bring such a one out of love
with that spirit which he formerly traded withal, when he compares the present
sweetness of our spirit, with the bitterness of that, and hereby we may bring
them to love our Master Christ, that rules us with a better spirit then their
Master ruled them.

Sixthly, and lastly (though I might propound many particulars more) if you do
not study and endeavor to show forth Christ's Spirit, the contrary thereunto
both must and will discover it self in you, even that which before you
disliked so much in other men, God will even give you up unto it; now consider
how uncomely it will appear for Gods Ministers to walk in condemned paths,
you censured such and such men for their cruelty, for their mercilessenesse and
want of compassion, for their pride, their harshnesse and superciliousnesse
toward their Brethren, and for these things sake (I suppose) you counted them
antichristian but if you now tread in those their steps, wise men will think^
you to be as Antichristian as they, and that most truly, for (what ever some
say) doubtless it is not Prelacy, but sin, that makes men Antichristian.

And suppose those your enemies were altogether as bad as you thought them
then, those their conditions will worse become you then they did them: it is
cruelty in the Wolf to hurt the Sheep, but more natural, then for the Sheep
to pursue the Wolf; they say, revenge is sweet, and the taste of blood will
make even a Sheep Wolvish, he that once has drunk the blood of an enemy,
will afterward thirst for the blood of his friend upon a small occasion.

Do you think it will be comely, to hear people say of us, it seems the
Lambs are let out to play the Wolves? Christ's Ministers are called from prison
and banishment to revenge themselves, to persecute those that hunted them,
their former afflictions we had thought had meekened their spirits, and taught
them to be pitiful to their enemies, and to them in misery, as Christ was, we
believe Gods providence laid them upon them for that end, but we see they have
done them little good: surely (brethren) such speeches will be but little for
our credits: and let us know if we turn rampant now we are got loose, and
deal with others as they did with us, and not show the spirit of Christ to our
enemies, God the great Shepherd, has an hook to catch us by the leg
again, and to hamper us worse then ever, if the Wolf could not run from him,
the Sheep cannot.

Therefore I say from these considerations, let us only preach and practice the
spirit of the Gospel, be pitiful, be courteous, pity the sorrows of our
enemies, but most of all their sins that have brought them into the same, if
ever we loved them according to Christ's command, we shall now pity them, for
true love always turns into pity when the parties loved fall into misery, let
us not delight to spur on others against them, let us not aggravate and enlarge
their faults, let us not repeat them; it is a sad thing to hear Ministers or
any others to publish openly, and with joy, how many hundreds of their
scandalous brethren have been complained of: I do not read that ever Christ's
spirit delighted in such like publications; Christ was mild to offenders, let
not us be rugged, Christ endeavored to draw men from their sins unto
himself by love, let not us think ever to do it by currishnesse, our enemies
could never prevail by this mean, they that think by force of fear, or
unkind dealings, to draw men either to God or to themselves, will sooner drive
them both from God and from themselves, we must trade for Christ in Christ's
way, else let our aims and ends be never so good, though God may happily
accomplish them, yet he will cross and shame us: in a word, (my Reverend
Brethren) if some of our calling and function, have stumbled and fallen, if
they like those branches (Romans 11.) are for a season broken off, and any of us
are ingraffed in their stead, and do now partake of the favor, and fatness
of the times, let us not boast our selves against these branches, but remember
that we stand only by mercy; be not highminded (says the Apostle) but fear:
Breathing times of the Church, unthankfully entertained, or too wantonly,
proudly, or unprofitably employed, have been heretofore followed with most
sharp and sad calamities.

2. But now last of all, a word more to all Christians in general, and then an
end.

You redeemed of the Lord, whom in mercy he has reserved till these last
days, to live under the Gospel, and to partake of the spirit thereof, and to
manifest the fruits of it to the honor of his name: I beseech you also, even
by the mercies of Christ, and for that honoursake which you are bound to
advance, that you would lay aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies,
and envies, and evil speakings, and that you would study by all means to
glorify the Gospel which you profess, that you would, according to your duty,
only mind, speak, and do that which is suitable to the spirit thereof: let
your intentions, words, and actions, be mild, gentle, tender, and compassionate
toward all men: and to this end let me propound to your considerations also,
these few particulars.

1. These Gospel-like conditions are the only marks that do difference you
from other men: If, says our Savior in Mat. 5. you love them only that love
you, and do good only to your friends, what do you more then the Heathens or
Publicans? what goodness of spirit do you show more then they? but says he,
if you be my servants, I must have you excel other men, therefore I say unto
you, love your enemies, those that hate, curse, and persecute you, those whom
none else will love, that so you may show your selves to have such a spirit as
none else have, and to be the children of the most High, who does do good to
the unthankful, and to the evil: Christ would that the carriages and
conditions of his servants should speak as loud to the world whose they are,
as the conditions of the wicked do speak to whom they belong: does not the
merciless, cruel, and bloody dealings of the Papists in Ireland, speak them
to be the very members of Antichrist, and limbs of him that was a murderer from
the beginning? O let the merciful, tender, and gentle carriages of the
Protestants in England, speak them also, to be the members of Christ's, and
children of him that loved us from the beginning.

In the Primitive times the Christians were known from all other men, only by
their discovery of this spirit of the Gospel in them: the story says, that in
the time of that great Famine and Pestilence under Maximinus, that the
Christians only did show compassion to the Heathen, their persecutors,
traveling up and down, some in burying the dead, and some in helping the
sick, when they were of their own sort forsaken; yea, and other some of the
Christians called and gathered the company together which were in danger of
death by famine, and distributed bread unto them, whereby they ministered
occasion to all men to glorify the God of the Christians.

Brethren, you are their successers in profession of Christianity, let it
appear that you are also their successors in the possession of the same holy
and loving spirit, by your not degenerating from their conditions.

2. Consider you are called of God into the state of Christianity, for this
very end, to discover to the Age wherein you live these Gospel-like conditions:
see 1 Pet. 3. 8, 9. Finally, says the Apostle, be all of one mind, have
compassion one of another, love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous, not
rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing, but contrariwise, blessing,
knowing that you are there unto called, that you should inherit a blessing;
there you see, first, that you are called to manifest these conditions: and
secondly, that your manifestation of them does fit you to inherit the blessing
of God: And I pray (friends) who should set forth and show the sweet conditions
of the spirit of the Gospel, if you should not who are called there unto? your
enemies will not, they are all for the contrary spirit, for railing, lying,
hatred, blood, revenge, rebellion, nor does God call them to so holy and so
clean a work as this is.

3. Consider it is a great honor which God hereby does call you unto; even the
greatest that is, namely to present his own self, and his Son to the dark
world; Jesus Christ was the Image of the everlasting Father, in whom was
clearly discovered all Gods fatherly affections and dispositions, his
meekness, patience, gentleness, mercy, pity, and all his lovely graces and
attributes, as you may see and observe in the story of Christ, and his carriage
in the Gospel: And (Brethren) you are appointed to be the Images of Christ to
discover the same things to other men: and is not this a great honor?
therefore you must walk as Christ walked, and manifest to the world all those
lovely graces and conditions that were transparent in him: there be many men
that cannot read the Bible to observe Gods and Christ's affections and
conditions there, many will not, they care not for it, now the Lord therefore
in pity to these poor creatures, has ordained you to be living Bibles to
manifest to their view what ever in the written word is commended and
commanded, he would have you always in a visible sort to represent to their
eyes, himself and his Christ by your carriages: O therefore behave your selves
worthy of the honor.

4. Consider that your neglect of duty herein will make you above measure
sinful, and answerably distasteful, both to God and man: God threatened to make
the Prophets more vile and contemptible then others, because of their unworthy
walking in so high a calling; and because his Vineyard which he had honored
with his cost and care, from which he expected good, brought forth wild Grapes,
he exposed it to utter r^ine and desolation: and amongst men, who cares to live
near a scandalous professor, that has a malicious and a bitter spirit, a foul
mouth and a railing tongue? The Lord deliver me (will they say) from having
dealings with such a one, his blows are more bloody then other men's, they
pierce deeper, his profession puts a sharp edge upon a slander, and more
poison into it: wherefore (as the Apostle says) Shall I take the members of
Christ, and make them the 1 Cor. 6. 15.
members of a Harlot? God forbid: so do thou that art a professor say, Shall I
take the tongue of Christ, and make it the tongue of a railer, of a slanderer,
of an ^vill speaker? Shall I take the spirit of Christ, and make it the spirit
of malice, mischief, and cruelty, of sedition, rebellion, and disobedience?
Shall I so dishonor and grieve the good spirit of God, by which I am sealed to
the day of redemption? God forbid.

5. Consider that by the careful performance of this yo^ur duty, you shall
have honor both from God and man, He that honors me, says God, I will
honor: and he that confesses me, says Christ, before men, I will acknowledge
him before my Father: Who honors God, and confesses Christ aright, but he
that imitates Gods and Chr^sts conditions? we glorify God and Christ not so
much by profession as by imitaton: and says the Wifewan, if a man's ways
please the Lord, he will make his A'rov. 16. 7.
very enemies to be at peace with him, namely, at the last; the Heathens in the
Primitive times, by seeing and tasting the sweetness of the Christians spirits
in their forenamed miseries, did cease to persecute them, and began to love
them, and to plead for them; or however, though in this world you meet with
trouble for God and Christ's sake, whose Image you bear, and for the Gospels
sake, whose spirit you show; yet be of good comfort, says our Savior, for in
me you shall have peace; John 16.
peace in the midst of trouble: the spirit of the Gospel, is the spirit of
consolation, and a thankful spirit, if you honor that, that will comfort you,
that will assure you from the pity toward others of Gods pity toward you^
that you are forgiven, as you practice forgiveness: and if you are of a gentle
Gospel-like disposition, all that are good, will think themselves happy in your
neighborhood and acquaintance.

6. And lastly, Whereas there is much talk now adays, and men pray that
Christ alone might rule in his Church: consider and know, that by acting only
with his spirit, and by manifesting the conditions thereof, in your words and
ways, you advance him faster into his Throne, then all the Books that are
written for, or against Church government are able to do; whereas on the
otherside, by pride, and contention, and faction, and cruelty, and divisions,
and the like, Christ is kept out of the chair of his Kingdom: surely, the
spiritual Government of Christ is chiefly exercised over the spirit or inward
man, and therefore it is a matter of more concernment, to endeavor the
Introduction of that into your hearts, that so there may be a fitted matter,
then to busy your heads with fancyes about external Administrations: God
would quickly advance Christ into the Throne of his Church, if he were first
well enthroned in all our hearts, if his spirit were but all in all there,
himself would quickly be all in all elsewhere, and every where; but while men
will hand over-head, do all themselves, revenge themselves, pull down their
enemies themselves, and think nothing either will be done, or can be well
done, unless themselves have a finger in the business, and suffer Christ to
do nothing alone, or in his own way, leave nothing to his power, wisdom, and
providence, to be effected in his time; for my part, I cannot see any such
unjust keepers of Christ out of the Throne of his Kingdom, as are these
themselves: But you (beloved of the Lord) be you wise, and wait upon Christ in
his way, submit your selves wholly to the government of his sweet spirit, let
it command all your members, let it order all your carriages, let your
thoughts, words, and actions, savor of it, and so you shall approve yourselves
the faithfullest and truest friends to Christ, in furthering his progress into
the Throne of his Kingdom: And so much for this time: Consider of these
things, and the Lord give you understanding.

Gratia and Gloria Deo and Christo, Jesu and adjutori meo,

Amen.
FINIS.

