TO THE NOBILITY AND GENTRY, Lawyers And Physicians, Seamen and Tradesmen,
Magistrates Subordinate and Supreme, etc.


By THO. SWADLIN D. D.

Cui ad Manticam res redit.

Printed in the Year 1658.

TO The Readers.
IF any of you ask, Why these incomposed Papers? They are to beg your Charity:
Nor am I ashamed of it, since a King, without dishonor, because without
dishonesty, did it before me, when he said, Date obolum. Belisario; and a
better King since him, when he said, He had rather live on the Churches alms
than take the bread out of Priests mouths; and another before them both, when
he said, Have pity upon me, Have pity upon me, o ye my friends! for the hand
of God is upon me: The Hand of God permitting; else the Hand of man punishing
could not continue so violent, as to threaten a starving; which how near it is,
though not known, is yet much feared by

Tho. Swadlin.

TO THE NOBILITY AND GENTRY.
NObility and Riches are not absolutely good; For they are given to the Bad, as
well as to the Good. Esau was a Noble man and a Rich man, as well as Jacob;
Dives as well as James: and therefore I have no reason to put my confidence in
them, or to think my self the more in Gods favor, because I have more of the
worlds Treasure.

Neither yet are Riches and Nobility absolutely bad; For they are given to the
Good, as well as to the Bad. David was Noble and Rich, as well as Saul; and so
was Nicademus, as well as Caiaphas: and therefore I have no reason to be
diffident of my self, because I am Rich and Noble, or to think my self out of
Gods favor, because I have so much of the worlds. Nobility and Riches are
only bad, when they are badly obtained, or retained worse; and then only
good, when they are sent by Gods blessing, either by way of inheritance, from
my Parents; or by way of industry, from my Pains; and again distributed and
used to Gods glory, and the good of his servants.

Achan by an ill obtention of Riches, purchased an ignominious death: and if
others

Knew what it were to kill, and then possess,

They would aspire still, but to be less. Dives by an ill detention of Riches,
purchased the torments of Hell: and if others

Knew what it were to deny poor men food,

They would covet still, but covet to be good. Job with his humble Nobility,
with his large possessions, obtained Gods favors: And Zacheus, by his
munificent distributions, possessed the Joys of Heaven. I fear not my self
therefore, because I am Noble, because I am Rich; all that I fear is, That I
may use my Riches and Nobility ill; and, that I may not, I ask my self these
Cases of Conscience.

superfluities, to relieve the poor's necessities? Else I am Dives like, Luke
16.

Poor and Needy, and save them the pains and shame of begging at my door and
elbow? Then I am David like Ps. 4.

poor and needy? Sam
That is, Nabal-like.

Cases are resolved to the comfort of my soul, I may humbly and confidently
address my self to Almighty God.

O most gracious God! thou have dealt largely with me in thy Outward blessings;
I beseech thee also, give me a large portion of thy Inward grace. My heart is
full of corruption, and even with these thy blessings, of a Noble blood, and a
full purse, I shall pride my self, and despise others, and scorn the Poor, and
forget thee; unless with this Nobility in my blood, and this plenty in my
purse thou give me the Poverty of thy spirit; It is not a poor spirit I desire,
but to be poor in spirit, that while others highly conceit of me, I may be
humble in mine own conceit; remembering, the more I have of thee, the more thou will require from me; and the greater my charge is by thy trust, the greater
must be my discharge by my truth: Else my Nobility will puff me with security,
and my wealth will be a thorn to choke and wither the seed of thy word in me,
and make it unfruitful to me. Let me therefore take more delight in thy word,
than in all manner of Riches, that in this slippery place (for Riches and
Nobility are but slippery, they either thaw from us, or we melt from them) I
may keep an even step, and walk with a right foot. Let not mine eye be dazzled
with the glory, nor heart bewitched with the delicacy of those Treasures; lest,
e're I am aware, They be taken from me, or I from them. Let my chief delight be
upon that durable wealth and eternal Nobility, which is better than Gold and
Coronets, that my heart may be enriched with the dew of thy spirit, my soul
filled with the knowledge, and my hands enabled with the practice of thy will.
Oh! let me remember, That these Riches, these Titles are not my Lordship, but
my Stewardship, that the bowels of the Saints may be refreshed, and the hearts
of the widows rejoiced, and the loins of the Naked warned by the fruits of my
faith, my good works; and thereby others provoked to glorify thee. Let that be
the Emd of my charity, To glorify thee; not any thought of merit, or to
glorify my self. Let every Mite I give, be a fruit of faith, not a gift of
fortune; and every mercy I show to others upon this ground, assure me, it is a
beam of thy love unto my self; and while I have no other aim but thy glory, no
other ground but my obedience, let me in the End find it a good groundwork
against the time to come, and so attain the End of my faith, even the salvation
of my soul; not for these works-sake, but for that Promise sake, Psalm 41.2.
Blessed is he that considers the poor and needy, the Lord shall deliver him
in the time of trouble. Deliver me, o Lord! in the trouble of my life, from
worldly care; and deliver me, o Lord! in the trouble of my death from sinful
guilt, through Jesus Christ. Amen. In whose most blessed Name and words, I
further call upon thee, as he has taught me in his holy Gospel: Our Father
which art in heaven. Hallowed be thy name, etc.

The Noblemans Character.
HE is endowed with the four cardinal virtues; and is a man, neither covetous,
nor prodigal, but temperate; he knows how to give charitably, and to gather
providently. He is a man neither foolish, nor craf^y, but prudent; and knows
when to speak plainly, when politickly, never falsely. He is a man neither
indulgent, nor cruel, but just; and knows how to punish Iniquity, and to reward
Honesty. He is a man neither timorous, nor temerous, but magnanimous; and knows
how to bridle precipitancy, to spur pusillanimitie, and dares scarlet his sword
in an Honorable cause.

Sola Virtus vera Nobilitas. To the Gentlemen of the Law.
MY Calling is lawful, I question it not; no wise man does question it; or if
any man does question it, yet God being the ancient Lawmakers, and the eternal
Law giver, would soon decide it, and determine my Calling to be lawful: All my
fear is, whether I use not my lawful Calling unlawfully? That I may not, I
propose these Cases of Conscience to my s^^f:

Gods glory or mine own gain, moved me to make choice of this Calling?

Fees in right or wrong Causes?

Tenth or a Tantamount of my abundant Fees to the relief of the poor?

And when these are resolved I acknowledge it my duty, as it is every man's
duty, to pray God to direct me in my lawful Calling; and so I do.

O most just and righteous God! who to preserve Peace amongst men, and to
prevent men from wronging one another, have ordained the Profession of the Law,
and have appointed me to that Profession; I beseech thee, give me grace so to
execute my Profession, that I may do right to all men; sanctify my Tongue
that my words be not deceiptful; and sanctify my Heart, that equity not
opulency, be the chiefest mark I aim at: keep my Hands from taking Fees, to
plead in, or maintain an unjust cause; and when I shall take a Fee in a just
Cause, and do not deserve it, either by my neglect, or multiplicity of other
Employments, give me grace to restore it: While I am busied to obtain earthly
Goods for my Clrents, let me not forget to make Thee my Advocate for obtaining
the Eternal good of mine own Soul: In all my pleading before an earthly Judge,
give me grace to remember that great and last day, when I, and all men besides,
must appear before Thee, the Judge of Heaven and Earth. And because then, not
subtle words, but a pure heart, a good conscience, and not a full purse shall
speed, so direct me by thy Spirit in this Calling of the Law, that in my whole
Practice, I may endeavor to execute Justice, and maintain Truth, and then
receive, as thou have promised, to them that walk uprightly, glory and
immortality, Ps. 80 11.
through the merits of Him, that is the Advocate of Sinners, and the
propitiation for our sins, Jesus Christ the righteous. Amen. In whose most
blessed name and words, etc.

The Lawyers Character.
NO wife man sees him, but he thinks upon his Estate, and is glad there are
such men, without whom, themselves cannot live in peace, nor their Estates be
secure: None but fools grudge at their abundance, since by their diligence, we
possess such abundance as we have tranquillously: Be as rich as you can, so
you be honest, and though your Law cannot, yet the Gospel will find a way to
cut off the entayl of difficulty to Heaven from Riches: Else

Vae vobis. The Physicians Devotion.
NO man that has pulse in his Body, or pastion in his heart, or brain in his
head, or urine in his bladder, but will confess the lawfulness of my
Profession; or if any man be so mad, or malicious, yet Asa's preposterousness
in seeking to the Physician, before the Divine, and Hezechias his application
of a Figg to his Plaguesore, will confute him, and tell the whole world,

That the Physicians Profession is lawful and honorable, because not a wise
man sees him, but he thinks of death; not a fool, but sends for him in
sickness; and therefore a happy man he is in the mean time, that is welcome to
fools in extremity, and to wise men at every opportunity.

He is indeed as happy as any man living, if he ascribe not too much to second
causes; If he make God his, as God has made him other men's, Physician; If he
show God his tears, as he looks upon his Patients urine, he may then as well
prognosticate his own health, as his Patients death. The sight of him shall
ever put me in mind of death, that I may not be afraid of death, when I cannot
have the sight of him, the Physician; To whom I propose this one Case of
Conscience.

Whether his Prescriptions and Aims are more for his Patients recovery, or his
own Gains? And then let him pray thus, or otherwise as it pleases him.

O most wise, most powerful, and most gracious God! who have created Man for
thy self, and service, and all other things for the service of Man; and amongst
men have or ^ained, several Professions, and amongst them the Profession of
Physic, to repair the Health, and to recover the Sickness of Men; The seech
thee to give me grace to remember, that I must one day answer, for what I do
all the days of my life; and therefore withal I beseech thee for a blessing
upon all those Prescriptions I shall direct for my Patients, and to trust in
and expect only from thee, the First cause, a virtuous operation upon the
second cause, for the good and benefit of my Patients; and as I feel for the
evennesse or unevenness of their pulse, I may keep the pulse of mine own soul
in an even and just temper before thee, that as I behold their urines, thou
may behold my tears, that as I prescribe their Diets, I may always keep a
temperate Diet my self; and so keep my body under, that my soul may continually
have recourse to Thee, until thou take me to thy self through Jesus Christ.
Amen. In whose most blessed Name and words, etc.

Physician his Character.
HE is Natures best friend, as always following her dictates and directions.
He is a good friend to Grace; for when he sees Nature spent, he bids his
Patient send for the Divine; nor do I blame him for it, that he puts Divinity
after Physic, since I know, Men are more sensible of flesh and blood, than
they are of soul and spirit; nor do you blame me, if I highly prise that piece
of Apocrypha, Honora Medicum honor debito.

The Sea-mans Devotion.
THat my Calling is lawful, honorable, and ancient, Noah's Ark, Genes.
David's wonder in the deep, Psalm.
Solomon's sending ships to Ophir for Gold, and St. Act 27.
Paul's escaping danger at Sea, by the help of the Shipmaster, Pilots, and
Mariners, do abundantly satisfy and confirm; Yet before I go to Sea, I shall
propose to my self this Case of Conscience.

Whether I have taken this Calling by the direction of my Parents, the guidance
of Providence, or the love of money, and desire of seeing Fashions? And being
resolved, I am lawfully called, I pray:

O God! who have appointed me to go down into the Sea in ships, and to do my
business in great waters, Have mercy upon me.

O God! who do whatsoever I thou please in Heaven, in Earth, and in all
deep places, Have mercy upon me.

O God! I am now ready to commit my self unto the waters, I am now floating
upon the bottomless Sea; and that my sins may not go along with me, nor
provoke thee to vex me with thy storms, Have mercy upon me.

The Ship that I am now in, is but a vain thing to save a man; and that Pirates
may not board us, that winds and waves may not drown us, that Infidels may not
captivate us, Have mercy upon us.

That the Devil may not infect us, That we may be constant in our Religion,
That we may be true and just in our dealings, That in all places, we may demean
our selves as the Professors of Christ, and give no occasion to the Adversary
to speak evil.

Have mercy upon us. That the great Leviathan may not seize upon our souls, as
the Whale did upon Jonas his body for sins we stand guilty of, Have mercy upon
us, and blot out all our offenses.

In a Storm.

O God! who did save Noah and his Family in the A^k from perishing by water,
Help us, or else we perish.

O God! who did hear the prayer of thy Prophet from the bottom of the Sea,
and our of the belly of Hell, Hear us and help us, else we perish.

O God! who have commanded, and raised the stormy wind, which lifts up the
waves of the Sea, Help us, else we perish,

O God! these winds and these waves mount us up to Heaven, and bring us down
again to the depth, and melt our souls, Help us, else we perish.

O God! we reel to and fro, and stagger like drunken men, and are at our wits
end, Help us else we perish.

Our sins have raised thy Anger, O God! and thy Anger has raised these storms;
In justice thou may deal with us, as thou did with Pharaoh and the
Egyptians; but we beseech thee to deal with us in mercy, as with Moses and the
Israelites in the red Sea: Cast our sins into the bottomless Sea of thy mercy;
Drown them in the red Sea of Jesus Christ's blood; and as he did rebuke the
waves and the Sea, so do Thou turn this Sea into a Calm, and bring us to our
desired Haven: Spare us a little longer before we go hence, and be no more
seen Guide us in this whole voyage by thy Power; Govern is with thy Mercy,
Return us with thy Grace, that we may give up our lives in the Land where we
received them: Or if thou have (...) appointed us unto death^ prepare us for
death, in the full remission of our Sins, in the free justification about
Persons, in the frui^full sanctification of our remaining Dai^s, and in the
future glor^fication of our Souls, through Jesus Christ. Amen. In whose Name,
etc.

After the Storm.

That thou have heard us from above, and drawn us out of many waters, My soul
does magnify thee; o Lord!

That thou have delivered us from all our Fea^s, and have not suffered the
water-floods to over whelm us, nor the deeps to swallow us up, My soul does
magnify thee, o Lord!

That thou ^ast shown us thy w(...) in the deep, and (...) delivered us from
death, by preserving us in the ship, and commanding the waves to be quiet, and
the winds to be still, My soul does magnify thee, o Lord!

That (...) have brought me (...) to the shore, and comforted me with the
sight, and life, and health if my friends My soul does magnify thee, o Lord!

At thy Return.

And now, what shall I render unto thee, o Lord! for all thy benefits? My soul
and body I dedicate unto thee, and beseech thee to consecrate them unto thy
self: They have been washed in the waters of the Sea; oh, now wash them in the
laver of Regeneration: They have tasted the saltness of the Sea; oh, let them
now taste the Merits of my Savior; and then my soul shall never consent again
to sin, my body shall never again commit sin: And that this may not prove
presumption, but that I may bring my promise into performance, Be (...) O God!
with the earnestness of my soul, upon the k^ees of my body I beg thy
assistance, and the graces of (...) holy Spirit, that I may conq(...)s;in; he
commanding power of sin, and never again obey it, the condemning guilt of sin
and never despair under it: And this for the bitter Agony and precious death ^f
my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ Amen. In whose blessed Name and words I
further call upon thee saying, Our Father, etc.

The Sea-mans Character.
IN him I see a warrantable, a dangerous, a gainful, and an honorable Calling;
so warrantable, that Christ of his twelve Apostles chose four Seamen, Andrew,
Peter, James, and John; so dangerous, that there is never above a foot and half
betwixt him and death; which made one Poet say, Ille robur, etc. He had an
heart of oak that first adventured to Sea: and another; Aut insanit, etc. He
is either a madman, or a beggar, or desirous to die that goes to Sea; only
they are so happy in this danger, that they see Gods wonders in the deep, and
give him thanks, when they are by him brought unto the haven; so gainful, that
Solemons good huswife is compared to a Merchants Ship that brings riches from a
far Country; so honorable, that of old the merchants of Tire were called
Princes; and of late years, those of Genoa, Venice, and the Low Countries are
arrived so high, that a great part of the world envies them, the rest admires
them: to them we are beholding for Balm from Gilead, for Incense from Sheba,
for Gold from Ophir, for Cedar and Firr from Tire, for Gumms and Spices, from
India; and somewhat more than ordinary there is in this Calling, since Christ
has graced it with the immaterial letters of his own name.

The Travailer.
I Am now taking a journey by land; whether for the necessity of business, or
the visiting of my friends, or the wooing of a wife, I need not scruple my
self; so I am sure, it is not for vanity or sin; I may pray God for his
protection; and thus I address my self to his Throne of Grace:

O most gracious God! who did protect thy servants; Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
in their several journeys; and gave thy servant Tobias a convoy of Angels to
conduct and bring him back again; conduct me also in this my journey by thy
Angels, that I may be safe from the violence of Thieves, and guide me by thy
spirit, that I may be safe from the assaults of those great Thieves of my Soul,
the Flesh, the World, and the Devil: against the World give me the staff of
faith; against the Devil give me the bag of charity; against the Flesh, give me
the bottle of tears, that as a Pilgrim, I may not be cumbred with any thing of
impediment, but only furthered with all things of emolument; and in every step
of this journey, remember my great journey from Earth to Heaven, and keep such
an even pace in the path of Grace, that thou may return me back from this
journey to my home; receive me at the end of that journey to thy City of Glory,
for his sake, who is the way, the Truth, and the life, Jesus Christ. In whose
blessed name and words, I further call upon thee, etc.

At thy Return.

O most merciful God! That many have miscarried in their travails, I hear and
know; some in their purses, some in their lives; that I am returned safe in
both, and injured in neither, I feel and know; and know no cause of it, but thy
providence; and therefore know my self bound to acknowledge the duty of my
thankfulness to that providence of thine; which I do and ever will bless,
not only for this, but for all the preservations of my whole life; and
consecrate the remainder of my whole life to thy service; wherein I beseech
thee so to bless me in my whole race upon earth, that I may bless thee in the
long race of eternity in heaven, for his sake who took his journey from heaven
to earth, and returned again from earth to heaven, to prepare a place for me,
and now sits at thy right hand to intercede for me, Jesus Christ my Savior.
Amen. In whose blessed name and words, etc.

The Travailers Character.
HE is an honest, and a wise man; h^ never goes on foot, but when he wants an
horse; nor does he ever ride, but when he has business: he spends like
himself, little, or much; nor does he make much account of his expenses; for he
lays up that before he finds, or is forced occasions to use it; if he travails
with safety, and returns without danger, his first salutation is, Gratias De^.

The Soldier.
SOme Phanaticks in the world have questioned the lawfulness of my calling: But
I have Gods word for my warrant, and Gods servants for my pattern.

Gods word says, when thou go out with thin^ Host, Deuteronomy. 23
or when thou go to war; and that very word when, does suppose it; and sure
I am, Gods word does not suppose any thing which is unlawful.

As Gods word, so his servants too warrant it; yea, and his choicest servants;
Abraham, Joshua, Debora, Sampson, Gideon, David; they were all warriers; they
waged war; some of them offensive; some of them defensive; and therefore I need
not doubt of the lawfulness of my Calling: all the doubt is, in resolving these
Cases of Conscience;

Whether I am lawfully called to this lawful Calling?

How I may be assured that I am lawfully called, and may with a safe conscience
take up, and make use of these weapons?

And that being done I thus address my self to Jehovah the Lord of Hosts.

O Almighty God! who have styled thy self a man of war, and have now called me
to be a man of war, I beseech thee, teach my Hands to War; and my Fingers to
Fight; give unto me, and to every one of my Fellow Soldiers the strength of
Sampson, the courage of David, and the wisdom of Solomon, that we may
undermine all the attempts, and overthrow all the plots, and overcome all the
Giants, that fight against thy Truth; yet even in the heat of Fury give us pity
that we may rather spare than spoil, and while we gird our selves with Armor
to resist these Enemies of ours, do thou put upon us thy whole armor that we
may resist that enemy of mankind, and quench all the fiery darts of the Devil;
go thou forth with us against them, that are come without thee against us;
animate our, and abate their courage; confound their devices, but convert their
souls: and because death is before our eyes, give us grace to be mindful of it,
and prepared for it, that while we fight against them, we may also fight the
good fight against all our ghostly enemies, and receive a Crown of
righteousness: Take our Bodies into thy protection, and defend us; take out
souls into thy tuition, and sanctify us; that though we return not home, we
may be received into heaven, through Jesus Christ. Amen. In whose most blessed
name, etc.

The Soldiers Character.
HE is the Father of Peace, and Mother of Patience; his subtilty begets peace;
his magnanimity nurses patiences; in both he is the founder and supporter of
Kingdoms: If he be conquered, he sowes patience; if he conquer, he reaps
peace; in That he founds, in This he supports the Kingdom; if he be able to
second the peace of victory, with the grace of humility, he is the breeder of
all virtue, and the bane of all vice; for then good laws are put in execution,
and bad men in the house of correction; so necessary he is in peace, that else
we lose it; so necessary in war, that else we have no hope of it; so necessary
in both, that no Kingdom can subsist long without him: if you chance to see
him, you see a head quick of wit, a tongue full of eloquence, an eye of
vigilance, a face of courtesy, a hand of bounty, and an heart of valor, and
for his good parts, say, God bless him, so that he remember and practice his
lesson, Neminem concutit eneque calumniamini.

The Trades-mans Devotion.
THis Calling is of a large extent: For the extent of Trades is very large; so
many several Trades as there are, so many several callings to those Trades
there are too. The best mark whereby to know the lawfulness of a Trade, is, To
find a ground for it in Scripture; or, if humane Inventions have found out some
Trades, that the Scipture gives no ground for; yet if the Scripture forbids it
not the Trade is lawful, and a man may lawfully make use of it; v.g. There is
no mention made of a Chimneysweeper in the word of God, yet though there were
nothing conducing to this Trade, This Trade notwithstanding is lawful, because
it is not forbidden; whereas on the other side, The Trades of Usury, and Pawn
taking, are directly forbidden in the word of God, especially the latter, The
taking of such things to pawn as are necessary for livelihood and subsistence.

But I thank God my Profession is not forbidden; (for I am a Merchant, I am a
Mercer, I am a Tailor, I am a Carpenter, etc.) and therefore I may safely use
it: and that I may use it honestly, I pray:

O God! who for the sin of Adam have appointed, that every man shall earn his
living by the sweat of his brows, and shall eat his bread in the sweat of his
face, and have also forbidden that man to eat, who will not work; and to this
end have ordained several Callings, to some whereof every particular man should
apply himself, whereby, with thy blessing, he should provide for his family and
posterity; and amongst all have called me to this Trade and course of life (
(...)) and herein have promised to bless my honest labors and endeavors; I
beseech thee that I may comfortably and contentedly undergo it, without
grudging thereat, as at some uneasy burden, driving not only at mine own
private gain, but also at the public good; not seeking Riches by wronging of
others, by false weights, short measures, or deceitful work, (Be such thoughts
and things, o God! ever far from me) but only seeking a competency and honest
increase, doing to, and dealing by others, as I would others should do to, and
deal by me; and that I may so do and deal, I beseech thee let me ever
remember, That the wages of unrighteousness, and Riches gotten by wrong and
Robbery, are put into a broken bag, and shall soon diminish and be devoured; or
if they do continue, they shall be for my greater hurt, and such prosperity
shall destroy me; That a little with thy blessing is better than great
Revenues, with thy curse; That thy all-seeing eye is ever beholding me in all
my doings; and all my doings, however close from the world, are naked in thy
sight; Add to this grace of remembrance, the grace of holy care, whereby I may
walk uprightly, and approve my self before thee in an even behavior toward all
men; and if it shall please thee to bless my labors, and increase my store,
by my honest industry; o let me not set my heart upon that increase and make
those Riches my strong City, lest such deceitfulness choke the seeds of thy
graces in me, and steal my heart from thee, from the Poor, from my Calling; but
let me follow my Calling in an holy measure, not wholly ingulphing my self
into, nor wholly sequestring my self from the business of it; but giving my
self all convenient opportunities to serve thee in piety, and to relieve the
Poor in charity; that when thou shall put an end to these days of labor, thou
may say unto me, Well done good and faithful servant, enter into thy
Masters rest. All which, and all other things needful for me, I beg of thee in
the Name, and for the sake of Jesus Christ, saying as he has taught me,

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. The Trades-mans Character.
HE is a good Commonwealths-man, but a bad Statesman; and then the best, when
he meddles least with it: The ware in his Shop, next to the care of his soul,
should take up his time and tongue: for if he make no conscience how he spends
his time, he has no care for eternity; and if he care not to guide his tongue,
he sets the Greater and the Lesser, himself and the whole world, on fire and
combustion: Happy he, if he prays aright, and endeavors to do as he prays,
without injuring his Customer by false weights and measures. These and many
more instructions are given him from the name of his Trade, whatsoever it is,
since all Trades are called, Instituta, Rations, Mores, Disciplinae.

To the Magistracy.
MY Calling is lawful, whether I be supreme or subordinate; because God made
David supreme, and Moses appointed the subordinate, both Justice of Peace, and
Judge, and Lord Chief Justice, and Lord Keeper: only if I am a Justice of
Peace, I must resolve these Queries.

ambition or virtue set me on this Bench?

Bench, with an eye of fear to my Superiors, with an eye of favor to my
Equals, with an eye of scorn to my Inferiors, or with an eye of impartiality to
them all?

If I am a Judge, I must resolve these Quaeries.

Christ in his scarlet Gown and Minivere Hood?

Garments were red with the spoil of his Enemies only; so mine be red only
with the spoil of malefactors?

his hood was white by a holy conception, by a sinlesse life, and a saving
death; so mine be white by an unspotted conversation, without taking bribes to
turn the stream of Justice into a strange and contrary channel?

If I so live, I may then assure my self, when I come to his Judgment Seat, I
shall find him not Judex to condemn me, but Jesus to save me; and so I shall
live, if I will remember, Judicium non mei, sed Dei.

If I am a Lord Chief Justice, I must then resolve these queries truly:

Ark of God with nothing but the Law of God?

Arc, I tell no man less than his duty, I give no man more than his due;
condemnation if he be a transgressor, without taunts; absolution, if he be an
observer of the Law, without bribes?

If I do so, I may then assure my self, the incorruptible Lawgiver will not
condemn me, though a corruptible Law-expounder, because I was not wilfully
corrupted; and so I shall do, if I remember, Hoc fac, and vives; sin aliter,
peribis.

If I am a Lord Keeper, I must resolve these Queries truly;

Propitiatory upon the Arc?

covering, keep the Law from a too severe pleading against the poor Client?

extremity of Jus summum, for the maintenance of Aequum bonum?

And this I shall do, if I command my cursitory Angels to become Dii tutelares
of several Shires; if I prohibit the sending out of Fines, without the sponge
of Repentance, to wash out the transgressions of the Law.

If I do so, I shall find Christ as Christ has placed me, The poor man's
Advocate, my Advocate with the Father, to plead his merits against my demerites.

Sicredo, vivam. If I be Supreme, The Kings, I must then resolve these Queries
truly,

Sun, I give grace to Saturn, gravity to my Counselors?

might to Jupiter, respect unto my Nobles?

fortitude to Mars, magnanimity to my Soldiers?

benevolence to Venus, beauty to my Ladies?

pyth to Mercury, Rhethorick and reward to my Scholars?

constancy to the Moon, stedfastness and stability to the Commons?

Or if the Sun teaches me not my duty sufficiently; I will take it higher; and
because I am like God in all, only that I am a King of Men, and God is the King
of Kings, I must resolve these Cases of Conscience, because my Conscience must
answer for them to God;

Throne be clothed with Majesty? else my Subjects will not respect me.

Scepter be full of Mercy? else my Subjects will not love me.

Chair be fathomed with Justice? else my Subjects will not fear me.

sword be armed with Power? else my Soldiers will not obey me.

And because God dwells in absconditis, I must be careful that my Majesty be not
looked upon by every eye.

And because Gods justice is upright, I must secure my justice from being
staind by a^y bribes.

And because Gods mercy is not denied to any sinner, I must not deny my mercy
to any Delinquent.

And because God will not suffer his Power to be disputed by any Tongue, I must
preserve my Power from the quarrel of any Rebel; and when it is thus, I may
pray with confidence.

But now I think upon it, I shall not be so saucy, as to set down a Prayer for
these great persons; because Justices, and Judges, and Lord Chief Justices, and
Lord Keepers, and Kings, know better how to pray, than I to inform them; only I
hope without offense, I may pray for them, and the whole world thus,

From pestilence, famine, and war; from earthquakes, inundations, and great
fires, from the plagues of immoderate rains, and droughts; from corrupting
winds, and blastings; from thunder, lightning, and tempests; from epidemicall
and sharp diseases, and from sudden death, Deliver the whole world, good Lord!

From private interpretations of Scriptures; from innovations in holy things
from strange doctrines, from doting about questions, from heresies, schisms,
and scandals, public and private, Deliver thy whole Church, good Lord!

From the Priesthood of Micah and Jeroboam, from the combination of Judas
Iscariot, and Simon Magus, from the doctrins of the unstable, and the
unlearned, from the pride of novices, and from people that strive with the
Priest, Deliver this Church, good Lord!

From forain invasion, and civil insurrection, from displacing good
Magistrates, and exalting bad, from the massacre of Athaliah, and from the
bloodinesse of Herod.

Deliver this nation, good Lord! From the Anarchy of Corah, and Dathan, from
the tyranny of Ashur, and Achab, from the dangerous counsil of Achitopel, and
the foolish counsil of Zoan, from the Statutes of Omri, and the Judgments of
Jesabel; from the floods of Belial, and from the plagues of Peor.

Deliver the state of this Nation, good Lord! From the pride of the Amorite,
from the envy of the Hittite, from the anger of the Perizzite, from the
gluttony of the Gergashite, from the wantonness of the Hivite, from the
worldliness of the Cananite, and lukewarmnesse of the Jebusite, Deliver this
City, good Lord! for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

In whose blessed name and words. etc.

To the condemned to dye.
YOur time is short, and therefore my discourse to you shall not be long; not
many days betwixt you and death, and therefore not many words, lest I keep you
from the thought of death. I dare not be so unchristian, as to think you
prepare not your selves for the last fatal stroke; and therefore one only
prayer for you from me, if you have not a better from others for your selves.

O God! most powerful, yet most pitiful; by thy Power preserve them that are
appointed to dye, and redeem them from the sentence of death, which is past
upon them, if it may stand with thy Goodness.

But if thy Providence has appointed this time for their period, and this way
for their dissolution, yet by thy pity save their souls from eternal death, and
grant them all those graces which are necessary for their salvation.

Remember not their ignorances, Forget the sins of their youth, and Forgive the
sins of their age; Give them a sight of all their sins, Give them a sense of
all their sins, and true repentance to bewail; them; Give them a sight of all
thy Promises, Give them a sense of all thy Promises, and true faith to apply
them.

Suffer not their Ghostly enemies to assault them to any present desperation,
for their former presumptions against thy Justice.

Send thy holy Angels to take their souls, as they did the soul of Lazarus, and
carry them into Abraham's bosom; and let thy everlasting Gates be open to
receive them, for his sake, who by overcoming the sharpness has opened the
Kingdom of Heaven to all Believers.

Make and keep their senses entire, their understandings right, their penitence
unfeigned, their hope well grounded, their faith firm, and their charity
perfect.

Give them, o give them a quiet and joyful departure, by carrying their eyes
back unto Jesus, who died for them, and forward to those Joys, which are
purchased for them, by the life and death of Jesus Christ. Amen. In whose most
blessed Name and words I further call upon thee, as he has taught me, saying,

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Or if any sin lies heavy upon thy soul, and thou can not have those
assistances thou desire, then confess thy sins, and comfort thy soul in this,
or such a kind of Devotion as this.

Behold, o God! I was conceived in sin, Psalm. 51.
and brought forth in iniquity; and therefore I pray, God be merciful to me a
sinner.

And mercy I hope to have, Because my Savior was conceived by the Holy Ghost,
Luc. 1.
and born in innocence, not for himself, but me; for which, My soul does
magnify thee, o Lord!

But I have discoursed with the Devil, Genesis 3.
and at his temptations have tasted the forbidden fruit; and therefore I pray,
God be merciful to me a sinner.

And mercy I hope to have, Because my Savior wrestled with, and overcame the
Devil for me; Mat. 4.
for which, My soul, does magnify thee, O Lord!

But I have committed all sin, and kept the poison of Asps under my lips; Psalm.
and therefore I pray, God be merciful to me a sinner.

And mercy I hope to have, Because my Savior did no sin, 1 Petr.
neither was any guile found in his lips; for which, My soul does magnify
thee, o Lord!

But I have fulfilled the will of the flesh too, Psalm.
and done no good; and therefore I pray, God be merciful to me a sinner.

And mercy I hope to have, Because my Savior fulfilled thy will, Joh.
and did all good for me; for which, My soul does magnify thee, o Lord!

But I have defiled my body, Genesis
as Onan by Pollution, if not as Judah by Fornication, Genesis
if not as David by Adultery, 1 Samuel 11.
if not as Ammon by Incest, if not as the Sodomites by Bestiality; and
therefore I pray, God be merciful to me a sinner.

And mercy yet I hope to have, Because my Savior offered his Body to the knife
of Luc. 2.
Circumcision, to the water of Baptism, Mat. 3.
to the Curse of the Tree, to the Death of the Cross; and all this to expiate
the sins of my body; for which, Philip 2.
My soul does magnify thee, o Lord!

But mine hands have been lifted up against Heaven; and therefore I pray, God
be merciful to me a sinner.

And mercy yet I hope to have, Because my Saviors hands in Heaven are, as upon
the Cross they were, stretched out to embrace me; for which, My soul does
magnify thee, O Lord!

But my feet, my very feet have been swift to shed the blood of Revenge; and
therefore I pray, God be merciful to me a sinner.

And mercy yet I hope to have, Because my Saviors feet were nailed, to shed
the blood of Atonement for me; for which, My soul does magnify thee, o Lord!

But my heart, my inmost and remotest heart, has been filled with evil
imaginations, and that continually; and therefore I dare not but continue to
pray, God be merciful to me a sinner.

And mercy yet I hope to have, Because my Saviors Heart was pierced, to offer
up the blood of satisfaction for the sins of my heart; for which, My soul does
magnify thee, o Lord!

But my soul, my once most precious soul, I have defaced by all manner of
ungodliness; and therefore I pray, God he merciful to me a sinner.

And mercy I yet hope to have, Because my Saviors soul descended victoriously,
to trample upon the enemies of my soul; for which, My soul does magnify thee,
o Lord!

But yet in my Body I can see nothing but wounds, in my soul, nothing but
soars, in my life, nothing but sins, and therefore I pray, God be merciful to
me a sinner.

And mercy I yet hope to have, Because in my Jesus I see balm enough to cure
my wounds; in thy Christ I see unction enough to heal my soars; In his life
obedience, and in that obedience, merit enough to pardon my sins: In his death
patience; and in that patience, redemption enough to save my soul; In his blood
innocence, and in that innocence, satisfaction enough to cure my wounds, to
heal my sears, to pardon my sins, to save my soul; in his Descent, Humility; in
his Resurrection and Ascension, Hope; in his Intercession, Comfort; for he is
now at thy right hand to make intercession for me; and for which, My soul does
magnify thee, o Lord!

But yet, but yet, I have trampled that blood under foot, I have crucified my
Jesus afresh; and therefore dare not but pray afresh, God be merciful to me a
sinner.

But yet, but yet, but yet, I am the greatest sinner upon the face of the whole
Earth; for who, or what man, or devil, durst to do what I have done? I have
broke all thy commandments, I have broken all my vows; for better obedience,
and that even to this moment of my life, the very last moment of my life, and
therefore will pray so long as life does last, God be merciful to me a sinner.

And mercy yet I hope to have, Because that saying which is worthy of all
acceptance, is believed by me, and I desire I may believe it, to the very last
minute, Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, even my self the
chiefest of sinners; for which, My soul does magnify thee, o Lord!

And now most gracious God! I beseech thee to accept of my resolutions, and to
accomplish them in my true, though weak, and late endeavors; and look upon me,
nor as I am in my self, but as I am in thy Sen, washed, washed in his Baptism,
as well from my actual trangressions I have committed since, as from my
original corruption, I stood guilty of before I was baptized; look upon me, o
my God! as I am in thy Son, clothed, clothed with his righteousness; for his
love clothed himself with the imputation of my wickedness; and does not thy
gift of faith cloth me with the imputation of his righteousness? I do believe
the one, That he came into the world; and I desire to believe the other, That
he came into the world to save me; for I am a sinner, the chief of sinners;
look upon me, o my God! as I am in thy Son, healed; healed by his stripes; for
the bled to save the whole Body, the Church; and of that body, I am a member;
and do not, o God! do not suffer any member of thy Sons body to perish; look
upon me o my God! as I am in thy Son, reconciled, and at peac with thee; Rom 5.1
for being just fied by faith, I have peace with God through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Look upon me so, o God! and thy baptism shall cleanse me, cleanse me as well
from future filth, as from passed guilt; look upon me so, o God! and thy other
blessed Sacrament, which I have now (or shall by and by receive) received,
shall preserve me unto everlasting life; otherwise I dare not look upon thee,
but in the Face of Jesus Christ; and otherwise, I beseech thee, look not upon
me, but through the merits of Jesus Christ; in whose blessed name and presence,
I promise thee new and better obedience, (if I live) and for whose blessed sake
and merits, I beg thy assistance, that I may have victory over sin, victory
over the commanding power of it, and never again obey it in the lusts of my
mortal body, while I live, nor never despair under the condemning guilt of it
when I dye, but now while I live, and then when I dye, be cured of all the
stings I have received from the fiery Serpents, of the World, the Devil, and
mine own flesh, by fixing the eyes of my faith upon the true brazen Serpent,
Jesus Christ. Amen. In whose blessed name and words I conclude my prayer and
life, in that most perfect form of prayer, which he has taught me in his holy
Gospel, saying, when ye pray, say, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

To my Benefactors.
YOu are blessed men, so the Psalmist tells you; Psalm 41.1.
Blessed is the man that considers the poor and needy: So my savior tells you,
Come ye blessed of my Father; For ye gave me meat when I was hungry; Mat 25.
ye visited me when I was in p^ison: So St. Paul tells you; It is a better
thing to give, than to receive.

Such blessed men I have hitherto met with in my hunger, in my thirst, in my
mprisonment, in my nakedness; Their blessedness has blessed me; and they
have made themselves more blessed, by the law of beneficence, which is, they
forget their charity: But I may not make my self cursed, by forgetting my
duty, in the law of gratitude; No, I will remember my Duty, by remembering God,
not to forget their labor of love, because they have not forgot to do good to
them that are in bonds, and particularly to my self, the worst and unworthiest
of the rest.

To you, my Benefactors, I say, Be not weary of well doing; You shall reap, if
you faint not.

To God I pray, Reward them sevenfold, o God! with Grace and Plenty here, with
Glory and Eternity hereafter.

From Him, I assure you of both, if you add but your own Faith, to the Devotion
of your Beadsman, with whom

Vindicta oneri, Gratia in quaestu habetur. FINIS.

