THE LIFE AND DEATH OF Mr. Tho. Wilson, MINISTER OF MAIDSTONE, In the County of
Kent, M. A.

Printed in the Year 1672.

To the Christian READER, Especially those of Maidstone in Kent, who were
Hearers of, and held Communion with Mr. Wilson.
HOw great the force of examples is to draw Men to good or evil, is evilent to
the World by daily experience. The Governors of Families and Parishes, are
usually the Looking Glasses, by which inferiors dress themselves. And most
look rather to their doings then their sayings. Hereupon the Orator tells us,
Non solum obsunt superiores, quod illi ipsi corrum patitur, sed etiam quod
cotrumpunt: plusquam exemplo quam peccato nocent. Waters do not more constantly
vary their savor, according to the veins of the Soil, through which they
slide, nor Brutes their natures according to the Climates, in which they live,
then men their conversations, according to the examples that are set before
them. There is a persuasive power in rational precepts, but a compulsive power
in real patterns. It is recorded of Elies sons (men of vicious lives) that
they made (i e) by their examples, The Lords people to transgress, 1 Samuel 2.
24. And the Apostle rebukes Peter to his face for his Iudaizing in those words,
(...), 2 Gal. 14. (...), Why do thou bring the Gentiles under a necessity?
Why do thou necessitate them to judaize? Why do thou far them by thy
example to live as do Jews. Upon this account God commands the Jews, to
suffer no Caananites amongst them. They shall not dwell in thy Land, ne forte
peccare te faciant in me. A Lapide etc. Saint: Least they make thee sin against
me (i e) by their examples, Exodus 23. 32, 33.

The mind of man like Jacobs sleep, receives the tincture and color of those
objects that are presented to it. As the air in which we live, has a strong
influence upon our bodies, and inclines them to health or sickness; so has the
pattern of those amongst whom we live a strong influence upon our Souls, to
incline them to virtue or vice. Joseph quickly learns the Court Dialect, to
swear by the life of Pharaoh, by living amongst Courtiers, Israel becomes
guilty of that horrid sin of Idolatry, by their habitation in Egypt, for the
golden Calfe, was first fassioned and formed in the Iron Furnace. They who walk
in the Sun are taun'd insensibly; and before they are aware.

Thus also there is a sweet power and holy efficacy in good examples to draw
men to good. Justin Martyr acknowledges, that he was converted by observing
the pious lives and patient deaths of the Martyrs. The holy conversation of
Theodosius in his Family, turned his whole Court into a Nursery of Religion.
The strict life and gracious carriage of the Baptist, had so much power on
Herod (though bad enough, and above all fear of John, for any thing he could do
against him) that he reverenceth him, hears him gladly and does many things,
Marks 6. ^0. The Sanctity of John had a commanding beauty with it, his Holiness
had an awing Majesty in it, which conquered and triumphed in the Conscience of
the King. Peter Martyr tells us (Loc Commun. Part. 1. Cap. 1.6.) of a deformed
Woman (whose Husband was therein like her) which by looking daily on beautiful
Pictures, brought forth fair and comely Children. Its certain God is pleased to
give us in his Word, and in the World, many examples of humble, morti^ed self
denying Christians, that we beholding them, might resemble them; Therefore he
proounds them in the holy Scriptures, not only for our encouragement in the
ways of Godliness, Jam. 5. 10. Heb. 1. 2. But also for our imitation, that we
may walk as we have them for an example, 2 Cor. 11. 1. Phil. 3. 17. 20. He sets
up those shining lights in the World, not for men to play with or to play by,
but for men to work by, to be directed by them in the ways of Life; And our not
improving their holy patterns hereunto, is one cause why he takes them from us
so soon. If Children and Servants will play by that Candle which is given them
to work by, no wonder if he who set it up, put is out, and leave them in the
dark.

Reader, I do here present to thy view in this little Treatise, a great
examples of Godliness, one that did not only (...), but also (...), (...), not
onley divide the word aright, but also order his conversation aright. Though he
has been dead some years, yet as Abel being dead, he speaks to the living by
the good example of his life. What Nazienzen says of the Baptist (who is
called the voice of one that cries in the Wilderness,) that he was tota vor
All voice, made up of voice; a voice in his Habit, a voice in his Diet, a voice
in his Dwelling a voice at Home, a voice Abroad, a voice in the Pulpit, a voice
out of the Pulpit, a voice in the works and life. So I may speak of this ma^^
God without flattery (that is impossible, he being dead) or falsehood (many a
live can attest it) that he was all voice; A voice in his Doctrine, and a voice
in his Conversation, a voice in his Language, a voice in his carriage, a voice
in his Food, in his Raiment, in his Family, in the Street, as well as in the
Church. O what a lively pattern of zeal, love, faith, humility, Heavenly
mindedness, courage for, and Constancy in the Truth did he set before you, who
had the happiness to live under his Ministry. Be you followers of him as he was
of Christ, let his zeal inflame you, his love draw out your hearts more to your
God and his People, let his humility make you low in your own eyes. His
Heavenly mindedness lessen your esteem of the World and all therein and his
magnaminity of Spirit, encourage you in the ways of Truth and Holiness against
all the opposition that you meet with. Look often on him with the eye of your
minds, till you are transformed into his likeness. Can you not remember how
often your Spirits have burned within you, whilst be has been opening
Scripture to you; Have not your hearts sometimes been carried up to Heaven in
his Prayers. Were you never above in the Mount with him at a Sacrament? when
your souls spoke with Peter, Lord it is good to be here, O let us build a
Tabernacle, and no more go down to a vain empty World. O they are blessed that
dwell in thy House, they do ever (and me without infinite cuase) praise thee.
Beware you do not abate in your Sacred affections, that you do not leave your
first love, that you draw not back and decline in Religion.

I believe many of you are ready to say with Job, O that I were as in the days
of old, as in the days when God preserved me, when his Candle shined upon my
head, when the Almighty was yet with me, Job 29.28 O that I were as in the days
of ola, as in the days when I sat under Mr. Wilsons Ministry; O that I could
hear such Sermons, join in such Prayers, partake of such Sacraments, enjoy such
seasons for my soul, and see such gracious examples. When you are wishing thus;
consider what a mercy it was that you enjoyed him so long; Alas, how many
Parishes never had such a Pastor one Month? then bewail your folly in making no
better use of him while you had him. Let all your complaint be of your selves,
for your unfruitfulness and unprofitableness under such excellent means, and
Spiritual opportunities; And let you care be to make the most of him, more by
practicing those wholesome precepts, which you remember he gave you, and by
writting in your lives after that Copy which he has set you. I know his memory
is dear to you, and your love was great to him, I beseech you, manifest the
truth of your love by doing that which (you know) he loved so much. Did he not
tell you often. I have no greater joy then to see my Children walking in the
Truth. In a word, Zeno Cittiana, when he consulted with the Oracle how he might
live well, was answered; (...). If he were of the same color with the dead.
Its certain you will live well, if you live like them that died in the Lord.
The Prince of the Powers of the Air, (i e, the Devil) lives in them, who live
according to the course of the world, Ephesians. 2. 2. The world though it often
changes its customs, and fassions, yet never for the better, as the Camelion,
it turns in to any color but white, so that if you will live, according to
most amongst when you live, you may do, and be any thing, but what you ought to
do and be. But if you be of the color of them that sleep in Jesus, and
resemble the dead in Christ, your lives will be unblameable, your deaths
peaceable, your names after death honorable, and your resurrections at the
great day comfortable. That you may be followers of them who through faith and
patience inherit the Promises, and in special, that you may be your Pastors Joy
and Crown or Rejoicing at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,

Is the Prayer of your Affectionate Servant in Christ Jesus, G. S.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. HIs Birth, Education at School and University. Chap. II. His removal
from the University, with the occasion. Chap. III. His first Living in Surry.
Chap. IV. His second living in Hampshire. Chap. V. His third living, with the
success of his journey into Cumberland. Chap. VI. His removal to Otham in Kent,
with the occasion of it. Chap. VII. His great success at Otham in Kent, with
his faithfulness there. Chap. VIII. His care to sanctify the Sabbath. Chap.
IX. His appearance at a Visitation about the Prayer against the Scott. Chap. X.
His fresh prosecution by the Archbishop, with a strange Providence. Chap. XI.
Strange Providence, Mr. Wilson's freedom obtained by Sir Ed. Deering, with his
character of Mr. Wilson. Chap. XII. His removal to Maidstone. Chap. XIII. His
care for Otham, and for Reformation at Maidstone. Chap. XIV. His extraordinary
diligence and labouriousness on the Lords day. Chap. XV. The great pains he
took with his people on the Weekdays. Chap. XVI. His diligence on all
occasions to do good, and his way of Preaching. Chap. XVII. His carriage in his
Family. Chap. XVIII. The Reformation which was wrought by his means and
Ministry in Maidstone. Chap. XIX. His Courage. Chap. XX. His Zeal. Chap. XXI.
His Faith and Heavenly mindedness. Chap. XXII. His natural parts, and great
humility. Chap. XXIII. His Wives, and Children. Chap. XXIV. His Sickness and
Death.
After the Chapters, are annexed the Articles objected against him in the
Archbishops Court, with his answers to them.

Verses on his Death.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF Mr. THO. WILSON, Minister at Maidonestone, in the County
of Kent.
CHAP. I. His Birth, Education at School, and University.
THomas Wilson was born at Catterlon, in the County of Cumberland in the year
1601. His Parents were sober and honest, and of a competent Estate, being of
the best sort of Yeomen in those parts. As soon as his Age would permit, he was
sent to School at Blentow i^ the says County, where under Mr. Wilkinson his
Schoolmaster, he profited beyond, expectation; and far excelled all his
fellows. He was observed in his youth to have a sharp wit, large memory, and to
be very much given to his Book; whereby his friends had hopes that he would in
time (as indeed he did) prove a great instrument of good.

His great proficiency at School, encouraged his Parents to send him to the
University before he was seventeen years of Age, where ( viz. at Christ's
College in Cambridge) he spent not his time as too many do, male, alind, or
nibil agendo, but devoted himself wholly to his Studies, in so much that he was
taken notice of by the Master and Fellows, for his diligence and industry: It
might have been written over his Study-door, Nulla diel sine linea. And though
he did employ his time most there, about Academical Learning, (his acuteness in
which did appear above 20 years, after he had left Cambridge,) yet he did not
neglect Divinity, but in order to his design of serving God in the Ministry,
(if he saw fit) read both Positive and Polemical Authors: But of all Books none
was so dear to him, or read so much by him, as the Holy Scriptures, for as the
great Apostle says of Timothy, I may say of him, From a Child he knew the Holy
Scriptures, which are able to make wise to Salvation. Before he was Bachelor
of Arts he had read (as he told me) Tremel. and Iun. on the whole Bible, three
times over.

CHAP. II. His removal from the University, with the occasion.
SOmetime after he had Commenced Bachelor of Arts, he was removed from the
University by this Providence. Mr. John Bristow a Reverend Minister of
Chawswood in Surry, desired Mr. Mead (that eminent person for Piety and
Learning) his Tutor, to send him an able Religious Scholar, to teach School in
his House. Mr. Mead presently pitched his thoughts upon his Puple Mr. Wilson,
not knowing how to pleasure Mr. Bristow better, and glad he could answer his
request so well.

At Mr. Bristows he continued four years or there about, instructing the Lads
committed to his charge, with great diligence and faithfulness, being far from
the temper of Protagoras, who boasted (as Plato reports) that having lived
sixty four years, he had spent forty of them in corrupting and debauching
young persons, No, he made conscience of his time, and his trust, and gave his
Scholar more cause to bless God for their education under him, then Socrates
did Plato for his bringing up under such a Master. He has sometimes told me,
that he knew no Calling, except the Ministry, wherein a man might be so
serviceable to God as in teaching youth. And is clear that oftentimes Lads are
made men at School; If there they suck in ill principles, it will be hard to
remove them, if good, they continue with them, Quo semel^ est in buta, etc. It
is noted by some as one cause of Iulians profaneness, that he was bred under
two Heathenish Tutors Libanius and Iamblicus. Because he saw the Christians so
easily to confute the Idolatrous Gentiles, by reason of their good Education,
he made a Law, That no Christian should train up his sons with humane Learning.
But it was the happiness of Chawswood, that their Children were educated by one
who had both a dexterity and fidelity, to teach them Humane and Divine
Learning. But Mr. Bristow observing Mr. Wilsons fitness and ability for a
greater work then instructing Children; and how his heart was set upon the work
of the Ministry, (to prepare himself for which he made use of all his vacant
hours from the School) did not judge it convenient to deprive the Church any
longer of so worthy a Labourer, and therefore though it were a considerable
loss to himself and his Parish, to so go so good a man; yet he preferred the
public advantage of the Church before his own, and wished Mr. Wilson take
himself wholly to Preach.

CHAP. III. His first Living in Surry.
THe first Candlestick in which this light was set, was Capel in Surry, where
he continued some time, directing others by his holy pattern and judicious
diligent Preaching, the way to eternal Life. Though the Parish gave him little
or nothing for his pains, yet he was never the less faithful and labourious,
for the welfare of their souls, for he sought not theirs but them, not their
temporal good, but their spiritual good. Here he had the love and esteem of all
Godly persons, both Ministers and people round about and indeed by his holy,
Heavenly, humble conversation, he was such a Loadstone, as where ever he came
he drew the hearts of sober Christians after him. What Nazianzen says of
Athanasius, I may truly say of him that he was Magnes and Adamas, a Loadstone
in his sweet gentle nature, and yet an Adamant in his stout resolute carriage
against errors and profaneness.

CHAP. IV. His second Living in Hampshire.
HE continued not long at Capel, but upon some reasons, by means of the
forementioned Mr. Bristow, he was removed to Farlington (nigh Portsmouth in
Hampshire) an ignorant Heathenish place, which he endeavored so long as he
stayed with them to instruct and reform. Though there was little of Religion in
his Parishioners, nor scarce any savor of good, yet whilst he abode there the
Church was much frequented (Christians flocking in to hear him diverse miles
round,) and when he was called thence he was much bewailed.

He stayed not long in Hampshire, and though I am ignorant of the grounds of
his frequent removals, (which I suppose were weighty) yet by the sequel I
perceive that God intended so able and useful an instrument for more public
and general service, and thought not good to confine such great gaifts and
graces, to such small Parishes.

CHAP. V. His third Living in Surry, with the success of his Journey into
Cumberland.
HIs next change was to Tedington near Kingston upon Thames, in which place he
continued some years, and through the blessing of God with great success of his
Ministry, and much acceptance amongst them that feared the Lord. During his
abode at Tedington, he (being twenty six years of Age) had a desire to visit
his native Country, where his Relations and Friends lived, and it pleased God
so to assist him in his labors amongst them, that his journey became
profitable for the Conversion of many. While he was in Cumberland, he was
requested to Preach in Penroth, a great (if not the greatest) Market Town in
the County, where, time out of mind there had been a considerable Market for
all sort of food kept every Lords Day, till nine a Clock in the morning. But
after he had Preached two or three Sermons, he prevailed so far with the
Ministers and others of the Town, that it was Proclaimed on Tuesday their
Weekly Market day. That no person for the time to come, should bring any
Victuals or Ware whatsoever to be sold on the Lords day, but that Saturday
should be the time for the Sale of their Commodities. And for many years after,
the people did forbear to sell any thing on the Lord's Day in that Town.

CHAP. VI. His removal into Kent, with the occasion of it.
HIs next removal was from Tedington to Otham, within two or three miles of
Maidstone in Kent. The occasion is this, there were many serious understanding
Christians in Maidstone, much troubled and dejected at the deadness and dullness
of that Ministry, under which they lived. Alas, the children asked bread, and
their Spiritual Father (by Profession and Office) gave them stones, that their
souls were ready to famish for want of food. Whereupon Mr. Robert Swinnoche an
active Godly person, one of the Aldermen or Jurats of the Town, got the
presentation of Otham, upon the death of the Incumbent, and consulted with his
friends and Christian Neighbors, how he might procure an able Minister for
that place, aiming herein not only at the benefit of that Parish, but also of
the Christians at Maidstone, who might with a little trouble and travail reap
the fruit of his labors. In pursuance of this they repaired to London, where
they heard of Mr. Wilson, to whom they presently take their journey, hear him
Preach at Darking in Surry to their great satisfaction. After Sermon they
acquainted him with the cause of their coming, and the sad condition of the
good people in those parts, where they lived and desired him to accept the
presentation of Otham, He who was never hasty, especially in matters of such
weight, asked the judgment of his Neighbor Ministers in the Country, and
others of the City of London, who did concur and agree in this, that-in regard
of the necessities of those that feared God about Maidstone, and the great
opportunity he should enjoy there, of doing good to many souls he ought to
embrace the Call. Upon the declaration of their opinion he was presented to
Otham, where the Lord was pleased to prosper his Ministry, for the conversion
and edification of many.

CHAP. VII. His great success at Otham in Kent, and his faithfulness there.
HE was one that did divide the Word aright, a workman that needed not to be
ashamed, a Boanerges, a Son of Thunder, in Preaching the Law, to awaken secure
senseless sinners, that his hearers might say of him, as one of the Ancients, of
St. Paul's Epistles, Non tam verba quam To^itena audiebant, etc. That they heard
not so much words as Thunders, when they heard him opening the dreadful curses
of the Law, and the terrible wrath of God against sin and sinners. Many a one
has come to him, as the Gaolor to the Apostle, trembling and crying out, Sir,
what shall I do to be saved? To whom he was a Barnabas, a son of sweet
consolation, and could so display the exceeding abundant riches of Divine grace
in the Lord Jesus Christ, as to draw and attract their hearts to a cheerful
compliance with it, and hearty acceptance of it. He as a faithful Steward gave
every one his portion, terror to whom terror belonged, and comfort to whom
comfort, whereby (the Holy Ghost setting in with the Word,) a numerous issu of
new born children were begotton to Christ. He preached there according to the
command in season, and out of season, not only twice every Lords day, but also
every holy day, and at Funerals, though the persons interred were poor, and
nothing could be expected for his pains.

Whilst he was Minister of Otham, many of Maidstone and others several miles
about, to my knowledge some seven or eight miles from Otham, did ordinarily
attend on his Ministry, and join in Communion with him at the Lords Supper; but
the number that flockt after him, (which was so great that his Church would not
hold them) was a great eye sore to the profane world, and caused several of
the Ministers about him to envy and malign him.

CHAP. VIII. His care to Sanctify the Sabbath.
There was at Otham before his coming an ill custom, for the Fulling Mills
there abouts, to work every Lords day, but he convinced the owners so thoroughly
of the unlawfulness thereof, that they forbore presently, and suffered their
Mills to lie still on that day many years after he left them.

But the only wise God, who governs the world, saw fit for some time to lay
this useful person aside, for he had not been many years at Otham, before the
Book, commonly called the Book of Sports on the Lords day, Anno Domini 1635.
came forth, and was presented to him, with a Command, that he should publish
it the next Lords day in his Church, which he refused to do, (of which refusal
he gives the reasons, which you may see in his answer to several Articles
objected against him, Toward the close of the Book.
annexed to this Narrative,) and upon his refusal was suspended ab Officio and
Beneficio. Upon his suspension his Cure was committed to such persons as he
could not comfortably own or join with, which caused him to remove his
Habitation to Maidstone. To the Christians there he was a great help, whilst
his suspension lasted, and from them he received some support and supply for
himself and his Family.

Whilst he was at Maidstone he still was solicitous for the good of his people
at Otham, and therefore to encourage them to unity, and a Gospel conversation;
as also to convince his adversaries, who had causelessly traduced him to be a
savourer and a better of Schisms and Divisions; he wrote a Letter to his Parish,
wherein the exhorted them to fear the Lord and the King, and to walk in love,
etc. and not to nourish in themselves any dislike of Government, or contempt of
those whom God had set over them, etc. Which Letter was read on a Lords Day in
his Congregation by Dr. Tucke, (that all his Parishoners might know his
judgment, and the advice he judged necessary to give them) without the
appointment of Mr. Wilson. The tidings of this Letter and the public reading
of it was soon carried to London, and gave such a distaste, that both Mr. Wilson
and Dr. Tucke were cited to appear before the High Commission Court, and answer
what they had done. Both of them appeared several times to their great trouble
and cost, and were notwithstanding all they could allege in their own defense,
forced to continue their attendance on the Court, for the space of three years.
In this business Dr. Tucks trouble was the greater, because (his body unable to
bear riding) he was necessitated to make these long journeys of thirty miles
and better on foot.

During Mr. Wilsons suspension, a Neighbor Minister greedy of his Living,
commenced a Suit against him, to eject him wholly out of Otham; but his Patron
Mr. Swinnoche made good his Title, and so disappointed his Adversary.

CHAP. IX. His appearance at a Visitation about the Prayer against the Scots.
HIs suspension continued till the year 1639. about which time the Scots
entering England, a Parliament was called; and Archbishop Lawd took off his
suspension. But his sufferings were not at an end, for in the year 1640.
September 30. he and other Ministers were cited to appear at a Visitation of
the Archbishops at Feversham in Kent, to answer their not reading the Prayer
against the Scots, and also (as they there heard) to take the new devised Oath
ex Officiam; but when he and others of his Brethren presented themselves at the
place, they understood that the Oath should be wholly declined, and the only
question should be why they did not read the forementioned Prayer: Upon which
they consulted together, whether it were be^^ to appear before the Vicar
General or no. ^ was urged by some that the Parliament (whom they apprehended
would be some relief and shelter to them) being to sit down on the 3(...) of
November following, it was but prudential for them to hold off at present; and
in case they were cited afterward to Canterbury, to appear only by a Proctour,
and protract time as much as might be.

But upon a serious weighing the reasons for and against their appearing, it
was concluded that they would appear, and submit to the will of God, however he
should please to dispose of them. Mr. Edward Bright of Gondburst, and Mr.
Wilson immediately repaired to the Inn, where Sir Nathaniel Brent, the
Archdeacon, and some inferior Officers sat. They no sooner appeared but Mr.
Bright was pointed out by one present to the Archdeacon that knew him; who
presently asked him his name, and whether he had read the Prayer against the
Scots or no? Mr. Bright answered, No: Whereupon the Archdeacon suspended him
ab Officio and Beneficio, without admonishing him, or giving him any time to
consider of it; which sudden act was deemed even by the Favorites of that
Court, to be neither prudential nor Canonical. Though Mr. Wilson stood by when
his Brother was suspended, and perceived the service much hotter then he
expected; yet he did not fly from his colors, or retreat in the least; But
being called, answered to his Name, and being asked whether he had read the
Prayer? gave a Negative answer, with this reason: Because in the Rubric before
the Common Prayer, it was enjoined that no Prayer should be publicly read,
except those that were in the Book of Common Prayer; but this Prayer against
the Scots was not there This unexpected answer puzzled the Archdeacon (being
none of the readiest or accuted to reply) and caused him to apply himself to
Sir Nathan Brent, who upon information of Mr. Wilsons reasons, very ingeniously
left the Archdeacon to himself, and refused to meddle in it. Upon which the
Archdeacon (the edge of his fury being somewhat abated) proceeded more
considerately with Mr. Wilson then with Mr. Bright, and gave him fourteen days
time to consider of it, and then to appear again at Canterbury, and answer it.

CHAP. X. His fresh prosecution by the Archbishop, as also a strange
providence.
BUt for all this present favor, the Archbishop had not done with Mr. Wilson,
or in March following, he was again and fresh prosecuted by him. Upon an
Holy Day in that Month he met at the Personage house, (of which one Mr. Butcher
an eminently pious person had a part, of whom di^ not my Relation to him forbid
me, I could speak much,) after his Sermon in public with several friends, to
repeat the Sermon, and seek God by prayer. After the exercises were done (in a
Room peculiar to Master Butcher) one knocked at the poor, to which Mrs. Wilson
was going, but suddenly started back, fearing a Messenger was come to apprehend
her Husband; but the Messenger soon entered into the Room, where Mr. Wilson and
his friends were, and putting off his hat, enquired which was Mr. Wilson,
pretending some private business with him. Though Mr. Wilson was there in his
Gown, having newly Preached and Prayed, and thereby easily to be distinguished
from others, yet God so ordered it, that the Messenger observed served him not.
Soon after the Messenger came into the Room. Mr. Wilson stepped behind some of
his friends, and Mr. Butcher wisely stepped forward, and told the Messenger, that
the Room in which they were was his, and that he should look for Mr. Wilson in
his own Rooms; upon this he quickly withdrew into the Hall, another Room; in
the intrim Mr. Wilson went up the Stairs into his Study, and lay close there
till night, and then escaped to Mr. George Halls at the Park is Maidstone. The
Pursevant looking about in vain, on second thoughts returns back into the
Parlor, into which he first entered, and missing one whom he had seen there
before enquires for him, charge all there present that they had conveyed Mr.
Wilson away, and they must find him out; he also produced his Warrant, under
the hands of many privy Counselors, whereof the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
the Bishop of London were two, to attach the body of Thomas Wilson, Rector of
Otham, and bring him before them.

After he had showed his Order, he commanded Mr. Butcher and one Mr. Morgan to
assist him in the search of the House for Mr. Wilson. But notwithstanding his
diligent search, he mist his desired prey. The Messenger was very angry that he
should see him and yet lose him; but when in some threatenings to the persons
present, he had given his fury vent, he was somewhat cooler, and after some
private discourse with Mrs. Wilson, he took his leave. Before his departure, he
said that he had been a Messenger to the Council Table thirty six years, and
was never served so before, for as he confessed, he heard him Preach that day
in public, and yet when he saw him so soon after (and that in his Gown) he did
not know him. But God had an hand in it, Thy Kingdom rules over all, Psa. 103.
19. He has strange ways for the preservation of Men.

CHAP. XI. Strange Providence; Mr. Wilsons freedom obtained by Sir Edward
Deering, with his Charactor of Mr. Wilson.
THe Circumcellians beset the way, which they knew St. Augustine was to go,
that they might kill him; but he mistook his way, and so escaped their hands.
In Queen Mary's days the Bishop of Winchester pursued Mr. John Fox the
Martyrologist to Ipswich; the Bark in which he was, was newly gone out of the
Haven, when the Messenger came to take him, and the next day by reason of
storms forced to return thither again, the Messenger was departed. Since those
days Mr. Parker a learned worthy Preacher was prosecuted by Archbishop
Bancrost, for his Book against the Cross, etc. and the Archbishop having
intelligence that he was in a Citizens House in London, thought he had him
safe, sent one presently to watch at the door of the house, to see that none
stirred out, till others came with authority to search it for Master Parker.
The person sent, sat him down at the door, boasting that none should come out,
but he would know who and what they were.

Mr. Parker and his Friends within were in great thoughtfulness what was most
addresseable in such a straight; at last it was resolved that Mr. Parker should
habit himself like a Citizen and venture out; this way he might possibly
escape, if he staid within, he was sure to be taken. Accordingly, he thus clad
came forth, not knowing but that the Waiter was still at the door, but
Providence so ordered it, that the Waiter espying a Maid whom he Loved and
Courted, walking on the other side of the way, stepped over to her, just at Mr.
Parker came forth, so that though the Messenger stayed a very little while with
her, but returned again, Mr. Parker was gone; and when the rest came with power
to search the house, the person they sought was not to be found. But to return
to Mr. Wilson, who hid himself in the Country from the storm till the
Parliament sat, at which time he repaired to London, and there continued in
some change of Apparal (that he might not be commonly known) till his liberty
and freedom was procured, by the means of Sir Edward Deering, one of the
Knights of the Shire for Kent, whose character of him in one of his Speeches in
Parliament, I shall here insert,

-- Mr. Wilson, for so is your Petitioner named, a Man Orthodox in his
Doctrine, conformable in his Life, labourous in Preachings, as any we have, or
I do know; He is now separated from his People, to both their griefs, for it is
not with him as with others, who are glad to set a Pursivant a work, that they
may have an excuse to be out of the Pulpit; It is his delight to Preach.

Having thus obtained his liberty, he returned to his former charge and wonted
pains at Otham. Not long after he was chosen by the Parliament a Member of that
Reverend, Pious and Learned Assembly of Divines, which sat at Westminster; on
which Assembly he usually attended most part of the week, and notwithstanding
his pains there, supplied his Cure on the Lords Day, though his Parish was 35
or 36. miles from London. He was much esteemed in the Assembly, for his solid
judicious Discourses as occasion was offered, and his meek humble behavior.

CHAP. XII. His removal to Maidstone.
HIs last remove was to Maidstone, the Shire-Town of Kent, for who so fit for
so populous a place (where there is but one English Church) as one of such vast
parts exemplary Holiness and strong constitution of body. As soon as the way
was opened to his induction into Maidstone, (through the ejection of the old
Incumbent, by the Committee of Plundered Ministers) his old Hearers there,
whose hearts were close knit to him, longed for his settlement among them. But
the Parliament ordering that Plundered Ministers should first be provided for,
where any Livings were vacant, they could not at present obtain their desire:
For one Master Smith, an able holy man, of the number of the foresaid
Ministers, was by the Committee of Plundered Ministers sent down to Maidstone.
Mr. Smith had not been long in Maidstone, but a rumor was spread, that eminent
persons should be removed to great Towns and Cities, that they might be capable
of doing the more good, and that Mr. Wilson should be removed from Otham, to
some considerable place. At which news the people of Maidstone were much
startled, fearing they should lose their beloved Pastor. To prevent which,
they apply themselves to Mr. Smith, desiring him to accept of some other
Living, that Maidstone might be free for Mr. Wilson. Mr. Smith considering the
vehement desires of the good people after Mr. Wilson, yielded to refer the
business to six judicious Ministers of the Assembly, whereof three to be chosen
by himself, and three by the Christians of Maidstone. The Ministers met
accordingly, and having heard what could be said on both sides, and weigh the
matter thoroughly, gave their advice that it would be best for Mr. Smith to
resign the place to Mr. Wilson, which also he did, and having a considerable
place, some six or seven miles from Maidstone provided for him, viz. Harrison,
he took his own time to remove thither. Thus at last by the good hand of God,
Mr. Wilson and the people of Maidstone (who brought him first into Kent) who
were long before joined together in heart, were joined together in Habitation,
amongst whom he continued with much love and faithfulness, till God called him
out of this World.

CHAP. XIII. His care for Otham, and for Reformation at Maidstone.
BUt though he left Otham, he did not leave off to care for the souls of his
people there, but kept his Title to the place still, (least the Patron should
put in an insufficient Minister, in case he had resigned) and provided them a
pious learned faithful man, to whom he gave the whole profits of the Living,
for he held not his right to the place upon any carnal account, or for any self
ends, but only for the good of the people.

When he had been some time at Maidstone, he took care about the Reformation of
the Church, and due administration of the Sacraments, according to the Word of
God, to which end, he did first in his Preaching discover to them the necessity
of Church Ordinances and Discipline, the nature of the Subjects thereof, etc.
and then God accompanying his diligent endeavors (notwithstanding the
obstacles he met with, not only by the profane, but also some that professed
the fear of God) he brought it to a good issue, and put it in practice, to the
great comfort of them that were Godly.

Being freed Sea from attendance on the Assembly (they being dissolved) he
applied himself to the work of the Ministry, with the greatest diligence that
ever I heard or read of any.

CHAP. XIV. His great diligence and labouriousness on the Lords Day.
ON Saturday nights he would usually continue at his Study very late, often
till midnight, to prepare himself the better for his task on the Lords Day. On
the Lords Day morning he would rise by two or three a Clock ordinarily, and was
much displeased with himself, if at any time he did oversleep his hour. About
seven a clock he came down to his Family, called all together, read some part
of Scripture, expounded it, caused those present to give an account what they
remembered of his Exposition, Sung some part of a Psalm, Prayed with them, and
concluded between eight and nine a Clock that they might all be ready to attend
public Ordinances. About nine a Clock he repaired to the Church, and commonly
begun with singing two Staves of a Psalm, after which he prayed briefly for
assistance in, and a blessing on the Ordinances of God, then he read some part
of the old Testament, and expounded (sometimes three or four, sometimes more
Verses, as more or less matter was contained in them) for the space of an hour,
for he had an Hourglass in his Desk for that end. He had as excellent a
faculty in expounding as any I know of. His custom was first to analise the
Book, then the Chapters, as he came to treat on them, then he gave the several
readings and expositions of the Verses, which he handled. He had Iun. Tremel.
Piscator. Beza. Calvin. and several others ad rugnem, insomuch that in the
assembly of Divines (as Mr. Gibbons sometime of Blackfriars told me, he heard
it of his Father one of the Assembly) if at any time they doubted what was the
opinion of any of the aforementioned Commentators, Mr. Wilson was called to
satisfy them. After he had delivered the several readings and judgments of
Expositors, as there was occasion, he drew observations for the coherence,
dependence and matter of the Verses, which he very briefly illustrated and
applied. Mr. Hutchison on the Gospel of John comes the nearest him of any
Comment that I read in English, but he was fuller and larger then Mr.
Hutchison. I believe, if his expositions on the whole New Testament, and the
far greater part of the Old had been Printed, it would have been an useful
Treatise, and more serviceable for the enabling ordinary Christians to
understand the mind of God in his Word, then any Comment that is extant. After
he had expounded, he spent about an hour in the Pulpit. When he came home to
his Family, he constantly went to Prayer with them before Dinner, and begged
that the truths delivered out of the Word, might be written by the Spirit of
God upon all their hearts. After which he went to his Studdy, (eating little or
no dinner usually) till after his Family had dinn'd, then he spent some time
with them in singing and other religious exercises. In the afternoon in public
he did as in the Morning, only his exposition was then on some part of the New
Testament.

After the Evening Worship in public, many Neighbors came to his house, where
he called his Family together, asked of them and others present, an account of
his Sermons preached that day, most of them present would speak somewhat, one
what the Text was, another the division of it, another the Doctrine of it,
another the reasons, so others the explications and uses methodically as he had
delivered them, all whom he would help and encourage. Hereby their
understandings and memories were much advantaged, for they knowing before hand
his custom, were the more attentive in hearing, and the more careful to
remember what they heard, whereas when the Master of the Family repeats all
himself, Children and Servants (who have a natural aversness to, yea hatred of
all good) are usually heedless in hearing, and mindless both in public and
private of what they hear. After repitition he sung a Psalm and concluded with
prayer. Then he went to his quondam Patrons house Mr. Robert Swinnocks to
Supper. By that time he had supped, there would be hundred or more gathered
together to Mr. Swinnocks house, to join with him in the conclusion of the day.

Many times to my comfort, I have seen two Rooms, one considerable for
largeness, through which persons of all ranks, (the Mayor, Jurates and their
Wives by their patterns encouraging others) to worship the great God. After
Supper he came among them, begun with a short prayer, then would read the
Verses he had expounded in that day, ask what observations were raised from
such a Verse, then proceed to the next, so through all the Verses he had
expounded forenoon and afternoon, then enquire what the Text were, the
Doctrines, the Explications, Reasons, Uses, all in order as preached, seldom
named one head himself, but still heartned them to speak, and assisted them
when they were at a loss, then they sung a Psalm, and he ended the day with
prayer about ten a clock at night.

Once a month he administered the Lords Supper to a considerable number of solid
serious Christians, with that life and warmth in prayer and opening Scripture,
that some of his Communicants have thought themselves in the Suburbs of Heaven,
when they have joined with him in that Ordinance, in which he spent an hour and
half commonly. Thus he Sanctified the Lords Day, spending nine or ten hours in
public and private Worship, beside what time he spent in secret duties, in
which he was never niggardly; so that the Sabbath, which was a day of rest to
others, was a day of great pains and labor to him, yet it was easy, yea
delightful to him; and at the end of the day, when those who took not half his
pains, have complained of their weariness, he would be exceeding lively and
cheerful; such was his great love to his Savior, and the souls committed to
his charge. The Sabbath day to him was a day of light and gladness, and a good
day.

CHAP. XV. The great pains he took with his people on the Weekdays.
YEt he did not think it sufficient to Teach his people on the Lords Day, but
the Town being very populous, and the Parish large, and he rendered thereby
incapable of going from house to house) on the Weekdays he laid out himself in
the service of his Lord, for the henefit of his Parish. Every Thursday their
Market Day he preached a Lecture, to which many Ministers came, and with much
delight sat under him. On Frydays he met in private with as many of his people
as would come together, when sometimes he expounded the Scripture to them,
sometimes preached and always sung and prayed with them. And also Mundays or
Tursdays, for his day was altered as he saw occasion) he appointed a Conference
in the public Meeting place, where the question being before propounded and
known, ( ex gr. what was the nature of repentance or faith, or what the
sighness, or what the means, or what the motives to it) his people prepared to
speak to it, and he by his wise courteous carriage and language won their
hearts, and drew them to Study the Scriptures and good Books, that they might
be able to speak to the purpose. As they spoke when he saw occasion he would
help and assist them, yet still take care to keep them in the way of Truth, and
that none did go beyond their bounds, or incroach upon the Ministry. After they
had spoken, he would gather together their scattered notions, bring them into
an orderly method, apply to them suitable Texts of Scripture, add what of his
own he thought necessary, and so render the meeting exceeding profitable and
comfortable to his flock. I have heard him at one of these Meetings, when the
question was about one of the petitions in the Lords Prayer, to my great
advantage and delight, for Christian Communion, managed with prudence, is that
which keeps our Religion in breath, and without which it would be ready to die.

When he laid down this way of Conference, instead thereof he set up
Catechizing on the Weekdays in public, and this was continued till he had
gone through the whole Town, except some Families in the out bounds, which
Families he intended also to have Cathechized, but was prevented. He did work
the work of him that sent him into the world, spend himself as the Silkworm to
cloth, and as the Lamp to direct others, not to bury the Talent in the Napkin
of idleness: Indeed those Nurses (Ministers I mean) deserve the greatest
condemnation, who let their Children, though they cry, starve to death, because
they will not take the pains to draw out their breasts to them.

CHAP. XVI. His diligence on all occasions to do good, as also his way of
Preaching.
HE was of a noble disposition, very free upon the occasions, to communicate
knowledge to others, not like a Whirlpool that sucks all to it self, but as a
Fountain to disperse its streams for the refreshment of many. Seldom were any
in his company, but they might (if it were not their own fault) receive good by
him. He was neither vain in ostentation, nor niggardly in reservation, some
might think he did ill to take so much pains on the Lords Days, and on the
Weekdays constantly, and on all occasions, to the shortning of his life; but
he was sensible he could never labor enough for his Lord, and that God make no
difference between nequam and nequaquam, an idle and an evil servant. Hence it
was that when he was often advised by his friends to be mindful of his body,
and not to work it so hard, he was deaf to all those advice, and was ready to
say with Calvin (when counseled by his friends to take care of his health)
Would you have my Lord when he comes, to find me idle; and with Dr. Reynolds of
Oxford (when the Doctors persuaded him not perdere substantiam propter
accidentia) Noc propter vitam vivendi perdere causas. I met him once at night
at a friends house, when he had traveled near forty miles that day, yet
notwithstanding his great weariness, he would spend some time in expounding
Scripture to the Family, beside singing and prayer (which he never omitted)
before he went to bed.

St. Austins wish was, that Christ when he came to call him by death, might
find him aut precautem aut predicautem, either praying or preaching. Truly,
such seemed to be the desire of Mr. Wilson, by his indefalligable laboriousness
about his Masters business. I never knew him given to any recreation (though
never so innocent) but exceeding provident he was of his time, A little after
dinner he would sometimes sit and discourse, but usually if he was at home, his
Study was his place of abode. He was Hellno librorum, an indefutigable Student,
stealing time from his sleep (even when his body called for it) for his Book.
Its said of Bradfrod that he slept not above four hours in the night, and that
his Book went not out of his hand till sleep came, and that Latimer Winter and
Summer at two a Clock in the morning; and of another Martyr that he was spare
of meat, sparer of sleep, out sparest of time. Mr. Wilson made much conscience
of his time, and especially on the Lords Day.

If he were invited to a Feast, he was so zealous for his God, that he commonly
after dinner called for a Bible, sung a Psalm, expounded some Verse of
Scripture, and prayed with his friends. Mr. Fenner of Essex that eminent
servant of Christ, meeting him once at Mr. Butchers house, was so extreemly
taken with his active cheerful Spirit for God and Godliness, that he said to
Mr. Butcher, I am ashamed of my self, to see how Mr. Wilson gallopeth toward
Heaven, and I do but creep on, a Snails pace.

Though he was a good Linguist, well read in modern and ancient Authors, yet
ordinarily he preached (though always rationally and with evidence of reason,)
yet in a plain clear style, by Doctrine, reason, and use, that he might be
understood by the meanest capacity. His constant preaching discovered him an
able Workman; his Doctrines were always clear from his Text, his heads
pertinent to his subject, and he had a rare faculty in applying suitable
Scriptures (which is the principal way of convincing the judgment; for it is
the authority of God must do the work) to all his heads. On the Lords Day in
the afternoon for a considerable time (I suppose till he had gone through all)
he preached on the Heads of Divinity, but therein he discovered so much
Learning and judgment in his plain preaching, that if his Sermons had been
preached at the University, they must have been highly approved.

He was so much valued for his abilities, that there was scarce any public
occasion of Sermons in the County, but he was chosen to be the person to preach
them, sometimes he preached before the Judges at the Assize^, twice before the
Parliament. What Augustine said of another, I may say of him: Ratuir eloquens,
ut intelligenter, ut obedienter andiretur.

CHAP. XVII. His carriage in his Family, and his exemplary conversation.
HE was not of the number of them, who are zealous abroad, that they may be
well spoken of, but careless at home, what becomes of their Families; but as
David, he walked in the midst of his house with a perfect heart, and brought up
his Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. Cicero says of Quintus
Maximinus, that he was not good only in the sight of the people, but he was
better out of their sight: truly he was as good within, as without doors, each
morning and evening he read some part of Scripture expounded it, sung part of a
Psalm, and prayed with his Family. He would often ask his Children questions
about the Principles of Religion, examine them about his Sermons on the Lords
day, and cause them to learn the Scripture without Book.

As it was said to Mr. Hooper, he governed his house, so that in every corner
of it, there was some sinal of virtue, good example, honest conversation, and
reading of the Scripture. I am sure if Mr. Wilsons house was not so, the fault
was not the want of a good Governor.

He prayed often with his wife apart from the rest of his Family, and spent
much time in secret prayer, knowing a truth in what Lactantius says, Non est
vera Religio quae cum Templo relinquitur.

He was very watchful to set a good example before his Children and Servants,
knowing that such are led more by the eye then the ear, and more observant of
what their Superiors do then what they say. And indeed his whole conversation
was a living exposition upon the Gospel^ that what he taught on the Lords Day
in his Doctrine, he preached over all the week in his life. O how unlike was he
to those Ministers that are lovely in their preaching, but loathsome in their
practices, whose lives give the lie to their Doctrines. He was exemplary in his
converse with all men, and spoke much by his carriage, even when he spoke not a
word. His good works were unanswerable, syllogismes invincible demonstrations
to convince his Neighbors, whereby he stole their hearts, and won their
affections after the beauty of holiness. What Ruffinus says of Gregory
Naziaenzen is true, of him, Gregorius vir per omnia incomparabilis qui verba
and operibus clarus, splendissimum lumen scientiae Ecclesiae prebuit; dum ea
decuit quae ferit, etc. He practiced what he preached, and did according to
what he says; Such Ministers only can make their people believe, that when
they dissuade from sin, and persuade to holiness, they are in earnest, and
believe what they speak. It was not without cause that in the holy Scriptures,
where Epistles are recorded to be sent to two Ministers only, they are both
commanded to be examples to their people, 1 Timothy 4. 12. Be thou an example of
the believers, in Words, in Conversation, in Charity, in Faith, in Purity. Tit.
2. 7. In all things showing thy self a pattern of good works.

CHAP. XVIII. The Reformation which was wrought by his means and Ministry in
Maidstone.
MAidstone was formerly a very profane Town, insomuch that I have seen Morris
dancing, Cudgel playing, Stool-ball, Crickets, and many other sports openly and
publicly on the Lords Day; I have heard them jeer, and deride, and mock at
those who professed Godliness, and went to hear a Sermon on the Lords Day
abroad, when they had none at home. Commonly after the Evening Service, many of
them went to the Alehouse, many to walk idly in the Fields. It was their
constant custom to ply the conduits on the Lords Day for the drawing of water.
The former vain sinful customs of sports were reformed before his coming, but
by his preaching he prevailed with them to forebear vain walking, idling at
their doors, also to draw their water on Saturday night, which they should have
occasion for on the Lords Day. Though the Town was large and full of people,
yet you should hardly see one person in the street after the Sermons on the
Lords Day, and I have known when the Mayor has searched the Innes and
Alehouses he has scarce found one of the Town there. One of the Judges at an
Assize was pleased to say, That in all his Circuit he never came to a Town
where the Lords Day was so strictly observed. I must say that I scarce ever
knew any man so strict as Mr. Wilson in the Sanctification of the Lords day. He
so much wrought upon the people there, that in the house where I lived, all Pot
herbs were gathered and made ready on the Saturday night, and whatsoever for
their Dinners put into a readiness, for the fire on the day before, not a Rose
or Flower suffered to be gathered on the Lords Day. He was much of the mind of
the primitive Christian, who being asked Servasti Dominicum, answered
Christianus sum, omittere non possum. The Sanctification of that day is
exceeding useful to keep up the power of Godliness in our hearts and lives. And
as God on that day bestows great blessings on them, that humbly and
reverently worship him on that Queen of days, that Market day of our souls,
Isa. 58. 13, 14. So he has inflicted dreadful Judgments on the profaners of
that day, and when men have neglected to punish them, he has taken the Sword
into his own hand, and done it himself. One example whereof there was in
Maidstone when I lived there: In former time that day was much profaned, as I
said before, and children were wont to play in the streets on that day. One
Sabbath as children were playing near a wall, against which Wagen-wheels were
set up, on a sudden there arose a great wind, which blew down a wheel upon one
of the Children, and crushed it to death. Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula
cautum.

Besides on week days (such was the blessing of God upon his preaching and
example) many Families Morning and Evening did set up religious duties, who
never minded them before. You might there, if you walked in the great street
about nine and ten a clock in a morning hear singing in many Families, for they
commonly sung Morning and Evening, when they read the Word and Prayed.

CHAP. XIX. His great Courage.
HE had a strong and undaunted Spirit, not discouraged by any obstacles, which
were laid in the way of his duty. He feared God and none else. He was like that
Ancient, that when a threatening message of death was sent him, bid the
Messenger tell the Empress, Nil timeo nisi peccatum, I fear nothing but sin; Or
Rowland Tailor, who being entreated to fly the Marian days, said, I know the
cause so good, and the truth so strong on my side, it will by Gods grace-appear
before their Beads, resists their false doings for I believe I shall never be
able to Good so good a service as now.

He discovered much courage in reproving sin, for as Christ said of the Church
of Ephesus, he could not bear those that were evil, were they never so great.
Elijah durst speak to Ahab, and Mr. Wilson to the highest person, by way of
reprehension, when there was cause for it. If men were bold in sinning, he was
as bold in telling them of it, and giving their sins their due accents, yet as
wise Physician, he could distinguish between Pimples and Plague sores, between
infirmities and scandals, accordingly apply himself to his Patients.

CHAP. XX. Of his Zeal.
HE was one that abundantly discovered his zeal for God in embracing all
opportunities to do him service, in his great care where ever he came for the
strict observation, and right Sanctification of the Lords Day, in his sense of
the dishonor done to God by the profaneness and contempt of the ordinaces of
God by some, and by the errors and wilful withdrawings from the Ordinances by
others; which he bewailed bitterly to his dying day. Some who its hoped had the
root of matter in them; questioned his call to the Ministry, nay suspected his
call to be Antichristian and separated from him, though they themselves
acknowledges that he was their Spiritual Father, and had begotten them through
the Gospel, and he might say to them as the Apostles to the Corinthians, Ye are
the Seal of our Ministry, do we need as some others Letters of Commendation to
you, ye are our Epistle, known and read of all men; For as much as ye are
manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ Ministered by us, written not
with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, not in Tables of stone, but in
fleshly Tables of the heart, 2 Cor. 3. 1, 2, 3. How frequently and
affectionately did he urge that upon them, that separated in my hearing, Isa.
11, 6, 7, 8, 9. This causeless sinful separation lay near his heart, even when
he lay upon his dying bed. The great danger of their souls, as also of those
that wholly cast of the care of their eternal good, caused him in the course of
his Sermons and Expositions, when the Scriptures led him to it, to reprove
their sins sharply, and indeed according to the command of the Holy Ghost, he
could do it (...), cuttingly that they might be sound in the Faith. Tit. 1. 13.
Its reported of Bazil that one hearing much of him, had a great desire to know
what manner of man he was; hereupon in a Vision was represented to him a flame
of sire, with this motto, Talis est Basilius, such a man is Basil. And truly
such a man was Mr. Wilson, meek and cold, when at any time himself was
reproached and abused; but as hot as fire in the cause of his God. The zeal of
Gods house burnt him up. Errors and Heresies were very odious to him, such was
his love to the truth. It might be said of him as of Austin, that was Malleus
Haereticorum, The Hamer of Heresies and Schisms, I have heard him often quote
and comment on those Scriptures, Heb. 10. 25. and 1 John 2. 19. With much
warmth and vigor, that if it were possible he might reduce those that went
astray. And though such as were touched in their sores were angry, and said, it
was passion, and his natural heat was Kitchen fire, the effect of his natural
Spirit, yet the judicious knew otherwise, that it was a coal from the Altar,
true zeal, the fruit of Gods Spirit, in him knowing that he was set (...), (as
the Apostle speaks, Phil. 1. 17. For the defense of the Gospel. Some of those
that separated, were very dear to him, that he might say as David, It was not
an enemy that reproached me, then I could have born it willingly, was it he
that hated me, that did magnisie himself against me? But it was my friend and
my acquaintance, we took sweet counsel together, and (formerly) walked to the
house of God in Company, Psa. 55. 12, 13, 14. But as dear as they were to him,
the Truth of the Gospel were much dearer, Amicus Socrates, amicus Plato, sed
magis amica veritas. And he was a man of such clear convincing light, and as it
is said of Apollos, Acts 18. 24. (...), able, strong, mighty in the Scriptures,
that had they not been wilfully blind, or very weak eyed, they must have seen
their errors. It is observed by some as a special Providence of God, that the
same day in which Pelagius the Heretic was born in Britain, St. Augustine the
great Confuter of his Heresy was born in Afric; God so disposing it, that
the Poison and the Antidote should come into the World together, I am sure it
was a good providence to Maidstone, that when many errors sprung up, there was
such an able faithful Husbandman to watch them and root them out, otherwise
many more then did, might have fallen from their own stedfastness, and been led
away with the errors of the times.

CHAP. XXI. Of Faith and Heavenly mindedness.
HE was not only sound in the Faith, and did (...), hold fast the form of sound
words, 2 Timothy 1. 3. But also as Abraham (...), was strong in the Faith, Romans 4.
20. And in the greatest dangers and difficulties could rely on God, and trust
him with himself and all he had. He met with much opposition, (as is before
declared) in the work of Ministry from all sorts of persons, both from open
enemies and seeming friends, for Satan knowing him so great an enemy to his
Kingdom of darkness, both by his life and Doctrine, raised great winds and
storms, if it were possible to put out this burning and shining light; But he
was undaunted in the midst of all, not moved by any of those things, neither
counted he his life dear unto him, so he might finish his course with joy, and
the Ministry which he received of the Lord Jesus, Acts 20. 24. He minded his
own work, consulted his duty, left Gods work) the issues and events thereof) to
God.

He was a Rock immovable, though the Waves beat sore upon him, and had often
that saying of Luther in his Mouth, Mallem ruore cum Christo quam regnare cum
Caesare, I had rather fall with Christ then stand with Caesar. He knew God
could and would take care of his own cause and interest, what ever became of
him and other instruments. His Lutheran Spirit could argue, Si piam and justam
causam defendimus, cur Dei promissis non confidimus? praeter vitans hanc
misellam Satanas and Mundus nobis etipere nihil possunt. At vivit, and in
sempiternum regnat Christus in cujus tutela consistit veritas: Is nobis aderit,
is etiam causam hanc, quae non nostra sed ipsius est, ad optatum producet
sinem. If the cause be good that we defend, why do we not trust God who has
made us such gracious promises? The Devil and World can take nothing from us
but the miserable life, but Christ lives and reigns for ever, etc.

He was a man that lived much above the World, the great things thereof were
very little in his eyes, though his habitation was on Earth, his conversation
was in Heaven. Indeed he had but a small estate, especially considering his
great charge, but a poor man may be Earthly and covetous as one that is rich,
for covetousness does not lie in the Chest or Bags, or great Mannours, but in
the heart. But he was Master of, not a Slave to that little he had. His mind
was fitted to his estate, and notwithstanding he had many opportunities and
advantages for the getting riches if he had sought them, yet he never made use
of them for that purpose. He was wholly taken up with his Treasure in Heaven,
and was so far from minding Earthly things, that he seldom or never meddled
with Earthly things; but left all to his pious and prudent yoke fellow. I have
often admired his indifferency of spirit to the things of this life. O how far
was he from the number of many in our days who trouble themselves with
Ploughing, and Sowing, and Reaping, (unnecessarily) and worldly concerns, all
the Week, and on the Lords Day, and set their people off with raw indigested
confused discourses, and sometimes little better then nonsense. A little
before the insurrection in Kent in the year 1648. one hundred pound was brought
into Mr. Wilsons house, (being a Legacy given his eldest Daughter, by a
gracious man Mr. John Big, one of the Jurates of Maidstone, and I believe the
greatest portion any of his children had) which money in the time of the
insurrection was by the Soldiers (when they searched the house for Arms)
discovered and taken away (though quickly restored again) Mr. Wilson being then
at London. When the Country was quiet, and Mr. Wilson returned again to his
dwelling, I asked him whether he was not much troubled, when he heard his money
was gone, he answered me (and I do believe him,) I was no more troubled when I
heard the money was carried out of my house, then I was when I heard it was
brought into my house. I also then enquired of him what frame of spirit he was
in, when he went from Maidstone, for the Town and Country being in Arms, many
of the mean profane wretches reproached him, when he was going out of the
Town, they took his Horse by the Briddle, and twice or thrice brought him back)
crying out Wilson, Wilson, Where is your God now? Where is your God now? He
told me, truly I thought (when they blasphemously said unto me, Where is your
God?) on the Text, My God is in Heaven, and has done whatsoever he pleased,
Ps. 115. 3.

CHAP. XXII. Of his great natural Abilities, and his Humility.
GReat were his gifts as well as his graces; God was pleased to bestow on him
large natural endowments, whereby he became much the more capable of doing
good. He had a quick apprehension, a clear understanding, a deep and sound
judgment, and a most tenacious memory. He was none of those Preachers, whose
tongues and galloping, whilst sober reason and convincing sense stands still,
or at best does but creep. He discovered strong judgment in a few words. His
body was of a strong constitution, and truly so was his soul. He would
presently find out the meaning of hand Authors, and what he read was his own; I
never knew any of the same strength of memory. Though he was careful to write
down his Sermons, Heads, Proofs and explications (as he himself told me) yet I
never saw him use any Notes. And he made a good use of his memory, it was not
as a child's pocket stuffed with trash, but as the Ark wherein the two Tables were
laid up. He had scarce his equal for his remembrance of the Scripture; he was
(as I have heard) tried a long time together. One took a Bible, and read a
Verse in one Chapter, another Verse in another, went forward and backward, both
as to the Books and Chapters, and Verses of the Scripture, and all along he
told the Reader the Verse, Chapter, and Book, without any mistake. And to the
best of my remembrance, himself told me that he believed, he could tell the
Book, Chapter, and Verse, which any should read to him all the day long. Much
appeared in his Prayers. I have heard him of a fast day pray an hour together,
and most of the time in Scripture Phrases. The Word was dear to him, his daily
delight and meditation.

That which made all his parts useful and amiable, was that he made Hagar to
wait on Sarah, and as David consecrated the spoils taken from the Gentiles to
the Temple, so he Dedicated his natural accomplishments to his God, and made
them serviceable before the advancement of his honor.

But for all his great natural and gracious accomplishments he was clothed
with humility; None thought so low of him as he of himself. His face like Moses
shined, that all his judicious friends observed it, and admired it, but he knew
it not. He had not the least affectation or show of oftentation in his carnage
or language, or any other thing.

Empty Vessels make the greatest sound and noise, those that are full are more
silent. Ignorance and Pride, emptiness and arrogance are usually concomitants.
He knew much, yet the more he knew, the more sensible he was of his ignorance,
and nothingness, and unworthiness, and walked the more humbly with his God; as
a Bough laden with Fruit, or an Ear with Corn, the fuller and weightier, the
more they bend down-ward; he as the Violet hung down and hid his head, though
his fragranacy and sweetness discovered him what he was.

In his clothes he was always grave and sober, never minding the whimsical
modes or fashions, but ever keeping to the same manner of his attire. I stood
once with him at his door, when a great Gallant antickly dressed went by, upon
which he secretly said, I have made a Covenant with mine eyes, why should I be
hold vanity.

How accomplished was this good man, when he had such rich natural gifts, and
such great gracious Habits, which as the Diamond to the Ring add true value to
naturals. Alas what are all natural abilities which act grace, but as Ciphers
which act a figure insignificant, and in Gods account standing for nothing;
nay, usually the greater part which act grace, the greater profaneness, Satan
makes most use of such acute Wits, and sharp Swords to do the more mischief; At
best, they are but as Toads with a Pearl in their Heads and Poison in their
whole body. But Mr. Wilson had this happiness, to have his great gifts adorned
and ennamel'd with great grace, hourly he became the greater instrument of Gods
Glory.

CHAP. XXIII. His Wives, and Children.
WHen he was about twenty six years of Age, he married a Daughter of Sir --
Zinzans, who being in a consumption before she married him, (and as I have
heard for love of him, her Parents judging him much below her) died within
seven or eight months after her marriage.

About a year after her death he married Mistress Damaris Cable, (Daughter of
Mr. James Cable of London Merchant,) who was a meet help to him in his Civil
and Spiritual concerns; by her he had eleven children, one whereof, viz. his
eldest son Samuel who feared the Lord in his youth, died young, the other ten
he left at his death with his disconsolate Widow. He had little of this world
to leave his many Children, (about one hundred pounds a piece, as I have heard,
after their Mothers death) but he has left them much, if we consider the many
fervent prayers, which night and day he poured out before the Lord on their
behalves. I have read of one that when she came to die told her Children: I
have little to leave you, but this I must tell you, there is not one Room in
the House, which is not perfumed with prayer for you. Often did good Mr. Wilson
cry out to God, O that my children might live in thy sight: Lord come down by
thy Spirit into their hearts, least my children, die, least they die eternally.
The God of all grace, who has promised to be a God to his and their Seed, in
his own day give a gracious answer to all the Requests that are on the sile in
Heaven for them. He had the happiness promised, the good man, Psalm. 128. 3. Thy
Wife shall be as a fruitful Vine, by the sides of thine House: thy Children
like Olive Plants round about thy Table. O that he might have that happiness to
meet all his Children with joy at the great Day.

CHAP. XXIV. His Sickness and Death.
THat piety which did shine so brightly in his life, did wonderfully sparkle in
his death. The messenger which God sent to call him hence, (for morbus est via
ad mortem) was a violent Fever, which he welcomed, as knowing it was sent by a
gracious Father to call him home to his Fathers House. No guest comes at any
time a miss to him that keeps a constant Table, no providence, no not death it
self comes at any time amiss to him that is always ready, and dies daily while
he lives. His Lamps were burning, his Oil was ready in his Vessel, when the
Bridegroom came.

His Fever had continued but a little while, before his friends did
Prognosticate, that it would prove mortal, and remove him from thence, whom
they loved as their own souls, and under whose Ministry they had sat with so
much delight. But what he had been in the course of his life, the same did he
continue to be to his death; Though his desease was violent, and his fits often
acute and sharp, yet he never complained, he might groan, but he never
grumbled; his pain might cause him to mourn, but it did not make him murmur; he
reverenced the rod in the hand of his Father, and that Cup which his Father
gave him to drink he submitted to. In his extremity his Faith and patience
would eminently shine forth to the honor of God and comfort of those that
visited him.

Being sensible of his approaching death, he was exceeding solicitous for the
Town and Parish, whereof he was Minister. Its a worthy speech of Laelius in
Cicer. de Amicit. Mihi non minori Curae est, qualis respublicae post mortem
meam futura sit, quam qualis bodis sit. My care is as great what shall become
of the Commonwealth when I am dead, as what it shall do while I live. So this
good man was very anxious what should become of this people, when God should
call him away. As Moses before he died, was careful to appoint a Successor,
that might lead Gods people (whom he had brought into the borders) into the
Land of Promise the Earthly Canaan. So Mr. Wilson before he died took care for
a Successor that might further that good work which he had begun through grace,
in many of them, and be helpful to conduct them to their Heavenly Canaan. To
this end he called some of the Town, who were wise and gracious) to him, and
advised them to consider of some able good Minister to succeed him, and he
commended Mr. John Crump a worthy Minister to them as the fittest that he knew
to be their Pastor. Afterward Mr. Crump did succeed him not only in his
place, but also in his faithfulness, and diligence, and serviceableness, to the
comfort and advantage of the people.

As Jacob before his death called his children together, to direct and advise
what should befall them, so he called his Wife and Children to him; desiring
his Wife not to be discouraged at his death: or to sorrow as they that have no
hope, but to continue to serve God in Christ, to trust God, and to be cheerful
in him, adding this for her comfort. Though now we are parted for a time, yet
there is a time coming that we shall be joined again, never to part more. His
children were most little, but those that were capable, he exhorted to fear God
be times, and directing his speech to his eldest daughter, he said, Look to it
that you meet me not at the day of Judgment in an unregenerate estate. He
commended all his Children to the Lord, and left them with him, in much Faith
in the Covenant, which God had made to him and his.

When Christian Friends came to visit him, he always labored to require their
kindness in Godly counsel and exhortations: he wished them to be frequent in
reading the Scriptures, to prize highly and meditate much on the promises, to
be holy and blameless in their conversations, by no means to forsake but to
stick close to ordinances, and to hold on in communion with the people of God
in the Town. When Epictetus broke his leg (its reported of him) he discoursed
as if his soul had been in another man's body. And when the bones of Mr. Wilson
were sore vexed with the violence of his disease, he would discourse in such a
composed Heavenly manner, as if he had ayled nothing.

When one or two of those who had separated from communion with him, came to
see him, he did with much affection bewail their Schism, prayed that God would
bring them back again, and told them that he could willingly lay down his life,
so they might join in Communion with the other Godly people in the Town.

As Jacob when he was dying worshipped, leaning on his staff, Heb. 11. 21. So
he on his dying bed was frequent in praying to and praising his God. It was but
two nights before his death, though he were very sick, yet he made his bed his
Pulpit, out of which he preached to some that came to see him, concerning the
preciousness of the promises, bid them look the 2 Pet. 1. 4. Whereby are given
unto us exceeding rich and precious promises, we are made partakers of the
Divine Nature, and concerning the preciousness of Christ to Believers, desired
them to turn to 1 Pet. 2. 7. Unto you that believe he is precious; And oh, with
what affectionate expressions would this Minister and Member of Christ Commend
his head, the Pearl of great Price, and the Promises he had purchased, saying
to his visitors, that one Promise was more precious then a World.

He kept a pure conscience while he lived, and through mercy had a peaceable
conscience when he died. Its said of (...) Lampadius, that being asked on his
death bed by one, whether the light did not offend him, clapping his hand on
his breast, answered, Hic sat lucis, Here is light within. Mr. Wilson all along
in his sickness, manifested much peaceableness and calmness of Spirit. Dr.
Tailor when he came within two miles of the place of Execution leaped, saying,
God be praised I am almost at home, and have not past a mile or two: and I
shall be at my Fathers House.

Mr. Wilsons apprehension that Death drew near, was very comfortable to him. A
Gentlewoman of his society coming to take her leave of him (being to remove out
of the Town) he pleasantly said to her, What will you say good Mistress Crisp,
if I get the start of you and get to Heaven before you get to Dover. When
another came to see him, he asked her what she thought of him, who answering
truly Sir, I think you are not far from your Fathers House; he replied, Oh that
is good news indeed, which would make one to laugh for joy. When others spoke
to him of his death in a mornful way, he said to them, I bless God who has
suffered me to live so long, to do him some service; and now after I have done
the work appointed me, is pleased to call me away so soon. Thus in the
breathings of his Faith and hope he departed this Life, and commended his
Spirit into the hands of him that redeemed it, and that on the Lords Day; that
day on which he was wont to work so hard, was the day of his entrance into
eternal rest, to keep an endless Sabbath.

He needed no Picture or Monuments to preserve his Memory. His good works
(though transient in themselves, are yet permanent in the hearts of many, and)
praise him in the Gate, for as Agesitaus dying said, If I have done good, that
will be my Monument: if ill, all the Statues you can make will not keep my good
name alive.

He was when he died about 52. years of Age, of a strong constitution for
strength, and might in a course of nature (if God had so pleased) have lived
much longer. But he brought forth fruit early, and was ripe when others of his
age began but to blossom, and therefore no wonder that he was gathered by God
so soon. He was in his Meridian, when others were but just peeping above the
Horizon, and so might well set before them. It was much desired and prayed for,
that his life might have been lengthened; but his time was come, he had fought
a good fight, he had finished his course, he had kept the Faith, and his Master
called him to receive his Crown. It may be said of him, as one did of Bishop
Jewel in Seneca's Phrases, Diu vixit etsi non di^ fruit, He lived long and
much, though he was not long on Earth; he did not wast out with the rust of
idleness, but wear out with labor, yet he was a light that did not blaze out
needlessly and unprofitably, but burn out for the enlightening many, and
directing them in the way of life, which life he now enjoys, and happy are
they whom their Lord when he comes shall find so doing; of a truth I say unto
you, he shall make them Rulers over all that he has, Heb. 12. 43, 44.

Master Bright Minister of Gondhust in Kent, his Testimony concerning Mr.
Wilson, in a Letter directed to a Friend in Maidstone.
SIR,
FOr Mr. Wilsons practical actings in Preaching and Life, I need say nothing,
your self feelingly and experimentally, knowing more then any can relate; his
natural parts were generally known to be very high, in depth of Judgment,
readiness of Memory, and quickness of Apprehension; he was the best at much in
a little, with clearness of Judgment, and exactness of method, that I have
heard, or am ever like to hear. His Spiritual endowments for graces and gifts
were answerable; in his Ministerial abilities, he was taller by the head and
shoulders then most of his Brethren; his indefatigable pains answerable to his
parts, wore out his Spirit, and spent him for good, to be the sooner with God;
and that which to me adorned all, was the depth of his humility, in the height
of his Sanctity. He had much learned that hard lesson, to receive much from
God, yet to be little in his own eyes; his memory is still precious to my
thoughts; the general loss is great, yours in particular greater. I shall
heartily desire his indefatigable labors, and pious exemplary life, may still
live in your lives, in which he dead yet speaks, etc.

Yours in Christ, Edward Bright.

ARTICLES Objected against Mr. Tho. Wilson, Minister of Otham in Kent, April
29. 1635. in the Archbishops Court, with his Answers thereunto, presented May
28. 1635.
I. ARTICLE.
CAnonical Obedience due by Oath, taken at your Institution into your place.

RESP.
It Is true as I understand the Oath, it is according to Cannons, by Law
established in the Church of England, and as it is propounded, in omnibus
licitis and honestis.

II. ART.
That the Minister must have popular Election, as necessary to hold his place.

RESP.
I never held such an opinion, neither privately speak, nor publicly Preached
such a Tenet.

III. ART.
That there is little comfort to a Minister instituted and inducted, without
approbation of the people, as you know and believes are still of this mind,
challenging Mr. Cragge the Competitor of the Rectory before Mr. Barrel, with
what conscience he could come without their call.

RESP.
I know and believe the contrary, viz. that a Minister inducted according to
the Cannons and Custom of the Church of England, may with good conscience
discharge the place; neither do I think fit my Parish should choose their
Minister, nor did I depend on their call, but came in away approved by the
Church of England, this I said to Mr. Cragge before Mr. Barrel, the people
liked me, and I desire to love them, and that it is a good encouragement for a
Minister to take pains among such a people; and he will have little comfort who
knows he has, neither love of the people nor the people, but comes out of love
to himself, for the profits and his maintenance, as Mr. Barrel helped him to
answer; that was his end.

IV. ART.
Conventicles held in my house, and other private houses, in the Town of Otham
within this two years, and used exercises of Religion by Law, prohibited,
expounded Sermons, read and expounded Scripture to selected Proselytes, to the
number of twenty of six present.

RESP.
I deny holding of Conventicles, and using exercises of Religion by Law
prohibited, and the name, nature or number of Proselytes; but this has been my
practice with my Family in my own house, to examine them what they remembered,
and to help them where they could not remember, and I did teach Gods Word unto
them diligently, as I conceive I was and am bound by Gods Word, Thou shall
teach them diligently unto thy Children, and shall talk of them when thou
sit in thy House, Deuteronomy. 6 6, 7. Uses, moreover I took it to be my duty, as
I could to teach by way of exhortation and conference from house to house what
I had taught in public, that I might keep back nothing that was profitable, as
I am instructed to do, Acts 20. 20. Paul bids the Minister look to his duty, in
private toward every member of the Church by his example, as Iunius de natura
Ecclesae citet Libro cap. 2. de Officio Pastoris, Acts 20. 20. So that what I
had delivered in public, I might as occasion was offered deliver in private.
This is not prohibited by any Law, either Statute or Cannon that I know, but is
commanded of God, as I am a Christian in his Word to teach others, Let the
words of Christ dwell in you richly, Teaching and Admonishing one another, Col.
3. 16. And it is enjoined by Authors, and Fathers, Zanchy in Col. 3. 16. That
the duty of teaching is not only in the Church publicly, but to be much set
by, and used in houses privately, and Christians be bound to teach mutually and
privately, Chrisostom Archbishop of Constantinople on Genesis Hom. 2. commands,
let the Husband tell what we say, that the Wife and Children, and Servants may
learn, and the House be a Church, that Satan may be banished; again Hom. 6.
Let your speech be spiritual, let one take the Bible in his hands, and his
Neighbors being called together, let him water their mind, and his own with
Godly speech; Again, Hom. 8. I will, I pray you all to be Teachers, and not
only Hearers of our words, but carry our Doctrine to others; Further more, Hom.
10. He that studieth to teach his Neighbors and Brother, does him a good turn,
and God will reward him, and by repeating our sayings, he will hold them
better, adding, we may at home after Dinner take the Bible to profit, and to
feed the soul with it. Lastly, Hom. 14. I entreat you all that go hence become
Teachers and Admonishers, confer with your Neighbors of the things which we
have now said, Caesureus Arcletensis Episcopus de cura animae, Hom. 20.
teaches, he that can retain all that we say, let him thank God, and what he
retains let him always show it to others, adding, let people afterward
repeat what they have heard in a Sermon, saying, Christians ought for their own
good to seek and ask if need be, also to give rewards, that some may read over
again Gods Word unto them.

V. ART.
Within four, chiefly two years last, to permit Novellist of Maidstone, to the
number of 30. or 10. and lead them riding or going, and in some private houses
Collected, or cause to be got together before Supper 60, 50, or 40. persons
repeated Sermons, expounded Scriptures, and before it and after it made tedious
extemporary Prayers, full of Tantologies, delivered scandalous Doctrine, to the
perverting and corrupting sundry of his Majesty's Subjects.

RESP.
I protest against such Doctrine, and such effect on any, as to be corrupted
and perverted, I deny the number or nature of persons, and my Leading any, or
Collecting any, or causing any to be gathered together. I have no power to
restrain any from hearing Sermons, and it may be their Surties for their parts,
and duties did call upon them to hear Sermons. I was upon occasion of my Family
lodging and sojourning at Maidstone, necessarily to go home, and I have no
reason to shun the way home for any company, in which I knew no ill; a way home
being not denied me, and afterward I examined my Family what they did call to
mind of the Sermon, as a Master ought to do: also I prayed at all times,
according to the thing of a day in day, and I took it to be no sin, 1 Kings 8.
59. And I am taught to exhort, comfort, and edify others, as Crysostom in
Homily, cited, applies that 1 These. 5. 11. Babington Bishop of Worcester says
on that fourth Commandment, besides the hearing of the Word on the Sabbath; it
is our duty and a Godly exercise fit for the day amongst our selves, or with
our Pastor to confer of what has been said, that he may expound it, as we
read, was done by Christ to his Disciples, when they were alone he expounded
all thing unto them, Mark 4. 10. and 34. So I have answered as well as I could,
when any thing was asked me by any, for I durst not be dumb when I could
satisfy them that did not understand, and yet did desire to know the will of
God.

VI. ART.
Refusal to read the Kings Declaration for sports on Sundays, and giving
disdainful words toward Power, the Apparitor and Officer of the Court.

RESP.
I said unto the Apparitor, remember you to keep Holy the Sabbath day, and
added no more words. I refused to read the Book mentioned, not out of any
contempt of any Authority, but as being commanded by no Law, for the Kings
Majesty does not in the Book command or appoint the Minister to read it, nor it
to be read but published; neither came it with, nor know I of any Seal to
confirm it, so that I dared not take notice of it to be the Kings Book, for as
I understand all his Majesty's Writs, Proclamations, and Mandats, use to come
with a Seal; and his Majesty intended (as I conceive) not to trouble any that
refused to read it, seeing there is no penalty threatened, nor authority given
(that I know of) to any to question them that refuse to read it; my refusal to
read it was upon sufficient grounds of Law and Conscience, which for
satisfaction to his High Court, and to clear me from contempt, I shall here by
way of Answer briefly and fully express thus: His Majesty's express Pleasure
is, that the Laws of the Kingdom and Cannons of the Church be observed in all
places of the Kingdom, Book, Page 8. and therefore in Kent and in Otham; now
this Book as I conceive is contrary to both.

1. It is against the Law, as the Statute Edward VI. Anno 5. Cap. 3. Christians
on all Holy days and times appointed, should apply themselves, only and wholly
unto holy works, properly appertaining to true Religion, and such times be
dedicated only to God and his true Worship, and be separated from all profane
uses; but say I, no civil recreation is any part of Gods true Worship, the
Stature Caroli, Anno 1. Cap. 1. the Holy keeping of the Lords day is a
principal of the true service of God, and it is now profaned by a disorderly
sort of people, by interludes, and other unlawful exercises and pastimes, the
13. Cannon, all manner of persons shall keep the Lords Day, according to Gods
Holy will and pleasure.

2. Our Church is against it,

First, In Homilyes, which contain Godly and wholesome Doctrine, and necessary
for these times. We keep now the first day of the week, which is our Sunday,
and make that our Sabbath; by the fourth Commandment, God Commands one
standing day in the Week, and all Men, and Women, and Children, and Servants,
be to keep it in a holy rest, and use it Holily, and give themselves wholely to
Heavenly exercise of Gods true Religion and Service, but I say Archery,
May-poles, May-games, Dancings, Morrice-dancing, and the like be not exercises
of Gods true Religion and Service.

Secondly, In the Liturgy, a Minister in enjoined to read the fourth
Commandment, Remember thou keep Holy the Sabbath Day; and all are to entreat
Gods Mercy, to incline their hearts to keep this Law, Ps. 118. 24. is appointed
to be read on Easter day, as proper to it, it shows, V. 24. This is the day
which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it, so that the Lord
instituted it.

Bishop Andrews on Easter Day 1611. Preaching on that Psalm 118. Psalm. 22. etc.

Thirdly, In the Exhortation, fit for the time upon the Fast-days 1625.
declaring the apparent cause of the Plague, says the Lords Day is not kept
holy but polluted, and the Ministry of the Word despised, and in the end of
that Book mention is made of Plays, Pastimes, Idleness, Drunkenness, the
proper sins of our Nation, which pulled Gods wrath upon us, and I dare not by
reading seem to allow, what did bring the Plague of God on the Land that year.

3. It is against Scriptures, Exodus 20. 8. Remember the Sabbaoth-Day to keep it
Holy; where we are commanded to keep holy the Lords Day, as I learn out of
Authors Zanchy on the fourth Commandment, we keep holy the Lords Day and
Sanctify it; Iunius in Animadvers. in Bellar. Controv. Lib. 7. Cap. 10. The
Lords Day answers to the Sabbath and its proportionable to it, and is
commanded in Exodus 20. 8. again in Genesis 2. 82. This Law is established by the
fourth Commandment of the Decologue to be observed of all. Alexander Alensis,
Tom. 3. Q. 32. Memb. 4. Art. 4. In the observation of the Sabboath is
commanded, the observation of the Lords Day, chiefly according to
intermination, Isa. 58. 13. If thou turn thy foot from the Sabboath, from doing
thy pleasure on my Holy Day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the Holy of the
Lord, honorable, and shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding
thine own pleasures, nor speaking thine own words; and Cultetus in locum says.
they took away the Sabbath by scandalous deeds, that hinder Gods worship, as
drinking, sports, and idle wandering. Isa. 56. 2. The man is blessed that keeps
the Sabbath from polluting it, Verse. 4. God rewards such abundantly, Verse. 67.
Such a one shall be made joyful in Gods House, which is true in the day of the
Gospel, when Gods House is a House for Prayers for all people.

4. It is against Councels: Council. Toletan. 4. cited by Zanchy on the fourth
Commandment, Let there be no dancing on Holy Festivals, nor filthy Songs, but
let all be at leisure for Godly duties, and Divine Worship, Council. Laodice,
Cannon 59. In the Church there ought not to be sung any common Service, nor
Books be Read, besides the Connonical Scripture, but only the Sacred Volums of
the Old and New Testament.

5. It is against Divines, Ancient, Augustine on the Ps. 32. concio, Its better
to Delve then to Dance on the Sabbath, and on John 1. Tract. 3. Its better to
Spin then to Dance on the Sabbath.

Chrysostom. on Genesis Hom. 10. God intimates from the beginning, that in the
circle of the Week one whole entire day should be separated, and set by for
Spiritual works, Ireneus, Lib. 4. Cap. 30. The Sabbath requires, and Teaches
the continuance of the whole day in the service of God, Ignatius in Epistol. ad
magnes, Let every one keep the Sabbath Spiritually, rejoicing in the
Meditation of the Law, not in the recreation of body, let every one that loves
Christ, now keep holy the Lords Day.

2. Modern and late Divines, Rabington Bishop of Worcester, on the fourth
Commandment says, to keep Holy the Sabbath day, is to separate and consecrate
it to all Godly exercise, wherein our Faith and Obedience to God is shown.

Zanchy on the fourth Commandment, All the day is to be consecrated to the
Worship of God, by day, understanding the true natural day; the true observing
of the Sabbath, is, that we do not what we please, but what Gods will is; the
rest on Holy days is not to be set a part, for our lusts and pleasure, plays,
and sins, but for Gods worship only; They do not keep holy a day, which
instead of Gods worship, give themselves to pleasure.

Iunius on Numbers 15. He who neglected the Sabbath, in the least observation,
was guilty of casting off the whole worship of God.

Alsted Catech. on the fourth Commandment, after Sermon the Sabbath is
profaned, by being spent in given to Plays, Dancing, Idleness, etc.

6. Its against Schoolmen, Alexander Alensis, Tom. 3. Q. 32. Memb. 4. Art. 4.
morrally in the fourth Commandment is forbid any work that hinders ones leisure
to wait upon God.

Thomas Aquinas, Sum. Theol. 22. Quest. 122. Art. 1. in observing the Sabbath,
the end is that a man may be at leisure for Heavenly things.

7. Reasons be against it.

I. Reason.
If any civil work be forbid on the Lords Day, then civil recreations, for
honest pleasure calls a man away from things Spiritual; Zanchy on the fourth
Commandment as well as honest labor, recreation breaks the rest as much as
civil work.

II. Reason.
If recreations civil be not fit for consecrated places, then not fit for
consecrated times, fo(...)me that is holy, is the measure of holy Actions, for
diverse be called holy, not from the formal cause, but final, as ordained to
holy things; Zanchy on the fourth Commandment, A day applied to civil works is
no more holy but common, and a thing consecrated is profaned; by a civil use,
and is not the Lords Day profaned by sports, though civil; now Recreations,
Archery, May-games, Dancing, Morris-dancing, may not be in consecrated places,
Cannon 88. no Plays, and to play and dance is all one, as Exodus 32. 6, 19. And
therefore not sit for consecrated times, as the Lords Day is, for greater is he
that Sanctified the Day, then he that Sanctified the place, whether it were by
the Lord, or the Apostle, or the Church. Now I know not why they may not be
fittest in consecrated places, if they be most sit for consecrated times; and I
cannot in conscience read that which I take to be against man's Law, and our
Church, the Scriptures, Councils, Divines, Ancient, and Modern Schoolmen, and
Reasons, but think my self bound for conscience toward God, to maintain the
Truth and Holiness of the two Testaments, and to keep the Commands of God, and
the Faith of Jesus Christ, as a Preacher of Christ's everlasting Gospel, least
people should think Preaching to be yea and nay.

VII. ARTICLE.
1633. When Commission came for reparation of St. Paul's; in work to build
sumptuous Temples, is to justify Antichrist Writings, Hos. 8. 14.

RESP.
I know not the time of the Commission for St. Paul's reparation, I deny such
words, for I handled that Text, Luke 7. 35. Wisdom is justified of all her
Children; Showing that all the Children of God justify Christ, which does
reprove them that justify Antichrist, in erecting Altars to sin, and in
building Temples for Idols, alleging for this, Hos. 8. 11. 14. Ephraim has
made many Altars to sin; Israel has forgotten his Maker, and Builds Temples,
according to the mind of the Prophet as I learned out of Authors, Learned
Zanchy, Pareus, Ribera, who all understand it of Temples, wherein they placed,
honored, and adorned Idols, by forgetting God, and out of contempt of God,
brought in a different worship.

VIII. ART.
About the end of April 1634. he bid take heed of dealing with High Priests,
servants, in great scorn and derision.

REPS.
I deny both time and words, but in May handling, 2 Timothy 2. 12. If we deny him,
he will deny us: persuading people not to deny Christ, I admonished them to
avoid, as pernicious unnecessary company, with the enemies of Christ, producing
Peter's example, who being brought into the High Priest Hall amongst the
Servants, denied his Master, affirming it, was dangerous company, naming the
very words of the Text, as is usually done by Writers, Preachers, John 18. 16.
Peter is brought in, standing with the Servants and Officers, is questioned by
one of the High Priest Servants, Verse. 26. denied Christ upon it, Verse. 27.
which I spoke in the fear and sight of God,

IX. ART.
At Boxley-Inn 29. 1632. no man can have a broken heart that has two Steeples,
moaning two Benifices, alleging, Acts 20 20.

RESP.
I never spoke such words, but at the funeral of a grave ancient and learned
Minister; I did not exhort but entreat Ministers to prepare to give an account
of their Life and Livings, showing the vanity of Men, that plead for
pluralities, saying, That, were a man's heart broken, it would not bear the
weight of three Churches, and I followed in this no private opinions, but the
general Tenet of Divines.

1. Ancients, Chrysostom Tom. 5. Page 104. Edit Paris 1536. When that the Pastor
is away, great danger is at hand, seeing there is none which can defend and
keep the Flock. Damasus cited by Dr. Willet, says, men that put people over to
others, seem like Strumpets, which put their Infants as soon as they be born to
other Nurses to be brought up, that they may sooner fill themselves with filth.

2. Modern Bishops, Bishop Jewel, on 1 These. 2. 17, 18. and on John 6. Non
residents and plurality men, that hunt after many livings, serve their Belly,
seek to be rich, destroy the souls of many, bring confusion and shame into Gods
House, be blind Guides, and the darkness of this World, be the remnant of the
wicked Inhabitants of Jericho, and the overthrow of Jerusalem, resist the
passage of Gods people, toward the Land of Promise, the curse of God will fall
on them, the blood of Gods People shall be required at their hands, they bring
the Abomination of desolation in the Holy place, they suffer the flock of
Christ to perish for lack of knowledge, Pilkington Bp. of Durham 1585. says
there is remaining among us a sort, not Popish as they pretend, but earnest
builders of Gods cause in their own opinion, where indeed they be overthrowers
of it, which are in effect as ill Pharisees as the Papists be; They will take a
Benefice and Cure of souls, promising solemnly to feed the Flock, but when they
have turned their back, they have a Dispensation in a Box to lie from it, and
flock; and flout whosoever would have them continue there, and do their duty;
contending, by Law they may do it, and stand on their defense, Domine nos
exempri sumus, God in mercy grant such unprofitable Caterpillars, some remorse
of conscience, that they may become Pillars to uphold Gods Church, and not
poulers of his people, the great God will take a strict account of them at the
last day, when their dispensation may not be pleaded, nor will be allowed, nor
the dispensor can justly excuse himself nor them, but both like Wolves and
Hirelings shall be changed, Vae Pastor. and Idolum, Zach. 11. Woe to the Idol
Shephard that leaves the Flock, Verse. 17. and Ezekiel. 3. Their blood will I
require at thine hand, on Nehem. 3. Page 45. 46. Bishop Downam on the fourth
Commandment calls non residenss alin. against the fourth Commandment, and on
the fifth Commandment says, it arises of coveteousness.

Bishop Carleton in vita Gilpini a most holy and famous man, writes that
Cutbert Tunstall Bishop of Durnham, would have given Gilpin a Living, and a
Dispensation to hold it, but he answered, The Devil would not be held from
destroying the people with a Dispensation; and adds, I fear it will be a vain
answer, when God calls me to an account, to say, I was dispensed with all, I
cannot in conscience reap profit, and another take the pains, when another was
promised him to feed the people.

2. Doctors, Doctor Challener, Math. 29. 6. says, If we budge from our
station, Satan will immediately find entrance, pronouncing a woe to the idle
Shephard that leaves the Flock, adding before Gods Tribunal, men must be
proceeded against, not by common Law.

Dr. Willet on 1 Samuel 17. 28. says, non residency, and pluralities be the
scandal of Gods Church, hinders the due service of the Churches, it is Robbery,
worse then of goods, excludes many sufficient men, and so any step in, that the
Blind and the Lame keep sick, as 2 Samuel 5.8. Saying to have many Cures, is
unlawful, producing Iodocus Gallus: They shall go to Heaven by their Vicar, and
to Hell in their Parsons.

Cannons Anno 1571. show the absence of the Shephard from the Lords Flock, and
that careless negligence which we do see in many, and forsaking the Ministry,
is a thing in it self to be abhorred and odious to the people, and pernicious
to the Church of God.

4. Reasons against pluralities, 1. Plurality men cannot do their duties, which
be mentioned in Ezekiel. 34. 4. Therefore may not hold the place. 2. They that
have pluralities, feed themselves and not their Flock, therefore they be base
Shephards, Ezekiel. 34. 1. 8. 3. A good Minister is to feed by example, which
requires residence and presence, I Pet. 5. 8. Take heed to the Flock in your
own person, as Zyra, Acts 20.28. And so I understand that place. 4. They that
love Christ themselves, must feed the Flock of Christ themselves, for loving
Christ and feeding his Sheep, be spoken both to one person, John 21. 15. Now a
personal duty may not be put of to another, as praying, hearing, reading,
receiving Sacraments, and doing good works, and I cannot see how feeding the
Flock of Christ in a man's own person, can be put off with the manifesting his
love to Christ. 5. If our Church or Flock may need many Pastors, then one
Pastor is hardly sufficient for three Churches or Flocks twenty miles distant,
but one Church or Flock may need many Pastors, Phil. 1. 1. Bishops plural
musculus, and Calvin in locum, Ergo one Pastor is hardly sufficient.


X. ART.
Scandalising Governors and Government of the Church of England, as
Persecutors of Gods faithful Ministers and people, disgressing from the Text.

RESP.
It Is not true in the whole, nor any part thereof.

XI. ART.
April 1633. Delivered a dangerous Doctrine, that if a Magistrate make a penal
Law, if the Subject that transgresses it suffer, he is quit from sin.

RESP.
I deny Time, Month, Year, and Words, for such a Doctrine I never taught, nor
read, nor heard, till I heard this Article, and I abhor it and disclaim it as a
dangerous Doctrine, but May the 10 th 1632. handling those words, Ephesians. 4. 6.
There is one God and Father, of all, observing the Godly, be all children of
one Father; I exhorted them not to censure rashly their Brethren for
indifferent things.

XII. ART.
April 22. 1634. Lecturing and expounding after Inhibition by the Vicar General.

REPS.
It Is not so, I did not Preach but upon the Lords Days and Holy days, neither
did I expound, yet I had a License to expound, and was not forbid expounding
(but only Preaching) for I heard not a word of the prohibition of it: yet upon
prayer days appointed by the Church, viz. Wenesdays, Frydays, all the Eves,
constantly I did instruct by Question and Answer in the Catechism, such as came
to Prayers, for which I had my Institution and License, from which I never had
prohibition, nor is it any sin against God or Man, so far as I can understand.

XIII. ART.
Deemed and accounted a man against the Church of England, and for Schism draw
aside after me.

RESP.
I deny the whole and every part.

XIV. ART.
The promises be true by Voice and Fame.

RESP.
I believe what is in the Answer confessed, and deny what is in the Answer
denied in any part.

Additional Answers
I. ART.
BEing upon occasion absent, I procured one to Read Prayers and Preach on Palm
Sunday.

RESP.
I was suspended ab Officio, and so by the leave of Sir Nathaniel Brent, who
left it to me, I procured one to supply the place.

II. ART.
A Letter scandalous and offensive was sent to Otham to nourish Schism, and
tending to confirm people in the dislike of Government.

RESP.
A Letter was writ and sent to the Parishoners of Otham, which I know not who
has, nor did I keep any Copy of it; but I know, belief and remember, the sum
of it was to exhort them to fear God and the King, and meddle not with them
that are given to change; to walk by Faith and in Love, and to call upon God,
but I utterly deny all occasion of derogating from the Church of England, or
confirmation of any in the dislike of Government, and protest against all such
Aspertions and Imputations of Schism or scandal, neither did I direct it to any
to read it, nor intended, or desired it should be read at Church.

III. ART.
I or Dr. Tuck for reading the Letter in the Church against Orthodoxal
Ministers and Cannons, and Governors.

RESP.
This Article appertains not to me at all, further then is above answered.

IV. ART.
The premises be true by Voice and Fame.

RESP.
It Is contrary to truth in every part, but as is above confessed.

Credo Credita nego negata.

Th. WILSON.

Rector de Otham in Kent.

On the much lamented Death of my sincerely, honored and beloved Friend Mr.
Thomas Wilson Pastor of Maidstone in Kent, and to many more reverend Minister.
IF grief can help to versify,
And passion Poets make, I Will try,
Though long diceased, to sigh a Verse,
To offer at a Kingdoms Hearse.
And not sit mute in discontent,
Sorrow will kill, that has no vent.
I could my soul in sadness sleep.
I could whole Floods of Waters weep.
I could as Niobe bomoan
My self, till turned into a stone.
I could become an Heraclite,
And spend in tears each day and night.
Or Hermit like to some close Cell
Retire, and say, Vain mirth Farewell,
Alas t'th World what can I view?
But what bid me, bid joy Adien.
I see Monsters of vice abound,
Even Hell appearing above ground;
And Devils of the humane race,
Daring the Almighty to his Fate.
Such as can teach Nero to sin,
To whom no past Age has equal bin.
I see the Shephards laid to sleep,
Who tender were of th'harmless Sheep;
Whilst ravenous Wolfs and Bears survive,
Who only to devour them strive.
I see to set the greatest lights,
And hastening on us dark-some nights.
All this I see and cannot prevent.
And is it unlawful to lament?
What Marble is not wet with Tears,
When such a doleful change appears?
The great Assembly once renowned,
(Whost fame in Foreign parts did sound)
Displaced on Earth, in have remove
Their Session to their House above.
Seraphick Twisse went first it is true
As Prolocutor, it was his due:
Then Borroughs, Marshal, Whitaker, Hill.
Gouge, Gataker, Ash, Vines, White, still
Sharp Swords scon'st cut their Sheaths, Pern, Strong,
Spurstow, Tuckey, Calamy, they throng
The Gate of Bliss, as if they fear
That Heaven would fill, e're they got there.
But why such wast, Death, have no measure?
Do think 't no Theft to rob the Treasure
Of the Church? or art become so wise,
To seize first on the richest Prize?
Or are thy Laws so strict they cannot,
The Benefit of th'Clergy grant?
Or is it thine aim to cast the stone,
Where thou may kill many in one?
Thou needst not shake the Pulpit Glass,
Look with what have the Sand does pass.
Their work though great, is quickly done,
And too soon out of sight, they are gone.
They cannot themselves who others save,
Nor though great Clarks, decline a Grave.
Scarce have I fully dried my eyes
For one, but straight another dies;
Now Wilson's gone, that gallant mind,
That lofty soul that thither inclind
Whilst here, and always did aspire,
To join with the Caelestial Quire.
Whose head a Living Library,
Whose heart the Ark wherein did lie
The Law, whose Prayers could Heaven storm,
Whose Preaching Sodoms did reform.
Often did he break the stony heart,
Then bind it up with Heavenly art.
His Life the Gospel did expound,
And's Comment in the Text was sound.
Had I as many Mouths to fill
With His Praise, as he in Tongues had skill,
All were unable to set forth
His great, his large, his matchless worth.
Had I his Grace, his gifts, I Would vie,
With a whole Kingdoms Ministry.
He Is with the rest, the praise to Sing,
Of our most loving Lord and King,
These no dissenting Brethren be,
But all as one, in one agree.
One mouth, one mind, one heart, one way,
No strife, which side shall bear the sway.
(All doubts resolved, all knots untied,
All Truth in the God of Truth espied,)
With hottest love they there embrace
Each other, full of perfect grace:
Their glory's great, their wealth is vast,
But oh the pleasure that they taste
In The Tree of Life, and in the sight
Of that blessed face, that is all delight:
What Tongue can tell? what mind can think?
What joy it is of this Spring to drink.
Go fawning World, tempt me no more,
With thy skin deep fading store,
Thy best, thy whole is but a Toy
To that these happy souls enjoy.
My God invites to Angels fare,
To which thy Trash cannot compare.
On Swinish Husks why should I feed,
When I may eat what is Meat indeed.
Lord why should I contented be,
Whilst I am thus absent from thee.
Can there be day without the Sun,
Or bodies live when Souls are gone.
Thou art my Sun, my Soul, and I
Absent from that do daily die.
What do I here, when all is above,
That is deserving of my Love,
My God, my Christ, my Friends are there,
My heart, my hopes, what do I here?
O let my Heaven born soul expire
It self in sallies, and desire
Only to rest, and make its stay,
Where thou art all in all for ay.
O come thou down with speed to me,
Or take me quickly up to thee.
G. S.

Epitaphium Thomae Wilsoni, aliquando Madi Pastoris.
Wilsoni hic teanem Lectores cernitis rumbram.
Long hac clava magis stella micausque fuit,
Sic fust in vitae Wilsonus sicque recessu,
Sic nobis detue vivere sleque mori.
Englished.

Lo here of Wilson but a shadow slight,
He was a Star of more illustrious light;
Such Wilson was in Life, such in his Death,
God grant we may so live, so yield our breath.
I Obitam Reverendi nec non Eruditi Theologi Thomae Wilsoni, olim Madi in
Cantio Pastoris Fidelissimi Epicedium.
Quo fugis eximiae virtutis magne Sacerdos?
Doctrinae Princeps quo fugis? O quid agis?
Hostibus infestis pugnare relinquis agis,
Palma quibus celebris te Duce certa suit.
Dic quibus in terris habeant certamine duro,
Quae Natura tibi dona stupenda dedit?
Dic ubi cor largum, cerebrumque est, mentis acumen,
Ac tua lingua fluens, quove reperta loco?
Te coluere Patres, te quaeque Scientia norit,
Incaluere Arts servido a more tui.
Tullius alter eras, nec non facundus Apollos,
Doctrinae Decus, ac Religionis honos
AEtatis Phaenix, O terque quaterque beat
Ingenio, literis, sed Pierare magis.
Exemplum clarum probitatis, voce docebas
Et vita, omnimode sacra statuta Dei.
Sol velut innumeros radios jaculatus ubique,
Spargebas Tenebras luce micante ingras.
Te semel extincto, quam densa caligo secuta est,
Quantum nostra statim pectora noctis habent,
Napeo eras Terris summo sulgore coruscans,
Jam Caelis, nobis quam cito stella cadens,
Curribus igniferis rapide super aethera vectus,
Sedibus aeternis, est tibi plena quies:
Non tua maesta satis praesenti funera versu
Plangam, te lachrymis secla futura gemenr.
Te been perpetuam famae meruisse columnam
Quis negat, at quinam marmora digna sciat
Solvo Parentales vitus, mihi chare Valeto
Dum tibi me miserum hinc, ultima sata vocant.
Sic slerit G. S.

REader, Lo here, a soul raised up so high
As if extracted all by Chemistry.
Nothing I see, but what I dare to call
(And without pardon) Quint essential.
His memory a Miracle to hold
The Testaments at large both New and Old.
His intellect so radiant, which can
Cope with the Sun, when in the Meridian.
So big with learning that in him we see
Not Student, but an University.
His Graces when raised up and show the bead,
Ours like Stars hasten for shame to best,
What Mortal ever owned so blessed a state?
Thus here on Earth, Heaven to anticipate?
FINIS.

