THE Pastors Farevvell, AND VVish of VVelfare TO HIS PEOPLE. OR A Valedictory
Sermon.

By GEORGE SWINNOCK, M. A. Preacher of the Gospel late at Great-Kimbel in the
County of Bucks.

Oportet ut praedicatores sint fortes in praeceptis, compatientes infirmis, in
exhortationibus blandi. Greg. in Job Mor. 30.

Finally, Brethren, farewell: Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind,
live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you. 2 Cor. 13.11.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Three Crowns in the lower end of
Cheap Side over against the great Conduit, 1662.

TO His Honored and Courteous Friend, Mistress Mary Beresford, Wife of the
Worshipful John Beresford, Esquire
THere are two things which I have always judged chiefly requisite in a Pastor,
as he stands related to his people. viz. Labor and Love. The former is a
work of the Head, the latter of the Heart: faithful labor will speak his love,
and sincere love will sweeten his labor. Labor without love is unacceptable
to God, as a sweet perfume without fire, it cannot send forth its pleasant,
fragrant savor: Love without labor is unprofitable to men, like Rachel, its
beautiful but barren: both together (as soul and body are the essential parts
of a man) are the whole of a Minister. Whether to my power I discharged my
trust or no, in these partitulars, whilst the Divine providence continued me
in your Parish, I must leave to his judgment, whose eyes behold, and whose
eyelid, try the Children of men, nay whether I did not many times so labor as
to prejudice my own body, that I might serve and profit others souls: but sure
I am, when I left you, I could not better manifest my love to you, then by
commending you to him, who will never leave nor forsake his people.

Its the saying of Euripides, That a faithful friend in adversity, is better
then a calm Sea to a weather beaten Mariner. Indeed the world is full of false
lovers, who use their friends as we do candles, burn them to the snuff, and
when all their substance is wasted, trample them under their feet, and light
others; but God to his chosen, is as the Ivy clasping about a wall, which will
as soon dye as desert it, Extremity does but fasten a trusty friend whilst he,
as a well wrought Vault is the stronger, by how much more weight he bears
Though many men are as ponds, dry in the heat of Summer, when there is most
need of them: yet the blessed God deals not so with his Saints, but his help
is nearest, when their hardships are greatest, When they walk in the valley of
the shadow of death, he is with them.

How great a happiness it is to be under the favor and influence of this God,
can never be fully known on this side Heaven. The Prince of Orange had a mirror
(say some) which perfectly represented the beauty of the naturat Sun: But this
Sun of Righteousness is ever in a great degree Eclipsed, to us who dwell in
this lower World. Here we know but in part. Pompey, who presumed to enter the
holiest of all, when he came out was asked what he saw, he answered, that the
house was fall of a cloud: Indeed, He makes darkness his secret place, and yet
is pleased to let so much of his glory and goodness be seen in the glass of his
word, as may cause us to admire and affect him; and also assure us that he is
the chiefest good.

Somewhat of that felicity which flows from his favor you will find in some
measure discovered in the ensuing discourse: which I present to you as a small
acknowledgement of my great engagements to you. Lycurgus the Lacedemonian
Lawgiver, made no Law against ingratitude, as thinking it impossible for any
man to degenerate so much as to be unthankful, I esteem it my duty to retain
the former favors in memory, which I and mine have received from your self,
and my Honored friend your Husband, and I know not better how to testify my
gratitude, then by endeavoring to my power, your everlasting welfare, and that
you may come to your graves in a full age; as a shock of corn in its season.

Its a mercy to be full of days, a far greater mercy to be full of grace, but
to be full of days and full of grace, is one of the most blessed beautiful
sights in this World, I hope you are passed from death to life, because you
love the brethren; but your Age calls upon you to ensure your effectual
calling: The truth is death borders upon our births, and our Coffins, hang over
our Cradles, but though according to the saying of Epaminondas, we may salute
young persons with Good Morrow, or welcome into the World, yet we must salute
old persons with Goodnight, for they are leaving the world, The nearer it is
tonight, the harder we should work, when we know if our work be not done in
this day of life, we are undone for ever. Natural motions are swiftest at last.
The stream of grace must run with greatest speed when its emptying it self into
the Ocean of glory. The good Lord enable you to be more and more upright, and
abundant in well doing, and so bless your whole Family with his fear and favor
that when Death shall break it up ye may be preferred from his lower house of
prayer, to his upper house of praise, where is fullness of joy, and where are
pleasures for evermore, Which is the desire of

Your Servant in the blessed Savior, George Swinnock.

There is extant of this Reverend Authors these six other Treatises, all sold
by Thomas Parkhurst at the lower end of Cheapside,
The Christian-mans Calling; or, a Treatise of making Religion ones Business,
wherein the Nature and Necessity of it is discovered; as also the Christian
directed how he may perform it in Religious Duties, Natural Actions, his
particular Vocation, his Family Directions, and his own Recreation; to be read
in Families for their Instruction and Edification. The first Part.

The Door of Salvation opened by the Key of Regeneration; or a Treatise
containing the Nature, Necessity, Marks and means of Regeneration, as also the
duty of the Regenerate.

Heaven and Hell Epitomized, or the true Christian characterized.

The beauty of Magistracy, in an Exposition of the 82 Psalm, where is set forth
the necessity, Utility, Dignity, Duty and Morality of Magistrates.

The fading of the flesh, and the flourishing of faith; or one cast for
eternity, with the only way to throw it well.

There is in the press the Second Part of that practical Piece of Divinity
entitled, The Christian-mans Calling, Containing Directions for our dealings
with all men, carriage in all conditions, whether in prosperity or adversity,
in all companies good or bad, in solitariness, on the week day from morning to
night, in visiting the sick upon a dying bed.

ACTS. 20.32. And now Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his
grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance amongst
all them that are sanctified.


HVmane Histories have been valued at such an high price that they have been
dedicated to the most honorable persons, as worthy of their serious perusual.
Plinies natural History to Vespatian. Our English History to King James; the
small Treatise which Paulus Jovius wrote, De Rebus Turcicis, unto the great and
mighty Emperor Charles the fifth; scarce any National piece but its presented
into the hands of the Prince. Surely Divine Histories then (such as this
Treatise, The Acts of the Apostles which contain the Heroic acts of the Lords
worthies in their combats with, and conquests over, not only men and the
world, but sin and Satan) deserve the eye and ear and hearts of a Noble
Theophilus of great and small, of all men whatsoever.

The former part of the new Testament contains the great mystery of Christ, the
Head of his Church. This book of the Acts contains the glorious History the
Church, the body of Christ.

In the beginning of the book some particulars are mentioned of all the
Apostles to Chap. 13. but it treats most largely of Paul's trials and travails
in regard that as his conversion was most miraculous, so his conversation was
most illustrious.

In this twentieth Chapter we have this famous Apostle in his fourth
peregrination arriving at Miletus (a City upon the borders of Jonia and
Caesaria, close by the shore of the Egean Sea) and sending thence for, and
speaking to the Ephesian Elders.

In his speech we may observe these four parts.

First, His Vindication of himself, Ministers are bound not only to look to
their Consciences, but also to their Credits. Naturalists tell us, if the
Lodestone be rubbed with Garlic, it loses its virtue; When the name of a
Minister is contemptible, his Doctrine will be the less acceptable. The Apostle
vindicateth himself. 1. As to the Integrity of his life, ye know from the first
day that I came into Asia, after what manner I have been with you at all
seasons, serving the Lord with all humility and with many tears. verse 18. and
19. It Is excellent when the Pastor can appeal to the consciences of his people
for the purity of his conversation. Holy Ministers are called Angels, Rev. 2.
but unholy ones are degenerated into Devils, have I not chosen you twelve, and
one of you is a Devil. 2. As to his fidelity in his Doctrine, And how I have
kept back nothing that was profitable unto you, but have showed you, and have
taught you publicly and from house to house. verse. 20. The Steward is
faithful who distributeth to every person under his charge, their proper and
peculiar portion. Melch. Ad.
The symbol of Wolfius will become every Preacher. Pietate and labor. By a
sacred life, and sedulous labor, he will best declare his love to his people.
Ministers must be stars by the influence of their lips feeding, by the regular
motion of their lives confirming, and by the light of both directing many, Paul
magnified his Office, why should others debase it?

Secondly, His Exortation to them, As he taught them before by his pattern, so
now by his Precepts, take heed to the flocks over which the holy Ghost has
made you overseers, verse. 28. Take heed, that is, (...), Toti sitis addicti
totis animis ad hereatis.
let all your care and study be for your own and peoples welfare and
prosperity, like good Shepherds, work and watch night and day for the good of
your sheep. This counsel the Apostle urges upon a threefold ground.

1. From the person who committed to them this charge, take heed to the flocks
over which the holy Ghost has made you overseers. It concerns you to be true
to your trust, when it is committed to you by the Spirit of God. That
unfaithfulness which is but felony against the charge of a subject, may be
Treason when it is against the Charge of a Sovereign. O it is ill trifling with
the most high Gods trust.

2. From the price paid for them. To feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his blood. verse 28. Things of the greatest cost call for our
greatest care; souls are infinitely precious, and therefore deserve our utmost
pains; If God thought them worth his blood, we may well esteem them worth our
tears and sweat.

3. From the Peril their flock was in verse. 29, 30, 31. For I know that after
my departing, shall grievous Wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock;
also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw
Disciples after them, therefore watch, etc. If Wolves will watch to devour,
shepherds must watch to defend the sheep. Those Commanders who are entrusted
with a Garrison, when they are sure to have their quarters beaten up, had need
to be ever upon their guard.

Thirdly, His Prediction of his future sufferings, 1. Propounded. And now
behold I go bound in the spirit to Jerusalem, not knowing what shall befall me
there, saving that the holy Ghost witnesses that in every City, bonds and
afflictions abide me, verse. 22, 23. Christians of all men must bear their
Crosses, Ministers of all Christians must look to undergo misery. And the more
good a Minister has, the more evil he must expect. The fuller the Tree is
laden, the more cudgels will be thrown at it; the most fruitful meadows hear
oftenest in the year of the Sith; Pious and laborious Paul was the chief Butt
against which men and Devils shot. 2. Amplified, From the liberty it thereby
denied them of ever seeing Paul again And now behold, I know that ye all
amongst whom I have gone Preaching the Kingdom of God, shall see my face no
more. verse 25. Sad news to honest hearts upon a double ground, partly their
lack of him; he had told them of Wolves entering in among them; now at such a
time for the flock to be without a guide, when the storm arose for the Vessel
to be without a Pilot; when the Soldiers were to engage in hot service with
enemies, for their expert Commander to be wanting must needs be woeful; That the
Nurse should be taken away before the children could go alone, did much affect
and afflict their spirits. Partly their love to him; As Paul was a Religious
person, and as he was (probably) their spiritual parent who had begotten them,
brought them up in the nurture of the Lord, and upon all occasions advised and
assisted them, they could not but love him in an high degree, and therefore
much lament his loss.

Fourthly, His Valediction to those Ephesian Elders in the words of the Text,
And now Brethren I commend you to God and to the word of his grace, which is
able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance amongst all them which are
sanctified, verse. 32. before he had given them a command from God, and now he
commends them to God. The words contain the legacy which Paul bequeaths to his
Christian friends. He takes his farewell of them, and wishes a welfare to them.

And now, The opening of the words (...).
] since I see that I who am your guide must shortly be gone, and since I
foresee that Wolves will arise, so ravenous as to conspire and endeavor your
ruin, what remains, but that I should commend you to God; who can prevent the
effects of their cruelty, and supply the want of my company. And now, The
season is observable; its the last and the greatest kindness I can do to
commend you to God. The occasion is considerable. And now, the dying Father
commits his children to a faithful Guardian; And now I must leave you, never to
see your faces more; but now I shall leave you to one who will never leave you
nor forsake you. And now

Brethren] This title is an affectionate term, and speaks how dear and near
they were to the Apostle. (...).
It discovers much of his humility, though they were his inferiors, yet he
calls them his equals. Brethren stand on the same level; but more of his
love: this even relation is accompanied with great affection, Love as brethren,
1 Pet. 3.8. Love, like water, does not easily ascend, but will run swiftly and
pleasantly on even ground. And now my dearly beloved, whom I both love and
esteem as Brethren, who are both near and dear to me, since providence is
parting us, I cannot better evidence my affection to you, or care of you then
by committing you to him, from whom none can part you. And now Brethren

I commend you to God.] To commend one to another in our English phrase, (...),
significat Patrocinio, cura, ac tutelae alterius aliquid commendare. Beza.
Commendare veluti commendatur depositum servandum.
is either to praise him for some worth in him, or to present some respects
from him; but in Scripture sense, besides the former acceptations, it sometimes
signifies to refer one to the care of another, Romans 16.1. I commend to you
Phebe our sister. To commend in this place signifies to commit them as dear
pledges, or as precious jewels to the tender custody and keeping of the blessed
God. As if he had said, Be not discouraged nor disconsolate at my departure, as
if thereby ye should be left disolate, for I commit and commend you to one who
will abundantly make up my absence by his Almighty Power and favorable
presence; though I am taken from you, and constrained to forsake you, yet I
commend you to that God who will be careful of you, and never fail you; who
has infinite strength for your protection, and infinite Wisdom for your
direction, and infinite Favor for your consolation. And now brethren I commend
you to God

And to the word of his grace. (...).
] The Scripture is called Gods Word, because as men by their words discover
their wills, so God by the Scripture does manifest his mind and pleasure. But
its that part of Scripture which we call the Gospel, which is emphatically
termed here, and in some other places The Word of his Grace, because it
speaks Gods good will, and good pleasure to the children of men, Act. 20.24.
Tit. 2.11. The Covenant of Works which God made with Adam, and in him with all
mankind was in some respects a Covenant of Grace, for God was not bound to
promise man eternal felicity upon his perfect obedience, but might have
required it by virtue of his Sovereignty and domion. But since man's Apostasy,
and impossibility thereby of attaining happiness by his own works, God has
been pleased to accept of the perfect obedience of Jesus Christ, on the behalf
of the beleiving, penitent Christian; which act of infinite Grace being
revealed in the Gospel, it is most fitly called The Word of his Grace. The Law
(as the case stands with man now) speaks nothing but fury and death, but the
Gospel speaks favor and life; the Law wounds man with his blows, the Gospel
heals him with its balsom; the Law condemns man without pity to the
sufferings of Hell, but the Gospel allows him a Psalm of mercy, and so saves
him from the wrath to come. Now the affectionate Apostle commends his
fainting patients to this rich Cordial the word of his grace. They might think
it was small comfort and a poor courtesy to be commended to a righteous and
jealous God, as stubble to be committed to a consuming fire, therefore he tells
them. I commend you to God, not under the notion of an angry Judge. But in the
relation of a gracious father, and compassionate friend, which if ye doubt of,
do but look into the Gospel, which is Heavens Court rouls transcribed, wherein
ye may see the naked bowels of his good will, and read his curious eternal
contrivance of magnifying his grace in you, and toward you; I commend you to
that word of his grace wherein every line speaks love, and each expression his
tender affection to you. I know your poverty, but that word of his grace is a
mine of unsearchable riches; ye are hungry, but that is bread; when ye are
weary there ye may find rest, whatsoever your conditions be, there is suitable
Consolation. And to the word of his grace,

(...).
Which is able to build you up,] These words with them that follow, are by
Erasmus, according to our Translation refered to the word of his grace, but
according to Beza and some others, God is the antecedent to this relative, who
is able to build you up, etc. The reason of the doubt is, because both are of
the same gender, whereby its uncertain to which of the two this latter part
has relation. But there is a certain truth if we refer them to either. God is
able to build them up, etc. and also the Gospel or word of his grace, is able
to build them up, etc. God as the first cause, and principal efficient; the
word of his grace as the second cause, and subordinate instrument. The Gospel
cannot do it without God, and God will not do it without the Gospel; God
(ordinarily) by the Gospel does both sanctify and save, build up, and give an
inheritance.

Which is able to build you up,] The Foundation of godliness was already laid
in their hearts, but something was still wanting, a greater degree of grace and
holiness; Paul knew that his brethren would not be contented barely to know
Christ, but were desirous to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of Christ, and
did therefore the more lament his loss, because he as a faithful Steward had
furthered the welfare of their souls, (...)
by giving them their food in due season: Now to allay their fears of famishing
for want of his care, he commends them both to the same Master, and to the same
meat, by which they had hitherto thriven and prospered, and which were able
still to continue the same virtue, and communicate the same strength, which is
able to build you up.

And to give you an inheritance] Two things the Children of God do exceedingly
desire; (...).
Proficiency in grace, and perfection thereof in glory. The Apostle in his
valedictory speech, commends them to that God, and to the word of his grace,
which can answer both their requests, progress in holiness, and the possession
of happiness; which is able to build you up, and to give you on inheritance.
Saints are heirs joynt-heirs with Christ (Romans 8.17.) heaven is their proper
and peculiar inheritance, the inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 2. The
Gospel or word of his grace purifieth and prepares them for it, and also is
the deeds or conveyance speaking their right and title to it, therefore is
called the Gospel of our salvation; God is the Author and Donor of it. Glory is
his free gift, Its your fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom, Luke 12.32.

(...).
Among all them that are sanctified] The Inhabitants of Heaven are all holy.
Those that shall be glorified, must first be sanctified; the inner Court was a
type of Heaven, into which none might enter but the Priests, which were holy to
the Lord; Saints are all Priests, an holy Priesthood, Rev. 1.5.

The sum of the whole verse is thus much, And now Brethren, etc. And now my
dearly beloved Brethren, since infinitely wise providence sees fit to deprive
you of my presence, and I know the groans of your spirits to be after a farther
degree of sanctification here, and its consummation hereafter, I commit and
commend you to God, through whose strength the word of his grace, is able to
give you both growth in grace while ye live, and the Crown of glory when ye
dye, amongst all them that are prepared for it by being partakers of the same
hope and holiness. And now Brethren I commend you to God, and to the word of
his grace, which is able to build you up and to give you an inheritance amongst
all them that are sanctified.

In the words we may observe these three parts.

First, The Compellation, Brethren, The Company of Saints are a society of
Brethren, Love the Brotherhood. The company of sinners are a rabble of
Conspiratours.

Secondly, The Commendation of these Brethren, And now brethren I commend you.
This Commendation of them is amplified.

1. By the Object, 1. To God, as the fountain of their grace and bliss. 2. To
the Gospel or word of his grace, as the Channel in which it was conveyed to
them.

2. By the effects, which are two, 1. Proficiency, which is able to build you
up, having laid the foundation, its able to increase the building of grace. 2.
Perfection, its able to lay the topstone, and overlay it with glory. And to
give you an inheritance among all them that are sanctified.

3ly. The Occasion or special season of this commendation, And now Brethren, No
doubt Paul had many a time before commended them to God, Without ceasing he
made mention always in his prayers; But now upon his leaving them he does in a
special manner commend them to Gods care and keeping, And now Brethren,

I shall draw some Observations from the words, and then lay down the Doctrine,
which I intend to prosecute.

That Sanctity is no enemy to civility; the Apostle And now Brethren, some
think they cannot be Christians unless they be clowns, that good works, and
good manners are inconsistent; but though Christianity pare of the luxuriant
branches of courtesy, yet it does not root it up; like those spices which we
apply to windy fruits, it takes away the flatulency and offensiveness which may
be in it, but does not cast it away. Civil language and a courteous carriage
are (though no part of, yet) an ornament to Christianity. The Saints of God are
ever civil, and whereas sinners are complemental, they are cordial in all their
salutes. The holy Apostle spends the greatest part of a Chapter in courteous
salutations, which he would not have done had it be en either unlawful or
unnecessary.

That Grace will turn civil countesie into serious Christianity. The Apostle
does not take a bare civil farewell of them, according to the custom of most
men, but solemnly take his leave of them by commending them to the blessed God,
And now brethen I comend you to God. A gracious man prefers his low and civil
actions into the high form of religion; wicked men debase actions that are
sacred, and godly men advance actions that are civil. As the Iron Mine gives a
tincture and relish of its own nature to all the waters which run through it,
making them thereby more salubrious to our bodies; so grace gives a savor and
taste of its own nature and property to all the actions, The use of kissing was
frequent amongst the Saints in their holy meetings Ter^uq. de Orat,
about which the subject in which it is, is conversant, and thereby makes them
more healthful to our souls. It sanctifies our very salutes; Salute one
another with an holy kiss, Romans 16.16. kissing seems to be wholly civil, but
among the godly its sacred, an holy kiss.

That all Christians are brethren: And now brethren. Brotherhood. Tertul. Apol.
cap. 39.
The Jews called all Brethen of the same Country; and it was the custom of the
primitive Christians to call all Brethen and Sisters of the same communion;
they are brethren if we consider their relations; they have all the same
Father, God, I will be to you a Father, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters,
says the Lord Almighty, 2 Cor. 6.18. They are not only adopted, but also
begotten again or regenerated by the same God, Joh. 1.12. James 1.21. They are
all children of the same Mother; Jerusalem which is above is free, the Mother
of us all, Gal. 4.26. they suck the same breasts, Isa. 66.11. 1 Pet. 2.2. wear
the same garments, and as they grow up feed at the same Table, and shall dwell
together in the same house for ever. They are united under the same Head,
renewed with the same hearts, and travel to the same Heaven. They are brethren
in regard of affection; the curtains of the tabernacle were joined together
with loops, and so are true Christians with love; they love as brethren,
seeking the good and welfare of each other. A Saints talents are not an
enclosure for his private profit, but a common for the advantage of others.
Their desires are not confined within their own dwellings, but they reach
thousands in their prayers, whom they can never reach on earth in their
persons. For my brethren and companions sake, I will now say peace be within
thee, Psalm. 122.1. they sympathize in each others sufferings, and rejoice in
one another solace. Every Saint is a great Merchant, who has his Factors in
all parts of the world trading for him at the throne of Grace.

That the Gospel is the word of Gods Grace. And to The word Grace is taken in
Scripture

1. For favor or good will. Grace be with you. And so Col. 1.2. Grace be unto
you.

2. For the effects and fruits thereof Jude v. 4. Turning the grace of God into
lasciviousness.

The Gospel in both respects is fitly termed the Word of his Grace,

1. Because it contains the Infinite grace and favor of the most high God to
Sinners. The Law speaks in effect man's bottomless misery, but the Gospel speaks
Gods boundless mercy; the Law is a Court of Justice, but the Gospel a Throne of
Grace. Grace sits as Commander in chief in the Gospel, and as Ahashuerus to
Hester holds out the golden Scepter of Mercy for poor condemned persons to
touch with the hand of faith and live. The sum of the Gospel is comprehended in
a song of that Angelical Quire, Glory to God in the highest, peace on earth,
and good will toward men: the substance and body of Gods love to man was never
dissected and laid open to the view of mortals till the Gospel was preached.
Before it ran as a river under ground, but in the Gospel it bursts forth, and
shows it self to refresh us with its pleasant streams: the Law is as it were
a warrant under heavens hand and seal for man's execution, but the Gospel, like
the Dove, comes flying swiftly to prevent it with the Olive branch of peace and
pardon in its mouth: Ephesians. 1.5. 2 Timothy 1.9. Rom 3.24. 1 Pet. 3.7.
Chusing-grace, Calling-grace, Justifying-grace, and Glorifying-grace are all
discovered in the Gospel, and therefore it may well be called the word of his
grace.

2. Because the Gospel is the effect and fruit of Gods grace or good will to
men. Philosophers observe that dew never falls in stormy, tempestuous
weather; the dropping of the dew of the Gospel on parched, scorched hearts is a
sign and fruit of serene calm heavens: that our parts of the world, like
Gideons fleece should be wet with this dew when other parts are dry, this is
merely from Grace. I have caused it to rain on one City, and not upon another,
Amos 4.7. this rain of the Gospel which cools heat, melloweth the hearts, and
cleanses the unholy goes by Coasts, Psa 147.19, 20.

3. Because the Gospel is the usual means of begeting grace. As Manna fell
about the Isrealites tents with the dew, so grace is distilled and dropped down
with the Gospel. Many of the Jews heard the thunders of Sinai, the threatenings
of the Law and were not moved; but the Baptist wins their children with the
songs of Sion, the promises of the Gospel. Received ye the Spirit by the
preaching of the law, or the hearing of faith. The ice which is hardened by the
cold, is melted with the Sun. When the murderers of our Savior heard the
Gospel, they were pricked to the heart Acts 2.37. The hard flint is broken upon
the soft pillow.

That the Gospel is effectual, not only for conversion The Gospel does not
only bring forth souls to Christ, but likewise build up souls in Christ: the
natural child is nourished when in the world by the same seed (by a further
concoction turned into milk) by which it was conceived in the womb; the
spiritual child is begotten by the Gospel: I have begotten you through my
Gospel, and built up by the same, 1 Pet. 2.2. As new born babes desire the
sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby.

That the word of Gods grace can carry men to glory; It does like Moses lead
the Saints out of Egypt, deliver him from bondage to his lusts, conduct him
through the Wilderness of the World, and also like Joshua bring him into
Canaan, the land of promise. Its called the grace of God which brings
salvation, Tit. 2.11. It brings salvation to man, and it brings man to
salvation.

Heaven is an inheritance; And to give you an inheritance. An inheritance is an
estate left or given by the Father to his Son and heir; Saints are all Gods
Sons, and his Sons are all first born, and so Heirs. Gods natural Son is his
natural Heir, but his adopted Sons are his adopted Heirs, and so have an
inheritance given them by their Father. Others have inheritances by their
births, Saints have theirs by their new births. Their inheritance is
incomparable, its the same which the natural Heir has, joint heirs with
Christ, Earthly possessions are to it less then nothing. Their right to it is
indefeasible An inheritance reserved for us in Heaven, 1 Pet. 1.3. they can
never be deprived of it, either by others cruelty nor their own carelessness,
for it is in Gods keeping reserved for us.

the inheritance of Heaven is only for them that are Holy. Among all them that
are sanctified. None but the Children of God, such as are born again, are heirs
of this inheritance. All that are saved must be sanctified. The inheritance is
undefiled and so must all the inhabitants be. If a carnal, unsanctified person
ever enter into that Royal Palace, he must first make the Gospel a Lie, Rev.
2^. ult.
and God a Liar. And into it can in no wise enter any thing that is defiled or
unclean. All that are there, are admitted into Gods immediate service, and will
so great a King be served in unclean vessels, dirty feet are not for Royal
presence Chambers.

The Doctrine which I intend to prosecute, and which will include, the
substance of the verse is this, The Doctrine, That the greatest good a Pastor
can do for his Brethren whom he must leave, is to commend them to God: And now
Brethren I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace.

I shall speak principally to the fountain of their being and bliss, their
recommendation to God, and in the close of the Sermon briefly touch the Channel
of the Gospel, which he has cut out as the means of conveying his blessings to
the Children of men. I say again -- That its the duty, and the greatest good a
Minister can do for his friends whom he must leave, to commend them to God. The
Apostle had a great love to, and tender respect for the Brethren, but how does
he manifest it, by commending them to God.

That its the practice, duty, and greatest kindness of Chistians to commit
their friends to God, is visible in the Scriptures, Paul and Barnabas when they
came to Derbe, commended the Brethren to the Lord, on whom they believed, Acts
14.23.

But especially when Parents leave their Children, they commit them to the care
of some faithful person. When Old Jacob was to dye, he commends his Children to
the living God, Genesis 48.15, 16. and 49. before Moses left the Israelites in his
Swan-like Song, Deuteronomy. Chap. 32, and 33. he does not only command them Gods
precept, but also commend them to Gods protection.

Our blessed Savior, who is an unparralled pattern and president, being to
depart out of the world, and go to the Father, would not leave his Disciples
fatherless. He knew the hearts of his servants were heavy, that their Master
was to be taken from their head, alas! what can the Chicken do, when the Hen
under whose wings they used to be cluckt, and cherished was killed; therefore he
commends them to God as the greatest good which his boundless love could do for
them, And now I am no more in the the World, but these are in the World, and I
come to thee, Holy Father, keep through thine own name those whom thou have
given me. I pray not that thou should take them out of the World, but that
thou should keep them from the evil, etc. Joh. 17.11, to 16. How
affectionately, how pathetically does he entreat his Father to take the care
and charge of them. Father keep them, Holy Father keep them, as if he could
never speak it enough. How many Arguments does he use to persuade and prevail
with his Father to be the guide and guardian of his Children. Father, I must
leave them, O do thou love and keep them, that they may not be left alone.
Father I beg not their immediate translation to glory, but only their
preservation in an estate of grace; I desire not that they should be kept from
the evil of affliction, but only from the evil in affliction, and shall I be
denied. The World hates them for thy sake, and what will become of them if thou will not help them.

In the Explication of the Text I shall show

1. What it is for a Minister to commend his friends to God, or how this is
done.

2. Why its a Ministers duty, and the greatest good a Pastor can do for them
from whom he must part, is to commend them to God.

First, How a Minister can commend his brethren and friends to God. This is
done two ways, namely; by Prayer and by Faith.

1. By a cordial supplication to God, or by prayer; the departing parent
appoints his Executor to be careful of and faithful to his children, and so
commends them to him; but the departing Pastor, entreats God to be gracious
to, and mindful of his people. As by preaching the Minister commends God to his
peoples acceptance, so by prayer he commends his people to Gods benediction.
The principal part of the Priests Office under the Law, was to offer sacrifice,
and to pray for the people; Aaron must bear the names of the children of Israel
before the Lord. And the main work of us Ministers of the Gospel is to stand
betwixt God and our people, by giving precepts from God to them, and by putting
up prayers to God for them Aaron this wise shall ye bless the people, saying
unto them, The Lord bless she, and keep thee, Numb. 6.23. We bless them when
we beg of God to bless them. God blesses imperatorie, by commanding a blessing
on men; There the Lord commanded his blessing, even life for evermore, Psalm.
133.3. Ministers bless impetratorie, by commending them to Gods blessing. Gods
blessing is operative, his benedicere est benefacere; our blessing is optative
only; we wish the blessing, and that is all, but God can work the blessing.

The Apostle Paul usually made prayer the Alpha and Omega, the preface and
ending of all his Epistles. If we observe it well we shall find that each of
them is sented with this sweet perfume, Romans 1.9. and 15.13. and 16.24. 1 Cor:
1.3, 4. and 16.23. 2 Cor: 1.2, 3. and ult: ult: Gal: 1.3. and 6. ult: Ephesians:
1.2, 3, 15, to 20. and 6.23, 24. Phil: 1.2, 3, 4, 9, 10, 11. and 4. ult: Col:
1.2, 3, and 4. ult: 1 Thessalonians: 1.2. and 3.10. and 5: ult: 2 Thessalonians: chap: 1, and
2: and 2:16: and ult: ult: 1 Timothy: 1: 2: and ult: ult: 2 Timothy: 1: 2: and ult:
ult: Tit: 1:4: and 3: ult: Philemon verse: 4: Heb: 13:21, 22. Prayer was his
salutation, and prayer was his conclusion; nay as some persons of quality seal
all their letters with their coats of Arms, so the holy Apostle all his
Epistles with prayer for the persons to whom he wrote, and gives us leave to
look on all as forged where this mark was missing; The salutation of Paul, with
mine own hand, which is the token in every Epistle, so I write; The grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, Amen, 2 Thessalonians. 3.17, 18. All Christians
must pray for others; its their general calling in part. Among the Persians he
that offered sacrifice prayed for all his Countrymen, says Herodotus (lib: 1.
9) Pray one for another, Jam: 5. But its the particular calling of a Minister:
We must give our selves to prayer, it must be the element in which we breath
and live, He is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee, Gen: 20.7. Prophets of
all men must be frequent at prayer.

But there are some persons which Ministers must in a special manner commend to
God in their prayers; namely, the people which God has committed to their
special charge, A good Housekeeper will relieve and help his neighbors and
strangers, but he has a greater regard, and more tender respect for his
children and those of his own Family. Our prayers, like Sir Francis Drakes ship
must incompass the whole World, even all in the land of the living that have
not sinned the sin unto death; I will that supplications and prayers be made
for all men, 1 Timothy: 2.1. The higher a man is, the further he sees, and the
richer a man is, the more he releiveth; the higher a man is in holiness, the
further he sees into others indigencies, and the richer he is in grace, the
more he by prayer begs the releif of their necessities. But in the wide earth
our eye must principally be on Gods vineyard to water that with our tears, and
to beg the influence of heaven, for the refreshing and ripening the fruits
thereof; Praying always with all prayers for all Saints, Ephesians: 6.18. the
tongue may well pray for the other members of the same body; Christ has taught
us this in that Prayer of prayers, as a Father calls it. Our Father; Father
speaks our faith in God, Our, enjoyneth charity to our Brethren; but in this
vineyard our love and labor must be specially for that part of it which is
committed to our trust. Of all debts Specialties must first be paid: Prayer is
a debt, God forbid that I should sin in ceasing to pray for you, says Samuel,
and and in regard of our particular parishes, a Bond, a specially. We are bound
to thank God always for you, 2 Thessalonians: 1.3. The Ministers prayers as well as his
parts are the common stock of the parish, in which all have a share. Or as the
Buckets which hang up in the Churches at London, they are useful and helpful to
any part of the City as occasion is, but specially for the benefit of those
parishes in which they are. We must as some Shopkeepers, drive a trade a far
off, beyond the Seas, but be sure not to be idle in our shops at home. We must
mind others at the Throne of grace, but be sure to remember our own people. He
that starveth his family, is not likely to feast his Neighbors.

Secondly, By a fiducial expectation of good, or by faith, we commend our
business to a friend when we cast on him the care of it, and trust him with it;
Ministers commend their friends and affairs to God, by beseeching his favor
toward them, and believing that he will be tender of them. We have many cares
and fears about our dear friends whom we do love, and whom we must leave, but
faith eases our hearts by committing them into safer hands; The burden of all
the Churches lay on Paul, and surely it was heavy enough to have broken his back,
had he not learned the art of faith, by which he removed it to stronger
shoulders. Cast thy burden on the Lord and he shall sustain thee, Psa. 55.22.
Here is our charge, and our discharge. Our Charge is, to cast our burden on the
Lord; and our Discharge, He will sustain thee. The Apostle prays God for the
grace given to the Philippians, and prays to God for its increase. I thank my
God upon every remembrance of you always in every prayer of mine, making
request with joy, 1 Phil. 3.4, 5. But mark how he enliveneth his prayer by the
soul of faith, knowing that without it, twould be but a dead Corpse. Being
confident of this very thing, that he which has begun a good work in you, will
perform it until the day of Jesus Christ, verse. 6.

Our prayers for our people will be to little purpose, if faith be not joined
with them. There are indeed many blessings in the womb of prayer, but without
the Midwifery of faith it will never be delivered. Whatsoever ye ask in my
name, beleiving, ye shall receive. Prayer is the Key that opens Gods
Treasury, but Faith is the hand which takes out and receives of his infinite
bounty; Prayer must have a promise, or else it is a Vessel without a bottom, and
that promise must have faith, or else, the Vessel lies still, and cannot stir
at all. When a full gale of faith fills the sails, then the Vessel of prayer
launcheth fourth most hopefully, and returnest with its riches fraught.

When God had acquainted Abraham with his intention to destroy Sodom, Abraham
sensible of his Nephews danger, commends him to God by prayer and by faith,
Genesis 18.23. now mark the issue, God remembered Abraham, and brought Lot out of
Sodom, Genesis 19.29. Abraham's prayer hit the mark at which it aimed, but it is
because the eye of faith leveld the Arrow.

Faith honors God, by committing to him so great a trust as the inestimable
fouls of his people; and God honors faith, by being true to his trust, and
answering fully his chosens, and suppliants faith. The Children of Judah
prevailed because they relied on the Lord God of their Fathers, faith engaged
God in the combat, and therefore they could not but conquer, 2 Cron. 13.

He that prays for himself and not for others, is fitly compared to an
Hedghog who laps himself within his own soft down, and turns his brissels to
all the World beside. And he that prays for others without reliance on God
through Christ for audience, works at the labor in vain, and like Penelope
undoeth by night all that he wrought in the day. The truth is, we lie to God in
prayer, if we do not rely on him after prayer.

So then for the Preacher to commend his brethren or friends to God is in brief
thus much. To open their cases and conditions to God in prayer, earnestly
begging the releif of their indigencies, and beleiving that through Christ he
will supply all their necessities.

In the next place, I come to the Reasons why the Pastor must commend his
brethren and friends to God. And they shall be drawn from these three heads;
From God, from the World, and from the Brethren themselves; Gods propriety in
them, the Worlds enmity against them, and their own impotency, do all require
that they should be commended to Gods care and charge.

I shall now show the necessity of commending them to God, that its the
greatest good will appear in the Use, because he is the most able, loving and
faithful friend.

First, In regard of God, his propriety in them. None so fit to take care of
the Child as its Father. A brute will venture its self, and encounter with that
which is much stronger, in defense of her own; the fearful Hen which has
nothing but flight to secure her self from the Dog, will yet hazard a duel
against the Kite, to protect her little Chickens. The blessed Jesus gives this
ground why he commends his Chrch to God, I pray for them, I pray not for the
World, but for them which thou have given me out of the World, for they are
thine, Joh. 17.9. I pray not for strangers, nor enemies to thee, but for thine
own people, thine one family, for them thou have chosen, called and loved. For
they are thine; thy jewels, thy portion, thy temple, thy children. Men in a
flame will venture far to secure their own jewels. Nabath would hazard and lose
his life, rather then part with his own portion. What cost will some be at, and
what care will they take to keep their own houses in good repair? David would
have died, that his own Son might have lived. Propriety is a sufficient ground
for special protection. God does by a general providence take care of all his
creatures, because of his general propriety in them, because they are his
creature. He feeds the young Ravens, and satisfies the hunger of the Sparrows.
He is upon this account the preserver of man and beast, but his special
providence is exercised about them in whom he has a special propriety. The
Saints are his (...), peculiar people, and therefore he has over them a
peculiar protection. Hence his peculiar care is compared to a Bird flying over
the Nest, where her young ones are, Isa. 31.5. He abhors him as an infidel, who
does not provide for his own, surely then he will take care of his own himself.
Aristotle says, Propriety is the ground of all the toil and labor in the
World. If all things were common, every one would be careless, but because its
their own ground, therefore they Dung, and Plow, and Sow it; because it is
their own wealth, therefore they work hard to increase it, God has a propriety
in his people, they are his by Election. The new creature was conceived in Gods
eternal purpose before he was born; they are his by redemption, he paid an
infinite price for them; They are his by regeneration, begotten by him, and
born of him. They are his by promise, I entered into covenant with thee, and
thou becamest mine, I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Now
because they are his, therefore they go to him for protection. I am thine, save
me, Psa. 119.94. and therefore he affords them his special and gracious
presence, Israel is holiness to the Lord, the first fruits of his increase; all
that devour him shall offend, evil shall befall them, Jer. 2.3. None can wrong
God in any thing that is his at an easy rate.

Secondly, The worlds enmity against them. The sheep need some Dogs to defend
them, that have so many Wolves to devour them; They who have many and mighty
enemies, surely want some faithful able friend; this was another ground why
Christ commended his Disciples to God, I have given them thy word, and the
World has hated them because they are not of the world, even as I am not of
the World, Joh. 17.14. Father keep thy Children, for they are surrounded with a
wicked World, whose tender mercies are cruelties. Alas! what shall become of
thy lambs, who are ever amongst roaring ravenous lions if thou should not
protect them?

The old enmity between the Serpent and the Woman is not yet, neither ever will
be worn out. There are natural antipathies between some creatures, for which
little reason can be given. As between the Lion and the Cock, the Elephant and
Boar, the Cammel and Horse: The Serpent says Aristotle will rather fly into
the fire, then come near the boughs of a wild Ash: but there is a greater
antipathy between the seed of the woman, and the seed of the Serpent. An unjust
man is abomination to the just, and he that is upright in his way, is
abomination to the wicked, Prove. 29: ult. The Eagle says the Philosopher has
continually enmity with the Dragon and Serpent. Saints are Eagles, they have
enmity with the Serpentine brood, but it is odium offencionis, they hate wicked
men's sins, but not their persons. They loath the poison, but not the cup in
which it is. As tender Physicians they hate the noisome disease, but pity the
patient, thus the unjust man is abomination to the just; but the wicked hate
the godly, odio inimicitiae, with a hatred of perfect enmity, wishing evil to
their persons, and working it to the utmost of their power. They that are born
after the flesh persecute them that are born after the spirit; their rage is so
great, that were their power answerable to their malice, they would cut Israel
off from being a people, that the name thereof might be had no more in
remembrance.

Indeed every Christian may say as David, They hated me without a cause; the
World has no just cause to hate and curse the people of God, but there is a
reason of all their rage, and wrath, enmity and cruelty against the Saints? and
that is, because they are Saints; Wherefore did Cain imbrue his hands in his
own Brothers blood; Because his own works were evil, and his brothers
righteous, 1 John: 3.12. The light is burdensome and grievous to Owls and Bats,
and all night Birds, the light of a Saints holiness is offensive to sinners,
that are used only to the deeds of darkness; nay, the greater the light, the
more painful to their sore eyes. Swine cannot endure sweet odours; Those that
are unclean, and delight to wallow in the mire of vice, hate the fragrant
purfumes of grace. The pleasant smell of Spikenard is poisonous to them.
Horse-flies are killed with Ointments.

Now if Saints fight with enemies that are more politic and powerful then
themselves, they must be conducted by one that is strong indeed, or they will
be forced to leave the field. Besides it is an engagement to God to help his
people, because, for his sake the world hates them. A Prince counts it a
dishour to forsake him, who has ventured his life, and lost his limbs in his
cause and quarrel.

Thirdly, Their own Impotentcy. They are not able to take care of themselves,
and therefore must be commended to another. In the Civil Law there is provision
made for outcasts, there are some Hospitals to entertain them. By the common
law, if parents die there are Officers appointed to take care of poor
fatherless Children. With God the fatherless find mercy, Hos. 14.3. Those that
are Orphans, want a Guardian. Children which cannot go alone, need their
Mothers helping hand. The strongest Christian is but a child, and except God
hold him by his right hand will every day get many falls and knocks. The
greatest Saint is but a glass without a bottom, which cannot stand any longer
then it is held; Hence they are compared to anew born infant which is both
polluted and ready to perish, if nonetake care of it, Ezekiel. 16.5.

If beleivers dangers be temporal, their defense must be the Almighty and
eternal God, or they are foild. We have no strength, but our eyes are unto
thee, says 2 Cron. 20.12. They cannot do the ordinary actions of nature,
without his assistance, who is the God of all grace, in him we live, and move,
and have our beings, Act. 17.14. They live in him, and move by him, as they
have their beings from him; If the fountain fail, the streams soon are dried
up; If God denies his influence, man droppeth into earth: Inesse est de
essentia creaturae; Inherence is essential to the creature.

When spiritual perils overtake them, they cannot hold out without Gods
protection. When Hezekiah was left but a little in his own hands, how much does
he discover the pride of his own heart. Though Peter seemed so resolute and
valiant a Captain (as to go before all the Apostles in courage) yet when Christ
did but for an hour or two withdraw, how shamefully does he fly back like a
Coward? the weak breath of a Maid blows down the strong Castle of his
confidence. If God do but depart from Sampson, his strength departs also, and
the Philistines may make what pastime with him they please. The holiest man is
no match for a Devil. If our God leave us, our defense is departed from us, and
the uncircumcised one will make sport with us indeed.

All our power for sacred performances is wholly from another. Not that we are
sufficient of our selves to think any thing, 2 Cor. 3.5. To think (we suppose)
is an easy thing, but unless God help it is too hard for us; God gave Israel
their Manna every day, or they could not have subsisted; God must give us fresh
supplies of his spirit in every duty, or they cannot be rightly performed. The
greatest fullness of a Christian is not the fullness of a fountain, but of a
vessel; which because always is letting out, must be always taking in; The
Conduit which is continually running, must be always receiving from the River.
The Christians disbursements are great and constant, therefore such must his
incomes from God be, or he will quickly prove a bankrupt.

Habitual grace it self lies as water at the bottom of the pump, and cannot by
all our labor be raised up, till God pour in his exciting grace. The flame
does not more depend upon the fire, then we upon God. Things that are weak,
lean on that which is strong; the Wood-vine, not able to stand of it self
clings about the hedge, or tree, and thereby gets to some height: the weakest
will go to the walls if not protected.

This reason is implied in Christ's petition to his Father: Father keep them; As
if he had said, They are poor shiftless children, that can neither stand nor go
without help, therefore they must not be left alone: Alas they are such pitiful
helpless creatures that anyone may wrong them of the Legacies which I have
purchased for them, and bequeathed to them, they will lose the grace I have
given them, and fall into the sins which I have kept them from, whilst I was
with them, if they be but one moment out of thine eye and arms, therefore
Father keep them; If they who were to be endowed with an extraordinary measure
of the spirit were unable to keep themselves, much more unable are we; if
Pillars cannot stand of themselves, much less can weak Reeds.

Having spoken somewhat in the Explication, I shall proceed to the Application
of the Point.

First, It informs us of the Piety of a true Pastor, he commends his people
to God, this is his character: When others curse their people, and commit them
to the Devil; he blesses his Parishioners, and commends them to God: the
mouth of some indeed, like Rabshekahs are full of raylings, and their tongues
are even black with blasphemies against God and his people, (though their
curses are but like false fire which may flash a little, but will do no
Execution) but the faithful Ministers of the Gospel have learned other language
as they are blessed men, so they are blessing men: Some Ministers are Ministers
of Satan, all their business is to accuse the Brethren, they are the Saints
enemies because they follow the thing that good is; Publicans bless them, that
bless them; but though the people of God pity them, and pray for them, and beg
the blessing of God on them, yet they (far worse then Publicans) return cursing
for blessing, but true shepherds seek and study the welfare of their sheep.
The false Mother did not care though the Child were divided and slain but the
true Mother cried out, Divide not the Child, in no wise slay it, for her bowels
yearned toward her Child, 1 Kings 3.26: Ministers are called Fathers, and
their people their Children: Wicked Ministers are false Fathers, and cares not
what becomes of their children; the great murderer of souls may slay them at
his pleasure, and they will not open their mouths against him; nay too too
often they help him drive the poor silly sheep out of their pastors to the
slaughterhouse. But godly Ministers, like true Fathers, endeavor by all means
the welfare of their children; they cry out with Hagar, How can I see the
death of my child! How can I see the eternal death of my poor, ignorant, carnal
neighbors! they open their mouths and their hearts too (for their bowels yearn
toward their children) for their people to God, as the Ruler to Christ; Sir,
Come down quickly ere my child dye. Lord, such unregenerate, scandalous
children whom thou did commit to my charge are at the very point of death. I
have acquainted them from thee of the evil and end of their wicked ways, but
cannot obtain so much as a sober hearing; but Lord if thou would speak to
them they would hear thee; thou can open their eyes, break their stony hearts
and make them stoop; Lord come down quickly ere my children dye, nay dye
eternally.

Secondly, It discovers the great privilege of a gracious people; When they
are deserted by man, they are commended to God. Those that part them and their
Pastor, cannot part them and their God. And now brethren I commend you to God;
though Christians may be left by weak, earthly friends, yet they shall never be
forsaken by their Almighty heavenly Father. Christ prays for them in heaven,
Christians pray for them on earth, how rich must they needs be who have a stock
in such faithful hands employed for their use in both worlds. It was the misery
of Julian that the Church shut him out of her prayers, and that was a
forerunner of his sad future doom. Its the felicity of true Christians, that
they are in all the Saints prayers.

All the felicity of man is bound up in the favor of God, and therefore to be
commended to his care must needs be a great comfort. I must tell you no people
can enjoy a greater privilege. Israel was famous for this above all the
Nations on the face of the earth; For what nation is there so great? says
Moses Deuteronomy. 4.7. They that consider Isreal's outward condition may somewhat
wonder how Israel should be glorious beyond all comparison. Israel was now
wandering in a desolate, howling Wilderness, having no food for their bellies
but what a miracle must send them in; and no raiment for their bodies, but that
on their backs; Heaven must rain down bread, or they must perish with hunger; a
rock must be broacht to give them water, or they die for thirst; their clothes
must grow with their bodies, and not wear out neither, or they must go naked;
they had not an house to hide their heads in, but some slender tents; turn
which way they will they fall into the paws of ravenous beasts, or into the
hands of men no less cruel; yet in this barren Desert, and in the midst of
these destractions, no nation in the World, were their tables never so richly
spread, and their Wardrobes never so largely filled, can compare with Israel
for honor and happiness. But what is the reason? truly none but this, God was
their Patron and Guardian. For what nation is their so great which has God so
nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things we call upon him for?
Other Nations might excel them in number, in treasure, in creatures; other
Nations might have honors and pleasures nearer them; but every Nation was
inferior to them, because no Nation had God so near them. It Is the near approach
of this Sun that causes a Spring and Summer of light and gladness, of warmth
and delights. That Nation from which he departs, whatsoever they enjoy, have
but long dismal nights, and sharp bitter frosts.

When men are said in Scripture to be obnoxious to all evil, they are only
said to be forsaken by the chiefest good. I have forsaken my house, I have left
my heritage, Jer. 12.7. But what is the fruit of Gods forsaking his house?
Cannot the building stand, though the Workman be gone? No, it is tumbling down
apace, I have given the dearly beloved of my soul into the hands of her
enemies. Many Pastors have destroyed my vineyard, they have made my pleasant
portion, a desolate Wilderness, v. 10. When this fence is removed, the vineyard
is quicky destroyed. When David would pray his worst against the Churches
enemies, what does he beg? Let them be confounded, Psalm. 12.5. or disappointed
in all their designs; this is much, to conceive with sorrow, and to have hard
labor, and then to bring forth nothing. Let them be as the grass upon the
house top, which withers before it be grown up, verse. 6. Let them perish
speedily, suddenly, and irrecoverably; this is more. The former was bad, that
they should take much pains to no purpose; but this is worse, that their pieces
that they discharge against others, should not only miss their mark, but
recoil upon themselves. But all this, and much more, verse. ult. (which the
Psalmist adds as an amplification of the latter) Neither let them that go by,
say, The blessing of the Lord be upon you; this is worst of all. David knew
that if they were out of Gods care, they should be under his curse, and then
they should be miserable indeed. As an eclipse of the Sun darkens the Creation,
though the other lights of Heaven shine never so brightly; so whatsoever
comforts any man enjoys if God be wanting, he is miserably woeful. Its
Seneca's observation of Alexander, He overcame the Persians, but he slew
Calistines; he conquered to the Ocean, but he slew Calistines, etc. That the
slaughter of his friend drew a black line over all his honorable enterprises,
and as too much shadow to a picture, sullied the glory of them. It may be said
of some men, they have large estates, but no God; they have high preferments,
but no God; they have excellent parts, and natural accomplishments, but no God:
This want of a God gives a dash to all the other, and like Copris turns all
their wine (be it never so rich) into ink and blackness.

On the other side, the fruition of God is the greatest favor. As some write
of the Crystal that what stone soever it touches, it puts a luster and
loveliness on it; So whomsoever God approaches to, he puts beauty and glory on
the soul.

Because the witness of an Adversary is a double testimony. Let Balaam (who, as
some write of a toad, had a pearl in his head, though his body was poisonous)
give in his evidence. How goodly are thy tents O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles O
Israel, Numb. 24.5. He speaks both by way of interrogation and admiration;
their tents were so comely, and their tabernacles so lovely, that their very
enemy was affected and ravished with them. But whence came Israel to be such a
well marshalled army, that he who came to fight against them, thinks them
beyond all compare, nay does himself admire their postures and order, their
glory and gallantry. Why, from the presence of their Lord General. The Lord
their God is with them, the shout of a King is amongst them.

The new temple which the spirit of God describes so exactly in its various
dimensions, and curious perfections, such as should never have parallel; has
all its glorious privileges from Gods gracious presence; The name of that City
from that day shall be, the Lord is there. Ezekiel. ult. and ult.

It is observable, Exodus 33.1, 2, 3, 4. that God seems to make Israel a very
gracious offer. And the Lord said unto Moses, Depart and go up hence, thou and
the people which thou have brought up, out of the land of Egypt, unto a land
flowing with milk and honey. And I will send an Angel before thee, and I will
drive out the Canaanite, and the Amorite, and the Hitite, and the Perizite, for
I will not go up in the midst of thee, for thou art a stiff-necked people, lest
I consume thee in the way; yet mark how the people take this bountiful tender,
And when the people heard these evil tidings, they mourned, and no man did put
on his ornaments, verse. 4. What evil tidings were here, 1. To have an Angel
their guide and guardian, I will send an Angel before thee, surely that nurse
would have been very tender of his Lords Son, his first born. 2. To have all
their enemies conquered, and I will drive out the Canaanite; might not Israel
march along without fear, when God had engaged that all their foes should be
thrown at their feet? 3. To be conducted to the goodliest country under the
cope of Heaven. To a land flowing with milk and honey, to a place that was the
paradise of the earth, and the fittest to be the type of Heaven; would not
thousands have valued such a promise at an high price? What was there in all
this, which called for mourning, that the Israelites take it so heavily, and
lay it so much to heart? Truly this, the want of Gods presence, which could not
be made up by all these privileges, therefore Moses prays, If thy presence go
not with us, carry us not hence; Lord, its better to be in an howling, barren
wilderness with thy presence, then in Canaan without thee. It Is not a glorious
Angels being our Captain which can give us true comfort; it is not the casting
down our enemies, that can lift us up in glory; it is not the pleasant land
flowing with milk and honey that can please us, without thy presence; if thou
leave us, all our Isaacks (do they promise us never so much joy or laughter)
are Benonis, Sons of our sorrows, and Ichabods, the glory, the honor, the
happiness is departed from Israel, if thy presence go not with us, carry us not
hence. But here is the privilege of Saints, they have Gods presence. My
presence shall go with you, and I will give you rest.

Thirdly, Here is comfort for Christians, they are commended to the living Gods
care; The Apostle had little to give his sorrowful friends, but he would speak
for them to that King, who was able, and willing to give them all things. And
indeed this was his greatest charity. By bodily alms he had opened his own
purse, but by commending them to God he opened heavens Treasury; Paul's prayers
were more worth to them then the Empire of the whole world. The Apostle was a
right courtier, he observed his Princes will, and drew up his petitions
according to his pleasure, and therefore knew they should be prevalent. Joab
did not doubt of success, when he set the woman of Tekoah a work, for that
which David desired more then himself.

Beloved friends, I esteem it my duty and privilege that I may write after the
Apostles pious copy, ye are the people to which I was first called to be a
Pastor, though opportunity has sometimes been offered for greater preferment,
yet I still waved all thoughts of leaving my first love and removal to any
other Parish. I have been amongst you these eleven years, and cannot wholly
complain that I have spent my strength in vain, and labored in vain, some have
acknowledged that they are the seals of my Ministry; Others, that God has made
me instrumental for their increase in grace. Gods power has appeared in my
weakness, and his mercy been manifest in my unworthiness, yet alas how many of
you have had the dark side of this glorious pillar of the Gospel all this while
toward you, which is matter of sad lamentation. O how speechless will they be
at the day of Christ, who after so many years public and private preaching of
the word to them shall be found in a Christless, graceless estate; surely none
sink so deep into Hell, as they who are pressed down thither under the weight
of the Gospel.

I must notwithstanding this ground of unspeakable grief, admire that free
grace which has made me helpful to any one souls good. Besides, that I enjoyed
more of God in his Ordinances amongst you then ever I have enjoyed all my life,
I cannot but acknowledge that many of you have had much hearty kindness and
respect for me, not only above my deserts, but much above what any parish that
I have known or heard of in the County, have had for their Minister; I may say
as Paul did, my joy was the joy of you all (that feared God) but now the
providence of God is parting us, I know not better how to speak my love and
faithfulness to you then by imitating this holy pattern in the Text, and
commending you to God and the word of his grace; Indeed, all is in this one
God; if he charge himself with you, none can hurt you, if he be yours, every
thing will help you. When Alexander asked Porus (his Prisoner) how he would be
used. Porus answered (...), Like a King; Alexander asked the same question
again, he gave the same answer still; do you desire no more said Alexander? No,
says he, All is in that one word (Plut.) If it were demanded of you, to whom
ye would be commended, I hope ye would answer, to God; for ye cannot but know
that all good is in one God. The Covenant of grace is a rich mercy, to which
all the Crowns and Empires in the World are but Nits and nothings; but this is
the Sun which makes that Heaven so glorious, this is the sum and substance of
it; I will be your God, and ye shall be my people. The design of the Son of God
in his birth and death was certainly high and honorable; It was a noble end
that was in the eye of such an agent, but it was no more then to beg and buy
of God, to take care of man whom for his rebellion he had cast off. He suffered
the just, for the unjust, to bring us to God. 1 Pet. 3.18. Living David, when
his soul was amongst Lions, and ready to be torn in peiees every hour, commits
it into Gods hands; Into thy hands Lord, I commit my spirit, Psa. 31.4. The
dying Redeemer, who knew the worth of that inestimable jewel, his own soul by
the price which he paid for the souls of others, desired no other Cabinet to
have it laid up in, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit. To commend you
to God is all that I can do for you, and it is indeed all that ye can desire of
me. Were you my nearest Relations, and the object of never so dear affections,
though ye were as near and dear to me as my own soul; If I had the strongest
engagement to you imaginable, and the greatest obligations possible, I could do
no more, I need do no more then to commend you to God. Therefore give me leave
now I am taking my leave of you to commend you to God. And now Brethren I
commend you to God.

First, I commend you to his special favor and affection. The good will of God
is such a lump of Sugar, as will sweeten the bitterest cup, it has a virtue in
it which will turn the smallest liquor into cordial water; The little Bird in
her small down Nest sings pleasantly, when the great Birds in their large
thorny Nests, have but harsh voices. The Saint in the soft bed of Gods special
love sleeps comfortably, when the wicked in their high places, great
preferments, for want of this are in little ease, His general love is like the
ordinary beams of the Sun, which convey light and heat, for the refreshment of
all the World. So the Lord is good to all, his mercy is over all his works; but
his special love is like the beams of the Sun united in a glass, which passing
by others, fires the object only. Gods love to his new creatures in Christ is
burning love; he has choice good, and good will too, for his chosen ones. Let
me see the good of his chosen. Look upon me, and be merciful to me, as thou art
to them that fear thy name. Its said of Socrates, He prized the Kings
countenance above his coin.

A kiss from God is of greater value then all the Kingdoms on earth. The
Christian can travel merrily though his way be dirty underfoot, if the heavens
do but favor him, and it be clean over head. Prove. 16.15.
If in the light of a Kings countenance there be life and his favor be
(quickening and refreshing) as a cloud of the latter rain; what is there ^n in
the light of Gods countenance! If an Heathen could say, Contemno minutes istos
Deos modo Jovem propitium habeam. I care not for those petic gods and
demy-gods, so I can have but Jupiters good will: Surely a Saint may say, I care
not for men's frowns, or Devils fury, so I may obtain but the blessed Gods
favor.

This special favor of God is a pearl of such price that it was bought with
the blood of Christ, and none can beg a greater for themselves or others. This
was David's prayer for himself, Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance
upon me, Psa. 4. As the single Saint, so the Church, cause thy face to shine
upon thy servants, and we shall be saved, Psa. 80. Beleivers who love their
neighbors as themselves can desire nothing better or greater.

Joseph loved Benjamin entirely ( his bewels yearned upon his brother, Genesis
43.29, 30.) But how does he show it? what does he request for him? God be
gracious to thee my son. Daniel, who fasted prayed, and was sorely affected
with the Churches afflictions, when he poured out his very heart to God for
them, and would sum up all his prayers into one petition, this is it, The Lord
make his face to shine upon his Sanctuary that is desolate for the Lords sake,
Dan. 9.17. The prayer of the High Priest for the people was to this purpose,
The Lord make his face to shine upon you, and be gracious to you, Numb. 6.24.
Affectionate Paul's lips spoke the same language on the behalf of his
Corinthians, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and
communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all, 2 Cor. 13. ult.

(...) to this God in whose favor is life, nay, whose ^ng kindness is better
then life, Psalm. 30. Psalm. 63
I commend you, and my prayer shall be, God be merciful to you, and bless you,
and cause his face to shine upon you, Psalm. 67.1.

Secondly, I commend you to his special ear and protection: Angels are the
Churches Guardians; He shall give his Angels charge over thee: but God himself
is Captain of the Saints Life guard. He is Lord of Hosts.

It was an honor to David, and granted to him by Achish as a special favor to
be keeper of his head for ever; but its an infinite condescension in the
glorious God, yet this Office he is pleased to take upon him, To be Keeper of
his Saints heads, or their Head keeper for ever. Nay he is known by this name,
He that keeps Israel: And if you would know how he keeps them, truly so
diligently that he says, I keep it night and day (they are every moment within
the view of his favorable eye, and under the guard of his Almighty arm) Isa.
27.4. and so tenderly, that he is said to keep them as the apple of his eye,
Zach. 2.8. which is the tenderest piece (the Chrystaline humor, say
Naturalists) of the tenderest part of man's body; of which Nature is so tender
that she strongly guards it with tunicles. A great blow is better born on the
back, then a small touch on the eye. Oculus and fama non patiuntur jocos.

Gods providence extends to all his creatures, Deus fic curat universos quasi
singulos, sics s^*gulos quasi solos. Aug.
its like the Sun, of universal influence, but in a special manner its
operative for the safety of his Saints. He is the Savior of all men (that is
in respect of preservation, or temporary salvation) but especially of them that
believe, 1 Timothy 4. Godly men are compared to wheat, wicked men to chaff: Good
Husbands will not spoil their chaff, but they are specially careful of their
good corn. When a fire breaks out, God may leave sinners, as lumber to be
consumed, but he will be sure that his Saints, which are his jewels, shall be
saved. The Church is Gods house, and therefore that shall be well guarded,
whatsoever be neglected: The eyes of the Lord run too and fro through the whole
earth, to show himself strong on the behalf of them whose heart is perfect
toward him, 2 Chronicles. 16.9.

The words contain, 1. The universality of Gods Providence; his eyes walk the
rounds, as Satan's feet go tound fro through the whole earth to devour, so Gods
eyes run to and fro through the whole earth to defend. Diana's Temple was burnt
down when she was busy at Alexanders birth, and could not be at two places
together; but God is present every where, at the same time, and therefore his
Church which is his Temple can never suffer through his absence. Though Heaven
be Gods Palace, yet it is not his Prison. His eyes run lo and fro through the
whole earth.

2. The efficacy of his Providence, to show himself strong; God fights with his
eyes as well as his hands, he does not only see the peoples dangers, but save
them from it. When the Philosopher in a starry night was in danger of
shipwreck, he cried out, Surely I shall not perish, there are so many eyes of
providence over me. King Philip said, he could sleep safely because his friend
Antipater watched for him. God watches and wardeth for his people always.

If God forsake a people every enemy and evil will quickly find them. They are
bread for us, for their defense is departed from them, Numb. 14.9. The
out-lying Deer are shot while they within the pale are safe. The Romans in
their wars used to call out their Tutelar gods of those Cities they besieged,
as judging them invinsible while they remained there, but easily won if they
departed. When God left the Israelites, though but for a little while, the Holy
Ghost said they were naked, Ex. 32.25. how naked? not for want of raiment or
weapons of war, Non vest sed gratia and praesidio Dei. Jun. in loc.
but for want of Gods presence and protection, says Junius.

Whilst God continues with you, ye are safe; if trials and troubles come, run
under the shelter of this shield, if he does not prevent the evil of
affliction, he will protect you from the evil in affliction. When the City of
Sechem was taken, the inhabitants fled to the Tower. God is a strong Tower,
Pro. 10. that no Cannon can pierce, and he is an high Tower which no Ladder can
scale, no Arrow can reach. Psa. 18.

As it was said of the Tribunal of Cassius, Valor. Maxim.
that it was piorum rupes and reorum scopulus, a rock of refuge to the good, a
rock of revenge to the bad. So it may be said of God; He is a refuge for the
oppressed Saint, a present help in time of trouble, though he wound the heads
of sinners.

Now to this God whose power is an alsufficient shelter, and whose special
providence is sure protection, at whose beck and bidding are all creatures in
heaven and earth, who has infinite wisdom to direct you, and infinite strength
to support you, I commend you, and my prayer shall be, The Lord preserve you
from all evil, Psalm. 121.7, 8.
the Lord preserve your soul, the Lord preserve you in your goings out, and in
your comings in, from this time forth and for ever.

Thirdly, In a word I commmend you to his universal benediction, to his
blessings in all your undertakings and concernments, as to his grace to affect
you, in the midst of the Worlds hatred, and to his power to protect you in the
midst of all hardships, so to his presence to prosper you in all the works of
your hands. The fruitfulness of the earth depends wholly upon the influence of
Heaven; If the Sun withold its heat, and the clouds their moisture, all
things decay and wither. The success of all your actions depend on Gods
benediction; If he deny his concurrence, nothing prospers. Except the Lord
build the house, they labor but in vain that build it, Psa. 127.1. Its lost
labor to undertake the keeping up that house which God will have pulled down.
It Is to no purpose to Plow that field which God will have lie Fallow. Neither
men can help you in civil things, nor the means of grace in spirituals, unless
God afford his assistance. Some Philosophers tell us, that God is the soul of
the World, as the soul is in every part of the body, so God in every part of
the World. Sure I am as the body moves not, nor any part of it, but as its
animated and acted by the soul, so neither can the World, or any thing in it,
but as its enlivened and acted by God. He is the primum mobile, which sets all
the other Orbs in motion.

Its said of David, that he prospered whither soever Saul sent him, 1 Cron.
11.9. but what was the spring of the watch, which caused all the wheels to move
so regularly? For God was with him; It is his gracious presence alone, which
gives success to every enterprise.

His blessing can turn not only Water into Wine, temporal mercies into
spiritual benefits, but even poison into wholesome food, every stone thrown at
you by your enemies into a precious stone; he can cause the wrath of men (as
the hunter uses the rage of the Dogs for his own ends) to work, not only for
his praise, but also for your profit; as a wise Governor meeting with opposite
factions in a state, while each studieth and striveth to undermine the other,
serves his own ends, and secureth his own interest by both. The wise and
powerful God while wicked men plots against his people, makes them to conspire,
for his people. The worlds actings are against the Saints intentionally, in
regard of the malice of their hearts, but they are for the Saints eventually in
regard of Gods overruling hand. That Knife which wicked men endeavor to
thrust into some vital part of the beleiver to kill him, does but light upon
some imposthume, and thereby tend to his cure. The scorching Sun of
persecution, does but ripen him for a glorious harvest.

Now to this God who can blow upon all his enemies plots, and they perish; who
can breath with his spirit upon his peoples actions, and they prosper; who can
cause all his providence to tend to your spiritual profit, and eternal peace,
I commend you, and my prayer shall be, Psa. 20.2, 3, 4.
The Lord hear you in the day of trouble, and the name of the God of Jacob
defend you send you help from his sanctuary, and strengthen you out of Zion,
grant you according to your hearts gracious desires, and fulfill all your
counsels.

For your further comfort know, that this God to whom ye are commended is an
able friend, a loving friend, and faithful friend, and therefore it is the
greatest good I can do for you.

First, God is the most able Friend. To have a friend at Court, is a great
courtesy, because such a one can command much; but what is it then to have God
for your friend, who can command all things, God is able to do more for you
then you can ask or think. He is thirty times called Almighty in Job; He can do
above all expressions, beyond all apprehensions. What cannot he do for you, who
made the whole World of nothing, and hangs the massy earth upon nothing.

He is able to defend you from whatsoever is hurtful. There is a Dialogue
between an Heathen and a Jew after the Jews return from Captivity (all Nations
round about them being enemies to them) The Heathen asked the Jew how he and
his country men could hope for any safety, because (says he) every one of you
is a silly sheep compassed about with fifty Wolves; I but says the Jew, we are
kept by such a Shepherd as can kill all those Wolves when he pleases. God can
with a breath, a puff, blast all the plots of his enemies, and cause their
persons to perish; how happy are they then who have him for their strong hold?
The Egyptians had an Idol called Baalzephon Lord of the watch Tower, whose
Office was to fright such fugitive Jews as fled from their Masters; but it
seems he was a sleep, when the Israelites marched out of Egypt in a full body.
God is pleased to call himself the watchmen of his people, but he is such a
watchman as neither slumbereth (or takes those short sleeps by day) nor
sleeps (or has any long sleep by night) his eyes never close, all his
thoughts are waking thoughts for the good of his people.

If enemies come before them, He is the Lord of Hosts; If behind them he is
their rere-ward. It was said of the Palladium in Troy, that whilst that Image
remained there, the City was impregnable, and that till the Greeks found out a
stratagem to steal that Idol away they could not take it. Whatever fancy there
was in that, this is a truth, that God is the defense of a people, and while he
is present they are safe.

Are your dangers bodily, he can bear off those blows. No evil can arrest you
without leave from this King. Al his Servants are Courtiers, and thereby
privileged persons. He can make an hedge about your selves, your houses, and
all that ye have (as about Job 1. and 10.) and then neither men not Devils can
make a gap for any to enter and injure you. Hesiod speaks of thirty thousand
Demy-Gods that were (...), Keepers of men; The true God keeps his in a
Pavilion, as a Prince his Favorite, from the mischief of others envy and
malice, Psa. 31.20.

If afflictions be near, he will not be far off. He ventures his fortune in the
same bottom with his people. When thou passest through the fire, I will be with
thee, and through the waters it shall not come nigh thee, Isa. 43.2. If the
Church be a burning bush, it will not be consumed, because God is in it. As it
is safe in the fire, so also in the Water; though it be a Vessel (as that
wherein the Disciples were sailing in a rough Sea, tossed up and down with
tempestuous winds, and boystrous Waves, nay filled almost with waters, and
ready to sink, yet there is no fear, because Christ is in it, for though he
seem to sleep, waiting only for a fit opportunity to manifest and magnify his
power, yet when the storm comes, he will be sure to awake, and with his word of
command to cause a calm; The Church as Hierom says of Arcturus, semper
versatur, nunquam mergitur, is much tossed, but never drowned, God is in the
midst of her she shall never be moved, he shall defend her, and that right
early.

God is said to ride on the Heavens for his peoples help, Deu. 33.26, 27. That
is either, he will come speedily (as the heavens move swiftly) for his peoples
deliverance, he will not delay till it be too late, but prevent them with his
love. Or, he has power and will command all his creatures to be serviceable to
his Churches safety, he rides on the Heavens for thy help. As a man that rides
on an horse, can command it, or turn it, and wind it with a curb and bit, which
way he pleases; so can the Omnipotent God, command the Heavens and all their
Host, for his peoples help. Though enemies come with open mouth to swallow the
Church up quickly, yet she will be gravel in their teeth, and should they ever
take her down, as the Whale did Jonah, yet God will force them to vomit her up
again, and make them find by woeful experience, that she is too hard a morsel
for the strongest persecutors stomachs to digest.

Are your fears spiritual, God is able to be your defense; Its probable your
suspicions are great, that you shall fall off or fall away. The World is a
slippery place, but he is able to keep you from falling, Jude v. 4. We are apt
to fall on the right hand by its allurements. Its rich Wine is apt to
intoxicate our brains, and make us stumble. We are apt to fall on the left hand
by its affrightments, as the silver of its comforts fouls our fingers, so the
fire of its cross is apt to black and defile us. Those that travail in rugged
ways, and on stony lanes often fall; but God is able to keep you from falling.
If God keep his hold of you there is no fear, but ye will keep your feet and
your ground too. We are kept by his power, through faith unto salvation. His
power and his love are the Eagles Wings upon which the Saints are carried out
of Egypt, through the Wilderness, and safely conveyed to Canaan.

He can keep you from falling two ways.

1. He can deny temptations to you, if he see they will be too hard for you.
All have not the same faith, therefore all are not tried in the same fire, He
may give a strong purge or vomit to a strong man, but will not to a babe in
grace. He knows whether the Armor will bow, and if it will, he can prevent
the bullet. He is acquainted with the hardiest Soldiers in his Army, and them
he will call to the hardest service, Rev. 3.10. When the weather is very bad,
he will not venture his sickly child abroad.

2. He can enable you to foyl the tempter, Little David in his strength can
conquer great Goliath; he kept Joseph's soul from being so much as sienged
(miraculously as the three Childrens bodies) by that great fire which his
Mistress made to have burnt him. Though the Saint, like Daniel, be cast for his
conscience into a Den, there to fight with, and in danger to be devoured by
Lyon-like lusts, he can bring him out as safe and as whole as he was cast in.
The Goldsmiths would not venture his gold in the fire, if he knew it would be
consumed by it. Man is no match for Devils, but God over matcheth them.

Preservation from sin these two ways Austin acknowledges with much affection.
Lord says he, when I had an heart to sin, thou did keep off the temptation,
and when I had a temptation to sin, thou did keep off my heart. If your
hearts be as dry as tinder, he can hinder Satan from striking fire; if he
suffer the tempter to strike fire, he can make the tinder wet and hinder it
from taking. As he is able to defend you from what is hurtful so to relieve you
with what is needful. Si Esuris, panis tibi est; si sitis, ^qua tibi est; ^i
intenibris ^umen est, etc, Aug. Tract. ^n Johan.
As the fire both purifieth the air, and warmeth them that sit about it: he
knows that ye are indigent, and have nothing of your own to live upon, but he
can send you in such daily supplies as may afford you an honorable
subsistence. I have read of one that feasted the vast Army of Xerxes: Gods
estate is infinite, and therefore will bear a liberal provision for all his
Children. I know you desire proficiency of grace, and perfection in glory above
all the World. He can build you up in grace, he can cause all grace to abound.
If this Sun draw nigh to you the fruits of the spirit will ripen apace. This
well of Salvation can fill every vessel of your hearts, be they never so wide,
he can make the babe of grace to grow till he become a young man, a strong man,
and a Father. If the Nurse be taken from the Child, and the breasts be denied
it, of which it used to suck with so much delight, he can make it thrive as well
with the spoon; in the want of pure public ordinances, he can be a little
sanctuary to his Saints. He often sends them a warm bit up to their Chambers,
when they cannot come down and feed with the rest of the family. He can give
you an inheritance that fades not away, he can conduct you through all your
hardships and crown you at last with heaven, where ye shall be kept, both from
sin and suffering, and freed not only from foyls, but also from fighting; where
the love of God shall never be questioned, nor his providence quarrelled, where
ye shall never offend others with your purity, nor have cause to defend your
selves from their injuries, where all tears shall be wiped from your eyes, and
sorrow and sighing shall flee away. Where persecutors cease from troubling, and
the weary are at rest. Where your names shall be fully vindicated, your
infirmities be wholly banished, your graces be perfected, and your souls
infinitely blessed, being locked up in the bosom of Christ, and lodged in the
embraces of God for ever and ever.

2. He is the most Loving Friend: Some have power to do their neighbors a
courtesy, but tell us they owe them not so much good will. God as he has
power enough to enable him, so he has love enough to move him to do his people
good. Jonathan ventured far for David's safety, and the reason was, for he loved
him as his own soul. They who have Gods heart, are sure of his helping hand. He
chooses his love and then loves his choice; he had precious thoughts of them,
before they had any thoughts of themselves.

God loves his people as they are his Eternal choice; the Mother loves the
child whom she carried nine months in her womb; O how then does God love his
people whom he carried in the womb of his purpose from all eternity! He loves
them as they are his own picture, as they are like him in grace and holiness.
Men have loved others the more for resembling them in sin; so did Heliogabalus
his children: God loves his children the more for resembling him in sanctity.
Grace is lovely; God cannot but love his Saints, because he loves himself; he
loves them as they are his Sons purchase. They which were so dearly bought, are
not easily loathed. Jacob was exceeding tender of Benjamin, though he could, as
occasion required, expose the ten Patriarchs to all weathers, yet by his good
will the wind must not blow upon Benjamin; if Benjamin miscarry, he dies with
him: And what is the reason of this extaordiry affection? possibly this,
Benjamin was the child of his beloved Rachel; Benjamin was dearly bought, he
cost the life of his dear wife: So God loves his Saints with a singular love,
because they are the children of his dear Son, the travel of his soul. His
beloved Son had many a sharp throw, and many a bitter pang before he could
bring them forth, nay they cost him his very life.

He loves them above all the world besides: All others are dross, they are his
gold. This whole World was set up as a tent for them to lodge in, for the time
of their pilgrimage, and when they shall be removed to their fathers house,
this tent will presently be taken down. If all the wheat were but gathered into
the heavenly Garner, the chaff would not be an hour out of the unquenchable
fire. He loves them as his own Son, Joh. 17.26, 27. Who can tell the love God
bears to his Son? the same love he bears to his Saints. His name is love, his
nature is love, his Son is the token of his love, his Spirit is the earnest of
his love, the Gospel his love letter.

Hence it is that they are so happy who are committed to Gods keeping, because
he is so loving a Guardian.

All the while that his people suffer he does sympathize; and he will support
them. As a tender father he proportions the burden to the strength of his
childrens back. He does like a Lutanist (to use Chrysostoms similitude) who
will not let the strings of his Instrument be too slack, lest they mar the
music, nor suffer them to be too hard screwed up, lest they break. He who
taught the Husbandman to use several instruments for the threshing of several
sorts of grain, and not to turn the cart wheel about upon the Cummin (Isa.
28.25.) will certainly himself not suffer his people to be afflicted above what
they are able, 2 Cor. 10.13.

His love will set all his other. Attributes at work for his peoples good: His
Wisdom will contrive, his Power will act, and his Faithfulness will perform
(whatsoever he promises) for the comfort of his Church, and all because he
loves them. What would not David have done for Absalom, whom he affects so
dearly? when Absalom rebelled against him and sought his life, his heart
relented toward Absalom out of love? What a charge does he give his Captains
concerning him; Deal gently for my sake with the young man, even with Absalom?
What will not God do for his chosen whom he loves? when they wander and run
from him, he follows after and wooeth them; For the iniquity of his
covetousness I was wroth and smote him, I hid me and was wroth, and he went on
frowardly in the way of his own heart. Mark, Here is a child in a great crime,
his Father corrects him, and instead of kissing the rod he kicks at the hand
that holds it; He went on frowardly, in the way of his own heart. Well what is
the fruit of this frowardness? you might expect greater severity upon such
contumacy; surely if few stripes will do no good, many must be laid on; or if
the rod will not do, the ax might be used: But lo what love does! I have seen
his ways, and will heal him: I will lead him also and restore comforts to him
and to his mourners, Isa. 57.17, 18, 19. Well, though he be undutiful yet he is
my child; I will throw away my rods and draw him with the cords of love; though
he freez under the nipping frosts, yet he will thaw under my warm beams.

13. He is the most Faithful friend. He is constant in his love: Some are able,
and loving also for a time, but their love, like a candle (though it burn a
little in a closs room, and calm weather) is easily blown out by a stormy wind.
If a Christian be called to the cross he is (like the Deer that is shot, by the
herd) pushed out of their company; but God is a lasting, yea an everlasting
friend; his love like the Sun can never be abated, much less extinguished by
the greatest tempest, but is always going forth in its full strength. A brother
is born for adversity: A friend loves at all times, Prove. 17.16. Such a friend
is God, who (when few men will) never fails to appear for his suffering
servants, 2 Timothy 4.16, 17. Basil ventured very far for a persecuted friend, and
being blamed for it, answered, Ego aliter amare non didici, I have learned not
to love otherwise. The Ancients pictured friendship in the shape of a fair
young man, bare headed, with his breast open, meanly apparelled, with this
inscription on his clothes, To live and to dye with you, and this on his
Forehead, Summer and Winter, and with this on his heart, Prope long, far and
near. God is such a friend as will never disown or deny his people. In the
furnace the three children shall have his presence where ever he is absent.

When men are mutable, and appear as Tertullian says of the Peacock, all in
changeable colors; use their friends as we do Sun-dials, look no longer on
them, nor regard them, then the Sun shines on them. God is a faithful creator,
1. Pet. 4.19. will be sure to mind the house that he has built, and that most
of all when its out of repair and ready to fall. Bucholcerus upon his friends
going to Court to teach the Prince Electors children, told him, I will give you
one piece of counsel which may do you good whilst you live; His friend hearkened
to him: I commend (says he) to you the faith of Devils; Take heed whom you
trust.

Indeed there are many men like ponds, clear at the top and mud at the bottom;
fair in their tongues but foul in their hearts. The greatest men's words are
often like dead men's shoes, he may go barefoot that trusts to them. But O
what a faithful friend is God, who never fails his! he is such a Physician as
will be sure to visit his Patients often when sick, although he may pass by
their doors when they be well.

He is faithful to his promise; his Word is the truth, Col. 1.5. His Church is
the Pillar of truth (not to bear it up, but to hold it out) 1 Timothy 3. his
Sacraments the seals of truth; he himself is the Lord God of truth, Psalm 34.5.
Who fears to be deceived when truth promises. He keeps his promise to a word;
Quis falli t^*m at cum promitt^t veritas. Aug. confess. lib. 11. cap. 1.
Ye know in all your hearts, and in all your souls that there has not one good
thing failed of all that the Lord promises, Josh. 23.14. The birth of the
promise will answer their conception, and they bring forth in full feature and
glory.

God is usually better, but never in the least worse then his word. In sacra
scriptura non solum bonitas est quod praecipitur, and faelicitas quod
promittitur sed etiam veritas quod dicitur Hugo.
His promise is equivalent to possession, He keeps touch with his people in the
time of performance to a day. The self same day Israel marched out of Egypt,
Ex. 2.4. The four hundred and thirty years were that very day expired, nay to a
night, Dan. 5.30. In that night was Belshazer the King of the Chaldeans slain.
When the big-bellied promise had gone its full time (the seventy years being
then expired) it could not stay till morning for its delivery, but fell in
labor that very night, and was safe delivered.

The promises are the flowers of which the cordial Julips are made, which
refresh you in fainting hours; but as Gods love is the root upon which they
grow, so his faithfulness is the hand that must bring them to you. It Is your
happiness, that your riches lie in such good hands as Gods, and that the
public faith of Heaven is engaged for the payment of all your bonds; For be
confident he who will not suffer a Liar to enter Heaven, will much less suffer
a lie to enter his own heart; faithful is he that has promised, and also will
do it, 1 These. 5.24.

Thus my dearly Beloved I commend you to the favor and affection, power and
protection, care and benediction of this God, who is so able, so loving, and so
faithful a friend.

But as I desire, and shall endeavor by faith and prayer to commend you to
God, so I cannot but hope, and I beg it of all amongst you, that have any
interest at the throne of grace, that ye would commend me to God, I beseech you
for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, that ye strive together with me in your
prayers to God for me, Romans 15.30.

Before I conclude, as I have commended you to God, so let me commend you to,
and commend to you, the Word of his grace. Julius Caesar being forced to swim
for his life held his Commentary in one hand above water* and swam to land with
the other; Without question you have more cause to value the word of Gods
grace. The law breaths forth a cold blast, a northwind of threatening, but the
Gospel sends forth a warm gale, a Southwind of promises; grace of all Gods
attributes must not be neglected; love can least endure to be slighted: O let
me beseech you for the Lords sake, for your souls sake, to value the Gospel.
Alas what are ye without it, but condemned Malefactors, every moment liable to
be called forth and hung up, as monuments of Gods fury in Hell! If ever poor
creature in fear every moment of being fetched out of the Prison and carried to
the Gallows did esteem a pardon sure I am ye have cause to prize the Gospel. O
sirs, how had all of us at this day been shut up under the Laws curse, in the
Dungeon of endless wrath and misery, had not the Gospel opened the prison
doors, knocked off our shackles, and set our souls at liberty!

I commend the word of his grace to you under a fourfold consideration.

First, To purify your affections, I know ye want grace, now the word of grace
can beget grace, and increase grace. Its the usual pipe through which grace may
be conveyed into the vessels of your hearts. The Laws of men may reform your
actions, but, it is the Gospel of God which can renew your affections. Some Poets
speak of Musicians that by the force of their music can make stones leap into
Walls, and tame beasts, be they never so savage: The word of Gods grace will do
much more, twill turn stones into Children of Abraham, twill change an heart of
stone, into an heart of flesh, twill tame Lions, and turn them into Lambs, Isa.
11.4, 5, 6. It has made the very hearts of them to bleed, whose hands were
imbrued in the blood of the Redeemer.

Let your endeavor be, that this word of grace may come with power to your
souls, that you may not only hear it, but savor it, and not only read it,
but relish it. O my friends, the lack of this is the undoing of thousands.
What is the reason that some who seemed very fair for Heaven, fall away foully,
and (as some Mariners boast) can sail with all winds, to what Haven soever
they blow? truly this; the Gospel though sometimes it conquered their
outworks, never surprised the royal Fort of their hearts; though it darted in
some light, yet it was never received in the love of it. O therefore let me
beseech you that ye receive not the grace of God in vain, 2 Cor. 6.1. Ah how
sad will it be for you if your hearts be like rocks, on which the dews of grace
falling, make no impression, as the Apricock Tree leans on the wall, but is
rooted in the earth, so many seem to lean on Christ, but are rooted in their
lusts; the word of grace abused is the condemnation. If grace be your enemy, ye
have no friend in Heaven or Earth. The fruits of no Trees ripen so fast, the
sins of no men grow so great, as of them that stand constantly in the sunshine
of the Gospel. If the Gospel be not a morning star to you, a forerunner of an
eternal day, by ushering in the Sun of righteousness upon you; it will be an
evening star to you, bringing on you an everlasting night of death and
darkness. As the Ocean landeth some vessels safely at their happy ports, when
it sinketh others; so the word of Gods grace will either be a savor of life
unto life, or a savor of death unto death.

2. To be the rule of your conversations. Your whole race must be regular, and
there is no such rule to walk or work by, as the word of his grace. As many as
walk according to this rule, Gal. 6.16. that is according to the Gospel. It
contains not only promises for your consolation, but also precepts for your
conversations, therefore its called a royal Law, Jam. 2.8. A Law, because it is
to be the canon of our lives, the Law delivered on Mount Sinai, is by Christ
adopted into the Family of the Gospel. A royal Law, because given us by God,
the King, of the World, who has Sovereignty and Dominion over all, and
therefore power to command what he pleases. The word of his grace is a royal
Law, because the Kings highway, out of which road none may wander under the
penalty of Rebellion. Indeed the Gospel is a Law of liberty, but not a Law of
licentiousness, Jam. 1.25. It freeth us from the curse, but not from the
commands of the law. A true Christian is not (...) without law, but (...),
under the law to Christ, 1 Cor. 9.21. Look therefore to this Royal law, Expound
it, and comment on it in your lives.

Let it be your rule for faith; The Gospel is the only Creed, he that
beleiveth this is a true beleiver. As the Word, Christ is the personal
foundation, so the Word of Christ is the Doctrinal foundation, for every
Christian to build on, Ephesians. 2.19, 20. This we believe, says Tertullian, when
we first believe that we ought to believe nothing beyond the Scriptures. Paul
proves himself a true beleiver, because he believed all things written in the
Law and Prophets, Act. 24.14.

Make it your rule for worship. To serve God according to your own inventions,
or men's prescriptions, is Rebellion and dis-service. As the Moth eats out the
Garment, and the Rust the Iron, so does an Apochryphal worship in time eat out
an Evangelical worship, Mat 15.7. All worship of God without warrant, is like
private coining money, high Treason against the King of Heaven. God (though men
durst not) charged Jeroboam with this crime, He offered upon the Altar which he
had made, in the month which he had devised of his own heart, 1 King. 12.33.
He took liberty to worship, when, and where he pleased; not when, and where God
pleased. Till man can be his own maker, he may not be his own Law giver; While
his dependence is on God, God expects observance from him. The Gospel is not
only a royal law, but a perfect law, James 1.25. It needs not additions, or
traditions from men to supply its defects. Its horrid blasphemy to accuse
Scripture of deficiency, Christ Jesus was faithful in all his house, which he
had not been, if the Laws he left us were not sufficient for Gods service;
Those that add to his word, tell us, though not plainly, yet interpretatively,
that he was an unfaithful Prophet. Friends I beseech you keep close to this
rule. It will be a good Antidote against the infections of the Papists; when
the shops are full of adulterate ware, men that would not be cheated, will
bring what they buy to the light, To the law and to the testimony Isa. 8.20.

In all things, live by the Gospel, and look to the Gospel, let that be a light
to your feet, and a lanthorn to your paths; keep the word, and it will keep you
in an hour of temptation from sinning, and in an hour of dissolution from
sinking. The Lawyer in his doubts consults with his Littleton or Cook; The
Physician prescribes by Gallen or Hipocrates; the Philosopher takes advice of
his Aristotle; but the godly man must always take counsel of the Gospel, Prove.
4.3. ult. Ponder the paths of thy feet, and let all thy ways be established,
turn not to the right hand, nor to the left, remove thy feet from evil.

Darius would be advised by his Zophyrus, and Cipio would do nothing without
his Palybius. Let the Law of God be your Counselor, the man of your Counsel,
as David made it; fear every thing which Gods law does not allow.

The Hen does not only fear the Ravenous Fowls, but runs away if she see so
much as their shadow. Turn not in the least away from Gods law, but hate the
appearance, and shun the occasion of evil. Many will labor to keep their
credits, and to save their purses, do you labor to keep your consciences, and
to save your piety, and your souls.

Thirdly, To be your Buckler against opposition. The Gospel is a Magazin, out
of which Christians may be furnished with spiritual weapons in their holy war
against the kingdom of darkness. Other armor, as of parts and gifts, morality
and examples is (as Alexander said of the Persians, Live. lib. 9.
when he saw them come into the field so richly clothed to fight with the
Grecians) rather a prey to the Enemy then a defense to the Soldiers that wears
it. It Is the word which is a shield against evil principles, Mat. 22.29. it may
fitly be called (as Austin sometime was) Haereticorum malleus, the Hammer of
Herisie. He that is mighty in Scripture, is the man that can hit this unclean
Bird in the eye, and wound it mortally with one blow, Act. 18.28. Even Women,
that are the weaker sex with this Sword in their hands (having learned from the
Spirit how to use it) have encountered with great Doctors, disarmed them of all
their Philosophical weapons, and shamefully foiled them. A Friar being angry at
Luther for spoiling their market, said, That had it not been for Luther, they
could have persuaded the Germans to have eaten; lay aside Scripture, and
seducers shall prevail with you to eat poison.

Its a shield against evil practices, Psa. 119.9. By what means may a young man
cleanse his way? By taking heed thereto according to the word. It must be a
strong curb which can rein in a young man (who is hot and heady) when he is
galloping with full carrier in the road of sin and Hell, but the Gospel can do
it. When a spriteful Youngman which is tasting and taking his carnal pleasures,
which his youth will help him to savor above others; let but the Gospel spread
a table before him of his dainties, and let him but feed thereon, and this
mouth will be ever after out of relish with all the course food, and homely
fair of this World.

Does Satan assault you, Ephesians. 6.17. use the Gospel for your defense. It is
not the sign of the Cross, but the Word of the Cross which Satan fears. The
Gospel like Mustardseed, which Pliny says, mixed with vinegar is soverain
against the poison of Serpents.

As Fencers play some times, and fight with low weapons, merely to teach their
Scholars how to use them; So the blessed Savior, though he could with his
Deity have driven way the Devil, yet fights against him with the Word, Rev.
12.11.
to show us the virtue of, and how we should handle that weapon, Matthew. 4.4, 7,
10.

Is the world to you a place of thorns and briars, 2 Cor. 10.4.
get your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, and ye may
walk comfortably through it. The Irish some say tread so lightly on the ground,
that they run over bogs in which others stick and sink to their ruin. Though
many perish in the Worlds Sloughs and Quagmires, yet they that have the Gospel
shoe on are sure to be safe.

Would it allure you with prosperity to profaneness; This indeed is a most
dangerous bait: Adam was conquered in Paradise, when Job was conqueror on the
Dunghill. Whilst the Oyster is tossed by the Crab she so claspeth her shell that
she is in little danger of being devoured; but when without fear she lays her
self open to the Sun, then comes her enemy and thrusting in a stone to keep
her open, with his claws picks her out. But the Gospel will yield you a Pisgah
sight of Palestine; and what a poor nothing is this whole World in his eyes who
is able to look into the other World? He who beheld the recompense of reward,
scorned the dignity of being Son to Pharoahs Daughter, and according to some of
the Jewish Rabbis trampled the Crown she put upon his head under his feet.

Would it affright you with Adversity from piety: The Gospel will show you
that the Cross is the path to the Crown; and as long as the Traveller, to a
glorious Kingdom, is in the right way (though it be dirty) he is contented.
Christ went to Jerusalem (the Vision of peace) by Bethany (the house of grief)
Omnis Christianus crucianus, says Luther, Every Saint must be a sufferer.

I hope ye will be willing to go to Heaven in the same way which Christ and the
noble Army of Saints have all marched in. Besides the Gospel will hold up your
heads above these Billows, by discovering the gain you shall get by
afflictions. Christians, like some other creatures, see best in the night of
sorrow and distress. The Diamond of their graces sparkle gloriously at the
bottom of those Waters. When the Wind is down, the chaff remains with the
Wheat, but when it rises it blows the chaff away.

The Word of his Grace will assure you of Divine supplies suitable to your
sufferings; That God, like an indulgent Mother, will be sure to tend his sick
Children, though he leave others to the Servants. When Christ had caused Jacob
to halt, then the place was turned into a Peniel. Believe me there is no such
joy in the World as the people of God have under the Cross, says Philpot.
Israel never saw so much of God as in the Wilderness, then Manna from Heaven,
then the Pillar goes before them, and the Rock followed after them.

Fourthly, To be your Cordial in all afflictions. The Rams-skin covered the Ark
from the injury of wind and weather; which typified the defense the Church has
by the Gospel from those miseries to which she is liable on earth. This is my
comfort, says David, in my afflictions thy word has quickened me. When the
weight of his afflictions was ready to sink him, the Gospel, like blown
Bladders preserve him from sinking.

Some I remember expound that place, Thou O God did send a plentiful shower,
whereby thou did refresh thine heritage when it was weary, Psalm. 65.9: The
Law was rained down with those heavenly. Oracles on mount Sinai; while the
thunder affrighted the people, the Law refreshed them. If the Law did revive
them in that terrible temp est, what will the Gospel do? If his precepts are
sweeter then the honey and the honey comb, how sweet are his Promises? If his
Statutes are the Saints songs, surely the word of his Grace is his triumph.

Seneca going about to comfort his friend Polibius persuades him to bear his
affliction patiently, because he was Cesars Favorite. The word of grace
affords you infinitely richer cordials, exceeding rich and precious promises,
wherein ye are admitted to be the friends of God, the members of Christ, the
Temples of the Spirit, and the heirs of heaven. The feather of the promise has
dropped in some comfort into a broken heart, when it has been ready to die with
despair, and could take thing down: That ye through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope.

This life would be little better then Hell, says Bernard, were it not for the
hope of Heaven; but the hope of your future happiness, which is discovered in
the Gospel, may like Cork to the line keep your hearts aloft all waters and
afflictions.

Now ye have a storm, but hereafter an everlasting calm, now ye are tossed too
and fro, and weather beaten, but faith by the prospective glass of the Gospel,
discovers land, and this without question may support your spirits.

Therefore when trouble comes, take heed of fetching your comfort from any
creature. Alas, they are all puddle water, it is the word of grace which is the
pure River of water of life, clear as Crystal, the River whose streams make
glad the City of God.

Thus I commend you to the word of his grace, in this four fold respect.

To conclude all, it is Reported of a friend of Cyrus, that being asked, where
his treasure was, he answered, (...), Where Cyrus is my friend; I hope if any,
ask you, where your Treasure, your Riches, your Honor, your Happiness is, ye
will say (...), Where God is our friend. Now to this God according to my power,
I have, I do, and I shall commend you, to his favor and singular affection, to
his power and special protection, and to his care and universal benediction.

I cannot commend you to one so faithful, though others fall off like leaves in
Autumn, he will never leave you (that are his) nor forsake you, I know not to
commend you to one so loving, he lived in love, he in our natures dyed for
love. His love is like himself, boundless and bottomless, 'ts impossible to
commend you to one so able; he can suppy all your needs, fill all your souls to
the brim, grace is lovely in your eyes, who ever beheld it. Glory is infinitely
amiable in your judgments who ever believed it. He can build you up, and give
you an inheritance, where all the heirs are Kings and Queens, and shall sit on
thrones, and live and reign with Christ, for ever and ever; there ye shall have
robes of purity on your backs, palms of victory on your hands, crowns of glory
on your heads, and songs of triumphs in your mouths, there ye may meet together
to worship him without fear, and drinks freely of his sweetest, dearest favor;
there your services will be without the smallest sin, and your souls without
the least sorrow; If Pastor and People meet there they shall never part more.
Its some comfort now, that though distant in places, we can meet together at
the throne of grace; but O what a comfort will it be to meet together in that
palace of glory! But since we must part here. Finally my brethren, farewell, be
perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of love
and peace, shall be with you. And now brethren I commend you to God, and to the
word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an
inheritance amongst all them that are sanctified.

FINIS.

