THE XXXVI. QUESTIONS PROPOVNDED FOR RESOLUTION OF UNLEARNED PROTESTANTS In
matter of Religion, to the Doctors of The Prelaticall pretended Reformed-Church
of ENGLAND, RETORTED For Resolution of Unlearned PAPISTS In matter of Religion,
to V. H. and V. N. Doctors of the pretended Catholic Church of ROME.

By T. SVVADLIN, D.D.

Religio of^o vera, quae Deo honorabilior, quae paci amicabilior, quae Homini
favorabilior. LONDON, Printed by J. G. for the use of the Author, MDCLIX.

THE XXXVI. QUESTIONS PROPOUNDED FOR RESOLUTION OF UNLEARNED PROTESTANTS, etc.
WHether every Christian is not obliged to choose the safest way, all things
considered,

Yes Questionless;

Whether that way wherein both parties acknowledge,

I wish you had not so soon forgot the piety of your first Question; it is not,
the unlearned of the greater party, it is therefore prudently to be judged more
safe for the unlearned to make choice of the greater number, as the safest way
to Salvation.

For first, the incomparably greater number is a Multitude; and therefore not
the safest way to follow them.

For secondly, the incomparably greater number, may with the incomparably
conceited Crows, think their own feathers whitest.

For thirdly, your Argument thus retorts upon your self; the incomparably
greater number, and the incomparably less number, both confess Scripture to be
infallible; but the less deny the Pope to be infallible.

The like is confessed of Faith to be a sure rule; Tradition is denied by one.

The old Creedes both grant, a new one is denied by us.

To worship God is confessed by both; but to worship Images, or God by Images is
denied by us.

To trust in Christ's Merits is confessed by both; but to trust in Man's own Merits
is denied by us.

To pray to God in Christ's Name is confessed by both; but to pray to Saints, or
to God in the Name of Saints is denied by us.

In the Sacrament of the Eucharist is confessed by both, a Sacrifice
Commemorative, but a propitiatory Sacrifice is denied by us.

A real presence we both grant; but a Carnal we deny.

The Body and Blood by Institution, and Primitive Observation we both
acknowledge, but an Alienation of the Cup we disclaim.

In the English Liturgy is no error say some of you; in the Roman Missall are
many, say all of us; and therefore by this Argument of yours, it is by prudence
to be judged more safe for the unlearned to choose that way to Salvation, which
is confessed by both, then that which is conceived safe by one party only, i.e.
yours.

I have been somewhat long upon this, and yet must be a little longer, because
of your Marginall Note (viz.) Bishop. of Cant. Sect. 35. p. 280. Whom you quote
somewhat erroniously; for he bids, Mark, it is but a possibility of Salvation,
he grants to silly souls in the Romish Church; but a secure way he denies you,
and he backs it from St. Augustine, Lib. 1. de Bapt. cont. Don. ca. 3. Who
judged it a great sin to prefer, Incerta certis uncertain, and naked
possibilities before an evident and certain course: And there he gives you a
taste too from your own Learned Card. Bellar. lib. 5. de, Justif. ca. 7.
Tutissimum est, and afterward lays you, and the Donatists together in this
want of Charity amongst you, or Charity mistaken by you, and lastly desires you
that you would not make us as malicious (at least as rash) as your selves, in
denying Salvation to some ignorant silly souls, whose humble and peaceable
obedience makes them safe among any part of men, that profess the Foundation
Christ, let him that pleases read the whole thirty five Section, and he will
soon resolve which is the safer way, yours or ours.

Whether this be not the present Case betwixt Protestants, and those of the
Church of Rome, Protestant Authors; Bishop of Cant. ibid. They acknowledge the
said possibility of Salvation for unlearned persons in the Roman, and the Roman
Doctors denying all possibility to unlearned Protestants, so long as they
remain wilfully in the Protestant Religion.

Let it be the present Case betwixt us, Protestant Authors, and particularly of
that most Reverend Father in God, and now with God, because his Martyr, and
sum up your gains; There is a possibility, and but a possibility of
Salvation for unlearned Papists in the Church of Rome; which argues our
Charity; There is no possibility for Learned or unlearned Protestants, say you,
which argues your malice, Cant. p. 285. Yes, which likens, and compares you
with the Donatists; The words of the same Archbishop: Who galls you thus;
whether the Sacrament of Baptism was true in the Catholic Church, or in the
part of Donatus; The Donatists exhorted all to be Baptized amongst them; why?
Because both parties granted that Baptism was true amongst the Donatists,
which that peevish sect most unjustly denied the sound part, as St. Augustine,
lib. 1. Cont. Don. de Baptist. ca. 3. delivers it. I would ask now (the
Archbishops own words) had not the Orthodox true Baptism among them, because
the Donatists denied it injuriously? Now I say, pray read the Archbishop on,
and put the truth into your eyes, and tell the world if you see ere the worse.

Whether all unlearned Protestants, Protestants, and refuse to be of the Roman
Church?

And why not Learned as well as unlearned? Roman Church there is; but for a
(...) man, one that knows the errors of the Church, (and (...) know a great
many) there is not, for ought I yet know, so much as a possibility: Yet a
little more from that most Reverend Archbishop whom you have cited twice
before; my soul for a simple peaceable believing soul in the Church of England;
not so for such an one in the Church of Rome; no more for him or her but a
possibility.

Whether a person who is in quiet possession of any Goods, his ancient
possession, taken from him by force and violence, and whether he who thus
violently took the possession from him, be not obliged in Conscience to restore
it to him again? And whether he proceeds not unjustly so long as he retains it
from him?

I shall answer this impertinent Question by retorting it with a simile more
verisimilitude like.

Whether if a Bishop, (the Bishop of Rome be the man) do wrongfully deprive the
Emperor (Emperor of Germany be he) of his-Rights and Dignities, in calling
Gerall Councils, claiming his Right to that particular, and uncondemn'd by the
clear sentence of any lawful and competent Judge, etc. (pardon that Sir,) I
but follow your own example in this very Paragraph) does not sin egregiously in
this detension? Will you have another? Thus, whether if a Thief by force get in
possession of your (...) and goods, be not still a Thief, so long as he de^^^^
them; and your self a Fool, if you lay not hold (...) the first opportunity to
resume them? This is our (...) though it seems yours, your Church the Church
(...). Rome, or rather the Bishop, and Court of Rome had ^^^^oched, and usurped
too far upon the Rights of the Church of England, which was always opposed,
but at last regained, though now (for our sins, or by the sins of others)
disposed a third way, but it was violent, and I hope will not be lasting.

Whether th^^ has not been within the last hundred and fifty years, and still
is, Protestants against the Roman Church, violently excluding her Bishops,
Pastors, and People, from the quiet possession of many hundred years
continuance of their Doctrine, Dignities, Titles, Governments, Benefices,
Churches, Possessions, and still retain them, and refusing to restore them,
those of the Roman Church still claiming their Right, and never having been
condemned by any competent, or lawful Judge, nor acknowledging themselves
convinced to have obtained that possession wrongfully?

Sir, Protestants, ( Catholics I should have called them) have thus dealt with
them of the Roman Church for, 150. years shall not be denied by me, nor will
it be denied by you that they did it justly; because the Bishop of Rome had
never any universal power, until an usurping Pope, Boniface by name, from an
usurping Emperor Phoras, who murdered his Master Mauritius, gave him the
Title of Universal Bishop, and for their robbing the English Church betwixt
600. and 700. years, the English Church, and Churchmen with the consent of
King and Parliament, have resumed their own; which whether you will acknowledge
to be a competent and lawful Judge, and your selves convinced to have obtained
your former possessions wrongfully, I shall leave to wiser men, then you, or my
self to determine.

Whether the quiet possession of many Ages, Protestants, be not a sufficient
proof to justify the said Doctrine and Practice, till it be convinced clearly,
evidently and undeniably, (by Reason, or Authority) or lawfully condemned of
Error? So that it belongs to Protestants who are the Aggressors, to convince
their Adversaries of Error, and not to those of the Roman, or Grecian
Churches, to prove their Tenants by any other Arguments, then that of their
quiet, ancient, and universal possession, though Catholics be upon the
Affirmative, and Protestauts upon the Negative; as he who quietly possesses the
Name, Title, Arms and Lands, of such, and such a family, has sufficiently
proved, that he has a Right to them, and that they are truly his, till he
either confess, that the contrary is sufficiently proved, or that it be
lawfully determined against him?

It is confessed, Protestants, would prove some thing of sufficiency; but in most
points, it rises not to a sufficient proof; and yet for your most points you
leap before you look; for if you look upon the Rites in Baptism, you agree not
with the Eastern Church, we do; nor do you agree with them any more then we do
in the point of the Procession of the Holy Ghost, nor do they any more yield to
you in the Infallibility, and Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome; so that the
consent of the Eastern, or Grecian, and the Western or Roman, is not unanimous
in most, much less in all points of Controversies against the Protestants.

Whether is it not a most insolent madness (as St. Augustine terms it) or an
insufferable height of pride, for any Christian whatsoever, to call in
Question, much more to censure and condemn as erroneous, that which all the
visible Churches in the World taught and Practiced, and a manifest foolery to
follow any Teachers, and give ear and belief to them, who contradict the
universal Practice and Doctrine of the whole Christian World?

Sir, Protestants, and we call Catholics (for the Romans and Catholics are
not Terms convertible) or had these words been spoken as St. Augustine spoke
them, in relation to the Donatists, plain Heretics, and so condemned, which
Protestants were never yet lawfully condemned to be, these words of your might
have passed, and therefore for hereafter good words I pray; else your insolent
madness, may make madmen sober; your insufferable height of pride, may make
proud-men humble; and your manifest foolery, may make fools so wise, as not
longer o follow such Teachers as your selves, who for many hundred years have
contradicted the universal Practice and Doctrine of the whole Christian World,
Eastern and Western; prove you new Rome challenges no more privileges then old
Rome did, a Patriarchat-ship, and no more, prove that Patriarchall power above
the Supreme Ecclesiastical power, a General Council, to which Patriarchall
was always subject; prove us convinced by either, you say something; till
then, I stir not farther in these dirty words.

Whether the first was not done by the first Authors of the Protestant
Religion, Protestant Religion, received those points of their Doctrine from any
visible Church in the whole World, which existed immediately before their
relinquishing the Roman Doctrine, let that Church be produced and named.

Sir, whether the first was not done by the first Authors of the Protestant
Religion? If you mean insolent madness, insufferable height of pride, for any
Christian whatsoever, to call in question, much more to censure and condemn as
erroneous, that which all the visible Churches in the World taught and
Practiced? With your good leave, you must name the first Authors, and what it
was they censured and condemned, and so you must explain what follows, and the
second done, and still continued by their followers: if you mean manifest
foolery to follow any Teachers, and to give ear and belief to them, who
contradict the universal Practice and Doctrine of the whole Christian World;
You must name that universal Doctrine and Practice of the whole Christian
World, and how we have contradicted it, else you fight with the wind, and say
nothing.

For the rest of this ninth Question, to produce and name that visible Church,
from whence we have received those points of Doctrine, which existed
immediately before we relinquished the Roman Doctrine, the Roman Church it self
is named, and named thus, Antiquam Romam non Anglia, Roma reliquit,
Anglia non Romam Britannes Roma repellit,
Do but return to the old Roman Doctrine in the Primitive and Catholic
Constitution of it, and we are friends, till then, Farewell.

Seeing Protestants affirm, Roman Church is infected with errors in faith,
which they pretend to have purged in their Reformation, I demand that it be
evidenced, when any of those pretended errors began to be publicly taught, and
Practiced out of some approved Authors of any Age, who affirm, that the public
profession of the said errors, begun in, or about their times; for seeing they
were publicly Practiced through all Christendom, if that public Practice had
ever begun in any Age since the Apostles, it must have been taken notice of,
whereby their instances of Consumption of the Lungs, of a beard growing white,
etc. are showed to be nothing to the purpose, because they are either wholly
secret, or insensible, and no way public or notorious, as these were; and
seeing faith by St. Paul, Ephesians. 4. v. 1, 3. is said to be one, and reckoned up
with the Unity of God and Christ, and so must be perfectly one, how Protestants
and those of the Roman Church be properly said to have one Faith, when the one
believes, what the other disbelieves? And as opinions contradicting one another
cannot be said to be one opinion, how can Faiths contradicting one another be
said to be one Faith? Neither is it enough to say, that they are one in that,
wherein they agree, for so they will be one only in part, or partially, and
not absolutely and entirely, and as the least difference destroys the perfect
Unity of God and Christ, so will it do that of Faith; and though my opinion
agree with that of another in many things, but disagrees in many other from
his; we can never be said absolutely (as it must be in Faith,) to be of the
same, and one opinion.

Dolosus versatur ^i^ca universalibus, Protestants affirm not, that the Roman
Church is infected with errors in Faith, and yet we say, there are manifest and
clear errors in the Roman Church, which we purged, and when some of your Errors
(not pretended but real Errors) begun thus is evidenced. Purgatory was never
publicly taught by the whole Christian Church, and never decreed by the Roman
Church it self, until the Elorentine Council, 1439.

Transubstantiation was never publicly taught by the whole Christian Church,
nor allowed or decreed by the Roman Church it self, until the Laterane
Council, 1215.

Worshipping of Images was never publicly taught, nor allowed or decreed,
until the second Nicene Council, 787.

Communion in one kind not above 200. years, Supremacy of the Pope was
condemned by St. Gregory himself, lib. 1. Ep. 16. Anno 600. for Antichristian.

For your Consumption in the Lungs, and a Beard growing white, I think with
you, they are nothing to the purpose, whether yours, or ours; nor is it to my
purpose to be satisfied with the color of your Beard, whether it be blew or
yellow.

To your Text of St. Paul, Ephesians. 4. v. 1, 2. I confess Faith is said to be one,
and believe you believe, that you of the Roman, and we of the English Church,
have both but one Faith; whether you take it for the Rule of Faith, the Creed;
If you have a new Creed, we leave you; or the end of Faith, Salvation, if you
have any other end* we leave you; or the means of that Faith, and Salvation,
Christ; If you have any other means, we leave you still, and for your
contradicting opinions, I tell you, it is a lame similitude to bring in thereby
contradicting Faith; for though you and I agree but partially in points of
opinion, yet we agree entirely in point of Faith.

Whether it be not a great Argument, Protestant Authors are put to great
straits, and to desperate acknowledgments; which being ashamed of the first
refuge of their beginners, in dying for the defense of their succession to an
invisible Church, in alleging for their Predecessors, and continuance of the
visibility of their Church, Berengarius, the Waldenses, Albigerses, Wicklifsts,
Hussits, and other publicly condemned Heretics, they confess now that they
have no other means to save their visible Succession, but by acknowledging,
that they succeed to the Church of Rome, and other Churches adjoining with her
against them, in all the points of difference betwixt them and her, and all
those who are united to her, to be true Churches of Christ, and consequently to
hold no fundamental Error at all; and consequent to this, to acknowledge that
their first Authors, and Churches both in England and other Countries, wronged
the Church of Rome, and those others insufferably, first, in condemning them of
Superstition, Idolatry, Antichristianisme, etc. Which are fundamental Errors
in Religion, and destructive of Salvation.

Secondly, upon this pretext in destroying, burning, and alienating to secular
uses, so many thousands of their Churches, Monasteries, Towns, Cities,
Castles, Villages.

Thirdly, in Massacrating, and putting to cruel Torments and death so many
Priests and Professors of the Roman Religion.

Fourthly, in depriving their Bishops and Clergymen of their respective
Church-Governments, Dignities, Seas, Benefices and Churches, and setting up
others, they get livings in their places.

Fifthly, in making it no less then High Treason (which is yet in force) either
to be Priests, or to communicate with them in many Spiritual Church-Offices
and Sacraments.

Sixthly, in continuing to this day, in a violent detaining of their Churches,
Benefices, Dignities, and Spiritual Functions, from all those of the Ro^an
profession, and holding them in their own hands; and all this because they
maintain certain pretended Errors, which they now confess not to be
fundamental, nor destructive of Salvation; and consequently that those of the
Roman Church have suffered, and still suffer all these intolerable injuries,
for that which even these Modern Authors acknowledge to be no more then a venial
and small sin; for if it were mortal, it would destroy Salvation, so long as
one wilfully continues in it, which they affirm it does not.

Further by this Acknowledgement, these modern Protestant Authors must confess,
that their former Writers, who were of a contrary mind, in charging the Church
of Rome, and the rest with her, of Superstition and Idolatry, etc. and all
those who then joined with them, and all their modern Churches and Protestants,
both without and within England, who at this day hold it a point of their Faith
to accuse the Church of Rome in the same manner^ err damnably against
Christian Truth, and so consequently are no true Churches of Christ; for it
cannot be less then a damnable Error, to make it a point of their Faith and
Religion to condemn any one, much more all the visible Churches of the West,
nay and of the East too, and so of whole Christendom, for nine hundred years
together of grievous Superstition, when upon better examination, the Doctors of
the same Protestant Church, are compelled by force of truth to confess, that
those Churches neither are, nor ever were guilty of those horrid Errors, and at
most err only venially and lightly, which hinder them not either to be a true
Church of Christ, or to obtain Salvation, (Bishop of Cant. p. 129. number. 3.)
Even while they constantly and immoveably maintain them, and accuse all, who
wilfully contradict them, and condemn them as erroneous. And hence also it
follows, that seeing these modern Protestant Authors and their party
Communicate in Prayer and Sacraments with the Presbyterians and Calvinists, who
accuse the Church of Rome of Idolatry, etc. (and so put it in fundamental
error) and acknowledge themselves to make one Church with them, must be guilty
of deadly Schism by that Communion and acknowledgment; and consequently so
long as they continue in that Communion are incapable of Salvation.

Here are many words to small purpose,

Know you therefore whosoever you are without a name; Protestants are not put
to great straits, nor desperate acknowledgments, they are not ashamed of their
first beginners. They stand not for the Succession of an invisible Church; they
acknowledge not for their first beginners of a visible Church Berengarius, the
Waldenses, Albigenses, Wicklifsts, Hussits, (whom yet you cannot truly affirm
to have been legally condemned for Heretics) but we allege for our
Predecessors Christ and his Apostles, Ignatius, Clemens, Hegesippus,
Polycarpus, Irenaeus, Theophilus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Origan, Methodius,
Gregory, Neozes, Constantius Magnus, Eusebius Casarian, Lactantius, Athanasius,
Hilarious, Basilius Magnus, Gregorius, Nyssenus, Gregorius Nazianzenus,
Hieronymus, Epiphanius, Ambrotius, Chrysostomus, Cyrillus, Theodoretus,
Augustinus, with the four Oecumenicall Councils of Nice, of Constantinople, of
Ephesus, of Calcedon, with all the holy company of Saints, and noble Army of
Martyrs, until the seventh Age, against whose positions if we hold any thing,
name it, we answer it; prove it, we yield; and many more Catholics since, we
acknowledge not to succeed the Church of Rome, we were and are as the Church of
Rome was of the Catholic Church; we acknowledge her to be a true Church, we
deny her to be the true Church: she is, and we are parts of the true Church,
yet we not so erroneous as she; we acknowledge not to have wronged the Church
of Rome, we complain that the Church of Rome, or rather the Bishop of Rome with
his Court, has wronged that Church, this Church, and with both the whole
Chatholick Church by Quittance, and by Forfeiture.

1. By Quittance, the Bishop of Rome has wronged the Church, in assuming to
himself the Title of Universal Bishop, and spiritual Sovereign, and Monarch
of the Church, which is as inconsistent with a Provincial Patriarchiat-ship
(which was never by any, nor shall by me be denied him) as Humane and Divine
Institution.

2. By Forfeiture, for if the Rebellion of an Inferior forfeits by renouncing
his Loyalty to his Superior, then the Bishop of Rome, is notorious in his
Rebellion against General Councils, the only Supreme Ecclesiastical power;
and not only against a General Council, the Representative Church, but also
against the Catholic Church, in usurping a Dominion over it.

And not only by Rebellion, but also by Robbery; who but the Bishop of Rome
would have robbed the King of England of his Investitures of Bishops; which
Henry the seventh protested against by his Proctour? Who but the Bishop of Rome
robbed the King of his Patronages, by Collations, Provisions and Expectative
Graces? Who but he robbed the King of England of the last Appeals of his
Subjects contray to the ancient Laws of England? I could go on to inferior
Robberies committed by the Bishop of Rome upon the Nobility and Clergy of
England, but I hasten to the rest of your Question.

We have not condemned your Church of Rome of Superstition, Idolatry,
Antichristianisme, etc. Private men it may be have, the Church of England have
not; and if the Church of Rome be guilty of such Errors, let her free her self.

The Church of England has not destroved, burnt, alienated to secular uses,
thousands of your Churches, Monasteries, Towns, Cities, Villages; if any such
things have been done, let the Actors be quesstioned, let not the Church of
England be blamed.

The Church of England has not put to cruel Torments and death many Priests
and Professors of the Roman Religion, nor deprieved their Bishops and Clergy of
their Church-Governments; the Church of England has only recovered their own;
the Church of England has not made it High Treason to be Priests; you know,
when they are executed, they executed for something else, then for being
Priests.

The Church of England continues not in a violent detaining of Roman Benefices,
but in a lawful possession of their own; and all this, not for certain
pretended but real Errors, which you of the Roman Church do hold, and
destructive to Salvation to such knowing men as your self, though not of the
same consequence to simple and wellmeaning men amongst you; the distinction of
your venial Sins, we refer to your selves; every sin we say is mortal, so
long as a man wilfully continues in it, knowing it to be sin.

Nor do we hold it a point of Faith, to accuse the Church of Rome of
Superstition, and Idolatry; but if you are guilty of such Crimes, look you to
it; we err not damnably in saying, Worshipping Images, or God by Images, is
Idolatry, and therefore for all this, are true Churches of Christ; we condemn
not the visible Churches of the West, nor of the East, much less, whole
Christendom for 900. years together of Superstition; name but one point, we
hold contrary to the Tenants of the Catholic Church for 1600. years, (I give
you a larger time) we yield.

You are come acain to erring venially and lightly, to which you had answer
before; only take this by way of addition to your Quotation of the Bishop of
Cant. p. 129. Number. 3. All that that Learned and most Reverend Bishop says, and
grants, is, that the Church of Rome is a true Church in Effence, and this,
because she receives the Scripture as a Rule of Faith, though as but a
partial and imperfect Rule, and both the Sacraments as Isntrumental Causes
and Seals of Grace, though they add more and misuse these: And now what you
have got by this Quotation, when you have understood it, you may alter to a
better Mode.

To your last which charges us to Communicate in Prayer and Sacraments with the
Presbyterians and Calvinists, and so are guilty of deadly Schism, and are
thereby consequently incapable of Salvation, I would and do wish you had not
spoke false English, for we Communicate neither with Presbyterian or Calvinist,
let them be all one, it is all one to me, they are at a greater dinance from us
then Rome it self. And I think the poor Church of England suffers more under
one of them, then ever she did under the Church of Rome; and therefore as yet
are as capable of Salvation, as you of the Roman Church, because we hold of the
Catholic, in which, and which Church only is Salvation; and from which Church
if you have made a Schism, by giving the cause of separation, let it be your
care to return to the Catholic, that we may shake hands and be friends.

Whether it be not a great Argument of security to those who either are of the
Roman Church or convert themselves to it, Cant. p. 281. though these destroy
not Salvation, yet they are dangerous points and Practices, weakening the
Foundation and endeavoring the destruction of it in continuance of time; yet
who sees not that it is more secure to hold a Religion which makes the
Foundation only weak, by their Adversaries concession, then to hold theirs,
which the contrary party most constantly affirms to destroy quite, and raze the
Foundation of Religion, and to make Salvation, not only hard and in danger,
but utterly impossible, till it be deserted.

Security it may be, how they are made holy, you should do well to tell us;
adoring Christ as really and naturally present in the Sacrament, if by
naturally present you understand carnally, which has a direct negation in the
Scriptures, will not consist with salvation, no not with a possibility of
Salvation; which you might have learnt from the Archbishop of Cant. if you had
Quoted him right; for in the 181. p. which you cite, not a word of any such
thing. But in the 281. and 282. it is to the purpose, not yours but ours; and
there you shall find thus much with much more; a secure way they cannot go,
that hold with such Corruptions when they know them; now whether it be wisdom
in such a point as Salvation is, to forsake a Church in the which the ground of
Salvation is firm, to follow a Church in which it is but possible one may be
saved, but very probably he may do worse, if he look not well to the
Foundation, judge ye. So the Archbishop, so I, and so you have an answer to
your 12. Question.

Whether it be a likely thing, Roman Religion, contain any danger of losing
Salvation in maintaining them, seeing for this 1000 years by the common
confession of Protestants themselves, they have been universally believed and
Practiced as matters belonging to Christian Faith and Duty, both by the Latin
and Greek Church; and in the belief and Practice of them was the common way
wherein Christians were saved, which if it were dangerous, what other safe way
was there wherein Christians might be saved? and yet certainly there was
always a safe way to Heaven. And what likelihood is there that the safe way
should be wholly unknown, and unpractised for so many hundred years together,
and the common known way according to the full belief, and settled persuasion of
all the visible Churches of Christendom should be dangerous and unsafe? Or what
reason can be given, that the Professors of the Doctrine of the Roman Church
should be in an unsafe and dangerous way, before Protestants began, seeing they
had none in those times, to show them that they were in danger?

Yes, Roman Religion, contain danger of losing Salvation in maintaining them,
else why did Bellarmine himself (the greatest and learned Champion the
Church of Rome ever had, Lib. 5. de Just. c. 7.
) say in regard of the uncertainty of our own Righteousness, and of the danger
of vainglory, it is safest to repose our whole trust in the mercy and
goodness of God. And I think, and you believe, this is one Error, which
contains Error of losing Salvation; for he that stands upon his own Merits
totally or partially, is very like to come short of Salvation: Else King David
would never have prayed, Enter not into judgment with thy Servant O Lord, for
no flesh is righteous in thy sight: Else the Prophet Isaiah would never have
said, our Righteousness is as a filthy cloth: Else Christ would never have
Commanded us to confess, when we have done all we can, to say, we are
unprofitable Servants.

Seeing for 1000. years, by the common consent of Protestants themselves, they
have been universally believed and Practiced.

It is not long since you said for 900. years, now a thousand; but to let that
pass, for it is but 100. years difference, and we can well afford it you,
since it is said again as before, prove any point that the Church of England
holds was not the universal Doctrine of the Catholic Church for 900. yes,
1600. years, and then it shall be confessed, you have said something, and
therefore no danger yet, but Christians were saved in and by the right way, but
not in and by the Roman way, as the Roman way is now.

And yet more; you had some that did tell you, that the present Roman way was
not, is not a safe way to Salvation; what else persuaded St. Bernard to deny
praying to Saints? What else before him, put Gelasius to say, taking the Cup
from the Laity cannot be done without grand Sacrilege? What else after both,
put Gerson to give this sage advice, I see that the Reformation of the Church,
will never be effected by a Council, without the Presidence of a well-affected,
wise and constant guide? Let the members therefore provide for themselves
throughout the Kingdoms and Provinces, when they shall be able, and know how to
compass this work.

What else made Robert de Grosteste, write a sharp Letter to the Pope,
exhorting him to reform some Monstrous Enormities, which flew from Rome as a
poisonous Fountain, and infected the whole Church? And this, and a great deal
more does tell you, some in those times there were to show you, you were in
danger.

Whether it has any show of probability, Protestants confess, Bishop of Cant.
p. 283.) yet they may in time endanger the rasing and destruction of it, as
they argue, seeing that after the universal belief of them for 1000. years
together, the Foundation yet remains undestroyed and entire? For if 1000. years
continuance of them has stood with the integrity of the Foundation, what
appearance is there, that they will ever cause or induce the destruction of it?

No, indeed, there is not a show of probability, p. 285. tells you, such ill
luck you have in quoting him, saying, that the Errors of the Roman Church are
so many, and some so great (for which he cites Bellarmine; In praefat. operibus
praefixa) as weaken the Foundation, that it is very hard to go that way to
Heaven, especially to them that have had the Truth manifested to them.

And surely, the Foundation once weakened is in some probability of being rased
and destroyed, even by the virtue of Gutta cavat Lapidem.

Further concerning this Protestant distinction of Errors in Faith,
Fundamental and not Fundamental, comes to pass, or they say nothing to the
present purpose: This therefore supposed to be their meaning; I demand secondly
a Catalogue and precise number of the fundamental Errors in Faith, that is,
how many and which are those Errors in Faith which destroy Salvation? For what
helps it a Christian to know that there are such destructive and damnable
Errors, unless he knew whether he held any such Errors himself or no? And how
can he ever be certain of that, so long as he is ignorant, which are
fundamental Errors, which not? If this Catalogue be refused, I demand at least
some evident means or mark, to distinguish Errors in Faith, destructive to
Salvation or damnable, from others consistent with Salvation or venial, which
is neither to deny any of the Articles contained in the three Creeds, (as some
Protestants have thought) for one of them puts the Procession of the Holy Ghost
from the Father and the Son, the denial of which they neither do, nor can hold
to be a fundamental Error, unless they affirm the Grecian Church to err
fundamentally, and so deny it to be a true Church of Christ; which were quite
against the said Protestants, seeing they maintain the contrary: Nor is the
Creed of the Apostles alone a sufficient Rule to determine fully, which are
fundamental, which not; both because there are some things in it, which (by
reason of the lightness of the matter they contain) come not by far so near
the radical and primary mysteries of Christian Faith, as do many points
controverted betwixt Protestants and those of the Roman Church, and therefore
cannot with any show of Truth be termed fundamental by Protestants, such as
are the circumstances of Time and Persons, as that our Savior suffered under
Pontius Pilate, and no other judge, that he rose the third, and no other day,
etc. and because some points necessary to the subsistence of Christian Faith
according to Protestants, are not expressly defined in that Creed, as, that the
Holy Scriptures are the Divine word of God, which is the precise number of the
Books of Canonical Scriprure; whether there is any written word of God or no;
or any Sacraments, etc. So that a Christian finds not all fundamental points
of Faith, set down expressly in the Apostles Creed; neither is the Scripture a
sufficient Rule to know which are, which are not fundamental points, for there
are a thousand, nay a million of Truths expressed in Scriptures, which touch
not immediately the Foundation of Faith, as Protestants term it, and no small
number of points according to them fundamental, which are not expressed in
Scripture; as the number of Canonical Books, the entire incorrupt purity of
the Original in any Copy or Copies, which is come to the hands of Protestants,
etc. which in their principles are such points of Faith, that true Faith and
consequently Salvation cannot be obtained without them: For if sole Scripture
(as they affirm) be the Rule of Faith, and all that is in Scripture is to be
believed, and nothing to be believed but what is in Scripture, or evidently
deduced from it; seeing Faith is necessary to Salvation, the determinate belief
of all that is true Scripture, from which only (they say) the true points of
Faith are drawn, must be necessary to Salvation, and so a fundamental point of
Faith.

Thirdly, I demand how any Christian can affirm, that the danger of any point
of Faith whatsoever, being sufficiently propounded as such, is consistent with
Salvation, seeing all such denialls or disbeliefs, include this damnable malice
of attributing falsity to that which is revealed by God himself, as all points
of Faith are, how small soever the matter be which is revealed in them, which
appears evidently by this example.

I suppose that this sentence of Scripture, tertia die resurget, he shall rise
again the third day, is sufficiently propounded to any one, as a point and
Article of Christian Faith, as well according to the substance, resurget, that
our Savior should rise again, (which Protestants grant to be a fundamental
point) as the circumstance of time tertia die, the third day. Now suppose that
some Christian to whom this whole sentence of Scripture is sufficiently
propounded, should firmly believe the substance of the Resurrection, because he
esteems it to be a fundamental point, but should disbelieve the precise
circumstance of time, that it was only upon the third, and no other day; I
demand seeing both the one and the other is propounded equally, as expressly
contained in that sentence of Holy Scripture, whether he that disbelieves that
the Resurrection happened upon the third day and dies in that belief, can be
saved?

To your distinction of fundamental and not fundamental, Cant. answered the
Jesuit, or A. L. in that point, the same I give you, and beseech you, as you
will answer it to Almighty God, say, whether you do not believe the Jesuit or
A. C. was not fully satisfied by the Bishop? If you will have more, thus,
Points fundamental, without believing which, an ignorant man cannot be saved
are set down in the Creed; points fundamental which a learned man opposing,
that is Maliciously, Schismatically, Heretically opposing are many more, even
as many as the Scriptures propose, or the Church, the Catholic Church, either
Representative in a lawful General Council, or otherwise collected
altogether, shall determine from the Scripture either Divinely or deductively.

For your Catalogue, and precise number of fundamental Errors in Faith, as it
came from a cunning brain, so I leave it where I found it.

To your more modest demand, which are destructive of, and which are consistent
with Salvation? I answer, impugning any Article of Faith, stubbornly and
maliciously, is destructive of Salvation, disbelieving what a Church-shall
determine, though it consists not with, yet is not destructive of Salvation.

To your Grecian Church erring fundamentally about the Procession of the Holy
Ghost, I say no more then what some of your own have said, though they disagree
in words, yet they agree in sense, and so err not fundamentally, thereby to
make it no true Church of Christ, but only circumstantially, and so remain a
true Church of Christ; which if you do not remember, you may take it in this
Distick.

Ex Patre and Gnato procedit Spiritus Almus
Quamvis dissideat nomine Graecafides.
An Erroneous Church they may be in this particular, yet a true Church they
are, notwithstanding this particular, because they deny not the
Consubstantiality of the Persons. For your lightness of matter, which the Creed
contains, as it came in by a Parenthesis, so I wish you had left it out, for
fear some whether yours, or ours, I fear both, think lightly in time of all.

The circumstances of Time and Persons, Pontius Pilate, and the Third day, are
to be believed as well as the Substance, Christ suffering and his Resurrection,
that is, the circumstances being maliciously impugned, not simply disbelieved,
will not consist with Salvation.

To your precise number of Canonical Books of Scripture, though the Creed
define them not, yet that does not argue the Creed not to b^ in them, or they
in the Creed; put both together, and you have a sufficient Rule to know which
are, and which are not fundamental points.

Though the Scriptures do not tell you which are, and which are not Canonical,
yet the Church has, and for all that the Scripture is the Rule of Faith, not
the Church, because the Church is but the Door and Threshold, the Scripture,
the house and Foundation.

The incorrupt purity of the Original, we enjoy in our Translations, because
our Translations agree with the Original; nor yet does it follow, that the
determinate belief of what is true Scripture is necessary to Salvation; that is
to all men; to all men fundamental points are necessary, to some only all is
necessary.

Nor is your Example so evident as you would have it appear; for you begin it
with a suppositum, non supponendum, make it your own, not another man's case,
and deny the Resurrection of Christ upon the Third day, or assign it to another
if you dare, I dare not; nor dare I say you may be saved or shall be damned; if
you do, such secrets belong not to me, and I wish you not to be too busy with
them, lest you scorch your fingers.

I demand farther, Paul Heb. 11.1. says, that Faith is (...), the substance or
ground (as the Protestants English Bible of Anno 1648. has it) of things hoped
for, and is reckoned up by the same Apostle Heb. 6.1, 2. amongst those which
are called by him Basis, the Foundation, one of them being Faith to God, and
the Apostle Ephesians. 2.20. says, we are built (...), upon the foundation of the
Prophets and the Apostles, which now according to the Protestants, can be
nothing else save the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles in Holy Scripture,
I demand whether to say, that some points of Faith are not fundamental, or
belonging to the foundation, be not as contrary to common sense, as to say,
that some stone in the foundation of a building belongs not to the foundation,
or is not fundamental.

Sir, Ground or Substance needs not trouble you, nor shall it me; since the
Original will bear either, and Faith to God is one of them which are called
Basis or foundation. And we are built upon the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, may signify the writings of the Prophets and Apostles in holy
Scriptures: This, and all this will not bring in your demand, whether to say,
that some points of Faith are not fundamental, or belonging to the foundation,
be not as contrary to common sense, as to say, that some stone in the
foundation of a building belongs not to the foundation, or is not fundamental?
Or if it did, what harm hence to the Church of England, which says not, any
points of Faith are not fundamental?

Further I demand, Paul affirms in the forecited place Heb. 6.2. that Laying on
of hands, amongst many other points, is the foundation, how Protestants can
deny, that (seeing the Laying on of hands is disbelieved and rejected by them
in the Sacrament of Confirmation, and by some in the Administration of Holy
Orders, as a Popish Superstition) such Protestants differ fundamentally from
those of the Roman Church? Or if the Laying on of hands belong to the
foundation, as St. Paul here affirmed, why Anointing with Oil, mentioned by
St. James, should not also be a fundamental point? Or why Laying on of hands
(being only, as Protestants esteem it, a Ceremony, not Sacramental) should be
here termed the foundation and the substance of the Eucharist, which all hold
to be Sacramental, and more than a mere Ceremony, should not be fundamental? Or
lastly, what reason there is to say, that Laying on of hands has a nearer
connection to the radical and prime mysteries of our Faith, then many other
points controverted betwixt Protestants and those of the Roman Church?

Whether by Laying on of hands here is intended Confirmation, which to be a
Sacrament, properly so taken, that it is Sacramentale quoddam, and yet not
Sacramentum for want of visibile signum invisibilis gratiae, and yet hard again
for you to make it a foundation, the use whereof is not disbelieved or rejected
by us. No, the disuse of it is lamented, and let them answer it who have caused
it. Yes, and Laying on of hands in the Administration of Holy Orders is used by
all those who are ordained Episcopally; and yet no Sacrament for all that,
though we confess it a foundation quoad Ecclesiastices, not quoad Ecclesiam.

Why Anointing with Oil, mentioned by St. James, should not be a fundamental
point, you might have told your self without demand from others, because the
Epistle of St. James, and some other Books, were not received into the Canon of
the Scripture, until some time after the Foundation was laid.

Nor is Laying on of hands esteemed by Protestants a Ceremony not Sacramental,
nor is it by St. Paul termed the Foundation, and substance of the Eucharist.

We all, you and we hold the Eucharist to be a Sacrament, and not only
Sacramental but Fundamental, that is, Inadultis: Nor do I remember that I
ever read, that Laying on of hands has a nearer connection to the radical and
prime Mysteries of our Faith, (unless only in Ecclesiasticis) then many other
points controverted betwixt Protestants, and those of the Roman Church.

It is yet further demanded, Protestants affirm, that the whole Catholic
visible Church may err in the definition of points of Faith, not fundamental,
and seeing that they affirm, that the points in difference betwixt us are not
fundamental, and so not necessary to Salvation; and lastly seeing they affirm
also, that the Scriptures may be obscure in points not necessary to Salvation;
by what means can they ever think to convince the Roman Church of Error in
these points of difference betwixt them and her?

Sir, Protestants do not affirm that the whole Catholic Church can err in
Doctrines absolutely fundamental, and necessary to all men's Salvation; for so
we should destroy an Article of our Creed. I believe the Holy Catholic Church,
which consists of Triumphant souls, as well as Militant men; but that this or
that visible Church, or the whole visible Church and Catholic, as limited to
visible, may err in the definition of points not fundamental; yes, and
fundamental too Protestants do affirm, and the reason is, because the whole
visible Church consists of men; and men when they are at best, are subject to
Error.

Nor do Protestants affirm the points in difference betwixt you and them, to be
not fundamental or unnecessary to Salvation; for some of them, are so
fundamental, and necessary to Salvation to you, and such learned men as you
are, that unless you leave them, you will hardly find the way to Heaven; take
one for all, and let the Merit of your own works be it, and see if your sharing
with Christ in earning a part of your Salvation, will not lose you the whole;
and so by this, the rest of this Question is answered, and the Roman Church
convinced of Error in points of difference betwixt them and her.

Seeing also, that every point of Faith is a Divine Truth, Protestants) with an
infallible assent of Faith, if the universal visible Church may err, and the
Scripture may be obscure, as is generally affirmed by our Adversaries in points
of Faith not fundamental, how shall such points as are in Controversy betwixt
us and are accounted by Protestants not fundamental, or not necessary to
Salvation, be discerned to be points of Faith, or how agreed this Modern
Protestant Doctrine of no difference betwixt us, in points necessary to
Salvation, which that of their beginners, and more ancient Predecessors, who
taught that the Scriptures were clear only in all points necessary to
Salvation, and upon that pretext both affirmed that our Doctrines against them,
were clearly convinced of falsehood by the Authority of sole Scripture, and
allowed all Lay People promiscuously to read them, as being clear to them in
all the points controverted betwixt us, for this manifestly supposes, that they
were held by those beginners, to be points of Faith necessary to Salvation, or
fundamentals: Or what means is there to believe them as points of Faith, seeing
they can never be believed infallibly upon the Churches Authority, by reason of
her pretended fallibility in them, nor expressly for the Authority of Scripture,
by reason of its obscurity in the delivery of them, according to the principles
of Protestants?

That every point of Faith as divine Truth, Protestants) with an infallible
assent of Faith, I cannot say; for if by infallible assent you mean a full
assurance, or great confidence, I can tell you Protestants are not so bold, we
confess assurance to be the effect of a strong Faith, we affirm it not to be
the Essence of all Faith.

If the universal visible Church may err, and the Scriptures may be obscure
as is generally affirmed by out Adversaries in points of Faith not
fundamental, how shall such points as are in Controversy betwixt us, and are
accounted by Protestants not fundamental, or not necessary to Salvation, be
discerned to be points of Faith? How the universal visible Church may err, I
told you in the former; and how the Scriptures may be obscure, and to whom, I
tell you in this; Protestants do not generally affirm them obscure in points
not fundamental, though if they did, it were nothing to the purpose in points
controverted betwixt us.

That Scriptures are the Rule of Faith, which is fundamental, is by Protestants
affirmed.

That the Scriptures are easy and plain to all sorts of men, learned and
unlearned, which use the means, and are diligent in reading them, is likewise
affirmed; when they are obscure to any, they are obscure to them only who have
not eyes enlightened to see into them; they who have humble and diligent souls
will soon discern, which be, and which be not, points of Faith.

How our predecessor; and modern Protestants agree, need no further
demonstration then what is already given; that the Scriptures are clear only
in all points necessary to Salvation, is for you to prove.

Pretext we know none, your Doctrines against us are clearly convinced by
Authority of Scripture, not alone but of expositors also.

Lay People allowed by Protestants to read the Scriptures, and so they were by
the Primitive Fathers; and so they would by you, if you would follow Primitive
and Catholic example; we hold them clear in points of Faith necessary to
Salvation; which though not believed infallibly upon the Churches Authority, by
reason of her (not pretended) fallibility, yet are believed expressly for and by
the Authority of Scripture; without any obscurity in the delivery of them, not
according to the principal of Protestants only, but of the Primitive Fathers
also.

I demand further, in the definition of any points whatsoever, that Error must
either proceed from ignorance and want of light, or from malice and want of
virtue and goodness; not the second, for then the whole visible Church of
Christ should not be sancta, Holy, as it is believed to be in our Creed, and
described in the Scriptures, but should become a Harlot, and abominable
deceiver of the world, and a seducer of Nations, in teaching contrary to the
known truth: not the first, for if she could err out of ignorance, to what
purpose do Protestants appear to her Determination in a lawful and general
Council, in any of the points of difference betwixt them and those of the Roman
Church, seeing she may through ignorance err in the determination of them, as
being not fundamental according to them, neither can it be said,
notwithstanding the whole visible Churches fallibility in points not
fundamental, nay, though it should actually err, and that Error should be
evidently discovered, yet even those, who had thus evidently discovered the
said Errors, were to conform themselves to those erroneous definitions of a
general Council; for if this conformity be understood of an internal conformity
in Judgment, as it is wholly impossible, seeing that were to judge the same
thing to be true and not true at the same time, and to judge against an evident
knowledge: and if it be understood of an external conformity and profession
only, it were manifestly impious and high Hypocrisy in resisting the known
Truth, revealed by Almighty God, which they evidently know to be a most false
Error in Faith.

Secondly, if one were to subscribe and externally to conform himself to the
definitions of lawful general Councils, which one persuades himself he
evidently knows to be erroneous, till another be assembled to correct them; why
did not Protestants afford this external conformity to the definition of the
general Councils of Florence, of Lateran, and to the second Council of Nice,
(to omit others) till some other lawful general Council came to correct their
pretended Errors, they having no other reason to reject the authority of the
said Councils, then that they define many things against the Protestant
Doctrine?

Thirdly, seeing it was never yet seen, nor can be ever made manifest, that any
lawful general Council revoked any definition in matter of Faith of any former
lawful general Council, what hope is there, that they should now begin to do
what was never done before them?

Fourthly, if it were supposed that any such revocatory definition should issue
from them, that party, whose Doctrine should be condemned by such revocations,
would accuse the Council of Error, as much as the contrary party accused the
former Council of error in defining against them, and so the controversy would
remain as indetermined as it was before; neither would it be possible to
determine it fully by a general Council, for the party condemned would still
expect another Council to revoke that definition, which seems to him evidently
erroneous, and so there would be no end of new determinations and revocations
in infinitum.

Yet farther, seeing lawful General Councils do not only oblige, even under
pain of Anathema, or being accursed and excommunicated, all Christians to
believe and profess the Doctrine which they teach them, not only to be true
and free from Error, but to be divine Truth revealed by God himself, if they
should err in any such definition, they must make God the Father of Error and
untruth, which quite destroys the veracity of God, and consequently overthrowes
the main and primary foundation of Christian Faith, and therefore must
necessarily be held to include a fundamental Error: So impossible and
implicatory a thing it is, for them to err in matter of Faith, and not to err
fundamentally. For either that erring Council must define some positive Error,
or that which God never revealed to be revealed from God, or that some true
Revelation from God is an Error. Both which con^^ine no less malice then this,
To make God a Liar.

How the whole visible Church may err, Sancta, Holy, as you say most rightly;
but why not from Ignorance? For they are but men, and men at best know not all
things, they know but in part; and yet we appeal to the determination of her,
in a lawful General Council, because what she knows in part, and what you
know in part, and what we know in part, may amount to more then half the whole;
and therein we shall acquiesce until we know perfectly.

So then, the malicious, erroneous definition of a General Council, if
lawfully called, being declined, we shall study conformity, both internal in
judgment, and external in profession, without sinning, either against evident
knowledge within, or by high Hypocrisy without.

And yet why we conformed not to the definitions of the General Councils, (as
you call them) of Florence, of Lateran, and the second of Nice, you know, if
you would express it as well as we; not so much for defining many things
against our, as against the Catholic Doctrine.

Nor thirdly, is all hope taken away from doing what was never done, (as you
say, but most untruly) because some General Councils have revoked what former
General Councils lawfully called have determined.

And fourthly, upon supposition, that any such revocatory definition should
issue; that either you or our selves, either of our Doctrines being condemned,
should still expect another Council to revoke that definition? For certainly
the Catholic Christian will be so modest, as to stand to the definition of
that spiritual power, which he acknowledges the highest upon Earth, though
the Catholic Roman would not unless the Bishop of Rome both called and
commanded the Council, and so the In infinitum, would be yours, not ours.

And farther let it be granted, that lawful General Councils do oblige under
pain of Anathema to believe and profess that Doctrine which they teach to be
free from Error, and a divine Truth revealed by God himself, so it be not a new
Revelation against the old; we would not believe they make God the Author of
Error, or a Liar, you may do it if you please, or dare.

Seeing St. Paul Ephesians. 4.14. affirms that our Savior had appointed Pastors and
Teachers till the day of judgment, as a means to preserve Christian people
from being carried about with every wind of Doctrine, cannot be understood
disjunctively: For then, if those Pastors preserved them, from being seduced in
one only point of Christian Doctrine, it would not be true, that they
preserved them from being carried about with every wind of Doctrine; but they
must be understood Conjunctively, that is, that they preserve them from being
carried away with any wind of Doctrine whatsoever, which should chance to be
buzzed into their Ears by false Teachers; now seeing such winds of erroneous
Doctrine are raised as well in points which Protestants account not
fundamental, as in fundamentals, the meaning of the Apostle then must be, that
by means of these Pastors, Christians be preserved from following any Error in
Faith, whether it be fundamental or not fundamental, and consequently that
they can assuredly direct them to eschew all Errors in Faith, which they could
not do, if they themselves were subject to teach them any Errors, or seduce
them by any wind of Doctrine whatsoever.

Seeing also, that St. Paul in the same place Ephesians. 4.10. tells us that the said
Pastors, are to Consummate the Saints, and to build up the Mystical body of
Christ, I demand whether the Apostle by these words make not those Pastors able
to secure Christian people from Error, not only in the Foundation (as
Protestants term it) but in superstructures also, for otherwise they would
have been instituted by our Savior only to found his Mystical body the
Church, but not to build it up, and to ground and initiate the Saints, but not
to Consummate them?

Sir, Paul's Text, Ephesians. 4.14. be current or not, is a Question; if it be, why
may not the words be undestood disjunctively, as well as conjunctively? Your
own Predecessors the Romanists thought so, where they say upon these words, the
use of spiritual Governors (not all Pastors and Teachers) is to keep us in the
Unity and constancy of the Catholic Faith, that we be not carried away with
the blast and wind of every Heresy, (and there are Errors and winds of
Doctrine besides Heresies,) which is a proper note of Sects, and new Doctrine
which trouble the infirm weaklings of this Church; as sometimes the Arrians,
then the Manichees, then the Nestorians, then the Latherans and Calvinists and
such like; so the Rhemists, they might have left the last out, as being yet
uncondemned of Heresy; but you will have the words understood Conjunctively,
That the people be preserved from being carried away with any wind of Doctrine
whatsoever, and if this be granted you, what get you by it more then Turpe est
Doctori; for I pray what Pastors or Teachers have carried about silly people,
with such winds and kinds of Doctrine as these?

That Christ descended only in Limbum Patrum, a higher part of Hell. That some
sinners go into Purgatory, a side part of Hell. That half a Sacrament is
enough, contrary to Christ's Institution, and the Catholic Churches practice
for 1000. years. That the intention of the Priest is of the essence of Baptism.
That worship is due to Images. That there is a Transubstantiation; a conversion
of the Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ corporally. I forbear a
new Creed made at the no general or lawful Council of Trent, and many more such
winds of Doctrine wherewith you have carried about some souls.

To your other Text Ephesians. 4.10. and your demand upon it, whether the Apostle by
these words, To consumniate the Saints, and to build up the Mystical body of
Christ, make not those Pastors able to secure Christian people from error, not
only in the foundation, but in the superstructures also? Sure I think not; for
the Apostle himself was enabled by God, and so are all Pastors that do their
duty conscientiously. The Apostle only tells the succeeding Pastors their duty,
and woe to them if they do it not, he enables them not to do it.

If it should be answered,

I answer to this profane and unchristian Objection, first, that if Christ's
promises and institutions be thus inefficacious and conditional, that
notwithstanding the promises that Christ has made for the preservation of his
Church, yet by the malice of Christians, or others, the whole Christian Church
may utterly fail and come to nothing. Secondly, that it may err even in
fundamental points, (contrary to the Doctrine of Protestants) and so become a
Synagogue of Satan. Thirdly, that the ancient Promises of the coming of the
Messiah, of the REdemption of Mankind, of the saving of some at the last
Judgment, etc. have no absolute certainty in them, and so by the malice of men
might have been, or may be frustrated.

Fourthly, that by this there is no certain credit to be given to any Promise
or Institution of God or Christ, in the whole Old or New Testament, for a
thousand different conditions may be invented, which not being performed or
put, the prediction fails: Thus one may say (upon the like grounds) that as
the promises of benefits and blessings may be hindered by the malice and
demerits of wicked persons, so the threats and thundrings of punishments upon
sinners may be hindered by the virtues and good works of Saints; and because we
have no rule to know what proportion of goodness or malice is sufficient to
frustrate such predictions, we remain wholly uncertain, whether they shall be
absolutely verified or no, unless therefore this principle be settled, that all
divine Institutions and Predictions are to be held absolute, and never to be
frustrated, whenever it is not evidently apparent, that they are conditional,
and may be hindered, there can be no certainty that any Institution or
prediction in the whole Scripture shall be absolutely fulfilled.

Seeing therefore it is not evident that this institution, Ephesians. 4. etc. and
others of the same nature concerning the Church are conditional, they are to
be supposed to be absolute, and not to be frustrated by any malice of men
whatsoever.

Fifthly, no Protestants who hold the whole visible Church cannot perish, nor
all the Pastors prove wilful Seducers, can apply this answer to the Text now
cited, viz. Ephesians. 4. etc. for if it be hindered by the malice of the said
Pastors, they must with joint consent maliciously teach false Doctrine, to be
the Doctrine of Christ, which were to teach fundamental Errors, and to fall
off from Christ. If this solution may pass for current, who can be certainly
assured, that there is any true Church of Christ, visible or invisible existent
now in the world? for all the promises concerning the continuance of it to the
worlds end, may be as well said to be as well conditional and frustrate by the
malice of men, as this, Ephesians. 4, etc. and who knows that the said malice is not
already grown to that height, that it has deserved, that God should take his
true Church quite out of the world, and so that there is now no true Church
existent in all the world?

Sir, in this long passage,

That which was never Questioned or Answered, ought not now to be Questioned or
Answered; but the frustrating of Gods predictions (conditional or absolute,)
by man's malice or merits was never Questioned or Answeted, therefore now ought
not to be Questioned or Answered.

Such as these may well come out of a Jesuiticall Court, but never yet came
from the Catholic Church: Sir, I must and do tell you, there is little less
then Blasphemy in your supposition, and somewhat more then little less in your
position; this is beyond, Nihil dictum quod non dictum fuit prius.

Whether it be not evident, Protestants, who cannot determine differences in
Religion, either by force of Argument or places of Scripture, but must wholly
depend in the choice of their Faith, upon Authority and Credit of Christian
Teachers, are not obliged in Conscience to prefer that Authority and
credibility of Doctors, which all circumstances considered is absolutely and
unquestionably the greater Authority?

No, Protestants can determine differences in Religion, if not by force of
Argument, yet by places of Scripture; which they of Rome cannot do; and the
reason is ready, they deny their Laity, we allow ours to read the Scripture,
and therefore need not depend upon their Teachers, but upon the Teacher of us
all; nor have you yet proved your Authority, unquestionably the greater, but
unquestionably the least of all Authorities, unless you take it, Sensu Romano
non Catholico, what the next produces we shall see.

Whether that Authority of Doctors, absolutely, and unquestionably the greatest
Authority?

To pass your impertinences of Idem upon Idem, Protestants party in Learning,
Wisdom, Zeal, Sincerity, Virtue, Sanctity; to which add but the Scripture,
and we will acknowledge a complete Authority, and submit to the exposition of
that Authority in the sense of the four first General Councils, and the
Fathers of the first 800. years, or a present lawfully called General Council;
to which if you will do the like, we shall then praise God, for the fruition of
what we yet pray for, the Peace and Unity of Christendom.

Whether this equality at least in all the said perfections, Roman Doctors
compared with those of the Protestants?

Let the equality at least, Quoad hominem, though the Comparison savers not
well, what you gain by it, we may see anon.

Whether this forementioned equalizing the Protestant Doctors, those of the
Roman Church, Protestants profession?

No; it does not, years comes nearest to the primitive purity in matter of
Religion, your 800. or our 800. Name but one general Council, or any number of
Fathers for the first 800. exceeding our number, and actum est, the field is
yours.

Whether this equality in perfections, Protestants are not obliged, both in
Prudence and Conscience to prefer the Authority of the Roman Doctors, before
that of Protestants, and consequently to follow the Roman and desert the
Protestant Doctrine?

No, Id^m per idem still, only you have now added Conscience to Prudence, add
but Scripture to your Roman Doctors, and that Scripture expounded by the first
800. years, either representatively or successively, or by a present lawfully
called general Council, and we shall have conscience, yours and ours, ruled by
prudence, and prudence following conscience, and by both Unity restored.

Whether upon the foresaid considerations the Authority of the Protestant
Doctors, Romans, is not contemptible, and unable to sway the judgment of any
prudent Christian, to frame any moral esteem of it; for though in matters
wherein they are seconded, or not contradicted by an Authority incomparably
greater than their own, they may deservedly be esteemed for their Natural
Abilities, and Moral Qualities worthy of Credit, yet in all things wherein
they stand in opposition and contradiction against an Authority incomparably
exceeding theirs, they deserve nothing but to be slighted and contemned, by
all those who are to be led by the sole force of Authority: Thus when
Protestant Doctors affirm, that either the Scriptures or Fathers are for them,
and against the Roman Church; what they say in this is not to be regarded,
seeing the Authority of the Roman Doctors, absolutely greater then theirs,
unanimously affirm the quite contrary; thus when they affirm, that the Roman
Church is full of Errors and Superstitions, crept in they know neither when,
nor how, their accusation is to be slighted, being clearly and constantly
contradicted by a far greater Authority.

Thus when they say, that Protestants may be saved, living and dying wilfully
in their Religion, they deserve no Credit at all, for the quite contrary is
most constantly defended by the incomparably stronger Authority of the Roman
Doctors, and the like is to be affirmed in all points of difference betwixt the
two Religions; so that a Protestant is not to consider the Abilities and
Authority of his Doctors, absolutely or in matters out of Controversy, but as
contradicting an Authority incomparably excelling theirs, in which
contradiction they deserve neither Credit nor Esteem.

It was once, twice trice before but an equalizing, Gratis dictum: prove your
Authority greater, and but greater without incomparably then ours, and we
yield; in the mean time, you shall give me leave to send you this Syllogism
for answer to your Question.

Protestants alleging Scripture expounded by the Fathers for the first 800.
years, are at least of an equal Authority with the Church, and Doctors of
Rome, alleging Scripture without the exposition of those Fathers; but
Protestants so allege Scripture, and so the Roman Doctors allege Scripture.

Therefore the Protestants are of an equal Authority at least with the Roman
Doctors. You will be forced to confess more than my modesty challenges, in the
mean time I suspect you for an incomparably choleric proud man, contending
more for Triumph than Truth, and till you have incomparably proved your
Authority, seek not to Proselitize an unlearned Protestant, to captivate his
Faith and Religion to Roman Doctors without Faith or Religion.

I demand farther, Protestants be so inconsiderable in comparison with those of
the Roman Doctors, how much less will be the Authority of any one Sect or Party
of them, and then how minute and scarce perceptible will be the Authority of a
Laud, a Hammond, a Chilling-worth, a Fern, a Bramhall, a Tailor, etc. who now
obtain so powerful an ascendant upon the hearts of our modern Lay protestants,
seeing they are in a manner nothing in respect of the Authority of the Roman
Doctors?

Authoritatively supoken of your Roman Doctors, Protestants; but, I pray, whom
do you intend by Laud? so you style him, I knew him Mr. William Land, Dr.
William Laud, Lord Bishop William Laud, Lord Archbishop William Laud, and know
not you his Conference with Fisher, Mr. Fisher, or Dr. Fisher, if he attained
so high, be answered Sir.

I can tell you of a Gentleman yet living, who in Constantinople, at one bout,
heard ten of your Doctors rejoice much at the Archbishops death, because he was
the great, if not the greatest enemy your Roman Church ever had, and this
because he labored for an Unity and Reconciliation of Christendom: answer him
when you please or can, and till then let him enjoy peace in his Grave, without
your detracting him, as not living to give you his own answer.

By Chillingworth, so you, Mr. Chillingworth, so I, is dead too, I pray you
when will you answer his Letter to Mr. Lewiger a brother of your own, and which
I have now sent you, till you do, let him be in peace too.

Good Master Lewiger,
THough I am resolved not to be much afflicted for the loss of that which is
not in my power to keep, yet I cannot deny but the loss of a friend goes very
near to my heart; and by this name of friend I did presume, till of late, I
might have called you; because that perhaps for want of power and opportunity,
I have done you no good office; yet I have been always willing and ready to do
you the best service I could: And therefore I cannot but admire at the affected
strangeness, which in your last letter to me, you seemed to take upon you;
renouncing in a manner all relation to me, and tacitly excommunicating me from
all interest in you: The superscription of your letter to me is, to Mr. W. C.
and your subscription is, John L. as if you either disdained, or made
conscience of styling me your friend, or your self mine: If this proceed from
reason, I pray show it; If it proceed from passion or weakness, I pray mend it:
If you think me one of those, to whom St. John forbids you to say, God save
you, then you are to think and prove me one of those deceivers, which denied
Jesus Christ to be come in the flesh: If you think me an Heretic, and
therefore to be avoided, you must prove me (...), by my own judgment, which I
know I cannot, and therefore you cannot: If you say, I do not hear the Church,
and therefore am to be esteemed an Heathen or Publican, you are to prove then,
that by the Church is meant the Church of Rome: And yet when you have done so,
I hope Christians are not forbidden to show Humanity and Civility even to
Pagans: For Gods sake Mr. L. free your self from this blind zeal at least for a
little space; and consider with reason and moderation, what strange crime you
can charge me with, that I should deserve this strange usage, especially from
you.

Is it a crime with all my understanding to endeavor to find your Religion
true, and to make my self a believer of it, and not to be able to do so? Is it
a crime to employ all my reason upon the justification of the infallibility of
the Roman Church, and to find it impossible to be justified? I will call God to
witness, who knows my heart better then you do, that I have evened the scale
of my judgment as much as possibly I could, and have not willingly allowed any
one grain of worldly motives on either side, but have weighed the reasons for
your Religion, and against it, with such indifferency, as if there were
nothing in the world but God and my self: and is it my fault that the scale
goes down, which has the most weight in it? that the building falls which has
a false Foundation? Have you such power over your understanding, that you can
believe what you please, though you see no reason? or that you can suspend your
belief when you do see reason? If you have, I pray for our old friendship sake,
teach me that trick; and until I have learnt it, I pray blame me not for going
the ordinary way; I mean, for believing, or not believing, as I see reason: If
you can convince me of wilful opposition against the known truth, of
negligence in seeking it, of unwillingness to find it, of preferring temporal
respect before it, or of any other fault that is in my power to amend: It is
indeed a fault, if I amend it not, be as angry with me as you please: But to
impute unto me unvoluntary Errors, or that I do not see what I would see, but
cannot, or that I will not profess what I do not believe, certainly this is a
far more reasonable Error, then any you can justly charge me withal; for let
me tell you, that imputing Socinianisme to me, (whosoever was the Author of it)
was a wicked and groundless slander: Perhaps you will say (for this is the
usual song of your side) that Pride is a voluntary fault, and with this I am
justly chargeable, for forsaking the Guide, which God has appointed me to
follow; but what if I forsook it, because I thought I had reason to fear it was
one of those blind Guides, which whosoever blindly follows, is threatened by
our Savior that both he and his Guide shall fall into the Duch? Th^^ I hope
you will grant, it was not Pride but Conscience that moved me so to do; for as
it is a wise humiliation to obey those, whom God has set over me; so it is a
sinful Credulity, to follow every man or every Church, that without warrant
will take upon them to be my Guides: Show then some good and evident title
which the Church of Rome has to this office; produce but one reason for it,
which upon trial will not finally be resolved and vanish into uncertainties,
and if I yield not unto it, say, (if you please) I am as proud as Lucifer: In
the mean time, give me leave to think it strange, and not far from a Prodigy,
that the Doctrine of the Roman Church, being the Guide of Faith, if it be true
Doctrine, should either not be known to the four Evangelists, or if it were
known to them, being wise and good men, they should either be so envious of the
Churches happiness, or so forgetful of the work they took in hand (which was
to write the whole Gospel of Christ) ^s not so much as one of them should
mention so much as once this so necessary a part of the Gospel, without the
belief whereof there is no Salvation, and with the belief whereof (unless men
be snatched away by sudden death) there is hardly any Damnation.

It is evident they do all of them with one consent speak very plainly of many
things of no importance in comparison hereof; and is it credible, or indeed
possible, that with one Torrent, or rather conspiracy, they should be so deeply
silent concerning this Unum necessarium?

You may believe it if you can, for my part I cannot, unless I see
demonstration for it: For if you say, they send us to the Church, and
consequently to ^he Church of Rome, this is to suppose that which can never be
proved, viz. That the Church of Rome is the only Church, and without this
supposition upon the division of the Church, I am as far to seek for a guide of
my faith as ever; as for Example, In that great division of the Church, when
the whole world wondered (says St. Hierome) that it was become Arrian, when
Liberius Bishop of Rome (as St. Athanasius, St. Hierome, and St. Hillary
testify) subscribed their Heresy, and joined in Communion with them: or in
the division of the Greek and the Roman Church about the Procession of the Holy
Ghost, when either side was the Church unto it self, and each part heretical or
schismatical to the other; what direction could I then (an ignorant man) have
found from that Text of Scripture, Unless he hear the Church let him be unto
thee as an Heathen or a Publicane: or upon this rock I will build my Church,
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it?

Again, give me leave to wonder, that neither St. Paul, writing to the Romans,
should so much as intimate this their privilege of Infallibility; but rather
the contrary, put them in fear, in the 11. Chapter, because they as well as the
Jews were in danger of falling away.

That St. Peter, your pretended Bishop of Rome, writing two Catholic Epistles,
mentioning his departure, should not once acquaint the Christians, whom he
writes to, what guide they should follow after he was taken from them.

That the Writers of the New Testament should so frequently forewarn men of
Heretics, false Christ's, false Prophets, and not once arm them against them,
with letting them know this only means of avoiding their danger.

That so great a part of the New Testament should be employed against
Antichrist, and so little, indeed none at all, about the Vicar of Christ, and
the Guide of the Faithful.

That our Savior should leave this only means for the ending of Controversy,
and speak so obscurely and ambiguously, that now our Judge is the greatest
controversy, and the greatest hindrance of ending them.

That there should be better evidence in the Scripture to entitle the King to
this Office, who disclaims it, than the Pope who pretends it.

That St. Peter should never exercise over the Apostles any one Act of
Jurisdiction, nor they ever give him any one title of Authority over them.

That if the Apostles did know that St. Peter was made head of them, when our
Savior said, Thou art Peter, they should still contend who should be the
first; and that our Savior should not tell them, that Peter was the man.

That St. Paul should say, He was in nothing inferior to the very chief
Apostles.

That the Catechumeni in the primitive Church should never be taught this
foundation of their faith.

That the Fathers, Tertullian, St. Jerome and Optatus, when they flew highest
in commendation of the Roman Church, should attribute no more to her than to
all other Apostolical Churches.

That in the controversy about Easter, the Bishops and Churches of Asia should
be so ill catechized, as not to know this principle of Religion, The necessity
of conformity with the Church of Rome.

That they should never be pressed with any such conformity in all things, but
only with the particular Tradition of the Western Churches in that point.

That Fryverus, and many other Bishops (notwithstanding, Ad hanc Ecclesiam
necesse est omnem convenire Ecclesiam,) should not yet think that a necessary,
nor a sufficient ground of Excommunication, which the Church of Rome thought to
be so.

That St. Cyprian and the Bishops of Africa, should be so ill instructed in
their Faith, as not to know this Foundation of it.

That they likewise, were never urged with any such necessity of Conformity
with the Church of Rome, nor charged with Heresy or Error for denying it.

That when Liberius joined in Communion with the Arrians, and subscribed their
Heresy, the Arrians then should not be the Church and Guide of Faith.

That never any Heretics for five Ages after Christ were pressed with this
Argument of the Infallibility of the present Church of Rome, or charged with
the denial of it, as a detestable Heresy, for that Aeneas Silvius, should
have cause to say, Ante tempora Concilii Nicaeni quisque sibi vivebat, and
parvus respectus habebatur ad Ecclesiam Romanam.

That the Ecclesiastical story of those times mention no Acts of Authority of
the Church of Rome over other Churches, as if there should be a Monarchy and
Kings for some Ages together, and should exercise no Acts of Jurisdiction in it.

That to supply this defect, the Decretall Epistles should be so impudently
forged, which in a manner speaks nothing but Reges and Monarchas, I mean, The
Popes making Laws for, and exercising Authority over all other Churches.

That the Africane Churches in St. Austins time should be ignorant that the
Pope was Head of the Church, and Judge of Appeals, jure divino; and that there
was a Necessity of Conformity with the Church of Rome in this, and all other
points of Doctrine.

Nay, that the Popes themselves should be so ignorant of the true ground of
this their Authority, as to pretend to it, not upon Scripture or universal
Tradition, but upon an imaginary no-such Canon of the Council of Nice.

That Vincentius Lyrinensis, seeking for a Guide of his Faith, and a
preservation from Heresy, should be ignorant of this so ready a one, The
infallibility of the Church of Rome.

All these things, and many more, are very strange to me, If the infallibility
of the Roman Church be in deed, and was always by Christians acknowledged the
Foundation of our Faith.

And therefore I beseech you pardon me, if I choose to build mine upon one that
is much firmer and safer, and lies open to none of those Objections, which is
Scripture and universal Tradition; and if one that is of this Faith may have
leave to do so, I will subscribe with hand and heart,

Your very loving and true friend, W. C.


By Bramhall, so you; my Lord Bishop Bramhall, so I: when will you answer him,
or rather reply to his Answer to Mounseir Millitere? he is alive, and while he
lives you dare not (I suppose) do it, since he Commands as much Learning and
Reason as any of you all, put you altogether.

By Hammond, Fern, Tailor, so you, Doctor Hammond, Doctor Fern, Doctor
Tailor, so I, (nor should I have said less of any of your Roman Doctors, so far
have I read my Ethics) are all living and can answer for themselves, with whom
if you and yours hap to Cope, I am confident, you will fall in the Combat; if
you Conquer I will be your Proselite, not for the strength of your Questions,
or pinning my Faith upon their Learning, Religion, Zeal, Sincerity, Virtue, and
Wisdom, (in all which they exceed) but for the strictness of my own Conscience,
so that the Combat be decided before equitable, and equal Judges.

All this is demanded, supposing that the Roman Doctors were only equal to
those of Protestants in all the aforenamed Qualities, conducing to the perfect
Authority of a Master in Christianity.

But now I demand, whether those that have Authority of Teaching in the Roman
Church generally speaking in so much as can be prudently deduced by experience
from them, are not much excelling the Protestant Ministry in all the said
Qualities?

What Councils have they worth the mentioning in comparison of the General
Councils consenting with the present Roman Church, (even according to their own
Confession) as the second of Nice, the Great Council of Lateran, the Council
of Constance, Florence and Trent, wherein such multitudes of Learned men, and
holy Patriarchs, Metropolitans, Archbishops, Bishops, Doctors, Prelates, both
of the Eastern and Western Churches, unanimously confirmed the Roman and
condemned the Protestant Doctrine?

What proofs of Learning have the Protestant Ministry, comparable to those of
the Roman Doctors, whereof many have written one, no small number two, others
three, and four, others six, eight, ten, twelve, and some twenty, and four and
twenty great Tomes in folio, and those replenished in the general repute of
Christendom, even amongst Protestants also, with profound and high Learning?

Who amongst their Ministry have they, who have obtained the universal esteem
of Sanctity, as has our Gregory, Beda, Thomas, Bonaventure, Antonine,
Dominick, and diverse others?

Where find they amongst theirs that zeal to pass into the heart of so many
barbarous and Heathen Nations to plant the Cospel, even with the undergoing of
unheard of Torments, and suffering most cruel Martyrdoms, as many of the Roman
Clergy have done within these late years?

Let them name but any sole Minister, who has suffered Martyrdom for preaching
Christian Faith to Pagans.

What means have the Protestant Ministry, with their Wives, Goods and
Families, to apply themselves to study and devotion, comparable to our single
Clergy and retired Religions?

Where is that unanimous consent in all Points of Faith (seeing they are
perpetually jarring, not only one with another, but the same Minister
dissenting notoriously now from what they taught twenty years ago) amongst
them, compared to the constancy and agreement of our Doctors?

What Miracles have any of their Ministry done, in confirmation either of
their Doctrine against the Roman Church, or of the Christian Faith against
Heathens, as (unless all human Faith be infringed) many of ours have done, both
against them and Heathens?

I could instance in many more particulars, but these may suffice for these
short demands, whence appears evidently, That whosoever professes to be led by
the sole Authority of Christian Doctors and Pastors, must either deserve the
esteem, I say, not only of an unchristian, but even of an imprudent man, if he
adhere to so undeserving and contemptible an Autho^ity, as is that of the
Protestant Ministry in comparison of the Roman Doctors, who so incomparably
outstrip them, not only in multitude, but in all the motives and perfections
which give credit to the Authority of a Christian Teacher.

Again, incomparable comparison, and with your addition of an undeserving and
contemptible Authority in the Protestant Ministry, outstript in multitude,
motives, and in all perfections: If this be your way to get credit to your
cause, much good may it do you, but on an ordinary wise man I conceive it will
not work. Had you continued your supposition of Equality betwixt the Roman and
Protestant Doctors, it would more become you, and might have proved a better
way to overcome us; how much you excel us will presently be seen in your
demands.

The first whereof is, What Councils have the Protestants worth the mentioning,
in comparison with the general Councils consenting with the present Roman
Church? and then you name five, the Second of Nice, the great Council of
Lateran, the Council of Constance, Florence and Trent, now I must mark a
juggle here; you name not what you name these Councils for, but in the general,
the particulars must be guest at, and I shall guess at them.

The second of Nice I conceive you name for Images, or worshipping of God by
Images, for until this Council (which was not called until the Year 787.)
Images, or Worshipping of God by Images was never decreed, and what value this
Council is of, I tell you truly from my Books.

There were more unlearned and evil-disposed men in it, than ever were in any
before, or almost since: it was called by Irene the Empress, an Heathen borne,
converted Christian by Constantinus his Father, to whom she was married, and
suffered her son Constantine to lofe his eyes, for withstanding the
determinations of this Council, so much natural affection she had.

Called by her, and managed by one Tharisius a Layman, a Courtier, and Bishop
of one years standing, and John Legate of the East Church, of whom it is said,
he was a devout man, but of no great Learning, and the other two that ruled the
roast in this Council were Theodosius and Constantinus, of all whom together it
has been said, There were never simpler men for gifts, nor worse-disposed men
for attempts.

And now against this Council against us, we oppose four Councils for us
against you, The second of Ephesus, the second of Constantinople, that of
Eliberis, and the fourth of Carthage.

The great Council of Lateran, I conceive it alleged for the matter of
Transubstantiation, and here I note the Antiquity of this Council; It was
called in the Year 1215. so old is Transubstantiation, no older, and against
this we oppose all Councils and Fathers silence before, and before all, the
institution of Christ himself, who says, The flosh profits no thing, my
words are spirit, and the Exposition of this Institution of all Writers until
this Council.

The Council of Constance, I conceive it alleged for communion in one kind,
against which I need not say more, than what Gelasius Bishop of Rome it self
said, Sine grandi Sacrilegio fieri non potest, it was high Sacrilege to do it;
unless you will give me leave to add Christ's own Precept, Drink you all of
this, all Laity as well as Clergy.

The Council of Florence, I conceive it alleged for Purgatory, called Anno
1438. and if I am right in this Contecture, I need not say more then what
A^phonsus a Castro l. 8. adv. Here Is. verbo, Indulgentia, has said, the mention
of Purgatory in ancient writers is almost none at all; and if you will be
pleased to name any one Father, save Origin, until St. Gregory the Great his
time, that is direct for Purgatory, I shall not much stand upon it, since I
think it will not much hinder any man's Salvation, to believe it or disbelieve
it: for my part I neither do, nor dare, nor will believe it.

The Council of Trent, called Anno 1563. I conceive it alleged for all
differences whatsoever betwixt the Romans and Protestants; which Council, if
you can prove was either lawful, general or free, which I yet positively deny
in each, I shall sit down; and in this Council I tell you, were not many Holy
Patriarchs, Metropolitans, Archbishops, Bishops, not one of the Eastern Church,
and you know the reason of it too.

For proofs of Learning, if the Church of England be not comparable to you in
number, she has exceeded you in weight, and that this world knows, and you
have felt, and now you by your policy make the Churchmen of England smart for
it.

For your universal esteem of Sanctity, with your Gregory, Beda, Thomas,
Bonaventure, Antonine, Dominick, to avoid some stories of some of them, The
Church of England can produce as great a Cloud of witnesses by the Verdict of
all unbyassed men, in an Andrews, a Bucheridge, a Laud, a Montague, a Hall, a
Prideaux, and diverse others before them, a Jewel, a Whitgift, a Cranmer, a
Latimer, a Ridley.

Speak not too much of your zealous passing into barbarous Nations, to convert
them, lest the Indean be brought out of Love with Heaven, if the Roman go
thither.

And for our Ministry with their Wives, ( Goods and Families, we have little
left, thanks to you, or some as bad as you) they can apply themselves to Study,
and Devotion, as well and with less sin, then your single Clergy, and retired
Religions.

Boast not too much of your unanimous consent, until your Dominicans, and
Franciscans be at peace, about the immaculate Conception of the blessed Virgin,
until your Jesuits, and Dominicans be at peace about the Aids, and Operations
of Grace, until Bannes and Lessius be at peace in the sad point of absolute
Reprobation; until your Doctors of Sorbon and Lovaine be at peace about the
Popes Supremacy; until Venice and Rome be all at peace about the Popes power;
until the French and Spanish Papists be at peace about an equality of
Subjection to the Pope; until (...) ^regory the first, and Gregory the seventh
be by some (...) your selves reconciled about the Title of Vniversalis
Episcopus; until all of you be reconciled about the Popes infallibility;
until all and every one of you tell the world, whether Translation of the
Bible by Sextus the first, or Clement the eight be the best; cum multis aliis
quae nunc perscribere longum est.

For miracles to confirm our Doctrine against yours, we need none, until you
by a new miracle turn Rome as it is, into Rome as it was; and then we all meet
in an incomparable Authority of one Catholic Church.

Whether hence be not evidently discovered not only the insufferable Pride of
Luther, Original beginners, of any Sect in Protestancy in preferring their
sole Authority before that of the Prelates and Doctors, of all the visible
Churches in Christendom existent, when they begun first to preach their
Doctrine, but the extreme madness of all the ignorant Laity, who followed them,
upon their sole Authority, and preferred one single person upon his bare word,
(without any extraordinary signs or manifest proofs from Heaven, attesting
his Authority) before all the Doctors, Prelates, Councils, Churches, within the
precincts of Christendom; both of that present time, and for 900. years before?
And if those were infected with so deep a frenzy, how can any man be adjudged
deservedly discreet and prudent, who approves of their proceedings in this
particular, and sides with them, (at least in some Article of other) in the
opposition of the whole Christian world, as all Protestants do, even to this
day?

Rarely spoken, The insufferable Pride of Luther; if he were guilty of it, let
him answer for it, and all other Original beginners of any Sect in
Protestancy; Sir, it is very well known who said, This Sect is every where
spoken against, yet for all that, that very Sect overspread it self, and
conquered the whole world, and this very Sect of Protestancy, has put a fair
beginning to the Conquest of the Roman Doctrine; which though now like that
Sect under the ten Persecution (...) somewhat eclipsed, has yet so much light
left, as to discern between all the visible Churches in Christendom, all
Doctors, Prelates, Councils, Churches, within the precincts of Christendom, and
the present Roman, and claim none for our beginners but Christ and his
Apostles, the four General Councils and the Primitive Fathers, and the Church
of Rome it self as it was, when it was Catholic; and therefore think they are
to be judged deservedly discreet and prudent, who approve our present
Doctrines, with the whole Christian world, and desert the present Roman.

Hence I farther demand, the true Christian Religion, having the divine Wisdom
for its Authority, cannot admit of any thing imprudent as properly belonging to
it, in the choice of it; and on the other side, That the Protestant Religion,
or any Sect whatsoever sprung from it, or existent in it, cannot be prudently
chosen by any unlearned person, who is sufficiently informed of the nullity of
that Authority, which propounds it, compared with the Authority, propounding
the Roman Religion; whether, I say, those particulars considered, the
Protestant Religion in any Sect of it whatsoever can be esteemed the true
Christian Religion?

Sir, Protestant Religion divided into any Sects; we all believe the same
Creeds, we all hold the same foundation and Articles of Faith, we all hold the
Scriptures the only judge of controversies, which because you deny and
decline, we think that man imprudent who deserts the Protestant to turn Roman,
and him prudent that deserts the Roman to turn Protestant; since there is but a
possibility of salvation for an unlearned man in the Roman, because it depends
upon human Authority; in the Protestant there is a certainty of salvation for
unlearned and learned, because it depends upon divine Authority, and therefore
a true christian Church and Religion.

Hence I press further, Protestant Religion cannot be prudently chosen or
retained by any unlearned persons, who are sufficiently informed of the eminent
Authority propounding the Roman Religion, is not a sufficient Argument to them,
that no Sect amongst them, in any point wherein it differs from the Roman, has
either any solid ground in the Holy Scriptu^es, or true relation to Gods Holy
Spirit, or coherence with true Religion, seeing a Religion which cannot by them
be prudently chosen, cannot possibly proceed from any of these three,
whatsoever fair show Protestants (each respectively to his several Sect) make
vainly of them?

Sir, all these are but words, supponere not supponenda: For that Religion may
be prudently chosen, whose rule of Faith is certain; but such is the rule of
Faith in the Protestant Religion (as being ultimated and determined in and by
the Scripture) therefore the Protestant Religion may be prudently chosen.
Again, that Religion cannot be prudently chosen, whose Authority, proposing it,
is not sufficient; but such is the Authority, propounding the present Roman
Religion (as being human whether Pope or Council) therefore the Roman present
Religion cannot prudently be chosen.

Again, that Religion may prudently be chosen, which has true relation to Gods
Holy Spirit, but the Protestant Religion has such relation, therefore the
Protestant Religion may prudently be chosen; for there is a true relation
betwixt Gods Holy Spirit and Gods Holy Word, because Gods Holy Spirit is the
Author of Gods Holy Word.

I need not speak of the third, because coherence with true reason follows
either of the former.

And upon this I demand yet further, Roman Doctors have any obligation to urge
any other Argument then this, either from Scripture, Fathers or reason, against
Protestants, till they have cleared their Religion from the impeachment of
imprudence, committed by their followers in the election of it, or persisting
in it, as is before declared?

Sir, your before Declaration has proved little, and your present proves less,
though I confess your Roman Doctors have no farther obligation to urge any
other Argument then Scripture, Fathers, or Reason, against Protestants.

Urge either of them to purpose, and we shall be so far from clearing our
Religion from the impeachment of imprudence, that we will confess, it is the
only prudence in the choice of Religion, to embrace the Roman.

Till then, I say,

That Religion which has not hitherto been convinced from Scriptures, Fathers
or Reason, ought by the rule of prudence to be embraced; but such is the
Protestant Religion, therefore by the rule of prudence, the Protestant Religion
ought to be embraced; or if you will have it, per contraria, take it thus:

It is a part of imprudence to embrace that Religion, which has been convinced
from Scriptures, Fathers, and Reason; but such is the Roman Religion, therefore
it is the part of imprudence to embrace the Roman Religion.

Now Sir, to avoid reply, give me leave to tell you, Baptizing as Christ has
Commanded, Praying as Christ has taught, Believing the Scriptures, Serving and
Worshipping God without Images, Receiving the Sacrament as Christ Instituted
it, have not been convinced by Scriptures, Fathers or Reason.

Equalling Tradition to Scripture, Worshipping of Images, or God by Images,
Praying to Saints, Receiving the Sacrament in one kind, believing the Popes
infallibility, etc. have been convinced by Scriptures, Fathers and Reason.

On the contrary side, I demand, Roman Doctors have any obligation in rigor of
dispute, to use any other Argument for persuading unlearned persons to desert
the Protestant, and embrace the Roman Religion, then this imprudence, in
adhering to the Protestant, and of prudence, in uniting themselves to the Roman
Church, so long as the said unlearned Protestants persuade themselves, that
they proceed prudently, in preferring their own before the Roman; seeing this
erroneous persuasion is the first step which must be redressed in relinquishing
the one, and the contrary persuasion the first step which must be fixed in
approaching to the other.

Now when unlearned Protestants once confess that they are convinced in this,
and thereupon recede from Protestancy, but object, that the prudentiall Motives
to prefer the Roman Religion before the Protestant, as they conceive that the
Protestant is wholly improbable, and so to be deserted, so they convince no
more, then that the Roman is probable, and so it is great Likelihood to be the
true Religion, but convince not, that it is so much as morally certain. To
Protestants brought thus far, there is an obligation put upon the Roman
Doctors, to prove at least the moral certainty of it, to such as acknowledge
that it is morally certain, that the Roman Re-Religion is the sole true saving
Religion, but deny notwithstanding that it thereby follows, that it is
infallibly certain, rises an Obligation to prove, that it is Infallibly
certain; and when one is once convinced of this also, but yet doubts, whether
this Infallibility be Divine, and so the highest of all Infallibilities, there
will be also an Obligation to show to such as are brought on so far, the most
high divine infallibility of the Roman Religion; hence therefore I demand,
whether our late Protestants and Socinians proceed not preposterously and
unreasonably, in pressing Roman Doctors to demonstrate the Divine Infallibility
of the truth of the Roman Religion, before they themselves grant, that it is
infallible in any degree, or morally certain, or probable, or prudential? for
though it be necessary to prove all these particulars in their due
circumstances, yet there is no necessity to prove them all at once to every
Adversary, but by degrees, the one in order after the other, with
correspondence to what of them is denied, or called in question by those with
whom we treat; for thus we proceed orderly and logically, a notioribus ad
ignotiora, and hold a correspondence with Nature, by proceeding ab
imperfectioribus ad perfectiora, still observing the step or progress of our
Adversary, and still stepping and going along with him; and if this method had
been strictly held by our late controvertists, the Adversaries mouths had been
stopped long before this.

Sir, imprudence upon the unlearned, either to embrace the Roman, or desert the
Protestant Religion, and therefore some obligation lies upon your Roman
Doctors, without rigor of Dispute, to use some other Argument than this:

But this is an erroneous persuasion in the unlearned Protestants; and as the
first step must be removed, for relinquishing their own and embracing your
Religion; and then you will use another Argument to convince, that the
Protestant Religion is wholly improbable, and then you will convince, that the
Protestant Religion is not so much as morally cortain, but your own is; and
then you will prove, that it is the sole true saving Religion, and then that it
is infallibly certain, and last of all, that your Roman Religion is the most
divine, infallible, certain Religion; and all this to follow Logic and Nature
from things known to things unknown, from things imperfect to things perfect:
But first of all the poor unlearned Protestant must deny his own Religion to be
either prudential, or probable, or morally certain, or infallibly certain or
divine.

Nunc lupum auribus teneo; just so the Wolf would have dealt with the Lamb,
to part with his Protector, and then the innocent Lamb should know that he had
no better friend then the Wolf; I will deal more Lambelike with you; prove
either, or all of these, either Pro, or Con, for the Roman, or against the
Protestant, and you will be taken for an excellent Logician, and a good
Naturalist, but till then for a poor Divine, since your whole course and
discourse hitherto has been but Petitio principii, and not able to stop your
Adversaries mouths, though you speak aloud, till then I say but this much,

That Religion is most prudently to be chosen which has probable, Moral,
Infallible Divine certainty in it.

But such is the Protestant Religion, because it is Probably, Morally,
Infallibly, and Divinely certain by the Authority of Fathers, of the Councils,
and of the Scriptures.

Therefore the Protestant Religion is most prudently to be chosen, because the
Fathers, Councils, and Scriptures assert all their Affirmative Tenants.

Seeing these demands are proposed to such as believe, true Christian Faith no
man can be saved, and that this saving Faith is one only, and that this only
Faith is Infallible, and Divine; and moreover seeing it is already showed, that
every difference in any point of Faith whatsoever, makes a different Faith and
Religion, and that amongst all the different Religions and Beliefs now on foot
in these parts of Christendom, there is none that can be prudently embraced (by
such as are in the number of the unlearned, and yet are sufficiently informed
about the force of the Authority of those who teach them) save the Roman, and
that no Religion can be true which cannot be prudently embraced by such
unlearned persons, seeing in a manner the whole multitude of Christians
consists of those who are unlearned; and must according to prudence follow the
Authority of their Teachers; those things I say, considered, it is finally
demanded, whether by proving that the Roman Faith only can be prudently
embraced (which is already done) it is not made inevitably clear, that the
Roman only is that Divine, Infallible, one true Faith, wherein Christians may
be saved?

Sir, Roman Faith only can be prudently embraced, though you say, it is
already done, (for it is already undone) and therefore it is not inevitably
clear, that the Roman only is that Divine, Infallible one true Faith wherein
Christians may be saved. For,

That Faith only is not Divine, Tradition, because Tradition is but Humane,
but the Roman Faith is built upon Tradition.

Therefore the Roman Faith only is not that Divine Faith wherein Christians
can be saved.

That Faith only is not infallible, Authority of men, whether Pope or Council,
because the Authority of men, whether Pope or Council, is fallible.

But such is the Roman Faith, because Virtually resolved into the Pope, who
cannot err, say some of the Romanists, and Representatively into a Council,
which cannot err, say other of the Romanists, but both one and the other
erroneously.

Therefore the Roman Faith only is not that infallible faith wherein
Christians may be saved.

That Faith only is not the One, Articles added to it, then what the Apostles
faith, the Nicene faith, the Athanasian faith contain.

But such is the Roman faith, because the faith of Rome, in the Council of
Trent, has added the Articles of Purgatory, of the Priests intention in
Baptism, etc.

Therefore the Roman faith only is not the one faith wherein Christians may be
saved.

That faith is not the true faith, professors dare not as well dye as live; but
such is the Roman faith, because in their Life they rely upon, and preach their
own merits, but at their death rely only upon the mercies of God in the
merits of Jesus Christ; in which divine, infallible, one true faith, that you
and all Christians with my self may meet, is the hearty desire of,

Sir, Your Friend and Servant, T. SWADLIN.

FINIS.

