THE Fading of the Flesh, AND Flourishing of Faith; OR, One CAST for Eternity,
WITH The only way to Throw it Well.

AS ALSO The Gracious Persons incomparable Portion

By GEORGE SWINNOCK, M. A. Preacher of the Gospel late at Great-Kimbel in the
County of Bucks.

Eccles. 5.15. As he came forth of his Mothers womb, naked shall he return to
go as he came, and shall take nothing of his labor, which he shall carry in
his hand. Vides viventem, cogita morientem, Quid hic habeat attendis, quid
secum tollat attend. Quid secum tollit? multum auri habet, multum argenti,
multum praediorum, multum mancipiorum, moritur, remanent illa, nescio quibus.
Aug. in Psalm. 49. v. 17. Incertum est, quo te loco mors expectet, itaque tu
illam omniloco expecta. Sen. Epist. 26. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at
the Three Crowns in the lower end of Cheap Side over against the great Conduit,
1662.

There is extant of this Reverend Authors these Five other Treatises.
The Christian-mans Calling; or, a Treatise of making Religion ones Business,
wherein the Nature and Necessity of it is discovered; as also the Christian
directed how he may perform it in Religious Duties, Natural Actions, his
particular Vocation, his Family Directions, and his own Recreation; to be read
in Families for their Instruction and Edification. The first Part.

The Door of Salvation opened by the Key of Regeneration; or a Treatise
containing the Nature, Necessity, Marks and means of Regeneration, as also the
duty of the Regenerate.

Heaven and Hell Epitomized, or the true Christian characterized.

The beauty of Magistracy, in an Exposition of the 82 Psalm, where is set forth
the necessity, Utility, Dignity, Duty and Morality of Magistrates.

There is in the press the Second Part of that practical Piece of Divinity
entitled, The Christian-mans Calling, Containing Directions for our dealings
with all men, carriage in all conditions, whether in prosperity or adversity,
in all companies good or bad, in solitariness, on the week day from morning to
night, in visiting the sick upon a dying bed.

To the Courteous Ms. Jane Swinnock, WIDOW OF Mr. Caleb Swinnock, LATE OF
Maidstone Deceased
Honored Cousen,
THe whole World is fitly termed by the Holy Ghost, a Sea of glass. Rev. 4.
A Sea for its tempestuousness, all the passengers who sail on it are sure to
be driven too and fro with the surging waves, and high winds of sorrows. Man
enters on this stage of the World crying, goes off groaning, and the part
which he acts is chiefly Tragical, his whole life being little else from the
Womb to the Tomb, but a chain of crosses, and a circle of sufferings; he is
tossed like a Tennis Ball from hazard to hazard, till at last he fall to the
Earth. A sea of Glass, for its brittleness; Glass is soon broken be it never so
much Gilded: The fashion of this World passes away; all its carnal comforts
perish with it. The possessions of it are corruptible; Gold and Silver are
liable to that rust which will consume them. The Relations in it are mutable;
whilst we are refreshing our selves with those pleasant flowers, and embracing
them in our breasts, and sticking them in our bosoms, they wither. The Jews at
this day have a custom (says one) when a Couple are married, to break the
glass wherein the Bridegroom and the Bride have drank; thereby to admonish them
that though at present they are joined together, yet ere long they must be
parted asunder. The Saints of God themselves are not privileged from such
arrests; nay those vessels which are most richly laden go often deepest in
these waters. The howling Wilderness is the direct way to the heavenly Canaan.

The late Providence which removed your loving and beloved Husband (I hope to
Heaven) has taught you the truth of these particulars. The loss of such a
relation must needs be a sore affliction. The nearer the union is, the more
difficult the separation. Husband and Wife are one flesh, therefore to part
them cannot but be painful; but Grace will help you both to submit to that blow
which is so grievous to Nature, and to be the better for it.

It was some comfort to me to observe your Christian carriage under so great a
cross. The hour of affliction is an hour of temptation. Satan loves to fish
when the Waters are troubled; He would bring us to hard thoughts of God, by the
hard things we suffer from God; Touch him, and he will curse thee to thy face.
In such stormy weather some Vessels are cast away. A corrupt heart in adversity
(like Water boiling over the Fire) then most of all discovers its froth and
filth, Isa. 8.21. But though frosty seasons are hurtful to Weeds, yet they are
helpful to good Corn. A sanctified person, like a silver bell, the harder he is
smitten, the better he sounds. Faith is a special Antidote against the poison
of the Wicked one. It can read Love in the blackest Characters of Divine
dispensation; as by a Rainbow we see the beautiful image of the Suns light, in
the midst of a dark and waterish Cloud. Gods Rod, like Jonathans is dipped in
Honey. Our daily bread, and our sharpest rod grow upon the same root. Every
beleiver may say in affliction, as Mauritius, when his Wife and Children were
slain before his eyes, Righteous art thou O Lord, and in very faithfulness have
afflicted me.

Dear Cousen,

Since Gods Rod has a voice as well as his Word, and like Moses his Rod in
Egypt, works wonders in, and for his people; Let me beseech you to hear it,
and to know him that has appointed it. O how highly does it behove you to
labor, that as Aarons Rod it may bud and blosome with the fruits of holiness.

Two Lessons principally God would teach you by it.

First, That your affections be taken off from Earthly possessions; Dying
Relations, call for dying affections. When Israel doted on Egypt as a palace,
God made it an Iron furnace to wean them from it, and to make them weary of it.
The creature is our Idol by nature, we bow down the knees of our souls to it,
and Worship it; but infinite Wisdom makes it our grief, that it may not be our
God. When Children fare well abroad, they are mindless of home; but when abused
by strangers, they hasten to their Parents. The World is therefore a Purgatory,
that it might not be our Paradise. As soon as Laban frowned on Jacob, he talks
of returning to his Fathers House. Every rout the World puts us to, sounds a
retreat to our affections, and calls off our heart from the eager pursuit of
these withering vanities. Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not,
Prove. 23.5. much less thine heart.

I have read of a young Hermit, who being passionately in love with a young
Lady, could not by any Art suppress the fury and violence of that flame, till
at last being told that she was dead, and had been buried about fourteeen days,
he went secretly to her Vault, and with the skirt of his Man^le, wiped the
moisture from the Carcass, and still at the return of his temptation laid it
before him; saying, Behold this is the beauty of the Womad which thou did so
much desire; And the Man at last with that moisture of the Corpse put out the
Fire.

The godliness of the World, its whole glory and gallantry is but a curious
Picture drawn on Ice, which affords no good footing, for whilst we are standing
on it, we are sliding from it, and who would lay the stress of his felicity
upon so slippery a foundation. No wise man ever put his chiefest goods and
riches in such low damp rooms, where they will corrupt and putrify.

Hipocrates affirms that all immoderations are Enemies to the health of the
body. Sure I am, they are to the health of the soul. The amity of the World, is
emnity against God. All the Water is little enough to run in the right Channel,
therefore none should run beside. The time is short, use the World, as net
abusing it, 1 Cor. 7.29.

Secondly, That you choose the good part that shall never be taken from you.
Man's heart will be fixed on somewhat as its hope, and happiness. God therefore
puts out our Candles, takes away Relations, that we may look up to the Sun and
esteem him our chiefest portion. When we are Digging and Delving in the Earth
to find out content, and comfort, he sends damps, purposely to make us call
to be drawn upward. Till the Prodigal met with a Famine, he regarded not his
Father. If the Waters be abated, the Dove is apt to wander and defile her self,
but when they cover the face of the earth, and allow her no rest, then she
returns to the Ark.

I hope there is a good work begun in you, which shall be finished at the day
of Christ. But every one stand h or falls to their own Master. Get Scripture
on your side, and you are safe for ever. The Romans when they parted from the
bones of their Dead friends (for they burnt them,) took their leave in such
language, Vale, Vale, Vale, Noste ordine quo natura permiserit sequemur.
Farewell, Farewell, Farewell, We shall follow thee in the time, and order, which
nature allows us. You may say of your Husband, as David of his Child, I shall
go to him, but he shall not return to me. Prepare therefore for your dying hour.

Labor to be rich in godliness; Grace alone is special bayl against death; It
is such wealth, as will be current in the other World; lay up your treasure in
Heaven, where neither Thief nor Moth, neither Men nor Devils, can rob you of
it. Take God in Christ for your Heaven, and you are happy in spite of the
World, Death and Hell. You know the living comfort of your dying Husband was,
that though his flesh and heart failed him, yet God was the strength of his
heart and his portion for ever. And it was a memorable speech of His, when some
Friends came to him and commended the richness and magnificence of Hampton
Court, newly trimmed and adorned for the reception of her Majesty; One drop of
the blood of Christ, is more worth then all the World. I must tell you, there
is no such Cordial in a day of Death, as this Covenant Relation to the Lord of
life.

The Child may walk in that dark entry without fear, if he have but his Father
by the hand; Though I walk in the Valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear
none ill, for thou art with me. Death indeed is strong, it overcomes
Principalities and Powers, but as strong as it is, it cannot separate God and
the godly person. It may dissolve the natural union betwixt soul and body, but
not the mystical union betwixt God and the soul; The Saints dye in the Lord,
they sleep in Jesus.

O Cousen, be married to Christ, and you are made for ever. Heaven is the
Jointure, and Death one of the Servants or slaves of her that is the Spouse of
this Lord. Death is yours, ye are Christ's, 1 Cor. 3.21. Other men are Deaths
(it has dominion over them) but Death is yours, your servant to strip off your
rags of sin and misery, and to cloth you with the Robes of joy and glory.

The ensuing Discourse was for the substantial part of it, delivered at the
Funeral of your dearest Relation on earth. You gave me the Text, and my
indisposition of body allowed me then but little time, which caused me now to
make some enlargements and additions, but its the same body (possibly in a
little neater far, from gaudy) dress, which was prepared for the Pulpit. I
present it to you, not doubting of its acceptance, for his sake whose death was
the occasion of it. The good Lord bless it to you, requite your love to me, and
them that fear him, make up the want of streams in the more abundant enjoyment
of the fountain, fill you with all the fruits of righteousness, enable you to
persevere and increase in godliness, and so to live with a good conscience,
that you may dye with much comfort, and be a follower of them who through faith
and patience inherit the promises, so prays,

Your Servant for Jesus sake, George Swinnock.

TO THE Right Worshipful, THE Mayor, with the Recorder, Jurats, Common
Council, and the rest of the Inhabitants of (his Native Town) Maidstone in Kent.
Honored and Beloved,
IT is a general observation, that all creatures have propensity and
inclination toward those places where they receive their births and beings.
Vegetatives which stand in the lowest rank of life, thrive best (because they
delight most) in those grounds whence they first grow. Sensitives as they have
an higher being, so a stronger inclination to those parts where they are born.

The Prince of Philosophers tells us that Fish usually stay with pleasure in
those Waters in which they are bread, Arist. Hist Animal. l. 4. c. 8
and Beasts in those Woods in which they are brought forth, and that neither of
them will remove without force and violence; Nature has planted in them both
this principle of affecting their native places. Hence it comes to pass that
even these creatures, have manifested their thank-fulness after their manner.
Trees acknowledge that sap which they borrow from the earth in which they
stand, in the tribute of leaves which they pay back to the same in Autumn. The
Storks are said to leave one of their young in that part of the Earth where
they are hatched. Patriam quisque amat, non quia pulchram, sed quia suam. Sen.
Men as they have a Nobler life, so a greater love to their Native Country.
Heathen themselves have been famous for this.

Pericles the Athenian did so affect his Countrymen, that his usual speech was.
If none but my self should lead them to the shambles, Plut. in vit.
as much as lies in me, they shall be immortal. When Cleomenes King of Sparta,
being greatly distressed, had a promise of help from Ptolemy King of Egypt,
Idem.
upon condition that his Mother and Son were sent to him as pledges.
Cratesiclea (for so was his Mothers Name) as soon as she understood it; said to
her Son (who was afraid and ashamed to mention it to her) How is it that thou
have concealed it so long and and have not told me. Come, come, put me straight
into a Ship and send me whither thou will, that this body of mine may do some
good unto my Country, before crooked Age consume it without profit.
Themistocles notwithstanding his Countrymen had banished him, Diodor.
drunk the blood of a Bull and poisoned himself to keep Artaxerxes (who had
sworn not to go against it without him)* from invading his Country. Pez. Mel.
Hist.
Codrus King of Athens, Tul. de Offic.
Attilius Regulus General of the Romans and Livie.
M. Curtius are renowned in History for sacrificing their lives for their
Countries liberty.

The Christian is (...) a man of like passions, only he acts from higher
principles, and affects for holier purposes. Religion does not break the
string of natural affection, but wind it up to such a pitch, as may make its
strokes more true, and its sound more melodious. Nehemiah was sad and pensive,
when the City of his Father was solitary, Nehem. 2.3. The Jews were
disconsolate when their native Country lay desolate, Psa. 137, beginning. Paul
could wish himself parted from Christ, that his Kindred and Countrymen might be
united to Christ, Romans 9.3. Greg. Nazianzen and Hierom report that the Jews to
this day come yearly to the place where Jerusalem the City of their Fathers
stood (which was destroyed by Titus and Adrian) and upon the day of the
destruction of it, weep over it.

As its natural to love, so not unusual in our Kingdom for rich persons to
manifest their love, to their native parishes by large gifts to the poor. But
though my respects to you be sincere, yet I may say (in a sense) Silver and
Gold have I none, to speak my affections by, only such as I have I give you. A
Treatise which may, through the blessing of God, help you to the true Treasure.

Bucholcerus blessed God, Melch. Adam.
that he was born in the days, and bred under the Dicipline of holy Melancthon.
I must Ingenuously acknowledge, that it was a great mercy to me that I was born
amongst you, and brought up under as pious, and powerful a Ministry there, Mr.
Thomas Wilson.
as most in England.

In Testimony of my unfeigned love, I present you with this brief discourse,
which was conceived in your Pulpit, and through the importunity of several of
you, brought forth to the Press. The occasion of it (as is well known to you)
was the Death of your Neighbor and my dear Relation, Master Caleb Swinnock,
(who was interred May, 21. 1662) whose Father and Grandfather had three or
four times enjoyed the highest honor, and exercised the highest Office in your
Corporation. I am much of his mind, who says, That Funeral Encomiasticks of
the dead, are often confections of poison to the living; for many whose lives
speak nothing for them, will draw the example into consequence, and be thereby
led into hope, that they may press an Hackny Funeral Sermon, to carry them to
Heaven when they dye; and therefore am always sparing my self, though I condemn
not the custom in others, where they do it with prudence, and upon good cause.
My Friends holy carriage in his sickness (besides his inoffensiveness for ought
I ever heard in his health) commands me to hope that his soul is in Heaven. I
had the happiness some time to be brought up with him, in his Fathers Mr.
Robert Swinnocks Family, whose House (I cannot but speak it to the glory of
God) had Holiness to the Lord written upon it. His manner was to pray twice a
day by himself, once or twice a day with his Wife, and twice a day with his
Family, besides singing Psalms, Reading and Expounding Scriptures, which
morning and evening were minded. The Sabbath he dedicated wholly to Gods
service, and did not only himself, but took care that all within his Gate
should spend the day in secret, and private duties, and in attendance on
public Ordinances; of their proficiency by the last, he would take an account
upon their return from the Assembly. His house indeed was as Tremellius says
of Cramners, Palaestra Pietatis, a Scool of Religion. I Write this not so much
for the Honor of him (of whose industry for the good of the souls committed to
him, I was a frequent eye witness, and whose memory is blessed) but chiefly for
your good, that as some of you do already, so others also may be provoked to
follow such gracious patterns. I must tell you, that what low thoughts soever
any of you now may have of holy persons, and holy practices, yet when you come
to look Death in the face, and enter into your unchangeable estates, a little
of their grace and godliness will be of more worth in your esteems then the
whole World. Though the Saint be marked for a fool in the Worlds Calender at
this day, and the prosperous Sinner counted the wisest person; yet when the
eyes of sinners bodies are closed, the eyes of their souls will be opened; and
then, O then, they will see and say according to that Apocryphal place which
will be found Canonical for the matter of it, We Fools counted his life to be
madness, Wisdom 5. 4, 5.
and his end to be without honor; But now he is numbered among the Children of
God, and his lot is among the Saints.

The Subject of this Tractate is partly, The true way to dye well; which I am
sure is of infinite concernment to your immortal souls, and such a Lesson, that
if it be not learned you are lost for ever. Laert.
The Cynick cared not what became of his body when dead, and the other Heathen
could slight the loss of a Grave, Facilis jactura Sepulchri.
a little Earth; but without question it concerns you nearly to take care what
becomes of your souls, and you cannot so easily bear the loss of God and Heaven.

Men indeed are generally unwilling to hear of Death, and the Minister who
would urge them to it, is as unwelcome as foul weather, which usually comes
before its sent for; whatsoever has a tendency to Death is killing; the
telling them of it sounds as mournfully in their ears as the tolling of a
passing Bell; and the making their Wills as frightful to them, as the making
their Graves. Hence, when they are riding post in the broad way of sin and the
World, and conscience would check and rein them in with the curbs of Death and
Judgment, they presently snap them in pieces, and stifle its convictions; They
dare not look into the book of Conscience, to see how accounts stand between
God and themselves, but like Hauks are ever Hooded within doors, Mori timeat
qui ad secundam mortem de hac morte transibit. Cypr. de mortal.
blind at Home, and never use their eyes but Abroad, to the hurt and censuring
of others.

The Egyptian slaves drank Wine freely, and wrapped their heads in Vails, that
they might dye without sight or sorrow. I know many drown the thoughts of their
future mourning in carnal pleasure and present mirth, but such mirth, like
Nabals, will last no longer, then while they are drunk with ignorance and
senslesness; for they no sooner come to themselves, to understand the state
they are in, but their hearts dye within them. Besides, hereby they put
themselves upon a necessity of perishing; for, alas how will they do to dye,
who consider not before hand of their latter end.

Naturalists tell us of a Cockatrice, that if men see it first, that dies, if
that sees a man first, the man dies. Its most true of Death, if we see it
first by an holy preparation for it, we kill it, it cannot hurt us; but if
Death see and seize us first, it kills us eternally. O believe it sirs; Its
another manner of thing to dye well, then the sleepy World dreams of. The
lustiest of you all must expect that ere long Death will trip up your heels,
and give you a fall. Ask your souls whither you are ready for it; Will it not
prove your downfall? When Death throws you, will it not be your eternal
overthrow? Its possible ye think, of preparing for Death hereafter, but why not
now? Do any of you say, To morrow I will repent? What if God say, Thou Fool
this Night thy soul shall be required of thee? Where are you then? Its one of
the greatest stratagems of the Devil, whereby he has undermined millions of
souls, by prevailing with them to delay till it was too late. O Consider, Death
like Thunder and Lightning blasteth the green corn, and consumes the strongest
buildings, Job 21.23, 24. One dies in his full strength, being wholly at ease
and quiet. His breasts are full of Milk, and his bones are moistened with
Marrow. The Cock in the Arabic Fable, having overcome another Cock in a
Battle, thought now that he had no Enemy, Vide. Locmu.
and therefore got to the top of an House, and began to crow and clap his Wings
in token of Triumph. When behold on a sudden, a Vulture comes and snatcheth
away this braging Champion and Conqueror. If nature in any of you have
mastered one distemper, it gives you not leave to be secure, for an outward
accident or inward disease will on a sudden Master you.

It is observable in the days of Solomon, when Israel enjoyed the greatest
peace, they made strong preparation for War, 1 Kings 4.25, 26. And Israel and
Judah dwelt every man under his own Vine, and Figtree. And Solomon had forty
thousand stalls of Horses for his Chariots, and twelve thousand Horsemen.

Iphicrates the Athenian General in times of peace entrencht his Army, ordered
his outworks, set his watch, kept his guards, and observed all Martial
Discipline, as if he had been in the height and heat of War. And being asked
the reason by one of his Familiars, and what he feared; He answered to be
surprised, and least it should so fall out, that he should be constrained to
say, I thought not on it. O that we were as wise, who are Listed under the
Captain of our Salvation, for that War wherein there is no discharge. Beloved
friends, Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour when the Son
of man comes. Mat. 25.13.

The Brachmanni had their Graves before their doors. The Sybarites at Banquets
had a Deaths-head delivered from hand to hand by every guest at the Table. The
Emperor Ferdinand, had one appointed at certain times to salute him with Vive
memor Lethi Ferdinand. O Ferdinand, live as one that is mindful he must dye.
Joseph of Arimathea had his Tomb in his Garden. When the blessed Savior was in
his glorious transfiguration in Company with those heavenly Courtiers, Luke
9.31.
they spoke to him of his decease; Could you think but one quarter of an hour
every day, what a searching, trying day, the day of Death will be. Ah how holy
would you live? how exactly would you walk? Were death at your doors, at your
tables, in your gardens, in your shops, present before your eyes in all your
projects and pleasures, how would it deaden your hearts, to these sublunary
vanities, and quicken your affections to celestial felicities?

I have read of one that prayed six times a day, and being asked the reason,
said no more, but this, I must dye. If any argument in the World will dissuade
from wickedness and persuade to godliness, and abounding in the work of the
Lord, Death will. They who steer the ship aright sit in the hindermost part of
it. They who order their conversations aright, dwell in the thoughts of their
dissolutions. When our time is short, we must work the harder.

Its reported of the Birds of Norwey, O Laus. Mag. Hist. Septentrion.
that they fly faster then the Birds of other Countries, not because they have
greater nimbleness of wing, but by a natural instinct, they knowing the day in
their Climate to be very short (not above three hours long, say some) make the
more have to their Nests. Your time is little, your accounts will be great,
your work must be done now or never. O work the work of him that sent you into
the World, while it is day, for the night comes when no man can work, Joh. 9.4.

I am bound to tell you, that God has committed many Talents into the hands of
several amongst you, ye are higher in place and power, ye have more
opportunities then others to serve the interest and honor of Christ, and
therefore God expects that you should do more for him then others. Indulge
the Drunkenness, and Swearing, and uncleanness, and Sabbath breaking of others,
least ye should be counted busybodies, or precise persons, and you destroy
both your own and their souls. There is no such cruelty to men's souls, as
clemency to their sins. He loves his friend best, who hates his lusts most.
Besides, the wrong your sinful compliance does to others, whilst ye bear the
Sword, as Women wear their Artificial teeth, for show only, not for service,
ye treasure up wrath on your own heads against the day of death, for as a
reverend Divine now with God said truly. Nothing more sads the heart when one
comes to die, then his neglect of those opportunities, which Gods providence or
his own place, have put into his hand of doing or receiving good. Neither is
there a sharper Corrosive, then the reflection upon those days and times, which
have passed over him, male, aliud, nihil, agentem.

Its Cronicled of Philip the third, King of Spain, that though he never
committed gross sin, Val. Max.
all his life time, yet when he came to dye, he screeched out dreadfully, O
that I had never reigned, O that I had never been King, for then I should not
have now to Answer for my neglect of doing the good I might, and my not
hindering the evil I ought in my Government. Sirs, (I beseech you give me leave
to be faithful to you) Will it not be a dreadful time with you, when you are
tumbling on your dying beds, and near your eternity, if conscience should fly
in your faces for your falseness and unfaithfulness in your places, and make
you cry out; O that I had never been Mayor of Maidstone; O that I had never
been Justice; O that I had never been Jurat, for then I should not have now to
Answer before the dreadful tribunal of a righteous God, for all the Oaths,
Fornications, Profanation of the Lord day, and other evils which I might have
hindered, and did not, and for all the good which I might (by my holy pattern,
and encouraging others in piety) have done, and would not. Alas ye cannot
imagine the dreadfulness of such a man's condition on such a day. Therefore now
be Terrors to evil doers, and encouragements to them that do well, if ye would
find comfort then; for as in Philosophy; so in Divinity. They who mind not the
premises, make but mad, but sad conclusions.

The Naturalists assure us that the Ashes of a Viper applied to that part of
the body which is stung, will draw the venom out of it, (natural attraction as
it were calling home that poison, which injury and violence had misplaced) the
serious consideration that you must dye, and be turned into dust and ashes,
will be a sovereign medicine against the poison and pollution of sin, it will
make you both good men and good Magistrates.

The Latter part of the Treatise contains the Gracious Persons Glorious
Portion. Therein I have endeavored so to set forth the vastness of the Saints
estate, (though I must confess neither men nor Angels can cast up its total
sum) that I might prevail with you to desire the felicity of Gods Children, and
the Inheritance of his chosen ones. This is the portion, which is as the
Spanish Ambassador said of his Masters treasure in the Indies, without a
bottom. Though the seven streams of Nilus are known, yet the head of it was
never found out. Much of the riches and beauty and perfections of the ever
blessed God may be read in the book of the creatures; more may be seen in the
glass of the Scriptures, but the longest line of humane or Angelical
understanding, can never fathom his boundless, bottomless nature and being, yet
there is so much to be known of him even in his life, as may draw out your
hearts to choose and close with him. The World is ready to wonder what the
people of God see or enjoy in him, that they are so fearful of his fury, and so
joyfully in his favor; as the ignorant wretch could see nothing in the Picture
of Helena, why Nicostratus should admire it so much, but as Nicostratus told
him, O friend if thou had my eyes, thou would wonder at it as much as I do;
so had the World but the Saints eyes, could they see what a Crown of glory,
What a Paradise of pleasures, What a Mine of riches, What a loving, able, and
faithful friend God is, could they but behold that beauty, and bounty, grace,
and peace, love, and life, which are in the infinite God, they would admire him
too; yea their eyes would affect their hearts, Qui Venetias non vidit, non
credit, and quiae aliquandi ibi non vixit intelligit.
that they could not but love him, and delight in him, but Satan with his black
hand (like Swallows dung) puts out men's eyes, that they not seeing so great a
good, might not desire him.

The Italians have a Proverb, He who has not seen Venice does not believe; and
he who has not lived there some time, does not understand what a City it is.
This is most true of God; he who has not with Moses seen him that is
invisible, does not believe; and he who never had fellowship with the Father
and Jesus Christ his son, cannot understand what a vast alsufficient and
infinite portion the eternal God is. O friends, did your eyes with Isaiah, see
this Lord of Hosts, or with Isreal's Magistrate beheld but his back parts; or
had you with Paul ever been caught up into the third heavens, ye would quickly
trample on all the honors and pleasures, and treasures of this lower World, as
toys and trifles, and say with David, whom have we in heaven but thee, and
there is none upon Earth that we desire besides thee.

I have undertaken briefly in the ensuing discourse to show also the vast
difference between the Christians, and the Worldlings portion, by which you may
understand, that if any one among you could enjoy the wealth of Craesus, the
wisdom and glory of Solomon, the beauty of Absalom, the strength of Sampson,
the pleasures of Sardanapalus, and to all, the long life of Methuselah; yet in
the midst of all these, his soul would be as beggarly as the body of Lazarus,
and as restless and unsatisfied as the stormy tempestuous Ocean. No Water, say
Naturalists, will quench the Dragons thirst. No creature can fill the vast
desires of a capatious, immortal soul. As among all the Beasts of the field
there was not a meet Companion for man, Adam was solitary and alone,
notwithstanding their numerous society; so amongst all the creatures in the
World, there is not a meet portion for the soul, its poor and beggarly without
God, in the midst of all its possessions; your heads may be solicitous, and
your hearts industrious, to heap up creature comforts, and when ye have got
what the World can give, ye would be but as hungry men in a Room full of Stones
or Chips. That which is unsuitable to the souls nature, cannot be satisfying to
the spirits desires.

There is a nourishment proper to every Animal. Spiders feed on Flies, Moles on
Worms; the Horse on Grass, the Lion on Flesh; there is also food proper to man's
soul, Spiritual Meat, and spiritual Drink; my flesh is Meat indeed, my blood is
Drink indeed (all other is bibi and potus tantummodo umbra) this this is that,
which when the soul comes once to feed on it, its filled, its satisfied.

Philosophers observe that the matter of the Heavens desires no other form,
whereas in all sublunary things it constantly does, and the reason is, because
of the Actuality and Perfection of that heavenly form. While the soul fasteneth
on any sublunary thing, as its happiness it desires more and better, but when
it does once choose the blessed God, it desires no more, no better, because of
those infinite perfections which are in God. One God answers all the souls
desires and necessities.

Plut. in vit.
To keep you no longer out of the body of the book, It is Recorded of Marcus
Cato, that after his return from Carthage, when he did at any time deliver his
judgment about any business in the Senate, he would conclude his speech with,
Methinks Carthage should be destroyed. Sirs will you suffer me to tell you
again, and again. Methinks a dying hour is not to be neglected; Methinks a
living God is worthy to be embraced. Though there may be some difference among
you, about things that are ceremonial and circumstantial, yet ye are I hope
generally agreed (I am sure all are, that have the least favor of Religion)
Deu. 32.29 Psa. 90.12.
That man's greatest wisdom is to prepare for his dying hour. Psa. 73.25. Mat.
22.35. 1 John 2.15.
That the heart of Religion consists in taking (not the World, but) God for
your portion and happiness. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.
That profaneness ought to be avoided in your selves, and Rev. 2.2. 2 Chronicles.
15.16 Psa. 101.7. 1 Timothy 5.22.
suppressed according to your places and powers in others. 1 Timothy 4.8 2 Timothy
3.5. Joh. 4.24.
That the power of Godliness ought chiefly to be minded and countenanced, Romans
8.5, 13.
That an holy, spiritual, not a fleshly, sensual life is the way to Heaven,
Genesis 18.19 Prove. 22.6 Ephesians. 6.4.
That your Children and Servants ought to be instructed in the knowledge of God
and Christ, of their misery and the means of their recovery, Josh. 24.15. Psa.
101.2, 6 7. Col. 3.16. Romans 16.5. Jerem. 10. ult.
That your houses should be Churches, praying, reading, and singing Families,
and Exo. 20.8. Isa. 58.13. Act. 20.7. Rev. 1.10.
that the Lords day should be conscienciously observed and devoted to the
dearest Redeemer by secret, private and public duties. These things are
written (as with the beams of the Sun) so clearly in the Scriptures, that if ye
deny them, ye deny your selves to be Christians, and profess your selves to be
Infidels, I beseech you therefore in the name of the blessed Savior, who
redeemed you from your vain conversations with his own most precious blood, and
for the sake of your immortal souls, which within a few day, must throw their
last cast for eternity, that your practices be answerable to such principles.
For, Believe me, it will be a dreadful thing another day, for your lives to
give your consciences the lie at this day.

I have but one request more to you (pardon my freedom, and plainness of
speech, for truly my heart is enlarged toward you) be pleased to peruse the
following discourse, with serious consideration of the truth and weight of the
particulars therein delivered, and with supplication to God, that the Treatise
may be serviceable to your eternal salvations. If I write not what is agreeable
to the Word of God, reject it, but if I do, submit to it, least ye subvert your
own souls. The Father of mercies, and God of all grace, inlighten all your
minds in the saving knowledge of himself, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent,
bless this brief discourse to you, infuse grace in every of you, where it is
wanting, increase grace where it is, bless you so in civil things, that your
Town may be an habitation of justice, and so succeed you in Spirituals, that it
may be a mountain of holiness, and enable you all so to prepare for death, that
it may be to you the gate of life, so to take him for your portion, that he may
be your everlasting possession; and so to glorify him in your Generations,
that ye may be meet for, and heirs of the eternal weight of glory, which is the
Prayer of

Your most affectionate Servant George Swinnock.

The Contents of the several Chapters
CHAP. I. THe Preface, division of the Psalm, and Coherence of the Text. page.
1 CHAP. II. The Interpretation of the Text, and the first Doctrine, That man is
mortal. page. 7 CHAP. III. The Reasons of the Doctrine, Man's corruptibility,
Gods Fidelity, and man's Apostasy from God. page. 16 CHAP. IV. First use of
Information, containing the folly of them who make provision for the flesh,
page. 23 CHAP. V. An Exhortation to Sinners to prepare for death, with three
quickening Motives; Death will come certainly. Death may come suddenly. When it
comes it will be too late to prepare. page. 29 CHAP. VI. Three Motives more to
prepare for Death; A dying hour will be a trying hour. The misery of the
unprepared. The felicity of such as are prepared for death. page. 43 CHAP. VII.
What is requisite to prepare for death, viz. A change of State, and a change of
Nature, with a gracious offer from the most high God to sinners. page. 60 CHAP.
VIII. How a Saint may come to dye with much courage. page. 83 CHAP. IX. The
second Doctrine, That God is the comfort of a Christian in the saddest
condition; With the Reason, Because his happiness is in God. page. 105 CHAP. X.
God must needs be man's happiness, because 1. He is an All-sufficient Good; able
to free the soul from all evil, and to fill it with all good. page. 108 CHAP.
XI. God the Saints happiness, 2. Because God is a suitable good. page. 115 CHAP.
XII. God the Saints happiness, because of his Eternity, and the Saints
propriety in him. page. 118 CHAP. XIII. The first Use, The difference betwixt a
Saint and a sinner in distress. page. 122 CHAP. XIV Second Use, Information,
The difference betwixt the portions of the Gracious and Graceless in this
world. page. 127 CHAP. XV. The difference betwixt the Sinner and the Saints
portion in the other world. page. 133 CHAP. XVI. The second Use by way of
Trial, Whether God be our portion or no, with some marks. page. 138 CHAP. XVII.
The third Use, Exhort. to choose God for our portion. page. 147 CHAP. XVIII. God
is a satisfying and a sanctifying portion. page. 158 CHAP. XIX. God an
universal and eternal portion. page. 168 CHAP. XX. Comfort for such as have God
to their portion. page. 178
Books Printed for, and sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the sign of the three
Crowns, over against the Great Conduit, at the lower end of Cheapside.
Folio's.
THe Anotations on the whole Bible, or all the Canonical Scriptures of the Old
and new Testament, together with, and according to their own Translation of all
the Texts, as both the one and the other were ordered and appointed by the
Synod of Dort; now faithfully Translated for the use of Great Britain, at the
earnest desire of many eminent Divines of the English and Scottish Nation. A
Commentary upon the three first Chapters of Genesis, by John White. The Works
of that famous, and learned Divine, Mr. William Pemble, gathered into one
volume. The History of the Evangelical Churches in the Valleys of Piedmont:
containing a most exact Geographical description of the place, and a faithful
account of the Doctrine, life and persecutions of the ancient Inhabitants:
Together with a most naked and punctual relation of the late bloody Massacre,
1655. justified partly by diverse ancient Manuscrips, written many hundred years
before Calvin or Luther, by Samuel Morland Esquire A Commentary upon the holy
Writings of Job, David, and Solomon; that is these five. Job, Psalms, Proverbs,
Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Songs, being part of those which by the ancient
were called Hagrographa. Wherein the diverse Translations and Expositions, both
literal and mystical, of all the most famous Commentators, both ancient and
modern are propounded, examined and censured; and the Texts from the Original
much illustrated, by John Mayor, Doctor in Divinity. A practical Commentary, or
an Exposition, with observations, Reasons and Uses, upon the first Epistle
general of John, by that pious and worthy Divine Mr. John Cotton, Pastor of
Bosten in New England. A learned Commentary, or an Exposition upon the first
Chapter of the second Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians; being the
substance of many Sermons formerly Preached at Gray's Inn, London, by that
Reverend and Judicious Divine Richard Sibs, D. D. sometimes Master of
Katherine-Hall in Cambridge, and Preacher to that honorable Society.
TAAIATHEPONYA, or Divine characters, in two parts, accutely distinguishing the
more secret, and undeserned difference between, 1. The Hypocrite in his best
dress of seeming virtue, and formal duties; and the true Christian in his real
graces, and sincere obedience: As also between the blackest weeds of daily
infirmities of the truly godly, eclipsing saving grace: and the reigning of
sins of the unregenerate, that pretend unto that godliness they never had; by
that late burning and shining Lamp Mr. Samuel Crook, B. D. late Pastor of
Wringion in Summersetshire.
Quartos.
THe humbled Sinner resolved; what he should do to be saved, or Faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ, the only way for sensible sinners, discovering the Quality,
Objects, Acts, Seat, Subject, inseparable Concomitants, and degrees of
justifying Faith. Wherein several Cases are resolved, and Objections answered,
by Obadiah Sedgwick B. D. and late Minister of the Gospel in Covent Garden. The
Anatomy of Secret sins, presumtuous sins, Sins in Dominion, and uprightness.
Wherein diverse weighty Cases are resolved, in relation to all those
Particulars: delivered in diverse Sermons Preached at Mildreds Bread-street,
London, on Psalm. 19.12, 13. by the same Author. The Fountain opened, and the
water of life flowing forth, for the refreshing of thirsty sinners. Wherein is
set out Christ's earnest and gracious invitation of poor sinners to come unto
the Waters, in several Sermons, Preached at Covent Garden, on Isa. 55.1, 2, 3.
by the same Author. The plain Doctrine of the justification of a sinner in the
sight of God; justified by the God of truth in his holy Word, and the cloud of
Witnesses in all Ages. Wherein are handled the causes of the sinners
justification, by Charles Chauncy, President of Harvard College in Cambridge in
New England. Two Excellent Treatises of Mr. Jerremiah Buroughs, one on the
fifth of Matthew, being many Sermons Preached at Cripplegate, upon all the
Beatitudes. And Gospel-Revelation in three Treatises, viz. 1. The Nature of
God. 2. The excellency of Christ. 3. The excellency of Man's immortal Soul: both
published by William Greenhil, William Bridge, Phylip Nigh, John Yates, Matthew
Mead, William Alderly. Holy things for holy men, or the Lawyers Plea nonsuited,
etc. In some Christian reproof and pity, expressed to Mr. Pryns Book,
entitled, Lords Supper briefly vindicated, by S. S. Minister of the Gospel A
Vindication of a Christians Messiah, that Jesus is the true Messiah prophesied
and foretold by the holy men of God, who were writers of the Old Testament, as
also proved out of their own Talmud. The Souls progress to the Celestial
Canaan, by John Wells Preacher of the Gospel. Comfortable Sermons on Psalm 24.
Preached before the Lady Elizabeth her Grace, by Danial Dyke, B. D. Plenary
possession makes a lawful subjection to Powers that are in being, proved to be
lawful and necessary, in a Sermon before the Judges in Exeter, by Richard
Saunders Preacher of the Gospel. The new World, or the new reformed Church
discovered, out of the second Epistle of Peter, by Nathaniel H^mes, D. D. God
save the King, in a Sermon preached the day after his Majesty came into London
by Anthony Walker, preacher of the Gospel. A plea for Ministers in
Sequestrations; against Mr. Mossom, by S. S. An antidote against Anabaptism,
wherein the Baptizing Infants, taking Tithes, etc. are fully vindicated, by
Aylmor Hauton. The conversation as Heavenly, and as Natural, in two Treatises,
by Dr. Stoughton. An Exposition with practical Observations, continued upon the
thirtieth and one and thirtieth Chapters of the Book of Job, being the
substance of thirty seven Lectures delivered at Magnus near the Bridge, London,
by Josep Caryl, pastor of the Congregation there. Also a Continuation by the
same Author of the 32, 33, 34. Chapters of Job, being the substance of forty
nine Lectures, delivered at Magnus near the Bridge, London. The Covenant of
life opened, or a Treatize of the Covenant of Grace, by Samuel Rutherford,
Professor of Divinity in the University of of St. Andrews. Jesus Christ the
mystical or Gospel Sun, sometimes seeming Eclipsed, yet never going down from
his people: or Eclipses spiritualized, opened in a Sermon at Paul's Church,
before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, etc. March 28. 1652. the
day before the late Solar Eclipse, by Fulk Beller, M. A. and Preacher of the
Gospel in the City of London. A Sermon preached before the honorable House of
Commons, at their late monthly Fast, being on Wednesday, June 30. 1647 by
Nathaniel Ward, Minister of Gods Word. A Declaration of the Faith and Order
owned and practiced in the Congregational Churches in England, agreed upon, and
consented unto by their Elders and Messengers, in their meeting at the Savoy,
October, 12. 1658. The humble Advice of the Assembly of Divines, concerning a
Larger Catechism, presented by them to both Houses of Parliament. Mesolabium
Architectonicum, that is a most rare and singular instrument, for the easy,
speedy, and most certain measuring of Plains and Solids by the foot; invented
long since by Mr. Thomas Bedwel Esquire. A Changeling no company for Lovers of
Loyalty, or the Subjects lesson in point of sacred submission to, and humble
compliance with God and the King. The beauty of Magistracy, in an Exposition of
12. Psalm, where is set forth the Necessity, Utility, Dignity, Duty and
Morality of Magistrates, by the labors of Thomas Hall, B. D. and Pastor of
Kingsnorton; and George Swinnock M. A. and Pastor of great Kimbel. A
Continuation of the Exposition on the remaining Capters of the Prophet Ezekiel,
beginning at the thirtieth Chapter, to the end of that Prophecy, by William
Greenhil, late Minister of Stepney near London, to complete the whole
Exposition upon that part of Scripture. An Exposition on the whole Book of
Solomon's Song, commonly called the Cantieles, by Richard Roboltam. The humble
advice of the Assembly of Divines, concerning a Confession of faith, presented
by them to both Houses of Parliament. A Theater of flying Insects, wherein
especially the manner of Rite ordering the Be, is excellentlly described, with
discourses, historical and phycical concerving them, with a second part of
meditations and observations theological and moral in three centuries upon the
same subject, By Samuel Purchase, M. A. An Exhortation of the Churches of
Bohemiah to the Churches of England, wherein is set forth the good of unity,
order, discipline and obedience in Churches rightly constituted, with an
exhortation premised, of the order and discipline, used in the Churches of the
Brethren of Bohemia, dedicated to his most excellent Majesty Charles the second
in Holland, at his departure for England, If possibly, it may be for an
accommodation among the Church of Christ, By J. Amos Comenius the only
surviving Bishop of the remains of these Churches. The whole Trial of the
Marquess of Argyle wherein you have had his indictment, and his Answer,
together with his last speech and words upon the Scaffold. The great mystery of
godliness, opened by way of Antidote, against the great mystery of iniquity,
now a work in the Romish Church; wherein 1. The incarnation of the Son of God,
is fully displayed. 2. Ceremonies in point of Worship, Proved to be by Christ
abrogated. 3. Christian liberty, with its eight steps, and five boundaries, by
Thomas Douglass, M. A. Truth brought to light, and discovered by time, or an
Historical Naration of the first fourteen years of King James. The sacred
Ordinance of Ordination, by imposition of the hands of Presbytery, as it was
lately held forth in a Sermon Preached at a solemn Ordination of Ministers in
the City of Norwich by John Brinsley.
Large Octavo's.
THe Pastor and Clerk, or a debate (real) concerning Infant Baptism, by John
Ellis. A breastplate for the keeping of the heart, with a rich Treasury for the
promises, being Several Sermons by Jeremy Turner. Mr. Robinson. Christian
Armor. Divine principles, or a Scripture Catechism. Five Sermons in five
several ways of preaching, the 1. in B, A. the 2. in B, H. way, the 3. in Dr.
M. and M. C. way, the 4. in the Presbyterian way, and the 5. in the Independent
way of preaching, by A. VV. Minister of the Gospel. A Wedding-Ring fit for the
finger: or, the salve of Divinion the sore of humanity. I aid open in a Sermon
at a Wedding in Edmonton, by William Seeker, preacher of the Gospel. To which
is adjoined the non such professor in his Meredian Splendour; or, The singular
actions of sanctified Christians; being the substance of seven Sermons on Mat.
5.47. by the same Author. Four profitable Treatises, very useful for Christian
practice, viz. The killing power of the Law, The Spiritual watch, The New
birth: of the Sabbath; by the reverend William Fenner, late Minister of
Rotchford in Essex. Inchyridion Jndicnm, or Jehoshaphats change to his Judges;
together with the Catastrophe Magnatum, or King David's lamentation at Prince
Abners Incineration, by James Livesey Minister of the Gospel at Atherton. The
greatest loss on Mat. 16.26. by the same Author. Meditations Divine and moral,
by Henry Tabb, M. A. The Psalms of King David, translated by King James. Wilful
impenitency the grossest Self murder, by that able, faithful and laborious
Minister of Jesus Christ, Mr. VVilli m Fenner. (...) the almost Christian
discovered, or the False Professor tried and cast, by Matthew Mead. Spiritual
wisdom improved against Temptation, by the same Author. Beams of former light,
discovering how evil it is to impose doubtful and disputabe forms or practices
upon Ministers Habbakkuck's prayer applied to the Churches present occasians,
on Hab. 3.2. and Christ's counsel to the Church of Philadelyhia, on Rev. 3.11.
by that late reverend and faithful Minister of Jesus Christ Mr. Samuel
Balmford, Pastor of Albons VVood-street London. The Rudiments of Grammar: The
Rules composed of English Verse, for the greater benefit and delight of young
beginners, by James Shirley. The Ladies Dispensatory, containing the Natures,
Virtues, and qualities of Herbs and Simples useful in physic, reduced into a
methodical Order, for their more ready use in any sickness, or other accidents
of the body.
Small Octavo's.
TEntation, their nature, danger, cure, by Richard Capel, to which is added his
remains. Balm for bleeding England, and Ireland, or seasonable instructions
for persecuted Christians; delivered in several Sermons, by Nicholas Lockyer.
M. A. The good old way, or Perkins Emproved in a plain Exposition, and sound
application of these doubts of Divinity, briefly comprised in his six
principle, by Charles Broxolme. Gospel glory without prejudice to the Law,
shining forth in father, son, and holy ghost for the salvation of sinners, by
Richard Byfield. A glimpse of Gospel glory, being the sum of several Sermons,
on 2 Cor. 13.18. Preached by VV. Sherwin. Catechizing Gods Ordinance, in sundry
Sermons, by Mr. Zachary Crofton, Minister at Butolphs Aldgate, London. The
Godly man's Ark in the day of his distress, discovered in diverse Sermons; the
first of which was preached at the Funeral of Ms. Elizabeth Moor. Whereunto is
annexed Ms. Elizabeth Moors Evidences for Heaven, by E. Calamy B.D. Pastor of
the Church at Aldermanbury, The Gale of opportunity, and beloved Discipline, by
Thomas Froysal. Sion in the house of mourning, because of sin and suffering
being an exposition on the fifth Chapter of the Lamentations, by D. S. Pastor
of Vpingham in Rutland. A word of Comfort for the Church of God, by Mr. Tho.
Watson, Minister of Stephens Walbrook. A Plea for Arms, delivered in a Sermon
at the Spittle on Tuesday in Easter week, April. 13. 1658. by the same Author.
Moses unvailed, or those figures which served unto the pattern and shadow of
Heavenly things, pointing out the Messiah Christ Jesus, briefly explained;
whereunto is added the harmony of the Prophets, breathing with one mouth the
Mysteries of his coming, and of that Redemption which by his death he was to
accomplish; by William Guild Minister of Gods Word at King-Edward in Scotland.
Good company, being a collection of various, serious, pious meditations, by J.
Melvin, Minister of the Gospel at Vdimer in Sussex. A Religious Treatise upon
Simeons Song; or instruction how to live holily and dye happily, by T.
VVood^iff B. D. pastor at Kingstand in Herefordshire. The reformation in which
is reconciled with God and his people; or a Catechism unvailing the Apostles
Creed, with Annotations; in which Faith, Ordinances and Government are
professed as in the primitive times, in opposition to all Errors and Heresies;
by W. K. Minister of the Gospel. Prospering profaneness provoking holy
conference, and Gods attention; several Sermons from Mal. 3, 15, 16, 17. by
Zachary Crofton. The Catechism of Hugo grotius, done into English. Benedictio
Valedictio, or the remembrance of thy friend, and thy end, being a farewell
Sermon, preached at the house of the late Right honorable, Leticia, Lady
Paget, Dowar, deceased; by her Chaplain Anthony Sadler.
Twelves.
IOhnsons Essay, expressed in sundry exquisite fantacies. The dangerous Rule,
or a Sermon Preached at Clonmel in the Province of Munster in Ireland, upon
August 3. 1657. before the reverend Judges for that Circuit, by S. L. M. A. and
lately fellow of C. C. C. in Oxen. The Riches of grace displayed in the offer
and tender of salvation to poor sinners. Wherein is set out, The gracious
behavior of Christ, standing at the door and knocking for entrance by Obadiah
Sedgwick B. D. and late Minister of the Gospel in Covent Garden. A short
Catechism by the same Author. The Woman's p^ory, a Treatise asserting the due
honor of that Sex, by manifesting that Women are capable of the highest
improvement; by Samuel Torshel. The discovery of the most dangerous dead faith;
by J. Eaten M. A. and sometime Student in Trinity College in Oxford. The new
Testament of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; newly translated out of the
Original Greek, and with the former Translations diligently compared and
revised, by his Majesty's special command, printed at Edinburgh. The Dying
Fathers Legacy to his living Son
Twenty fours.
GRoans of the Spirit, or a Trial of the truth of prayer. A Handkercher for
Parents wet eyes, upon the death of their Children or Friends.
FINIS.
PSALM. 73 26. My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my
heart, and my portion for ever.
CHAP. I. The Preface, Division of the Psalm, and coherence of the Text.
THe Holy Scriptures are famous above all other Writings for their Verity. The
Works and Books of men are like their Bodies, liable to many Weaknesses. After
their most correct Edition there may frequently be found more Errata's in the
Copy then in the Press. But the Word of God is like himself, Full, without all
imperfection; and faithful, without all Falsehood or corruption. Its Author is
the God of Truth, for whom its impossible to lie, and therefore its matter must
needs be the Word of Truth. Thy Law is the Truth, 2 Pet. 1.21. Tit. 1.2. Psalm.
119.142.

Among all the Books of Scripture the Psalms of David are famous for Variety:
Other Books are either Historical, Doctrinal or Prophetical; the Book of Psalms
is all. Psalm 22 Psalm 16
It describes some histories of the Church, foretells the passion and
resurrection of Christ, and declares the duty of a Christian. The Psalms, Io.
Gerrh. loc. Com. de Script. in Exeg^si.
says Gerrhard, are a jewel made up of the gold of doctrine, of the pearl of
comfort, and of the gems of Prayer. Basil says, It is a common shop of
remedies, Basil in Psalm.
a compendium of all Divinity, a storehouse of excellent Doctrine for all
persons, and in all conditions.

In this Seventy third Psalm we may consider, 1. the Title to it. 2. The
Substance of it.


Le Asaph, i.e. Asaphi vel Asapho, cum le inservit tum Genitivo tum Dative. A
Lap. Existimant non nulli Psalmum hunc and caeteros qui sequuntur a Davide
compositum. De ea re quanquam non dispute, tamen genus orationis in his Psalmis
tale est ut appareat alium esse carminum horum Authorem quam Davidem. Moller.
in Tit. Psalm. 73. De Psalmi authore non auxie disputo, mihi verisimile est,
quia canendi provincia mandata fuerit ipsi Asaphi, nomen ejus poni, praeterito
Davidis nomine, sicuti res per se notae saepe taceri solent. Calvin in loc.
Its Title is, A Psalm of Asaph, or a Psalm for Asaph, says Ainsworth. The
original bearing both, causes some difference among Expositors, whether Asaph
were the Penman of it, or only the Musician to whom it was directed to be set
and sung with the voice or instrument. That Asaph was a Prophet or Seer is
plain, 2 Chronicles. 29.30. As also that he was a Singer, 1 Chronicles. 15.19. Mollerus
thinks Asaph the compiler of it. Calvin judges David. The matter is not
much, for whosoever of the two were the pen, the Spirit of God, which is called
the finger of God, guided it, and wrote the Psalm.

For the substance of the Psalm, it contains the Godly man's Trial in the
former part of it, and his Triumph in the latter part of it. We have

First, The grievous conflict between the flesh and the Spirit, to the 15 verse.

Secondly, The glorious conquest of the Spirit over the flesh, to the end.

In the beginning of the Psalm he ingeniously points at those rocks against
which he was like to have split his soul.

In the middle, he heartily confesses his ignorance and folly to have been the
chiefest foundation of his fault.

In the conclusion, he gratefully kisseth that hand which led him out of the
labyrinth.

Or we may observe,

First, The cause of his distemper.

Secondly, The cure of it.

Thirdly, The Psalmists carriage after it.

His disease was Envy, The Psalmist was much troubled with the Frets, I was
envious at the foolish. verse. 3.

First, The Cause of it, When I saw the prosperity of the wicked, ver. 3. His
heart was pained, because profane men prospered. That weeds which cumbered the
ground, should be watered so plentifully, and grow so exceedingly, when good
corn was so thin and lean: That the Lion and Raven, those unclean creatures,
should be spared, when the innocent Lamb and Dove were sacrificed: That the
wicked should flourish like the Bay Tree, enjoy a constant Spring and Summer,
be fresh and green all the year, though without fruit; when Saints like good
Apple Trees had their Autumn and Winter; this touched the good man to the
quick; his sore eyes could not behold the glorious sunshine of their prosperity
without much pain.

The Heathen have from the flourishing of such unholy persons flatly denied all
providence. Diogenes the Cynick, seeing Harpalus a vicious fellow increasing in
wealth, whilst he wallowed in wickedness, said, That the Gods took no care how
things were carried here below. The Athenians upon the defeat and death of
their honest General Nicias in Sicily, concluded, That the divine Powers were
wholly regardless of humane affairs. And not only these blind Heathen who
walked in the night of darkness, but even Saints themselves, who were able to
see afar off, and who pondered the paths of their feet, have stumbled at this
stone, Jer. 12.1, 2. Hab: 1.13.

Secondly, The Cure of his distemper; his disease was bad eyes: An envious eye
is an evil eye; Why is thine eye evil because mine is good, Matthew. 20.15. His
remedy was this, His eyes were anointed with some Eye Salve out of the
Sanctuary which helped them. He saw the end of wicked men's prosperity, to be no
less then endless misery; that they did but like Malefactors, go up the ladder
above others, to be turned off and executed; and this satisfied him.

The Heathen as they ascribe the subject of the disease to many causes (some
Naturalists to the principles of Generation and corruption; the Stoics to the
necessary connection of second causes; the Astrologers to the motion and
influence of the stars, undertaking to show us the very Houses of Prosperity
and Adversity; the wiser sort of those Pagans, though also their foolish hearts
were darkened, to the will of Jupiter, who had his vessels of good and bad
things by him, out of which he gave to all persons according to his pleasure)
so also they prescribe for its removal many cures; though generally their
medicines like weak lenitives did only move and stir, not remove or purge away
the distemper: Their receipts were all of Kitchen Physic, such as grew in
Natures Garden, when those drugs which do work the cure must be fetched from
far. Hos D us quos probat, quos amat. indurat, recogno cit, exercet. Eos autem
quibus indulgere videtur, quibus parcere, venturis malis servat. Errat s enim
si quem jud^catis exceptum. Veni^t ad illum diu felicem sua port^o, qu squis
videtur d smissus esse, dilatus est. Seneca in lib. Quare bonis viris mala
accidant cum sit providentia cap. 14.
I confess the Master of Moral Philosophy (whom I most admire of all Heathen)
seems to harp upon the same string with the Psalmist, Those (says he) whom
God approves and loves he exercises and afflicts: Those whom he seems to
spare; he reserveth for future sufferings. But an ordinary capacity may
perceive by the Treatise (though there be many excellent things in it) how far
the Moralist came short of Christianity. It is also without question that his
sight was not so good as to look into the other world, and there to see the
eternal pains of the evil, and pleasures of the good, which vision did allay
the storm in the Prophets spirit. He tells us indeed that vicious persons are
not dismissed, only their punishment is delayed; but to him this life was the
time, and this world the place of their execution.

That which did assuage those boistrous Waves, which threatened to swallow up
the soul of the Psalmist; was the different conclusion of the Saints and
sinners conversations. By faith he foresaw that the whole life of a wicked man
was but a Tragedy; though its beginning might be cheerful, yet its ending would
be mournful; though their power were great on Earth for a time, yet their
portion should be in the lowest Hell to eternity, Until I went into the
Sanctuary of God, then understood I their end. Surely thou did set them in
slippery places: thou castest them down into destruction. How are they brought
into desolation as in a Moment, they were utterly consumed with terrors, v. 17,
18, 19. They are but exalted as the Shell Fish by the Eagle (according to the
Naturalists) to be thrown down on some Rock and devoured. Their most glorious
prosperity is but like a Rainbow, which shows it self for a little time in
all its gaudy colors and then vanishes. The Turks considering the unhappy end
of their Visiers, use this Proverb, He that is in the greatest Office, is but a
statue of Glass. Wicked men walk on Glass or Ice (thou have set them in
slippery places) on a sudden their feet slip, they fall and break their Necks;
Oh the sad reckoning which they must have after all their merry meetings;
Though their sweet morsels go down pleasantly here, yet they will rise in their
Stomachs hereafter.

The holy Prophet saw also that Saints after their short storm, should enjoy an
everlasting calm; Thou shall guide me by thy counsel, and afterward receive me
to glory, v. 24. As the Pillar of fire by Night, and cloud by Day, thou will
march before, and direct me through the Wilderness of this World, till I come
to Canaan.

Thirdly, His Carriage after it.

1. In an holy Apostrophe or conversion to God. Whom have I in Heaven but thee,
and there is none on Earth that I desire besides thee. What though ungodly
persons abound in sensual pleasures, yet I have infinitely the better portion.
They have the streams which run pleasantly for a season, but will shortly be
scorcht up; but I have the Fountain which runs over and runs ever. If
they like Grasshoppers skipping up and down on earth, have their Notes, what
Tune may I sing who am mounting up to Heaven, and enjoy him who is unspeakably
more desirable then any thing, yea then all things either in Heaven or earth!

CHAP. II. The Interpretation of the Text, and the Doctrine, That man's flesh
will fail him.
IN an Heavenly position concerning his happiness in God, my flesh and my heart
fails me, but God is the strength of my heart and my portion for ever.

In reference to which I shall

First, Open the Terms,

Secondly, Divide the Text,

Thirdly, Raise the Doctrinal truths.

The opening of the Words.
My flesh and my heart fails me.] Some take the Words in a spiritual, others
in a civil, others in a natural sense. Amongst them who take it in a spiritual
sense, some Expositors take it in an evil, others in a good sense.

Abbot in lo^.
They who take the expression in a bad sense, take it to be a confession of his
former sin, and to have relation to the Combat, (mentioned in the beginning of
the Psalm) between the flesh and the spirit, as if he had said. I was so
surfeited with self conceitedness, that I presumed to araign divine actions, at
the bar of humane reason; and to judge the stick under Water crooked, by the
eye of my sense, when indeed it was straight; but now I see that flesh is no
fit Judge in matters of faith, that neither my flesh nor heart can determine
rightly of Gods dispensations, nor hold out uprightly under Satan's temptations;
for if God had not supported me, my flesh had utterly supplanted me. My flesh
and my heart fails me, but God is the strength of my heart. Flesh is sometime
taken for corrupt nature, Gal. 5.13. First, because it is propagated by the
flesh, John 3.6. Secondly, because it is executed by the flesh, Romans 7.25.
Thirdly, because corruption is nourished, strengthened, and increased by the
flesh, 1 John 2.16.

They who take the words in a good sense, do not make them look back so far as
to the beginning of the Psalm, but only to the Neighbor verse. The Prophet
(say they) having passionately fixed his heart on God as the most amiable object
in Heaven and earth, (v. 25.) was transported therewith so excessively, and
carried out in holy sallies, after him so vehemently, that he was ready to sink
and swoon away; his spirits were ready to expire through the exuberancy of his
love to, and longings after the blessed God. The weak cask of his body was
ready to break, and not able to hold that strong and spiritual wine; My flesh
and my heart fails me. I am so ravished with delight in, and so enlarged in
desires after this infinitely beautiful object, that there is no more spirit in
me; I am sick, yea if God should not appear, the strength of my heart, should
die for love.

2. They who expound the words in a civil sense, (as I may say) affirm the
sentence to refer to the Psalmist sufferings.

He had a good rod instead of a good piece of bread for his breakfast every
morning, and the table was covered with sackcloth, and furnished with the same
bitter herbs both at Dinner and Supper; For all the day long have I been
plagued, and chastened every morning, verse. 14. Nam quicquid adversi accid t,
aut carni accidit aut animo. Muscul. in loc.
Now the weight of this burden was so great, pressing his body, and oppressing
his mind, that without an Almighty power it had broke his back, His flesh and
his heart failed him.

3. Others take the words in a natural sense, as if the Prophet did neither
intend by them his fault, Sunt quibus praesens tempus pla^et. aliis futurum
magis arr det. Marl. in loc.
as some who take them in a spiritual sense; nor his fear, as those who take
them in a civil sense; but only his frailty; as if he had said, My moisture
consumes, my strength abateth, my flesh falls, my heart fails, or at least
ere long my breath will be corrupt, my days extinct, and the grave ready for
me; how happy am I therefore in having God for the strength of my heart.
Deficit (consum^tur) caro mea and cor meum. Mollerus.
Ainsworth reads the words, Wholly consumed is my heart and my flesh.

I shall take the words in this sense, as being most suitable to this occasion.

So far the Thesis, now to the Antithesis.

Robur cordis. Calv.
But God is the strength of my heart] Though my flesh fail me, the Father of
spirits does not fail me, when I am sinking he will put under his everlasting
arm to save me.

The Seventy read it, But God is the God of my heart; because God is all
strength: God in the heart is the strength of the heart.

Petra cordis. Moller.
The Hebrew carries it, But God is the rock of my heart, e. i. A sure, strong
and immovable foundation to build upon. Though the winds may blow, and the
waves beat, when the storm of death comes yet I need not fear that the house
of my heart will fall, for its built on a sure foundation. God is the rock of
my heart. The strongest child that God has is not able to stand alone; like
the Hop or Ivy, he must have somewhat to support him, or he is presently on the
ground. Of all seasons, the Christian has most need of succor at his dying
hour, then he must take his leave of all his comforts on earth, and then he
shall be sure of the sharpest conflicts from Hell, and therefore its impossible
he should hold out without extraordinary help from Heaven. But the Psalmist had
armor of proof ready wherewith to encounter his last enemy. As weak and
fearful a child as he was, he durst venture a walk in the dark entry of death,
having his Father by the hand: Though I walk in the valley of the shadow of
death, I will fear none ill; for thou art with me. Psa. 23. Though at the
troubles of my life, and my trial at death, my heart is ready to fail me, yet I
have a strong cordial which will cheer me in my saddest condition, God is the
strength of my heart.

And my portion, Its a Metaphor taken from the ancient custom among the Jews,
of dividing inheritances, whereby every one had his allotted portion, as if he
had said, God is not only my Rock to defend me from those tempests which
assault me, and thereby my freedom from evil; but he is also my portion to
supply my necessities, and to give me the fruition of all good. Others indeed
have their parts on this side the land of promise, but the Author of all
portions, is the matter of my portion; my portion does not lie in the Rubbish
and lumbar as theirs does, whose portion is in this life, be they never so
large, but my portion contains him, whom the Heavens, and Heaven of Heavens
can never contain. God is the strength of my heart and my portion for ever; Not
for a Year, or an age, or a million of ages, but for eternity; Though others
portions, like Roses, the fuller they blow, the sooner they shed, they are
worsted often by their pride, and wasted through their prodigality, that at
last they come to want, Quicquid praeter deum possideas non poteris dicere quod
pars tua sit futura in s^ ulum. De deo solo dicit fi^^lis Pars mea deus in
seculum, Muscul. in loc.
and surely death always rents their persons and portions asunder, yet my
portion will be ever full without diminution, and first without alteration this
God will be my God for ever and ever, my guide and aid unto death; nay Death
which dissolveth so many bonds, and untieth such close knots, shall never part
me and my portion, but give me a perfect and everlasting possession of it.

The words branch themselves into these two parts. The parts of the Text.


First, The Psalmist Complaint, My flesh and my heart fails me.

Secondly, His Comfort, but God is the strength of my heart and my portion for
ever.

Or we may take notice in them,

1. Of the Frailty of his Flesh; My flesh and my heart fails me.

2. Of the Flourishing of his Faith; But God is the strength of my heart, and
my portion for ever.

According to the two parts of the Text, I shall draw forth two Doctrinal
truths.

1. Doct. That Man's flesh will fail him.
The highest, the holiest man's heart will not ever hold out. The Prophet was
great and gracious, yet his flesh failed him.

2. Doct. That its the comfort of a Christian, in his saddest condition, that
God is his portion.
This was the strong water which kept the Psalmist from fainting when his flesh
and heart failed him.

I begin with the first.

The 1. Doct. man is mortal.
That man's flesh will fail him. Those whose spirits are noble, will find their
flesh but brittle. The Psalmist was great, yet death made little, yea nothing
of him, like the Duke of Parma's sword, it makes no difference between great
and small; this Cannon hits the great Commanders as well as the Common
Soldiers; like a violent Wind it plucks up by the roots, not only low Trees,
but also tall Ceders; They who lie in beds of Ivory, must lie down in beds of
earth; Some Letters are set out very gaudily with large flourishes, but they
are but Ink as the other; Some men have great Titles, Worshipful, Right
Worshipful, Honorable, Right Honorable, but they signify no more with Death
then other men, they are but moving earth, and dying dust as ordinary men are;
Worship, Honor, Excellency, Highness, Majesty, must all do homage to the
Scepter of this King of Terrors. When Constantius entered in triumph unto Rome,
and had along time stood admiring the Gates, Arches, Turrets, Temples,
Theaters, and other magnificent Edifices of the City, at last he asked Hormisda
what he thought of the place. I take no pleasure in it at all, says Hormisda,
for I see the end of this City will be the same with all her Predecessors. What
he spoke of places, is as true of persons, though men may admire them for a
while, yet the stateliest and most curious buildings of their bodies, will fall
to the ground as their Ancestors have done before them, Job. 3.15 This storm
will beat on the Princes Court, as much as on the Peasants Cottage, What man is
he that lives, and shall not see death? shall he deliver his soul from the
hand of the grave? Selah, Psalm. 89.48. The interrogation is a strong negation.
The Prophet challenges the whole World to find out a person that can procure a
protection against Deaths Arrest.

The Psalmist was gracious, yet grace gave way to nature, death will like hail
and rain fall on the best gardens as well as the wide wilderness; The Wheat is
cut down and carried into the Barn, as well as the Tares. A godly man is free
from the sting, but not from the stroke, from the curse, but not from the Cross
of death. Holy Hezekiah could beg his own life for a few years, but could not
compound for his death, he did obtain a reprieve, (for fifteen years) but not a
pardon, the best fruit will perish because it is wormeaten: The gold and the
dross (the good and the bad) go both into this fire, the former to be refined,
the latter to be consumed. The whole World is a charnel house, and the several
inhabitants thereof so many walking carcasses. The voice said Cry, and he said
what shall I cry. All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof as the
flower of the field. The grass withers, the flower fades, because the spirit
of the Lord blows upon it, surely the people is grass, Isa. 40.6.7. The words
speaks man's mortality; He is grass, withering grass, a flower, a fading flower;
Secondly, Its certainty, the voice said cry. The Prophet had a charge in a
Vision given him, to proclaim so much from God to his people, surely the people
is grass. Thirdly, the Universality, the flesh of Kings and Counselors, the
flesh of Saints and Martyrs, the flesh of high and low, rich and poor, All
flesh is grass. Man is sometimes compared to the flower for its beauty, but
here for its frailty, a flower will quickly fade, if it be not cut down by an
instrument of Iron, nor cropped by the hand, yet the gentle breath of Wind
quickly blows off its beauty; Besides, an Expositer observes, it is to the
flower of the field, not of the garden; flowers of the garden have more shelter
and are better looked to, then flowers of the field; these are more open to hard
weather, and more liable to be plucked up or trod down. Naturalists tell us of a
Flower called Ephemeron, (...). Plut. ad Apol.
because it lasts but a day. Man is such a Flower, his life is but a day,
whither longer or shorter, a Summers or a Winters day; how quickly do the
shadows of the Evening stretch themselves upon him and make it night with him?
Pliny speaks of a Golden Vine which never withers. The bodies of Saints shall
be such hereafter, but at present the best Herbs wither as well as the worst
Weeds. Neither the Dignity of a Prince, nor the Piety of a Prophet, can excuse
from enrting the List with this Enemy. Against this Arrest there is no Bail.

CHAP. III. The Reasons of the Doctrine, Man's Corruptibility, Gods fidelity,
and Man's Apostasy from God.
Reasons of the Doctrine.
I Shall only lay down in the explication of the point two or three Reasons,
and then proceed to that which will be practical.

1 Man corruptibility.
The first ground of the Doctrine is, the corruptibility of man's body; Its
called in Scripture an house of clay, Job 4.18. and an earthly Tabernacle, 2
Cor. 5.1. The body of man at best is but a clod of clay, curiously molded and
made up. The Greek Proverb has a truth in it (...), Man is but an earthen
Vessel. Some indeed are more painted then others in regard of dignity, and
place; others are stronger Vessels then the rest, in regard of purity of
constitution, Profecto omni moda vanitas Iun
but all are earthen, Surely every man at his best estate is altogether vanity,
Psa. 39. All Adam, is all Abel, Man, nay every man, when most high in regard of
his hopes, and most firm in regard of his foundation, is even then the next
door to, and but one remove from corruption. What the great Apostle said in a
proper, every one may say in a common sense, I die daily. We carry our bane
every moment about us. The very food which preserves our lives, leaves that be
hind it, which will force our deaths. Its holden for certain (says one) that
in two Years space, The Netherland cure
there are in the body of man, as many ill humors engendered, as a Vessel of a
hundred ounces will contain. Ipsa suis augmentis vita ad detrimenta impellitur,
and inde deficit unde proficere creditur. Greg.
Against some, these enemies appear in the open field, often skirmishing with
them, but against all others they lie in ambush, and wait for an opportunity to
fall on and destroy them. In the best timbered body they are but like fire
raked under the ashes, and reserved to another day when they will flame out and
burn it down. We are all like the Apples of Sodom, quae contacta cinerescunt,
Tertul. Apol. cap. 40.
which being touched crumble into dust, or as the Spawn of Locusts, which being
handled dissolveth, Arist Hist. Animal.
according to the Philosopher. God needs not bring out his great Artillery to
batter down the building of man's body, a small touch will tumble it down; nay
its every moment decaying, and will at last fall of it self; There is
rottenness at the core of the fairest fruits, Our flesh is no match for the
Father of spirits. An ordinary Besome will sweep down the Spiders Web. Though
it has accurate weavings, and much curiosity, yet it has nostability. As it
was with the Gourd of Jonah, so it is with the Children of men, we breed and
feed those Worms which will devour and destroy us. Every Man's passing Bell
hangs in his own Steeple.

The second Reason is, Gods fidelity. 2 Reas: Gods fidelity
The righteous and gracious God has threatened eternal pains to the wicked, as
the wages of their sins; and has promised endless pleasures to the godly, as
the reward of Christ's sufferings; now the place of payment where these
threatenings and promises shall be accomplished, is the other world, to which
death is the passage. Man dies that Gods Word may live, and falls to the
earth, that Gods Truth might stand.

Sin, though it be finite in regard of the subject, as being the act of a
limited creature; In peccaeto duo sunt; Quo cum unum est aversio ab immutabili
bono, quod est infinitum, unde ex hac part peccatum est infinitum. Aliud quod
est in peccato est inordinata conversio ad immutabile bonum and ex hac part
peccatum est finitum. Ex part aversionis respondet peccato poena damni, quae
enim est infinita. Est enim a missio infiniti boni scilicet Dei. En part
conversionis respondet poena s^nsus. Aquin. 1, 2, quest: 87. Act: 4.
yet its infinite in regard of the Object, as being committed against a
boundless Creator; therefore its punished with the absence of all good, which
is an infinite loss; and the presence of all evil, which is infinite in
duration, though not in intension, because of the incapability of the sinner.
The infernal pit is the place of those punishments, into which by the ladder of
death men descend, Matthew. 7.23. and 25.41. Mark 9.49. Death is but the sinners
trap door into Hell. The English capital malefactors when cast are carried into
a Dungeon, and from thence to the Gallows. Ungodly men being cast by the Law of
God, and not suing out their pardon from the Gospel (which is an office set up
for that purpose) do go through the Dungeon of death, to the place of their
dreadful and everlasting execution.

God has also engaged to bestow on the members of Christ, an incomparable and
unchangeable Crown; It is your Fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom; but
Death is the young Prophet that anointeth them to it, and gives them actual
possession of it. They must put off their rags of mortality, that they may put
on their robes of glory, It is in the night of Death that Saints go to their
blessed and eternal rest. The corn must first die before it can spring up fresh
and green; Israel must die in Egypt before he can be carried into Canaan. There
is no entrance into Paradise but under the flaming sword of this Angel Death,
that stands at the gate. The soul must be delivered out of the prison of the
body, that it may enjoy the glorious liberty of the sons of God. This bird of
Paradise will never sing merrily, nor warble out the praises of its Maker in a
perfect manner, till it be freeed from this cage.

The sinner dies, that according to Gods word he might receive the bitter
fruits of his evil ways. Death is to him as the gate through which condemned
and piacular persons pass to their deserved destruction. The Saint dies that
according to Gods promise he may enjoy the purchased possession. Death to him,
is as the dirty lane through which Chrysostom passed to a feast, a dark short
way through which he goes to the marriage Supper of the Lamb. His body is
mortal, that his sins and sufferings might not be immortal.

The third Ground of the point, 3 Reas: Man's apostasy from God
may be Man's apostasy from God; Death broke in upon man by reason of man's
breaking the commands of God. We had never fallen to dust, if we had not fallen
from our duties. Sickness had never seized on our bodies, if sin had not first
seized on our souls. Mors est conditio naturae non peccati argumentum vel
poena. Son. Suas: 7.


The Pelagians and Socinians say, That death is not a consequent of sin, but a
condition of nature. The blasphemous Jews tell us, that Adam and his posterity
were therefore condemned to dye, because there was one to come out of his loins
who would make himself a God, meaning Christ; but the God of truth has
resolved the genealogy of death into another cause, even the first Adams
aspiring to be like God, and ambition to cut off the entail, and hold only
from himself, Genesis 3.15. Romans 5.12. As a Lethargy in the head diffuseth
universal malignity through the whole body, and thereby corrupts and
destroys it: Ideo factum est par peccatum non mortale quod erat, sed mortuum
quod non fieret nisi peccaret L^mb: Sent: lib: 2. did. 19.
The apple which Adam did eat was poisoned, which entered into his bowels and
being; the venom of it is transmitted all along like Gehazi's leprosy to his
seed. Some tell us that he would often turn his face toward the Garden of Eden
and weep, reflecting upon what he had done. Sure I am, it was not without
cause, for we all got the infection from him, and by him it is that the whole
world is tainted and turned into a pesthouse. Whatsoever delight he had in the
act, there was death in the end.

Vide Vossium Disputat. Theol: de peccat: pr: hom, quaest: 3. p 43.
It seems unquestionable, that man in his estate of innocence had a
conditional, though not an absolute immortality. It Is true, he was mortal,
ratione corporis, being a compound of corruptible Elements; but immortal,
ratione foederis, being free from the Law of death by virtue of the covenant.
As before he fell he had a posse non peccare, a possibility not to have sinned,
but since a non posse non peccare, a necessity of sinning; So in his estate of
purity he had a possibility of not dying, but in his estate of Apostasy, a
necessity of it. If he had stood, he should, like Enoch, have been translated
that he should not see death; he should have entered into his Fathers house, but
not have walked thither through the dark entry of death.

Psa. 90.7 Romans 8.
The flesh fails us, because sin has defiled it. Man's flesh at first was
fly-blown with pride, and is ever since liable to putrefaction. Sin is
therefore called a body of death, because it causes the death of the body.
When one asked who set up the stately Edifices in Rome; it was answered, The
sins of Germany (meaning the money which the Popes Agents received for Pardons
granted to the Germans) If it be demanded, Who pulls down the goodly building
of man's body; it may be answered, The sins of man. It is sin which turns such
costly curious houses into confused ruinous heaps. Draco the Lawgiver,
appointed death the punishment of every offense (for which cause his Laws are
said to be written in blood) and being demanded the reason, he gave this
answer, that though when crimes were unequal, he seemed to be unjust in making
all equal in punishment, yet herein his justice appeared, that the least breach
of the Law deserved death. The light of Nature taught them, that those that sin
are worthy to die, Romans 1.32. The estate of all sinners lies in the valley of
the shadow of death. Wheresoever sin has but a finger, death will have a hand:
Sin though never committed, but only imputed, did put to death the very Lord
of life. It is like that wild Caprificus, which if it get but rooting, though
in the substance of a stone in the wall, it will break it asunder.

CHAP. IIII. First Use, discovering the folly of them that mind the flesh
chiefly.
First Use of Information, The folly of them that provide for the flesh.
HAving laid down these reasons in the Doctrinal part of my discourse, I shall
now speak to that which is practical. The truth may be useful both by way of
Information and Exhortation.

First, by way of Information. If our flesh will fail us, what fools are they
whose whole contrivance is to feed and please the flesh. We laugh at the vanity
and folly of Children, when we see them very busy and taking much pains to
make up an house of Cards, or pies of Dirt. The greatest part of men are but
Children of larger dimensions, and are indeed more foolish, because they ought
to be more wise; What is their main work but to make provision for the flesh?
to provide fuel enough for the fire of its covetousness, and pleasant Water
enough for the Leviathan of its voluptuousness, and air enough for the Camelion
of Ambition, as if God had no other design in sending them into the World, but
that they might be Cooks to dress their bodies as well as possibly might be for
the Worms. All their care is, What shall we Eat? and what shall we drink? and
wherewith shall we be clothed? and how shall we do to live in these dear and
hard times? as vermin in Dung-hills, they live and feed on such filth, never
once asking their souls in earnest, What will thou do for the bread which came
down from Heaven, and how will thou do to put on the Robes of Christ's
righteousness, that thy nakedness may not appear to thy shame, and O what will thou do to be saved, to live eternally. These things are not in all their
thoughts. Like Flies they are overcome with the spirits of Wine, and nourished
with froth; Its enough they think, if when they come to dye, they bequeath
their souls to God in their Wills, (though its a thousand to one if those wills
be proved in Heaven, I can tell them of unanswerable caveats, which the Judges
Son will put in against them) and therefore their whole lives must be devoted
to the service of their bodies, like dying men they smell of earth, and carry
its complexion in their very countenances; If a man that had two houses in his
possession, one whereof was his own freehold for ever, and the other his
Landlords, which he agreed to leave at an hours warning; should neglect his
own house, let all things there run to rack and ruin, but night and day be
mending and adorning his Landlords House, as if he could never be at cost
enough; or make it neat enough; would not every one condemn this man for a fool
or a mad man? Truly this is the very case of most men. The soul in the body is
a tenant in domo aliena says the Orator. Cicero Tusc.
The body is our house of clay, in which we are Tenants at another will, we
may be turned out of its Doors without so much as an hours warning; the soul is
our own everlasting possession, yet generally the immortal spirit is slighted,
no time taken for a serious view of its wants, no cost laid out for its supply,
as if it were an indifferent thing, whither it swim or sink for ever; when men
are always plotting and studiing to gratify and please their fading flesh. O
this is one of the dolefullest sights which eyes can behold, the servant to
ride on horseback, and the Prince to go on foot; the sensitive appetite to be
the grave of Religion, and the Dungeon of Reason. Greg: de la NuZ. Tract: Evan.
It is reported of a certain Philosopher, that dying he bequeathed a great sum
of money to him that should be found most foolish: His Executor in pursuance of
his will, traveled up and down, to find out one that excelled others in folly,
and so might challenge the legacy; at last he came to Rome, where a Consul
abusing his office was adjudged to death, and another (suing for the place)
chosen, who cheerfully took it upon him, to this man he delivered the money,
telling him; That he was the most foolish man in the World, who seeing the
miserable end of his Predecessor, was nothing therewith discouraged, but
joyfully succeeded him in his Office. How much do most titular Christians
resemble this foolish Consul, they see in the World their sensual Companions,
like sheep as they are feeding in their fleshly pastures, culled out by death,
and called away from them; nay, they may see in the Word (if they will believe
God himself) the block on which they are laid by that bloody Butcher Satan, the
Knife with which they are stuck, and which he runs up to the very Haft in the
throat of their precious souls; the heavy curse of the law, and the infinite
wrath of the Lord, which they must undergo for ever, and yet they are therewith
not the least affrighted, but merrily follow them to the place of endless
mourning.

Reader, If thou art one of these fleshpots of Egypt; What folly and madness
art thou guilty of? Is not thy spirit (...), Plate.
an Heavenly plant, the immediate workmanship of the glorious God, and thy
flesh like the first Adam of the earth Earthy, and art thou not a fool to
prefer Dirt before that which is divine? Is not thy spirit the impress and
Image of God himself, in its immortality, noble faculties, and capacity of
honoring, and enjoying his infinite Majesty; and thy body the resemblance of
beasts, nay, in many things inferior to them, and art thou not unwise in
esteeming that which is brutish, above that which is the Picture of Gods own
perfections? Again, is not the well-being of thy body, involved in the welfare
of thy soul? As really as the branches depend on the root for its flourishing,
thy body depends on thy soul for its salvation, how mad art thou therefore to
let the Vessel sink, and yet presume to preserve the Passenger that sayleth in
it. Once more, shall not the life of thy spirit run parallel with the life of
God himself, and the line of eternity? and has not God himself told thee, that
thy flesh will fail thee? do thou not find it now and then tottering, and as
it were telling thee that it must drop down? and art not thou a fool in grain,
a fool in the highest degree, to place all thy happiness for ever, to set all
thy stress and weight for thine unchangeable estate on this rotten bough which
will certainly break under thee, when thou might have sure footing, and lay
up a good Foundation by an hearty regarding thine Heaven-born soul; O consider
it, and give conscience leave to call thee fool once, that thou may be wise
for ever. Attilus King of Swethland made a Dog King of the Danes, in revenge of
some injuries received from them. What wrong has thy soul done thee, that to
be revenged on it, and to spite it to purpose, thou make its slave its
Sovereign, that part by which thou art kin to the beasts, its Lord and King.

The truth is, were not men drowned in sensuality (as he whom Seneca speaks
of; that knew not whither he stood or sat, till his slave told him,) and their
consciences seared and made senseless by them (as young Gallants being arrested
for debt, make the Sergeants drunk, and thereby escape at present) it would be
impossible for men to live thus after the flesh. But as some cunning theives,
if there be a Mastiff belonging to the house which they intend to Rob, give it
some morsels which will keep it from barking, that so they may steal the
Inhabitants Wealth, and they not have the least warning either to hinder or
recover it. So the Devil has an art to make men's consciences dumb, whilst he
robs them of their inestimable souls; poor, foolish creatures they are lazing
on their beds of carnal security, and delighting themselves in their dreams of
lying vanities, and in the interim he rifleth their houses and takes away all
that is of any value. Yet as fast as conscience is now asleep, twill shortly
awake, as the Jailer at midnight, and then what fears and frights will possess
them? Ah how clearly will they see their folly, in sowing to the flesh, and
trusting to that which was never true to any! then they will roar out, If we
had served our spirits, as faithfully as we have served our flesh, they would
not have failed us thus.

When Pausanias desired Simonides, to give him some grave Apothegm, by which he
might apprehend his great wisdom, for which he was so renowned, Simonides
smiling spoke this, Esse te hominem, ne excideret tibi; Remember that you are a
man, that your flesh will fail you. Pausanius puffs at this, but in a short
time after, being almost pined to death with Famine, he began to think of
Simonides saying; and cried out, O Simonides, magnum quiddam erat oration tua
sed prae amentia esse nihil opinabar. O Simonides, thy speech was full of
weight, but I mad wretch, thought it of no worth. Friends, Ministers, nay the
chief Master of sentences himself, delivered thee this as the Master piece of
wisdom, To remember that thy flesh will fail thee; Prove. 19.20.
Hear counsel, receive instruction, that thou may be wise for thy latter end.
But possibly thou like Gallio carest for none of these things; It is death to
thee to think of death; Thou hate it, as Ahab did Micaiah, because it never
speaks well of thee; thy voice to it is as Pharaohs to Moses, Get thee hence,
Let me see thy face no more; It is said of Vitellius in Tacitus, that he was
one hour (trepidus dein temulentus) fearful, the next drunken, in the very
approach of his fatal ruin, striving to drown his fears in his cups; Thou art
resolved to riot and revel, and therefore can not endure to think of a
reckoning. Well, put off the thoughts of it, as far and as much as thou can,
make as light of it as thy hardened heart will give thee leave, yet be confident
it is on its way riding post toward thee with a Warrant from the God of Heaven,
for thy Execution; and O then when thou see its grim face, how will thine
heart tremble, and when thou hear its dreadful voice, how will thine ears
tingle! the flesh which thou now pamperest, will then wax pale, and the vessels
which now thou drawest thy comforts from, will then run dregs; and then, O
then, how mournfully will thou screech out; O Pastors, O Teachers, The counsel
which you gave me was of infinite weight, and consequence, but I fool, mad man,
had not the wit to follow it. Or as Carolus King of Sicily, did on his
deathbed. Alas, alas, I am going to dye, and yet have not begun to live.

I shall conclude this use with that sad Relation which Athenaeus makes of a
great Monarchs life and death, in which as in a Looking-glass, thou may see
that flesh-pleasing vanitities will end in soul-piercing miseries, and that as
wise as such a man may be counted by the World, yet in his latter end, he is
but a fool.

Ninus the Assyrian Monarch, had an Ocean of Gold and other riches, more then
the Sand in the Caspian Sea, he never saw the Stars, he never stirred up the
Holy fire among the Magi, nor touched his God with the sacred rod according to
the law, he never offered sacrifice, nor worshipped the deity, nor administered
justice, but he was most valiant to Eat and Drink, and having mingled his
Wines, he threw the rest on the stones; This man is dead, behold his Sepulcher,
and now hear where Ninus is. -- Sometimes I was Ninus and drew the breath of a
living man, but now am nothing but clay, I have nothing but what I did eat, and
what I served on my self in lust (that was and is all my portion) the wealth
with which I was esteemed blessed, my enemies meeting together shall bear away,
as the mad Thyades carry a raw Goat; I am gone to hell, and when I went
thither, I carried neither Gold nor Horse, nor silver Chariot; I that wore a
Miter, am now a little heap of dust.

CHAP. V. Second USE. An Exhortation to sinners to prepare for death, with
three quickenning motives. Death will come certainly; it may come suddenly:
When it comes twill be too late to prepare.
THE second Use shall be by way of Exhortation: which will run in two distinct
channels, partly to the sensual worldlings, partly to the serious Christian. I
shall speak one word to the Wise, but in the first place two words to the
Wicked.

Exhortaion 1. To the Wicked to fit themselves for the other World
If the flesh will fail you, mind the salvation of thy spirit, when one leaf
falls in Autumn, we conclude that all will follow after; by the death of others,
thou may conclude thy own dissolution; When men's Leases of the houses wherein
they dwell are near expired, they think of providing another Habitation, that
they may not be exposed to the injury of the wind and weather in the naked
streets. Reader, I am come to thee with a message this day from the faithful
God, and it is to acquaint thee, that the Lease of thy life is almost worn out;
the time of thy departure is at hand, what House will thou provide for thy
precious soul, that it may not be obnoxious to the roarings of damned spirits,
and to the rage of tormenting Devils? The Roman Gladiatours designed to death,
were very careful, so to contrive and carry themselves, that they might fall
handsomely. Sure I am, thou art one appointed for the dust; where, O where is
thy sollicitousness to dye comfortably. Possibly thou art one who have often
spoken of dressing thy body neatly for the Coffin, thy wedding shift, the
finest sheet, thy handsomest head-cloaths must all adorn thy clod of Clay, and
grace thy carcass, to entertain the Worms at their feast, with clean and fine
Linen: But in the mean time, thou have no thoughts of dressing thy immortal
soul against the coming of the bridegroom.

When thou die thou throwest thy last cast for thine everlasting estate, thou
shall never be allowed a second throw. An Error in death, is like an Error in
the first Concoction, which cannot be mended in the second. Where thou lodgest
that Night thou dyest, thou art housed for ever. That work which is of such
infinite weight, and can be done but once, had need to be done well. God has
given thee but one Arrow to hit the mark with, Shoot that at random and he
will never put another into thy Quiver; God will allow no second Edition to
correct the Erratas of the first, therefore it concerns thee with all
imaginable seriousness to consider what thou do when thou die.

One would think, thou should take little comfort in any creature, whilst thy
eternal state is thus in danger. Augustus wondered at the Roman Citizen, that
he could sleep quietly when he had a great burden of debt upon him. What rest
can thou have, what delight in any thing thou enjoyest, who owe such vast
sums to the Infinite Justice of God, when he is resolved to have full
satisfaction either in this or the other world? When David offered Barzillai
the pleasures and preferments of his own royal Palace, he refused them, because
he was to die within a while. How long have I to live, that I should go up with
the King unto Jerusalem? Let thy servant turn back that I may dye, 2 Samuel
19.34, 35, 36. i. e. Court me no courts, I have one foot in the grave, my glass
is almost run, let me go home and dye. Without controversy, thou have more
cause to wink on these withering comforts, and to betake thy self wholly to a
diligent preparation for death. The Thebans made a law, That no man should
build a house before he had made his grave.

Every part of thy life may mind thee of thy death. Mortibus vivimus. Senec.
The Moralist speaks true, Thou live by deaths; thy food is the dead
carcasses of birds, or fish, or beasts; thy finest raiment is the worms grave
before it is thy garment. Look to the Heavens, the Sun rises and sets, so
that life which now shines pleasantly on thee will set; how much does it
behove thee to work the work of him that sent thee into the world while day
lasts, that thou may not set in a cloud, which will certainly prognosticate
thy foul weather in the other world. Look down to the Earth, there thou
beholdest thy mother out of whose womb thou did at first come, and in whose
bowels thou shall ere long be laid. The dust and graves of others cry aloud to
thee, as Gideon to his Soldiers, Look on us, and do likewise; O trim thy soul
against that time: If thou risest up, and walk abroad in the streets, thou
see this house and that seat, where such a woman such a man dwelt, and lo,
the place which knew them shall know them no more; they are gone, and have
carried nothing with them but their godliness or ungodliness. If thou lie
down thy sleep is the image of death, thou know not whether thou shall awake
in a bed of feathers, or in a bed of flames; but art certain, that shortly thy
body shall lie down in the grave, and there remain till the resurrection. Look
on thy companions, thou may see death siting on their countenances, its
creeping on them in the deafness of their ears, in the dimness of their eyes;
nay its posting toward them in the very height and Zenith of their natural
perfections. Look on thy own house of clay, death possibly looks out at thy
windows, however it looks in at thy windows; thou wearest it in thy face, thou
bear it in thy bones, and does it not behove thee to prepare for it?
Naturalists tell us, that smelling of earth is very wholesome for consumptionate
bodies. O Reader, a serious thought of thy death, that thou art but dust, would
be very wholesome for thy declining and decaying soul.

Hard bones steept in vinegar and ashes grow so soft that they may be cut with
a thread. Give me leave for one half hour to steep thy hard heart in such a
mixture; possibly it may be so softened through the operation of the Spirit with
the Word, Drexel. Eternit
that thou may become wise unto salvation. Its reported of one Guerricus,
that hearing these words read in the Church, And all the days that Adam lived,
were nine hundred and thirty years, and he died; All the days of Seth were nine
hundred and twelve years, and he died; And all the days of Enos was nine
hundred and five years, and he died; And all the days of Methuselah were nine
hundred sixty nine years, and he died, Genesis 5.5. He was so strongly wrought
upon by those words, And he died, And he died, that he gave himself wholly to
devotion. Friend, if thou have any dram of true love to thy soul, and its
unchangeable condition in the other world, the consideration of death would
make a deep impression upon thee.

But that I may awaken and rouse thee while there is time and hope, and then
help and heal thee, I shall in the prosecution of this Exhortation

First, Speak to somewhat that may be persuasive.

Secondly, Offer to thee somewhat that is Directive.

First, I shall offer thee some thoughts which may quicken thee to a diligent
provision for this time.

Motives, 1 Death will come certainly
First, Do thou not know that Death will come certainly? As the young Prophet
said to Elisha, Do thou know that the Lord will take thy Master from thy head
to day? 2 Kings 2.3. Reader, Do thou know that the Lord will take thy soul
out of thy body, and send it to the unknown regions of the other World; where
thou shall see such things as thou never saw, hear such things as thou never
heardst, and understand such things as thou did never understand? Possibly
thou will answer me (as Elisha them) I know it, hold your peace. But truly I am
ready to urge it again, being assured that thy knowledge is (as Cicero speaks
of the Athenians) like artificial teeth, for show only; thou do not yet know
it for thy good. Therefore give me leave to enforce it still. Do thou know
that God will bring thee to death, and to the house appointed for all the
living? Do thou know that thy ruddy countenance will wax pale, thy sparkling
eyes look ghastly, thy warm blood cool in thy veins, thy marrow dry up in thy
bones, thy skin shrivel, thy sinews shrink, nay thy very heart strings crack?
And have thou provided never a cordial against this hour? Do thou not read in
the writings of God himself, That no man has power in the day of death, and
there is no discharge in that war, Eccles. 8.8. No man has power, either to
resist deaths force, or to procure terms of peace. The greatest Emperor with
the strength of all his dominions cannot withstand Death. The most eloquent
Orator by his strongest reasons, and most pathetical expressions cannot
persuade Death. The deepest Counselor by all his policy cannot outwit or
cozen Death.

O mighty Death (says the Historian) thou have drawn together all the far
stretched greatness, Sir Walt. Ral. Hist. World in fine.
all the pride, cruelty, and ambition of man, and covered it with these two
words, Hic jacet. There is no discharge in that War. Every one must go in
person, there is no appearing by a proxy: Though the Tenant would serve for his
Landlord, the Subject for his Sovereign, the Father for his Child, as David
for Absalom, yet it will not be accepted. All must in their own persons appear
in the field, and look that grim Goliath Death in the face; It is appointed for
all men once to dye, Hebr. 9. God has decreed it, and man cannot dissanul it,
The Grammarian (as one observes wittily) who can decline other nowns in every
case, can decline Death in no case. Death is every moment shooting its Arrows
abroad in the World, and doing execution, and though it shoots above thee,
slaying the Superiors; below thee, taking away thy Inferiors; on thy right
hand, killing this friend; on thy left hand, causing that acquaintance to drop;
yet twill never cease shooting till thou art slain. Thy life for a while may be
kept up, like a Ball by the Rockets, and tossed from hazard to hazard, yet at
last twill fall to the earth; When once Death this son of a murderer (sin)
comes to take away thine head, there will be none to shut the door, or hold him
fast. Now men that must travel, arm themselves for all Weather. Women that
cannot escape their appointed sorrows, provide Bezer and Amber powders, against
that time. But O what a mad man art thou, who know certainly of the coming
of this Enemy, and that when he comes he can both kill and damn, destroy both
body and soul, yet take no care to arm thy self for that hour.

In other things thou providest for what may be, and will thou not for that
which must be. In Summer thou layest in fuel and food, because it may be thou
may live to spend it in Winter. Thou workest early and late to increase thy
heaps, and to add to thy hoards, because it may be thy Children may come to
enjoy it. Where is thy reason then, to toly and moyl for an uncertainty, and
thus foolishly to neglect that which is of necessity?

Secondly, Death may come suddenly.
Secondly, Do thou know that death may come suddenly? Some diseases do no
sooner appear, but we disappear. Death like a flash of lightning has on a
sudden burnt down many a body. It sometimes shoots white powder, does execution
without giving warning.

Deiodorus dyed with sudden shame; Sophocles with sudden joy; Nabal with sudden
fear; Pope Alexander was choakt suddenly with a Fly; Anacreon the Poet with the
Kernel of a Grape; Aeschilus was killed by the shell of a Tortoise, which the
Eagle let fall on his bald head, mistaking it for a Rock; The Cardinal of
Lorrain was lighted to the Chambers of death by a Poisoned Torch; A Duke of
Britany Pressed to death in a crowd; King Henry the second of France was killed at
Tilting; Senecio Cornelius had his breath stopped by a Squinzy. I might name very
many others, who took a short cut to their long homes, Balthazers carousing in
his Bolls drunk his bane; Ammon, merry at his dainties, meets with Death; Zimri
and Cozbi unload their lusts and their lives together; Korah and his companions
find the Earth Opening her mouth and swallowing them up quick, though she stay
for others till they are dead; Herod scarce ends his proud speech, before he is
sent to the place of silence; Ananias and Saphira finish their lies and their
lives at the same time. Scarce a week but nigh those parts we live in, some or
other by violent or natural means, are suddenly sent into the other World. That
which has been one man's case may be any man's case. Reader, when thy breath
goes out* thou art not sure of taking it in again; thou may like the fool be
talking of many years, when that God whose word must stand, may say, this night
thy soul shall be required of thee; and O what will then become of thee! Thy
eternal condition, that estate which is to be for ever and ever, depends on
this uncertain life, and art not thou mad to be reveling and roaring, dallying
and delaying, when thine unchangeable estate is in danger. Theives after the
commission of their Robberies, frequently repair to Inns, where they drink
joyfully, and divide their booty, when on a sudden, the Hue and Cry arriveth at
that town, the Constable enters their Room, attacheth their persons, marreth
all their mirth, and carries them to the Goal, whence after their trial for
their fellonies, they are carted to Tyburn. Many a sinner in the midst of his
carnal triumph, has been haled to eternal torments, like that filthy Adulterer
mentioned by Luther, who went in^o Hell out of the embraces of his Harlot. The
Philosophers say that the weather will be warmish before a snow. When the sky
is most clear, then the great thunder comes; Sodom had a fair sunshiny
morning, but a storm of fire and brimstone before night. Sure I am, thou have
no promise to excuse thee in thy greatest pleasures from such a sudden
punishment. Thou art already a condemned person, and thou want nothing but
the messenger death; Speed.
nothing but an hurdle, an horse, and an halter, (as Judge Belknap in Richard
the seconds time said of himself) to carry thee to thy deserved Execution. Psa.
64.7. God shall shoot at them with an arrow, suddenly shall they be wounded.
When the Pie is priding her self on the top of a Tree, little thinking of a
Fowler so near, she is fetched down by a sudden shot.

It may be thou trusts to thy youth and strength, because thou feel no
infirmity, therefore thou fear no mortality; Thou think Death should go
to the dead bones, and dry breasts, to such as see with four eyes, and go on
three legs, but do thou not know that Death never observes the Laws of
nature. As young as thou art, thou may be rotten, before thou art ripe. Thy
Sun may set at high noon; the Jews have a Proverb, that the old Ass often
carries the young Asses skin to the market; Blossoms are liable to nipping, as
well as full grown fruit to rotting. Have not several been Married and Buried
in the same week; nay dressed by the same hands in one day, for their Weddings
and their Coffins; Bensirah the Jew has a good saying, The Bride went into her
Chamber, and knew not what should befall her there, Pro. 27.1. Therefore boast
not thy self of to morrow, for thou know not what a day may bring forth. Is
it thy strength thou trustest to? alas the Leviathan of Death, laughs at the
shaking of that Spear, he counts thy strength but as Straw, and thy youth but
as rotten wood, he makes a leak in a strong new Vessel, and it presently
sinketh; though thy body be never so strong a Fort, Death (to take it) needs
not besiege or block it up with lingering diseases, Maximum vivendi
impedimentum est expectatio quae pendet excrastino. Senec. de brevitat. vita.
cap. 9.
but can undermine it, and blow it down in a moment. Think therefore with thy
self, this day may be the last day that ever I shall see, this hour may be the
last hour that ever I shall spend, these words may be the last words that ever
I shall speak; O what a fool am I to live thus contentedly without fear, next
door to the eternal fire, there is but one step betwixt me and Hell, and for
ought I know the very next step that I take may be thither, and then Woe and
Alas I am gone for ever! Surely this consideration like an Hectic Fever,
might cause an irrecoverable Consumption of all thy carnal joy. Death is called
War, Eccles. 8.8. thou know not but orders may come from the Lord of Hosts
for thy sudden march, thou may not have an hours warning to put on thy
Armor, or prepare thy self.

Invasions are judged far more dangerous then pitched Battles, because those are
sudden, and usually take men unprovided, I must tell thee that when ever Death
comes, twill be dreadful and dangerous, for (continuing as thou art) twill
surprise thee unprepared, and unable to make any resistance; O how it will tear
thy soul like a Lion, renting it in pieces, whilst there is none to deliver it.
No Chapman comes amiss to him whose shop is ever furnished; but every Enemy
will foil him, who goes always unarmed and naked. Death to a sinner is always
sudden. They go down quick into hell. Job 21.

Thirdly, When Death comes, too late to prepare.
Thirdly, Do thou not know, that whenever Death comes, twill be too late to
prepare for it? The Ship must be Rigd in the Harbor, twill be too late to do
it in the main Ocean in a storm; Probably enough (though now thou can spend
thy days delightfully without Christ and grace, yet) when the Bridegroom comes
by Death, thou will, as the foolish Virgins, talk of getting Oil, because thy
lamps will be then gone out; but alas then twill be too late, only such as are
ready enter in with him. I have read of a Woman in Cambridge, who lying on her
death bed, was visited by persons of Worth and Piety, and heard much Heavenly
discourse from them; but they could hear nothing from her, save this, Call time
again, Call time again: But time runs swiftly, and being once past is
irrecoverable. Time, says Bernard, were a good commodity in Hell, if it could
be bought up at any rate. Ah when thou come to dye, a Week, a Day, nay an
Hour, would be more worth to thee then all the World. But twill be impossible
to put off the Trial which Death has with thee for thy soul till another time,
till another Term. When Death calls, at leisure, or not at leisure, ready or
unready, willing or unwilling, thou shall not deny, but must go the way whence
thou shall never return.

The Tide will not stay for the greatest Merchants goods, they must be shipped
before, or left behind, Death will not stay for any man to fraught his heart
with grace, he must do it before Death comes, or it can never be done. If our
spiritual change be not before our natural change, we are miserable
unchangeably. Petronius speaks of one Eumolpus, who in a desperate storm was
composing Verses, and when the Ship split upon a Rock, and they called to him
to shift for himself; He Answered, Let me alone till I have finished one Verse
which I perceive to be lame; Death will not wait whilst thou finishest the most
serious works.

It is said of Demetrius after that though he lived a slave all his life time,
yet when he lay on his deathbed, he earnestly desired manumission, that he
might descend into his grave in freedom. Reader, I doubt not but though thou
live a slave to sin, and Satan, yet thou would dye the Lords freeman; but
God himself tells thee, that if thy life be in bondage to thy lusts when Death
comes, there is no getting thy liberty, Eccles. 9 10. Either now mind thy soul
and ensure thy salvation, or it can never be done, there is no doing it in the
place whither thou art going. Life is Deaths seed time, and Death is life's
Harvest, Expect thy Crop both for quality and quantity answerable to thy seed
which thou now sowest. Cicero says of Hercules, that he had never been
enrolled among the Gods in Heaven, if he had not laid out his way thither
whilst he lived. Neither can thou live with God hereafter, unless thou live
to God here.

Friend, think of it seriously. Thy preparation for Death must be now or never.
Bees work hard in Summer, flying over this and the other field, sucking this
and the other flower, and all to lay in Provision against Winter, at which time
else they must starve, no honey being then to be made. The Shell Fish opens and
takes in moisture, whilst the tide flows in upon them, that they may be
supplied when the Waters ebb. And will thou like a Drone now sleep and then
starve. Let thy reason judge, Is it a fit time to dress thy soul for the
Marriage feast of the Lamb, in the dark night of Death? Or what can thou
think to do in that dismal hour? conscience will tell thee thou had thy
candle of life set up to have wrought by, and that is burnt to the snuff whilst
thy work is still undone. The day is past, thy soul is lost, because thou
unworthy wretch did defer it till it was too late. Will thou call to the Sun
of thy life as Joshua did, Stand still for one hour, that I may be avenged of
these fleshly Lusts which hinder me of the Heavenly Canaan? Alas, alas it will
not hear thee, it cannot obey thee, for time shall be no more with thee, thou
art entering upon thy eternity. Remember that thou art warned of it, and do not
(as Caesar being warned by Artemidorus of a conspiracy, to slay him suddenly,
Pocketed up the Paper, and was very busy in saluting the People, till at last
he was slain) so trouble thy self with trifles, as to complement away thy soul
and salvation.

CHAP. VI. Three Motives more. A Dying Hour, will he a Trying Hour: The misery
of the unprepared: The felicity of the prepared.
FOurthly, Fourthly,
Do thou not know that thy Dying Hour will be a Trying hour? When Grapes come
to the Press they come to the Proof. The Mariners skill is seen in a storm.
The Soldiers courage is known when he comes to the Combat, while he lies in
Garrison he may boast much, but then he fights only with his words, but in a
Battle it will appear how he can handle his Sword; Many flourish with their
colors when they know their enemies to be far enough off, woh change their
countenances when they meet them in the field; In thy life time thou art walled
in, and lie warm, in the confluence of creature comforts, no visible Enemy
appears against thee, but when this Champion shows himself bidding thee
defiance, and offering to fight with thief or thy soul, and Savior, and
Heaven, and happiness, (at the sight of whom the hearts of Kings and Captains
have melted like grease before the Sun) then, then thou will perceive what
mettle thou art made of? whither thou have the faith and spirit of a David, and
can encounter him in the Lord, or no. Now thou art a Vessel in the Harbor,
and so art kept above Water, though several things are wanting, but when thou
launchest into the Ocean, the boisterous Waves, and tempestuous Winds will soon
discover thy leaks and tell thee what is lacking.

Its like enough thou have some armor with which thou hopest to defend thy
self against the strokes of death, but know for a truth that Death will stab
thee through all thy Paper Shields of profession, privileges, and
performances, since thou art a stranger to Christ and the power of godliness.

Thy life is like the letting down a Fishermans net; thy death as the drawing
up of this Net, while the Net is down a man cannot tell certainly what he shall
catch, for the Nets may break, and the Fish may escape; whilst thou live its
not so evident what thine aim is, or what thine end shall be, but at thy Death,
when the Net shall be drawn up, then thou will see what draught thou have made.
Though godly men at their Deaths may look up to the Lord of life, and say, At
thy word we have let down our Nets and caught abundantly; we fished for
holiness, and have caught happiness, fished for grace, and have caught glory,
and honor, and immortality, and eternal life; yet when the Net of thy life
comes to be drawn up, thou may say with Peter, Lord I have fished all Night
(all my life time) and have caught nothing; I fished for honors, and
pleasures, and riches, and I have caught nothing but the Weeds of wrath and
damnation: I blessed my self many a time, like the vain confident Husbandman,
in the goodly show which my Corn made on the ground; but now the threshing time
is come, I find nothing but Straw and Chaff, vanity and vexation.

It must needs be a trying hour upon this twofold account.

1. Because all thy temporal mercies will then leave thee. When the hand of
death shakes the tree of life, all those fair blossoms will fall off. We
brought nothing into the World, and it is certain that we shall carry nothing
out of this World, 1 Timothy 6.7. The Hedghog gets to a pile of Apples, and
gathers as many as she can up upon her prickles, but when she comes to her
resting place, her Hole, she throws them all down, and carries not one in
with her. Thus men walk in a vain shadow, and disquiet themselves in vain,
heaping up riches which die with them; naked they come into the World, and
naked they go out of the World. Plutarch wisely compares great men to
Counters, which one hour stand for thousands, and the next hour for nothing.
Hermocrates being unwilling that any man should enjoy his estate after his
death, made himself in his Will, his own heir. Athenaeus reports of a covetous
Wretch, that on his Deathbed swallowed many pieces of Gold, and sowed up
others in his coat, commanding that they should be buried with him; but who
does not laugh at such folly?

In that storm of death all thy glory and riches which thou have taken such
pains, and wrought so hard for, must be thrown overboard. As the Great Sultan
has an officer to search all persons that come into his presence, and take
away all their Weapons; so the great God by his Messenger Death, will search
thee, and take away all thy wealth. In that day the Crowns of Princes, and
Shackles of Prisoners, the Russet of Beggars, and Scarlet of Courtiers, the
Honors and Offices of the Highest, the Meat and Drink, and Sleep, and Mirth of
the Lowest, must be laid by.

As it was said of Sarah, It ceased to be with her after the former manner, so
the time will come, that it may be said of thee; It cease to be with him
after the former manner. Now thou can relish thy food, and delight in thy
friends, ravish thine Ears with melodious sounds, and thine eyes with curious
sights, rejoice in things of naught, and be Titled with vanity and nothing, but
when Death comes, twill cease to be with thee after the former manner. Now thou
please thy self in thy lovely Relations, and pridest thy self in thy stately
possessions, these weak props preserve thy spirit from sinking at present; but,
Ah what will become of thee, when they shall all be taken away from thee, when
thou shall bid thy Wife, and Children, and Friends, Farewell for ever? and say
to thy House and Lands, and Credit, and Sports, and Pastimes, Adieu to
Eternity? or as dying Pope Adrian did; O my soul, the loving Companion of my
body, thou art going into a solitary place, where thou shall never, never more
take pleasure. At the hour of Death thy most costly jewels, and most pleasing
delights will be as the Pearl in an Oyster, not thy privilege or perfections,
but thy disease and destruction.

When those carnal comforts are gone, thy spiritual comforts (if thou have any)
will be known. When the hand which held thee up by the Chin, and kept thee
above Water is taken away, thy own skill in swimming will be discovered. When
the virtue of those Cordials which supported thy spirits for a time is spent,
twill appear whither Nature has any strength or no.

2. Because thy spiritual enemies will then assail thee. Those Adversaries
which before were hid, and lay lurking as it were under the Hedge, will then
appear openly, and wound thee to the very heart.

Thy sins will then assault thee. When the Prisoner appears before the Judge,
then the Evidence is produced, and the Witnesses which were never before
thought of show themselves. When thou go to stand before the Judge of the
whole Earth, thy sins will bear thee company. In the Night of Death those
frightful Ghosts will Walk. Thy Lusts which are now Lions Dormant, will then be
Rampant. Thou may say to Death, as the Woman to the Prophet. Art thou come to
call my sins to remembrance, and to slay my Son? Art thou come to call my sins
to remembrance, and to slay my soul?

While the Hedgehog walks on the land she seems not so uncomly, but when
she sprawleth in the waters her deformity appears. Whilst men walk up and
down they usually look in false glasses, and judge themselves fair, because
some may be found who are more foul; but Death will pluck off their masks,
present them with a true glass, in which all the spots, and dirt, and wrincles
in the faces of their hearts and lives will be visible. Men flatter them often,
but Death never flattered any.

It is observable, that Haman the day that he died was called and named
according to his desert; the Adversary and Enemy is this wicked Haman, Hest.
7.6. Haman probably had many a Title given him before; Some had styled him,
Haman the Great, Haman the Magnificent, Haman the Prince, Haman the Virtuous,
all before nicknamed him; but when he comes to dye, it is Haman the Enemy, it is
wicked Haman, then he is called by his proper name: Since he was born he never
heard his right name till now, The Enemy and Adversary is this wicked Haman. So
it may be in thy life time, thou art styled Great or Gracious, because in place
higher then others; but when Death comes those gaudy colors will be washed off,
and thou shall hear; Not the King of Heavens Favorite but his Fool; when thou
art nigh thy execution (as he was) it will be not the Worshipful, but the
Wicked Haman.

Satan will then play hardest upon thee with his biggest g^ns; when his time is
but little, his rage is greatest. This is his hour, and the power of darkness.
As the Turkish Emperor, when he has blunted the edge of his Enemies weapons,
and wearied their arms with thousands of his ordinary Soldiers, then falls on
with his Janissaries, the pride and power of his Kingdom: When thou through pain
of body, and perplexity of mind, art least able to resist, then the Devil
comes with his fiercest assaults. If on thy deathbed thou should think of
turning to God, he has a thousand ways to turn thee off from such thoughts.
When there is but one battle for a Kingdom, what wounds and work? what fighting
and striving is there? When the Devil (who knows thee to be his own already)
has but a few hours to wait on thee, and then thou art his for ever, be
assured he will watch by thy sick bed night and day, and if all the power and
policy of hell can prevent it, neither cordial shall benefit thy body, nor
counsel thy soul.

Will not this be a trying hour to thee, when the cloth shall be drawn, and
thy bodily comforts all taken off the Table? will not death search thee to the
quick, when those Theives in their frightful vizards, all thy sins in that
Night will break in upon thee? As the Elders of Samaria said of Jehu, when he
sent to them to prepare and provide to fight with him; Two Kings stood not
before him, and how shall we? Adam and Angels could not stand before sin (it
laid them both low) and how will thou? Believe it, those that have been Lions
in peace, have carried themselves like Hearts in this War. Brutus whose blood
seemed as warm, and to rise to as great a degree of courage as any, since the
Roman Consuls, yet when Furius came to cut his Throat, he cried out like a
Child. Heathen, who saw nothing almost in Death, save rottenness and corruption
accompanying the body, who looked no farther then the Grave, have esteemed Death
the King of Terrors; The Terrible of Terribles, and have been frighted into a
Feavor upon the sight of its forerunner. But Death is not half so terrible to a
moral Heathen, as twill be to thee, O wicked Christian; thou know that thy
Deaths-day is thy Doomsday; that the Ax of Death will cut the down as fuel for
the unquenchable fire; that as soon as thou art carried from the Earth, thou
art cast into Hell. Thou presumest that thou shall behave thy self like a man,
in the onset with this Enemy; but I dare be the Prophet to foretell, that thy
courage will be less then a Woman's in the issue, for man, man do thou not
know, as Pilate said to Christ, that Death has power to kill thee, as well as
to release thee, it can send thy body to the grave, and thy soul to the place
of endless misery and desperation.

Fifthly, The misery of the unprepared.
Fifthly, Do thou not know the misery of every carnal man at death. In thy
life time thou do the Devils work, and when Death comes he will pay thee
thy wages; sin at present is a Be with honey in its mouth, but then the sting
in its Tail will appear and be felt; now thou have thy savoury Meat and sugered
draughts, but then comes the reckoning. Some tell us that sweet meats though
pleasant to the taste, are very heavy in the stomach. Sure I am the sweet
morsels of sin, which now thou feedest so merrily on, will then lie heavier
then Lead on thy heart, and be more bitter then Gall and Wormwood; Thou may
see now and then in this World through the floodgates, some drops of wrath
leaking in upon thy soul, but when Death comes, the Floodgates will be all
pulled up, and then, O then what a torrent of wrath will come pouring down upon
thee. Here thou sippest of the Cup of the Lords fury, but then thou shall drink
the dregs thereof. The pains which thou suffer here, are only an earnest
penny of thy eternal punishment. It was a cruel mercy which Tamberlane showed
to three hundred Lepers in killing them to rid them out of their misery; but
Death will be altogether merciless and cruel to thee, for it only freeth thee
from the Goal, to carry thee to the Gallows; it will deliver thee from Whips, but
scourge the with Scorpions; its little finger will be infinitely heavier then
the loins of this miserable life. When God says to Death concerning thee, as
Judas to the Jews concerning Christ, take him and lead him away safely; who can
tell the mockings, buffetings, piercings, scourgings, the cursed, painful, and
shameful, eternal death which will ensue?

Suppose for thy souls sake, in earnest (as Turannius did in jest, Componi se
in lecto and velut examinem, a circum stante familia plaugi jussit, Senec. de
Brevit, vitae cap. ult.
who would needs be laid in his bed as one who had breathed out his last, and
caused his whole family to bewayl his death) that thou were ascending up to thy
Chamber (whence thou should never come down, till carried on men's Shoulders)
betaking thy self to thy dying bed. Thou look on thy body and beholdest
deaths Harbinger, Sickness, preparing his way before him. O how thy color
comes and goes, at the sight of this Ax which the hand of death has laid at
the root of thy tree of life. Like the Locust, thou art ready before hand to
dye at the sight of this Polypus. Now thou art laid down on that bed whence
thou shall never rise more. Thy next work is to seek for some shelter against
this approaching storm, thou look upward and see that God full of fury,
whom thou did many a time dare to his very face, and resolved since thou
would live without his counsels, thou shall dye without his comforts; thou
look downward and see Satan who formerly was thy flatterer and seeming
friend, now thy tormentor and desperate Foe, waiting like the Jailer to drag
thee to his own Den; Thou look inward, and conscience presents thee with a
black Catalogue of thy bloody crimes, and in the name of God (whose Officer it
is) arresteth thee for them, and charge thee to answer them at his dreadful
Tribunal, to which thou art even now going; Thou look without thee among thy
Friends and Relations, and earthly comforts, and seek the living among the
dead (as the Angel said to the Woman) living comforts amongst dead creatures;
but alas it is not there, thy Wife, and Children, and Neighbors may weep with
thee, but cannot ease thee of one tear; they may give thee occasion to call to
mind thy sins, but not abate the least of thy sorrows. Miserable comforts are
they all, Physicians of no value. I have read of one in Holland, that being
condemned for killing her Bastard, when the Messenger was dragging her away to
Execution, looks pitifully on her Father (a Person of quality then present) and
casts a doleful eye on her Mother; Will ye not help me? Where are your bowels?
Can ye find in your hearts to let your own Child be thus cruelly dealt with;
But alas they might not, they could not help her. Such truly is thy case, thou
look on thy right and left hand, on thy Father or Mother, or Husband, or
House or Land, and do as it were call for help, but alas they cannot give
thee any comfort in this groaning Hour, in this thy dreadful conflict; they may
be about thy body, as Ravens about a carcass, to devour it, to get something
from thee, but they cannot defend it.

Well now the Screech-owl of Death, which all this while clawd about thy
Windows, is entered thy Chamber, flies toward thy bed side, the Messenger by
this time is come to thee, and shows thee the Warrant for thy speedy and
immediate execution. Now, Now is the beginning of thy sorrows. Live thou can
not, and dye thou dare not; fain would thou be rid of thy pain, but fearful
least thou should go to a worse place; Thou dislikest thy dirty nasty
dungeon, but do not like to exchange it for a Gibbet. Thou choosest to stay,
but Death will not be denied, thou must go. Thou say, thou art not at
leisure, thou have such worldly affairs of concernment to finish, thou art not
prepared, thou have the business of thy soul, a work of infinite weight to
begin, as they for their farms, so thou, I pray thee have me excused; thou
begest on Week, one Day, nay one Hour, Death will not wait one moment; Death
pulls thee (as Benaiah did Job) toward the place of thy eternal punishment;
thy soul clings about thy body (as he about the Altar) and still sings loath to
depart; Death (like Solomon's Officer) renteth thee in pieces by force, and
slays thee there. Now thy soul standst quivering upon thy pale lips, ready to
take its flight to its everlasting home, thou see Devils looking and longing,
like so many ravening and roaring Lions for thee their prey, thy past sins
trouble thee, O how thou cursest thy pastimes and pleasures, thy Companions and
possessions which stole away thy time and affections, and hindered thy
preparation for such a dreadful hour, thy future fufferings terrify thee! and
Ah think thou, Whither am I going? Where must my soul lodge this Night? In
what place, with what persons must I dwell for ever? Oh that I had provided for
this before hand, how many a time did God wish me, Ministers persuade me,
Christ beseech me, and Conscience warn me? but fool that I was, I rejected the
entreaties of Christ, stifled the convictions of conscience, scorned the
counsels of men, set at naught the commands of God, trample on Sabbaths, and
Sermons, and seasons of grace, as things of no worth; and now my day is past,
my soul is lost, Heavens Gate is shut, and Woe and Alas its too late. The
Blessed God (in whose favor is life) to whom I wicked wretch said, Depart from
me, has now fixed my doom, to depart from him for ever. O what unconceivable
evil is there in the loss of so great a good, ten thousand hells are included
in my banishment from that Heaven. The frightful and cruel Devils, whom I
defied in my words, but deified in my heart and works, whose lust were my laws,
and whose Wills were my warrant, shall be my Masters Tyrants and Tormentors to
all eternity. My own spirit (O that I could flee from my self) is infinitely
more grievous and painful, then ever Sword was to any flesh; what Wolf in the
Breast, what pangs of the Stone, what pain of the Teeth, what Cancer in the
Bowels, ever caused the thousandth part of that torture, which the Worm in my
conscience causes! but it is as impossible for me to avoid it, as for the
Wounded Deer to run from the Arrow that sticks in his side. The fire burns me,
yet consumes me not, gives heat to scorch me, but no light to refresh me. Here
is blackness of darkness, yet I can see the heart cutting frowns of an angry
God, and can see my self to be infinitely miserable. I enjoy a long night, but
no rest; I must always complain, but have no releif; here is crying without
compassion; all pain without the least pity; sorrow without the smallest dram
of solace, or the least drop of succor; If my misery were ever to end, though
after so many millions of Ages as all the men in the World could number, my
heart would have some hope; but alas, alas, as it is intolerable, so it is
unchangeable; as long as God is God, I must fry in these flames, all my tears
shall not quench the least spark of this fire, though I must weep for ever; all
this fire will not dry up the least tear, though it will burn for ever. O that
I had never been, O that I might never be. What must I ever live, and yet never
live! must I ever dye, and yet never dye! Consider this all ye that pass by, is
there any sorrow like unto our sorrows wherewith the Lord afflicts us in the
day of his fierce wrath, for who can dwell in such everlasting burnings? and
who can abide such devouring flames? O that the Mountains would fall on us, and
the Hills cover us, from the presence of him that sits upon the Throne, and
from the wrath of the Lamb, because the day of his wrath is come and who can
stand! O what a dreadful Sunset of life will it be, which brings such a dismal
Night of eternal death!

O Friend, think of this now, how will thou do to dye? If thou should leave
this life, in the service of thy lusts, thou art thus irrecoverably lost. Thou
art miserable beyond all expressions, beyond all conceptions; If Job because of
some temporal calamity cursed the day wherein he was born, and the Messenger
that brought tidings of his birth, and desired to dye rather then to endure it,
whom will thou curse, or rather, whom will thou not curse, when under the sense
of eternal misery? surely thou will seek for death, but not find it, dig for
it, but twill flee from thee. Though Judas could make himself away, out of the
Hell he had on earth, yet he cannot out of the Hell he has in Hell, When thou
die, thou art stated by God himself, and there is no appeal from this Judge,
nor reversing of his judgment. It is the observation of the Schoolmen, that
what befell the Angels when they sinned, that befalls every wicked man at Death;
the Angels upon the first act of sin, were presently by God himself stated in
an irrecoverable condition of misery; so wicked men, upon the last act of their
lives, are fixed as to their eternal woeful estates; It is appointed for all men
once to dye, and after Death the judgment.

Sixthly, The felicity of the prepared.
Sixthly, Do thou know the felicity which upon thy death thou should enter
into, if thou were prepared for it. As the Good House-wife looks for Winter
but fears it not, being prepared for it with double clothing; so thou
might expect Death but not fear it, being prepared for it with Armor of
proof. Sirens (some write) screech horribly when they dye, but Swans sing then
most sweetly. Though sinners roar bitterly when they behold that Sea of
scalding Lead in which they must Swim naked for ever, yet thou should like
the Apostle desire to depart, wish for that hour wherein thou should lose
Anchor and sail to Christ, Phil. 1.23. (...), Solvere Anchorum, A Metaphor from
a Ship at Anchor, importing a sailing from this present life, to another Port,
So the Syriack, Chrysostom, Beza, Erasmus, and others take it.
as the word signifies; Thy dying day, would be thy Wedding day (as the
Martyrs called theirs) wherein the fairest of ten thousand, and thy soul (now
contracted) should be solemnly espoused together. As frightful a Lion as Death
is to others (that their souls are fain to be torn from their bodies) thou
might like a weary Child call to be laid to bed, knowing that it will send
thee to thine everlasting happy rest. Been mori est libenter mori Seuec. Epist.
61.
If it be an happy Death to dye willingly (as the Moralist affirms) thou
should give up the Ghost, and be a Voluntier in that War. Nature teaches
that Death is the end of misery; but grace would teach thee, that Death would
be the beginning of thy felicity; it could not hurt thee. Death among Saints
drives but a poor Trade, it may destroy the body, and when that is done, it
has done all its feats, like a fierce Mastiff, whose Teeth are broken out, it
may bark and tear thy tottered coat, but cannot bite to the bone. This Be
fastened her sting in Christ's blessed body, and is ever since a drone to his
Members. Though the wicked are gathered at Death (as the Rabbis sense that
place, Gather not my soul with sinners, let me not dye their deaths, Psa.
26.9.) as sticks that lie on the ground for the fire, or as Grapes for the
winepress of Gods fury, yet thou should be gathered (according to the Hebrew,
Isa. 57.2. as Women do cordial flowers, to candy and preserve them.

Nay Death would exceedingly help thee. Plutarch says, that strong bodies can
eat and concoct Serpents. Thou may like Samson fetch meat out of this Eater,
and out of this strong Lion sweetness. Death ever since it walked to Mount
Calvary is turned (to beleivers) into the gate of life. Nihi non a diis im
nortalibus vita erepta est, sed mors donata est. Cicer. lib. 3. de Orat.
An Heathen could say, Life is not taken away from me by the immortal Gods, but
Death is given to me; meaning as an act of grace and favor. Much more may a
Christian esteem Death (which puts an end to his trials and sins and troubles)
a privilege rather then a punishment. Blessed are they that dye in the Lord,
they rest from their labors, Rev. 14.13.

When sickness first gives thee notice that death is at hand, thou might
make the servant welcome, for bringing thee the good news of his approaching
Master. Thy heart may leap to think, that though thou art like Peter, now bound
in the fetters of sin, and Imprisoned amongst sinners, yet the Angel is coming,
who will with one blow on thy side, cause thy shackles to fall off, open the
Prison Doors, and set thy soul into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God:
When this Samuel is come to thy gate, thou need not as the Elders of
Bethlehem, tremble at his coming, for if thou ask the Question, Come thou
Peaceably? He will Answer, Yea, Peaceably I am come to offer thee up a
sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor, acceptable to God in Jesus Christ; the
pale face of death would please thee better then the greatest beauty on Earth.
When thou lie on thy dying bed, and Physicians had given over thy body,
Christ would visit and give thy soul such a Cordial, that thou might walk in
the valley of the shadow of Death and fear none ill; How willingly may thou
part with the militant Members of Christ for the Triumphant Saints? How
cheerfully may thou leave thy nearest Relations, for thy dearest Father, and
Elder Brother? how comfortably may thou take thy leave of all the riches,
honors, and pleasures of this life, knowing that though Death comes to others
with a Voider to take away all their fleshly comforts, and carnal contentments,
nay all their hopes and Happiness and Heaven, and hereby when they break at
death, they are quite bankrupts for ever, yet it is to thee only a servant to
remove the first course, of more gross fare, of which thou have had thy fill,
and to make way for the second, which consists of all sorts of dainties and
delicates?

When thy soul was ready to bid thy body good night, till the morning of the
resurrection, thou might joyfully commit thy body to the grave, as a bed of
spices, and should see glorious Angels waiting on thy soul, and carrying it
as Eliah in a Triumphant Chariot into Heavens blessed Court. There thou
should be saluted by the noble Host, and celestial quire of Saints and
Angels, welcomed by the Holy Jesus, and gracious God, in the fruition of whom
thou should be perfectly happy for ever and ever. If there were so much joy
in Heaven at thy repentance, when thou were but set into the way, what joy will
there be, when through so many hazards and hard-ships thou art come to thy
journeys end? Thus friend, were thou but prepared, Death would be to thee a
change, from a prison to a Palace, from sorrows to solace, from pain to
pleasure, from heaviness to happiness. Thy Winding Sheet would wipe off all
tears from thine eyes, all thy sins and sorrows should be buried in thy Grave,
and the Vessel of thy soul, which in this life is weaterbeaten, tossed up and
down with the boisterous billows of temptations, and the high winds of the
Worlds wrath, and the Devils rage, would there arrive at a blessed and
everlasting harbor. Death would sound a retreat, and call thee out of the
field, where the Bullets fly thick and threefold in thy Combat with the
flesh, world, and wicked one, to receive a crown of life. Hence that ancient
custom of placing a Laurel Crown at the head of the dead man's Coffin, in token
of Victory and Triumph.

CHAP. VII. What is requisite to preparation for Death. A change of state, and
a change of nature, with a most gracious offer from the most high God to
Sinners.
IF any thing or all that I have written, has wrought thee to a resolution to
prepare for thy dissolution; if these motives (which thy conscience must needs
confess to be weighty) have melted thee, and made thee pliable for a divine
stamp and mould;

I shall acquaint thee with the means and way, how thou may dye well. Having
finished what is persuasive.

Secondly, I shall offer thee somewhat that is directive. And know Reader
further, that there is no other medicine in the World, which can possibly cure
thy wounded dying soul, but that which I have from God to prescribe thee; throw
away this, or neglect the rules in applying it to thy sores, or advise with
flattering mountebanks, and thy lamentable condition will be irrecoverable, thy
dreadful estate will be desperate. I shall not like an Emperick try new tricks
or remedies, on thy bleeding gasping soul, but give thee that receipt
(consisting but of two ingredients) which the great Physician has left in
Writing under his own hand, and which thousands have experienced to be
effectual for their cure, whose souls are made thereby at this hour (as his
body in the Gospel) every whit whole.

Pride, or an Ambitious desire of self sufficiency, and self subsistence, was
the stone at which man at first stumbled, and fell into the bottomless pit of
matchless misery, it was the fatal Knife, which cut the throat of his glorious
hopes and happiness; the wise God therefore like a tender Father in man's
recovery, takes special care to lay these Weapons out of the Childrens way, by
which they had wrought themselves such woe. Hence it is that he has chosen
those two graces to make us happy, and carry us to himself, which speak us to
be most beggarly, and carry us most out of our selves. Faith and Repentance.
Faith teaches us to deny our selves, as utterly weak, and Repentance causing
us to abhor our selves, as altogether unworthy. Repentance discovers our
nakedness, and obnoxiousness, thereby to shame and suffering; and Faith tells
that our own rags come infinitely short of hiding it, and that we must fetch
our garments out of another Wardrobe. The whole Globe of Christianity divides
it self into these two Hemispheres. As the bodily life consists in natural
heat, and radical moisture, so the life of the soul in Faith and Repentance.

Therefore Reader, if thou would dye well, undergo that great change with
comfort; it is absolutely and indispensably necessary that thou mind these two
changes before hand; A change of thy state or condition which is wrought by
faith; and a change of thy nature or disposition which is wrought by Repentance.

The Door of thy happiness hangs on these two Hinges, the merit of Christ
without thee, and its acceptance with God for the justification of thy person;
and secondly, the Spirit of Christ within thee, and its operation for the
sanctification of thy nature.

A change of State requisite
First, There must of necessity be a change of thy state by faith in Christ, or
thou can never put thy head into the other World with comfort. There is no
such Shroud, such a Winding Sheet for the departing soul to be wrapped in, as the
righteousness of a Savior; Paul's care was that he might not be found naked, 2
Cor. 5.3. O it is sad indeed for thy soul to be summoned to appear before the
jealous God, and to have nothing to cover thy nakedness. Adam knowing that he
was naked, fled from God. Guilt cannot but be shie of a Judge; sore eyes will
not endure the sight of the Sun. God is a consuming fire to all who have not
Jesus Christ for their Skreen. He seems to every person as Joseph to the
Patriarchs; Thou shall not see my face with joy, except thou bring thy
Brother with thee. It Is alone in the Garments of thine Elder Brother, that thou
can have a sound hope to receive the blessing. Every one who dies out of
Christ, dies in his sins, John 8.21. And were not men's hearts desperately
hard, twere impossible that any should dye in their senses who die in their
sins; all would die distracted who dye thus defiled.

By nature thou art under the Covenant of works, and so bound to earn happiness
by thy fingers ends, if ever thou will have it; in which failing (for no mere
man ever saild to bliss in that bottom) thou art liable to the curse of the
Law, a bondslave to thy Jailer Satan, and an heir of Hell. If ever therefore
thou would arrive at Heavens blessed port, there is a necessity of imbarquing
in another Vessel, and that is the Covenant of Grace, by which thou may be
freed from all the former crosses and curses, and filled with all the special
comforts, and rich cordials of the Gospel. Now it is faith in Christ by which
thou come to be shipped in this Covenant, and surely it concerns thee then to
get this grace. Many, nay Millions, are drowned and cast away, sailing through
the boisterous billows of death, in the broken bottom of the first Covenant,
when others in the second, ride in Triumph with top and top gallant to their
desired Haven.

Reader, If thou art out of this Covenant, thou art like a man in the midst of
the Sea, without any Boat or bottom, though some in Vessels at the same time
are safe, yet he is sure to sink. It is related of one, that being at the point
of Drowning in a River and looking up, and seeing a Rainbow in the Sky (the
sign of Gods Covenant, that he would never more drown the World) he made this
conclusion; What if God save the whole World from a deluge of Waters, and
suffer me to perish in this River, what good will that Covenant do me? So say I
to thee, though thousands escape a deluge of wrath through Gods promise to
Christ, and in Christ to his purified ones, what good will it do thee if thou
perishest?

An interest in this Covenant was the living comfort of dying David, He has
made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure: for this
is all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make not my House to grow,
2 Samuel 23.5. Mark how the pious King draws all the Wine which made his heart
glad (in one of his last hours) from this Pipe. Death is one of the sowrest
things in the World, and such things require much sugar to make them sweet.
David found so much honey in the Covenant, that therewith he made Death it self
a pleasant, a desirable Dish. If you observe the beginning of the Chapter, you
will find that his end was near; Now these be the last words of David. But
this, this was the quiet and ease of his heart, that Gods Covenant with him was
everlasting and without end. As Death is famous for its terror (being King
thereof) so also for his power, it brings down the mighty Princes and
Potentates of the Earth; Cant. 8.6.
Samson was but a Child in Deaths hands, hence we read when Scripture would
draw strength in its full proportion and length, As strong as Death: but as
strong as Death is, David knew it could not break in sunder the Covenant
between God and him, nor dissolve the union betwixt his Savior and his soul.
The firmness of this Covenant being sure footing for faith to stand on, is that
which puts life into a dying Christian. As Death, though it parted the soul and
body of Christ, parted neither of them from the divine nature (they were as a
Sword drawn by a man, the Sword is in one hand separated from the Sheath in the
other hand, but neither of them separated from the man) so though Death break
the natural union between the beleivers soul and body, it cannot break the
mystical union between Jesus Christ and the soul, therefore Saints are said to
sleep in Jesus, 1 These. 4.14. And truly by the virtue of this Cordial, this
Covenant, they are so far from flying back at the sight of their Foe Death,
that they can look him in the face with courage and confidence. See how they
triumph over him, as if he were already under their feet, O Death where is thy
sting, O Grave where is thy Victory, 1 Cor. 15.57, 58. The sting of Death is
sin, and the strength of sin is the Law, but thanks be to God which has given
us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Hark, they speak as Challengers,
daring their disarmed enemy to meet them in the field; and they speak as
Conquerors being assured through the Captain of their salvation of the victory
before they fight. Epiphanius faith, Epiph. lib. 1. cap 33.
that Adam was buried in Calvary, where Christ was crucified. Sure it is, that
Christ at Calvary did somewhat which made the Christians bed soft and easy,
that whereas it would have been a bed of Thorns, he turned it into a bed of
down, and thereby the beleiver comes to lie on it so contentedly, and to sleep
so sweetly and comfortably.

By this time Reader, I hope thou understandest the necessity and benefit of
this relative change. With this Covenant thou art armed Cap a pe with armor of
proof (with the righteousness of Christ) which is law proof, death proof, and
judgment proof, and leavest Death wholly disarmed and naked. Without this thou
have no Weapons and find Death a man of War. In the forequoted place, thou
see that sin is the sting of Death, and the strength of sin is the Law. The
Law binds the soul over for disobedience to its precept, to its malediction and
punishment, passes a sentence of condemnation already upon the creature, and
begins its execution in that bondage and fear, as flashes of the
unquenchable fire, which seize on men in this life, Romans 7.6. John 3.18. Heb.
2.14. And as sin has its strength from the law (the law making it so powerful
to curse and condemn) so Death has its strength and sting, its venom and
virtue, to kill and damn, to destroy soul and body, for ever from sin. Sin
makes Death so deadly, that its the poison in the cup which makes it so mortal
and loathsome a draught. Thy work and wisdom therefore is (as the Philistinos
when they heard that the great strength of Samson (the destroyer of their
Country) lay in his hair, were restless till they had cut it off, and became
weak so) now thou hear wherein the strength of Death (the great destroyer
and damner of souls) consists, to be unquiet night and day, to follow God up
and down with sighs and sobs, strong cries, and deep groans for pardon of sin,
and to give thy self no rest till thou attainest an interest in this Covenant
through Jesus Christ. Pious Job, though not in thy case, was for this cause
exceeding importunate for a sense of this pardon. And why do thou not pardon
mine iniquity, and take away my trasgressions? for now shall I sleep in the
dust, and thou shall seek me in the morning, and I shall not be, Job 7. ult. He
cries out as one fallen into a deep dirty ditch, or one whose house is fired.
Water, Water for the Lords sake, to clease this defiled soul, and to quench
this scorched conscience, Lord; Why does the messenger (who uses to come post
to me a poor condemned Prisoner with a pardon) lingering so long. Alas I wish he
may not come too late. But what is the reason of this importunity for
expedition? Why, Job in his own thoughts was going to appear before his Judge,
and he durst not venture without a pardon in his hand, for now shall I sleep in
the dust. The child did not dare to go to bed at night till he had asked his
Father Blessing, and begd and obtained forgiveness of his disobedience in the
day.

Nothing in the whole creation can pacify the conscience, awakened with the
guilt of sin, and frighted with the fear of death, but a pardon in the blood of
this Covenant, for want of this it was that the Heathen were either desperate
or doubtful in their deaths; and their Orator ingeniously confesses, that
notwithstanding all the Medicines they could gather out of their own Gardens,
the Disease was still too strong for the Remedy. But a plaster spread with the
blood of Christ, and applied by faith to the sore, is a sovereign and certain
cure. Faith in Christ is such a Shield, that under its protection, a Christian
may stand in the evil day of Death, keep his ground and secure himself from all
the shot which the Law, Satan, or conscience can make against him, I am the
resurrection and the life, He that lives and beleiveth in me shall live though
he dye, Joh. 11.

Willet. Hexapl. in Levit. c. 11.
The Death of the King of Saints, is the only comfort and help against Death,
the King of Terrors; Its a strange property which some report of the
Charadrion, that if any man have the jaundise, and look on the bird, and the
bird on him, the bird catches the disease and dies of it, but the man
recovereth. Christ took man's disease and dyed, that all who look on him with an
eye of Faith might recover and live. The red Sea of his blood is the only way
through which thou can pass into Canaan. Reader, since there is a flood, and
vengeance, and wrath upon the face of the World, fly as the distressed Dove to
this Ark of the Covenant; see how Jesus Christ the true Noah, a Preacher of
righteousness puts forth his hand to take thee in. He is the Son of David, to
whom souls that are in debt and in distress may flee, and seems to speak to
thee as David to Abiathar, Abide thou with me, fear not, for they (the World
and Devil) that seek thy life, seek mine, but with me thou shall be in
safeguard, 1 Samuel 22.2. and ult.

A change of nature requisite.
Secondly, There must of necessity, be a change of thy nature by Repentance, or
Death can never be thy passage into the undefiled inheritance. The new man is
the only Citizen of the new Jerusalem. It Is bad venturing a voyage to the Happy
Islands in an old leaking bottom. In the Art of navigation; it was a Law, and
formerly seriously observed, that none should be a Master or Masters Mate, that
had not been first a Sculler, and Rowed with Owers, and from thence be promoted
to the Stern. None are fit to Reign with God, who have not wrought for God;
Others are more unfit for it then a Carter for a Princes Court. Men must be
bound Apprentices on earth, to that high and holy Trade of worshipping and
glorifying the blessed God, and know the Art and Mystery of it (which the
purblind eyes of nature cannot discern) before they can set up for themselves,
and enrich themselves by it in Heaven. Men that are wholly strangers to a
Country, and no whit acquainted with the Language, and Carriage of the natives,
would find (if in it) but a solitary place. He whose eyes are so bad that he
cannot see God with the help of the spectacles of Ordinances, will be much more
unable to see him face to face. Alas what would an earthly man do in Heaven.

Till thou art converted, and have a sense of thy sins and miseries, thou art a
Rebel in actual Arms against God; If Death finds thee in such a condition, God
takes the Fort of thy Soul by storm, with thy Weapons in thy hands, and
therefore thou can expect nothing less then Death eternal without mercy.
There is no peace to be thought of with God, whilst thou maintainest War
against him. The sinner instead of disarming, armeth Death against himself; The
life of sin is the life of Death, and enableth it to kill the soul. Till thy
nature be renewed, thy heart is full of enmity against God, and thy life
nothing else but a walking contrary to him, and therefore thou can have no
delight or joy in him, which is the very Heaven of Heavens. There must be
conformity to him, before there can be communion with him. God and man must be
agreed, before they can walk or dwell together; Except ye be converted, ye can
in no wise enter into the Kingdom of God; and again, Except a man be born
again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, Mat. 18.3. John 3.3. Which negatives
can in no wise, and cannot enter, speak not only the impossibility of it on
Gods part, because he is fully resolved against it; but also the incapacity on
man's part, because he is wholly unprepared for it. Swine are not fit for a rubd
Room, or a presence Chamber. As Timber must be laid out and shrunk, before its
fit for building, otherwise twill warp; So God humbles and draws out
self-^ap, and self-indisposition, before they become the Temple of the Holy
Ghost. That building which reaches up to Heaven, must have a low foundation.

They that would turn Pewter (by Alchimy) into Silver, first dissolve the
Pewter, or otherwise their labor is in vain. Thy heart must be melted by godly
sorrow for sin, and hatred of sin, before thou can be a vessel of Silver for
thy Masters use; the Angel troubled the Waters before they were healing, John
5.4. Repent that your sins may be blotted out, Act. 3.19. Repentance and
Remission are ever Twins. It Is observable that nature ha^h made the roots of
many trees bitter, whose fruits are very sweet. They that in life sow in tears,
at death shall reap in joy; It is the wet seed-time that has the sunshiny
harvest. God is re^^^^d that all the sons of men shall feel sin (...) in broken
Bones on Earth, or broken Backs in Hell.

When sin has its deaths-wound before, it will expire at death; for though sin
brought death into the body, death will cast sin out of the body; When grace is
before budded and blossomed, at death it will ripen into glory. Holiness is the
Raiment of Needle Work, in which thou art to be brought to thy Lord and
Husband, Psa. 45.14. but its necessary, that like Abraham's Ram thou be
perplexed in these Briars, before by death thou art offered up as a
peace offering to God. They are foolish who Dream of being carried to Heaven in
a Feather-bed. None but such as are weary of the work (as a sick man of his
bed) and heavy laden with the weight of sin (as a Porter can be of his burden)
shall enter into the everlasting rest.

Naturalists observe that the Egiptian Fig Tree being put into the Water,
Pliny. Not. Hist. Lib. 13. Cap. 7.
presently sinketh to the bottom, but being well soaked, contrary to the nature
of other Trees, it boys it self up to the top: Till thy mind is enlightened, to
see sins deformity; thy will renewed, to refuse it as thy only enemy; and thy
affections purified, to grieve for it, and loath it, as it is contrary to the
blessed God and thy own felicity; till thy soul is soaked in these bitter
waters, never expect to be lifted up to the Rivers of pleasures at Gods right
hand. This howling Wilderness is the only way to Canaan: The path to Sion
lies by Sinai, God powers the Oil of gladness into the broken Vessel. Some
Philosophers tell us that Feeling is the foundation of natural life, no
feeling, no life: Its true, I am sure in Divinity, no feeling, no sense of sin,
no spiritual, no eternal life; Impenitency like a Lethurgy is deadly, is
damning.

God does qualify all whom he intends to dignifie. Saul is qualified (by
receiving another spirit then he had before) to reign over men; much more must
they be qualified (by receiving a new heart and a new spirit) who are to reign
with God. The Sun never leapt from Midnight to Midday, but first sends
forth some glimmerings of light, in the dawning of the day, then looks upon
us with some weak and waterish beams, after that beholds us with open face, and
even then has many Miles to run before he can arrive at his Meridian glory.
God never carried a soul from Hell to Heaven, from a natural condition, to the
beautifical Vision, but through the door or gate of conversion.

Reader, to conclude this Use and sum up these two particulars, which are more
worth then the whole World, that thou may see how willing I am to be
instrumental for thy welfare. I shall come up a little nearer and closer to
thee. O that I did but know what savoury spiritual meat thou love most, if
possible, I would provide it for thee, and set it before thee, that thou
might eat, and thy soul might bless God before thou die.

In order to thy eternal good, I have a special offer to make to thee from the
blessed God, and that is of a Marriage with his only Son the Lord Jesus
Christ. I am this day sent to thee as his Ambassador with full instructions to
woe in his behalf, that I might present thee a chaste Virgin unto Christ; thou
need not doubt of my authority, for in the Scriptures thou may read my
Commission, and credential letters which may give thee full security and
satisfaction against all jealousies and suspicions, which can possibly arise in
thy breast. Thou need not question Gods reality in the tender of so great a
fortune to thee (notwithstanding all thy unworthiness) for he sent his Son so
great a journey, as from Heaven to Earth to marry thy nature, on purpose that
he might be Married to thy person; and has caused him already to be at
infinite cost in providing glorious attire, and precious Jewels out of Heavens
Wardrobe and Cabinet, that thou might be adorned as is fit for the Spouse of
so great a Lord; nay he himself has sent thee his picture (of greater value
then Heaven and Earth) drawn at length, and to the life in the Gospel, in all
his royalty, beauty, and glory, to try if thou can like and love his person.
Friend, look wishly on him, consider his person; He is fairer then the Children
of men, he is the express Image of his Fathers person; Thy beloved (O shall I
call him so) is white and ruddy, the fairest of ten thousands, he is altogether
lovely; nothing but amiableness, none ever saw him, but were enamoured with
him; Veiw his Portion; He is Heir of all things; All power is given to him in
Heaven and Earth. I know thy poverty, but there are unsearchable riches in
Christ, yea durable riches and righteousness. Thou art infinitely in debt, and
thereby liable to the arrest of Divine Justice, and eternal Prison of Hell, but
I must tell thee, the revenues of this Emperor are able to discharge the debts
of millions of Worlds, and to leave enough too for their comfortable and
honorable subsistence to all eternity. Behold his Parentage; He is the only
begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth; the eternal Son of God. As
there is incomparable beauty and favor in his Person, and inestimable riches
and treasure in his Portion; so there is unconceivable dignity and honor in
his Parentage; for he is the only natural Son and Heir of the most high God.
For thy further quickening, He is thy near Kinsman, bone of thy bone, and flesh
of thy flesh, Genesis 24.4, 5. and so has right to thee; God has given his
Stewards a command (as Abraham his servant) not to take a Wife to his Son (of
the Daughters of the Canaanites) from among the evil Angels, but to go to his
Sons own Country, and kindred and to take a Wife for him, among the Children of
men. Friend, thou have heard the errand about which I am sent to thee. I hope
there is such an Arrow of love darted into thy heart from the gracious eyes and
looks of this Lord of glory, that thou art wounded thereby, and beginnest of a
sudden to be taken with him, and to wish, O that I might have the honor and
happiness to become the Bride of so lovely a Bridegroom, that this King of
Saints would take me a poor sinner into his bed and bosom; Thou say as
Abigal when David sent to take her to Wife, Behold, let thine handmaid be a
servant to wash the feet of the Servants of my Lord; I am unworthy to be his
Spouse. If it be thus with thee, I see that thy affections are already
entangled, and for thy comfort, know that he is not of the number of them, who
when they have gained others good will, then cast them off. Only it will be
needful that thou understand what he requires of thee, to avoid all future jars
and differences; plain dealing is never more necessary then in Marriage; those
that by dawbing have hudled up Matches in have, have found cause enough to
repent at leisure.

I shall propound two Arguments for thy encouragement; Motives to the best
match.
and then demand thy agreement to two Articles, upon which and no other this
Match can be concluded.

First, The necessity of it.
Consider the necessity of thy Acceptance of Christ for thy Husband. It is
impossible to obtain Heaven for thy Jointure, but by Marrying with him who is
the Heir. It may be, like him in Ruth (Chap. 4. Verse. 2, 3, 4. whom the Spirit
of God thought unworthy to be named) thou art ready for the band, the portion,
but unwilling to marry the person; thou art forward to be pardoned, adopted and
saved, but backward to take Jesus Christ for thy Husband, least thou should
lose thy sinful pleasures, and thereby mar (in thy Opinion) a better
inheritance. But know of a certain (as Boaz told him) What day thou buyest the
field, thou must Marry the owner of it. What day thou gainest the invaluable
privileges of the Gospel, thou must Match with Christ the Purchaser and owner
of them. There is no gaining the precious fruit, but by getting the Tree that
bears it. Indeed thy Marriage with him is so fruitful a blessing that thou
need no more. Forgiveness of sins, the love of God, peace of conscience, joy
in the Holy Ghost, eternal life, every good thing, all good things are in the
Womb of it; thou can not imagine what a numerous posterity of Barnabasses, of
sons of consolation, would be the effect and issue of such a Wedding; but it is
so needful a blessing that without it thou art completely and eternally woeful;
beware, O beware how thou refusest so good an offer, for thou art in the same
condition with the Woman taken captive by the Jews, ( Deuteronomy. 21.) either to
marry or dye, either to match with Christ, or be damned for ever.

Gods clemency in its offer.
Secondly, Consider Gods clemency and condescension, in tendering thee so great
a fortune: Kings on Earth will not stoop so low (unless necessity force it) as
to match their only Sons with their Subjects, though he and they are of the
same make and mould, if they do, it is with the highest Families, with such
among them as sparkle most with the Diamonds of birth, breeding, beauty, riches
and glory; but (hear O Heavens, and be astonished O Earth) wonder O Reader, at
this low stoop of the infinite God; He is willing, nay earnest that his only
Son and Heir, the King of Kings should marry with his creature (between whom
and him, there is an infinite distance and disproportion) nay not with the
Noblest House among those creatures, not with Angels those heavenly Courtiers
(He is their Head, not their Husband) though by matching with them he had
matched somewhat more like himself, but with sinful polluted Dust and Ashes.
That our spiritual souls should be joined to our earthly bodies is much, yet
here is some proportion, (both are limited, created beings) but that God should
marry with Man is infinitely more. Its said of the King of Babylon, that he
lifted up the head of Jehojachin out of Prison, and spoke kindly to him, and
changed his Prison Garments, and set his Throne above the Throne of the Kings
that were with him, (2 Kings ult. cap. 27, 28, 29.) Man was a poor Prisoner,
bound and fettered with his own corruptions, kept up close by the Devil his
Jailer; and condemned to suffer the pains of eternal death, but lo the
Philanthropy and kindness of God, he sends his only Son to open the Prison
Doors, (having first satisfied the Law, for the breach of which they were cast
in, and removed its curse which was as a Pad-Lock on the Prison Gate to to keep
it fast,) set the poor captives at liberty, change their nasty Prison weeds,
and to exalt their nature above the nature of glorious Angels, by marrying it
to himself. Can thou find in thy heart Friend to abuse such Matchless Grace
and Favor? Is not that beggar mad that should refuse the real offers of a
Match from a Gracious Emperor? Shall Majesty thus stoop to Misery in vain? I
must tell thee, its infinite abasement in God, thus to make suit to thee, but
its the highest preferment thou art capable of (nay, such as it had been
blasphemy to have desired it, had not God offered it) to close with him.

I come now to the Articles of this Marriage, which truly are no more then
thou requirest of thy own wife (if thou have any) and therefore thou can not
but think them reasonable. I shall propound them to thee in these two Questions.

First, Art thou heartily willing to take Jesus Christ for thy Savior and
Sovereign? Can thou love him with the hottest superlative love as thy
Husband? (Its one thing to love a man as a Friend, and another thing to love
him as thy Husband) can thou give him the keys of thy heart, and keep thy
affections as a fountain, sealed up from others, and opened only for him, and
in subordination to him? Will thou honor him with the highest honor as thy
Lord; submitting to his spirit as thy guide, and to his laws as thy rule? Is
thy soul so ravished with the beauty of his person, the excellency of his
promises, and the equity of his precepts, that thou dare promise through his
strength to be a loving, faithful and obedient wife? Have the hot beams of that
love which have been darted forth from this Sun of Righteousness (as the rays
of the Sun united in a glass) turned thee into a flame, that thy heart is now
ascending and mounting to Heaven, where thy Beloved is, and thou can no more
live without him, then thy body without thy soul? Art thou willing to be
sanctified by his spirit, that thou might be prepared for his bosom and
embraces, and to be saved alone by his merits, as the only procuring cause of
all thy hopes and happiness? Will thou take him for better and for worse, for
richer and for poorer, with his cup of affliction, as well as his cup of
consolation; with his shameful Cross, as well as his glorious Crown; chosing
rather to suffer with him, then to reign without him; to dye for him, then to
live from him? Such as marry thou know must expect trouble in the flesh.
Christianity (like the Wind Caecias) does ever draw clouds and afflictions
after it, but thy future glory and pleasure will abundantly recompense, thee
for thy present pain and ignominy.

Secondly, Will thou presently give a bill of Divorce to all other lovers, and
keep the bed of thy heart wholly for him? Shall the evil of sin never more have
a good look from thee, but (as Ammon served Tamar) shall the hatred wherewith
thou hate those filthy strumpets (with whom thou have had cursed dalliances,
and committed spiritual fornication) be greater then the love wherewith thou
have loved them? Can thou pack away the bondwoman, and her son, and these
things not at all be grievous in thy sight, that thy whole joy and delight may
be in, and all that thou art worth preserved for the true Isaac? Shall this Sun
reign alone in the Heavens of thy heart without any Competitour? As when a
Dictatour was created at Rome, there was a supersedeas to all other authority;
so if Christ be exalted in thy soul, there must be a cessation of all other
rule and power. Christ will not be a King merely in dirision as the Jews made
him; nor as the stump of Wood was to the Frogs in the Fable, whom every lust
may securely dance about and provoke.

These are the terms upon which this match (so honorable and profitable) is
offered to thee, give up an hearty Yea to these two equitable Articles, and
thou art made for ever. Refuse it, and thou art miserable above all
apprehensions, and beyond Millions of ages even to all eternity. What say
thou to it? Shall I put the same Question to thee, which they put to Rebekah.
Will thou go with this Man? In thy denial there is no less then eternal Death;
Methinks the thoughts of that fire and Brimstone should force thee to fly to
this Zoar; In thy unfeigned hearty acceptance, there is no less then Heaven and
eternal life; What would thou not do to continue natural life? What then
should thou not do or suffer for eternal life? It may be thou desire time
to consider of it; as Rebekahs Mother, thou art willing to the match, but
would not have it yet concluded. Austin bewails it in himself, that when God
was drawing him to Christ, his carnal pleasures represented themselves before
his eyes; Saying, What will thou leave us for ever, and shall we be no more
with thee for ever? And then he threw himself down, and weeping cried out. O
Lord how long, how long shall I say to morrow, why not to day Lord, why not to
day? Why should there not be an end of my sinful life this hour? But believe
it, delays are dangerous, especially in works of such weight.

If thou answerest (as Rebekah did) I will go. Cheer up poor soul, what ever
thy course or carriage has been (thy Husband is able and willing to pay all
thy scores, were they a million for a mite) and come forth, behold thy beloved
in his imbroydery and glory, see how his Arms are stretched out to embrace thee,
his Lips are ready to kiss thee, O what a look of love he gives thee; sure I
am, thou art more in his heart then in thine own, little do thou think what
Rings and Robes, what dainties and delicates, what grace and mercy, and peace
he provided on purpose against the return of thee a wandering prodigal. Thou
needst now no longer run a score with the World for any of its course, carnal
fare, thy beloved will entertain thee at his own table with curious and costly
feasts; thou shall have bread to eat which the world knows not of. If dangers
and evils pursue thee, thou have thy City of refuge at hand, wherein thou may
be secure from the fear and fury of men and Devils.

Twill be life to thee now to think of Death; thou may lift up thy head with
joy, when that day of thy redemption draws nigh. Death will give thee a writ
of ease both from sin and sorrow; then thy Indentures will expire, and thy soul
be at liberty. Thou have now taken in thy full lading for Heaven, and may
therefore call (like a Merchant that has all his goods on shipboard) to the
Master of the Vessel, to hoise up sail and be gone toward thy everlasting
harbor. O how may thy heart revive (with old Jacobs) to see those wagons which
are sent to fetch thee to thy dear Jesus, for thou know that he is Lord of
the Country, and able to make thee welcome when thou come thither; Now thou
art present in the body, and so absent from the Lord, but then thou shall ever
ever be with the Lord; but if thou refusest so great, and so good an offer,
choosing slavery to the flesh before this Christian liberty, and resolving (as
many wicked ones do) rather to be free for many Harlots then to take one Wife;
rather to love and serve diverse lusts and pleasures, then to be wedded to Jesus
Christ; go on, take thy course, but be confident that thy fleshly life (like
the head of Polypus) though pleasant at present, will afterward cause
troublesome sleep and frightful Dreams. If thou intendest to lanch into the
Ocean of eternity without this Pilot (the blessed Savior, who alone can steer
the Vessel of thy soul, amidst those dangerous shelves and sands aright) and
the ballast of grace, not regarding what passage thou have, nor at what Port
thou arrivest in the other World, whether Heaven or Hell; prepare thy self to
take up thine eternal lodging amongst frightful Devils, and to bear thy part in
the endless yellowings, and howlings of the Damned; and know withal to thy
terror, that this very tender of grace will one day like Joabs Sword to Abner,
stab thee under the fifth rib, cut thee to the very heart, and like a mountain
of Lead sinck thee deep into that Ocean of wrath, when thou shall have time
enough to befool thy self for refusing so good an offer; and where thou shall
be tormented day and night for ever and ever.

I have this day set before thee life and death, blessing and cursing,
therefore choose life that both thou and thy seed may live. That thou may love
the Lord thy God, and that thou may obey his voice, and that thou may
cleave unto him; for he is thy life and the length of thy days, Deuteronomy. 30.19, 20.

CHAP. VIII. The Second Exhortation To the serious Christian, showing how a
Saint may come to dye with courage.
I Shall now speak in this Use of Exhortation to the Serious Christian.

If thy flesh will fail thee so, fortify thy Spirit, 2. Exhortation To the
serious Christian to be valiant in Death.
that thou may give the flesh a cheerful farewell. Thy care must be to dye
with courage. A good Soldier in all his Armor may be daunted at the sight of
that Enemy whom he meets on a sudden. Mary was troubled at the sight and
sayings of that Angel which brought the best news that ever the world heard,
Luke 1. It Is true, thou can never dye before thou art ripe for Heaven, but
thou may dye (in some sense) before thou art ready (in thy own apprehensions)
to leave the earth. Many go to Heaven certainly, who go not to Heaven
comfortably.

Tertul. de Spectat. cap. 1.
It was Tertullians character of the Christians in his time, that they were
Expiditum morti genus, A sort of people prepared for death. When a son has
loytered in the day, he may well be afraid to look his Father in the face at
night; but when he has labored faithfully, he may come into his presence
without fear.

Though he that is sober at home be more ready to put off his clothes, and go
to sleep, then he that is drinking and vomiting in a Tavern, yet even this man
may think of some business which he neglected in the day time that may make him
unwilling to lie down. Surely somewhat is the cause that the children of God
are so unquiet when night comes, and so many of them go wrangling to bed.

Christian, I would in a few words direct thee how thou may put off thy
earthly Tabernacle as cheerfully as thy clothes, and lie down in thy grave as
comfortably as ever thou did in a bed of Down. It is thy own fault, if thou
do not keep such a good fire all day (I mean Grace so flaming on the hearth
of thy heart) that thou may increase it at night, and so go warm to bed, even
to thy Eternal Rest.

The first Means.
Take heed of blotting thy Evidences for Heaven: Darkness we know is very
dreadful, 1 Blot not thy evidences for Heaven.
when men by great or willful, sins have so blurred the deeds which speak their
right to Heaven, that they cannot read them; no wonder if being thus in the
dark they are afraid to leave the earth.

It is reported of good Agathon, Doroth Doct. 2.
that when death approached he was much troubled, whereupon his friends said
unto him, What do thou fear? He answered, I have endeavored to keep the
commandments of God; but I am a man, and how do I know whether my works please
God or no? for other is the judgment of God, and other is the judgment of
men. He must needs be troubled to be removed from present pleasures, who
knows not that he shall go to a better place. Twenty pounds a year certain is
counted better then (and a man will be unwilling to part with it for) forty
pounds a year that is doubtful. It is assurance only of a better life which
will carry the soul with comfort through the bitter pangs of death. Hence it
was that Job called so frequently, and cried so earnestly to be laid to bed; O
that I might have my request, that God would grant me the thing that I long
for, even that it would please God to destroy me; that he would let loose his
hand and cut me off, then should I yet have comfort. Let him not spare, for I
have not concealed the words of the holy one, Job 6.8, 9, 10. Job had lived
with a good conscience, and therefore feared not to dye with great comfort. His
fidelity to God, encouraged him to expect mercy from God; He had not concealed
nor shut up Gods faithfulness from men, and therefore knew that God would not
conceal his loving kindness from him. But David on the other hand, when night
(in his own thoughts) drew near, was as importunate to fit up longer; God
seemed to call him to bed, but he begs hard, O spare me that I may recover
strength, before I go hence, and be no more, Psa. 39. ult.

Now mark the reason of this petition. David as it is generally conceived, was
now persecuted by Absalom; the unnatural Son forced his Father to fly; He in
his suffering reads his own sin, and Gods indignation, and so dreads an
appearance in the other World in such a condition. He, who when things were
clear betwixt God and his soul, could walk in the valley of the shadow of Death
and fear none ill, could even give Death a challenge; now when things are
cloudy and dubious runs back like a Coward; He had lost the sense of Gods
favor, and therefore could not think of venturing into his presence without
much fear. The train of his corruptions threatened to wait on him to the highest
Court, and he durst not appear before the Lord with such company. He had been
declining in his grace under a sad distemper, and as a weak consumptionate man,
he was afraid to travail so great a journey, as the way whence he should never
return. The Tenant who wants his rent, loves not to hear of the Quarter day.

Friend, If thou would leave the World cheerfully, live in the World
conscienciously, take heed of those fiends which will fright thee in the night
of Death; choose suffering before sin; and punish thy body to keep thy soul
pure. The Ermin some say will die before she will go into the Dirt to defile
her beautiful skin; and the Mouse of Armenia will rather be taken and slain,
then preserve and pollute her self in a filthy Hole. As the white is always in
the Archers eye, so let thy Death be in thine, that it may quicken thee to
diligence and exactness in thy life.

Logicians who regard not the premises, infer wild conclusions; so if thou art
careless of thy conversation, expect but an uncomfortable dissolution. As when
God looked on all his works, and saw that they were good, then followed his
Sabbath of rest; so when thou can reflect upon the several passages of thy
life, and see that through Christ they are good, and thou have not been guilty
of enormities, though of infirmities; after this thou will joyfully by Death,
enter into thy everlasting Sabbath. Thy evidence will be clear, if thy
conscience be kept clean; but the truth is, many, even amongst Christians,
wound their souls by venturing on sin, and thence flinch and start back, when
they come to be searched; besides they neglect casting up their accounts so
long, that they know not whether they are worth any thing or nothing, and so
may well be unwilling to have their estates ransackt into.

If thou should fall; (I would not sad any Saint) take heed of lying there,
but be as speedy as is possible in calling to Christ to raise thee up. If thy
conscience be raw with the guilt of any sin, a light affliction (much more
Death) will make thee kick and fling and unwilling to bear it. But when thy
flesh is sound (thy spirit healed by the blood of Christ) Death it self will be
but a light burden on thy back. How merrily may thou (though thou have not a
penny in thine own purse) go the way of all the Earth, travel into the other
World, when thou art sure of Christ in thy company, who will bear thy charges
all the way.

The second Means.
2 Wean thy heart from the World.
Secondly, Mortify thy affections more to the World and all its comforts. They
who love the World most, leave it worst. Lots Wife lingered in Sodom so much,
and was so loath to depart, because she loved it overmuch. When boards lie close
one upon another they are easily parted, but when they are glewed one to
another twill cost some trouble and pains. If thy heart be loose to the World,
twill be a small matter to thee to leave it, but if thou art fastened to it in
thy affections, twill not be done without much reluctance and opposition.

The Wife who has been so faithful to her Husband, as to keep her heart wholly
for him, is ready always to open the Door to him; when she that entertaineth
other Lovers, though her Husband knock at the Door, dares not run presently to
open it, but first makes a shuffling and busling up and down to hide, or get
them out of the way. The more thy affections are set on Christ, thy true
Husband, the more the World is taken out of thee; and so the more easily will thou be taken out of the World. He who has laid up his heart in Heaven will
comfortably think of laying down his head in the Earth. When the pins of the
Watch are taken out (which held it together) how easily does it fall in pieces?
When thy affections from these things below are removed, how quickly, how
quietly will thy soul and body fall asunder? If the World be as loose to thee
as thy Cloak, thou can put it off at pleasure, but if it be as close to thee
as thy skin, they shall have somewhat to do who shall persuade thee to part with
it. We read of some unwilling to dye, for they had treasure in the field, Jer.
41.8. Where their treasure was their hearts were also.

Make it thy work therefore by considering the Worlds vanity and deceitfulness,
and by pondering Heavens glory and happiness, to wean thy heart from sublunary
things, hereby thou will as willingly leave them as ever infant did those
breasts which long ago it was weaned from.

The third Means.
3. Familiarize the thoughts of Death.
Use thy heart to the frequent thoughts of Death. When Children are frighted at
a Dog or a Cat, we do not give way to their foolish fears, but bring the brute
to them, and get them to touch and handle it, and show them that it is not such
a frightful thing as they imagine; and hereby in time they are so far from
being frighted, that they can play with it familiarly. Do thou dread this
King of Terrors, Death, give not way to this fear, but bring death up to thy
spirit, handle it, feel it, there is no such hurt in it as thou imaginest,
nothing which should terrify thee, hereby at last thou may come to play upon
the hole of this Asp.

One ground I suppose why Job made no more of dying, was, because he was so
well acquainted with Death. Strangers are startled at many things in a place,
which they that are home-born and used to, can delight in. I have said to
corruption Thou art my Father, and to the Worms thou art my Brother and Sister,
Job 17.14. Job was as familiar with Death, as if it had been his Father; and
made no more of dying, then of falling into the Arms and embraces of his
Mother or Sister Moses at first started back at the sight of the Serpent, but
when he had handled it a little, it was turned into a rod and nothing frightful
to him.

There is a story of an Ass, called Cumanus Ass, which jetting up and down in a
Lions skin, did for a time much terrify his Master, but afterward being
descried, did much benefit him. Thou art fearful possibly Reader, of this
beast, supposing it to be a roaring Lion, but come up to it, and thou will find
it but an Ass in the skin of a Lion, and such a one as will be no way hurtful,
but many ways helpful to thee. What is this Bugbear Death which thus frights
thee? Is it not the Paranymphus, which presents thy faithful soul to thy
beloved Husband? Is it not a leaving the World and a going to thy Father? Is it
less then a kiss of Gods lips? The indulgent parent will take the babe into her
Arms, and with many kisses lay it in her lap, when its falling asleep.

The Chaldee Paraphrase tell us, Moses dyed with a kiss of the Lords mouth,
Deuteronomy. 34.5. Will it not be the funeral of all thy corruptions and crosses, and
the resurrection of all imagiable delights and comforts? Did thou but know
this, friend, more, thou would not be so shie of its company.

The Roman used their youth to gladiatory fights, and bloody spectacles, that
acquaintance with them beforehand might make them less troubled in Wars with
their enemies* Philostrates lived seven years in his Tomb before his death,
that his bones might be the better known to his Grave: Accustom thy self to the
thoughts of death, thy change, thy translation to bliss, thy entrance into
Heaven, and when it comes (his Errand being known so well before) he will be
welcome.

Mithridates by accustoming his body to poison, turned it into good
nourishment; Use thy soul to the thoughts of Death, and though it be worse then
poison to others, twill be pleasant and profitable to thee.

CHAP. IX. The Second Doctrine. That God is the Comfort of a Christian, with
the grounds of it; His happyness is in God.
I Proceed now to the second Doctrine, from the second part of the Text, the
Saints comfort; But God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever:

That the comfort of a Christian in his saddest condition is this; That God is
his portion. The Psalmists condition was very sad, his Flesh failed him. The
second Doctrine, that the comfort of a Christian in his saddest condition is
that Go^ is his portion.

(...). lib. de Ju. and. Se. cap. 3.


Man's Spirit often decays with his flesh: The Spirits and blood are let out
together. His Heart fell with his flesh; but what was the strong cordial which
kept him from swooning at such a season? Truly this, But God is the strength of
my heart, and my portion for ever. Aristotle affirms of the Tortoys that it
lives when its heart is taken away. The holy man here lives when his heart
dies. As the Sap in winter retreateth to the root, and there is preserved, so
the Saint in crosses, in death retireth to God, the Fountain of his life, and
so is comforted. David when his Wives were captivated, his wealth plundered, and
his very life threatened (for the Soldiers talked of Stoning him) was doubtless
in a very dreadful estate; one would have thought such an heavy burden, must
needs break his back; but behold, the joy of the Lord was his strength; But
David encouraged his heart in the Lord his God. 1 Samuel 30.6. When the Table of
earthly comforts (which for a long time at best, had been but indifferently
spread for him) was quite empty, he fetches sweetmeats out of his Heavenly
Closet. But David encouraged his heart in the Lord his God. Methodius reports
of the Plant Pyragnus that it flourishes in the flames of Olympus. Christians
(as the Salamander) may live in the greatest fire of affliction, at this day;
And (as the three Children) may sing when the whole world shall be in a flame
at the last day. They are by the Spirit of God compared to Palm Trees (Psalm.
92.12.) which though many weights are hanging on the top, and much drought be
at the bottom, are neither (say some Naturalists) born down nor dried up. This
nightingale may warble out her pleasant notes with the sharpest thorn at her
breast.

The only reason which I shall give of the Doctrine, Reason of the Doctrine,
because God is his happiness.
is this; Because a Godly man places his happiness in God. Its natural to the
creature in the midst of its sufferings to draw its comfort and solace from
that pipe, (whether supposed or real) happiness. All things have a propensity
toward that in which they place their felicity. If a stone were laid in the
Concave of the Moon, though air and fire and water are between, yet it would
break through all, and be restless till it come to the earth its center.
Asutable and unchangeable rest, is the only satisfaction of the rational
creature. All the tossings and agitations of the soul are but so many wings to
carry him hither and thither, that he may find out a place where to rest. Let
this Eagle once find out, and fasten on the true carcass, he is contented; as
the needle pointing to the North, though before in motion, yet now he is quiet.
Therefore the Philosopher though in one place he tells us that delight
consists in motion, yet in another place tells us (...), that it consists
rather in rest.

Happinese is nothing but the Sabbath of our thoughts and the satisfaction of
our hearts in the fruition, Eth. lib 7. cap. ult.
of the chiefest good. According to the excellency of the object which we
embrace in our hearts, such is the degree of our happiness; the Saints choice
is right, God alone being the souls center and rest. Omnes literae in Jehovah
sunt literae qui escentes, say the Rabbis. Let a sinner have but that which he
counts his treasure, though he be under many troubles he is contented. Give a
covetous man wealth, and he will say as Esau, I have enough; When an ambitious
man mounts up to a chair of state, he sits down and is at ease. If a voluptuous
person can but bath himself in the streams of carnal pleasures, he is as a fish
in his Element. So let a Godly man enjoy but his God, in whom he places all
his joy, and delight, in whom is all his happiness and heaven, he is well, he
has all; Show us the Father and it suffices; No more is desired, John. 14.8.

No man thinks himself miserable, till he has lost his happiness. A Godlyman
is blessed when afflictied and buffetted, because God is the proper Orb in
which he does fix, and he has his God still: Job. 5.17. When a few leaves blow
off, his comfort is, he has the fruit and the tree still. As a man worth
millions, he can rejoice though he lose some mites. Pliny Not. hist. lib. 2
cap. 103.
In the Salentine country there is mention made of a lake brim-full: put in
never so much, it runs not over; draw out what you can, its still full. Such
is the condition of a Christian, he has never too much; and take away what you
will, having God, he is still full. Augustine out of Varro alleges 288.
several Opinions about happiness; but those Philosophers were vain in their
imaginations. I shall clearly prove The strength of Man's happiness to flow from
another spring.

CHAP. X. God must needs be Man's happiness, because he is an Alsufficient Good.
THere are some things in God, which speak him to be the Saints happiness and
chiefest good.

First because of his perfection and alsufficiency. That which makes man happy,
God is man's Happiness, because an al ^ufficient g^od
must have no want, no weakness in it. It must be able both to secure him
against all evil, and to furnish him with all good. The injuries of nature must
be resisted, and the indigencies of nature must be supplied. Now this Sun of
righteousness (as the great Luminary of the world when it mounteth above the
Horizon) does both clear the air of mists and foggs, and cheer the inhabitants
with his light and heat. And according to the degree of our enjoyment of him,
such is the degree of our happiness or freedom from evil and fruition of good.
Those that enjoy God perfectly in heaven, know no evil; they are above all
storms and tempests, and enjoy all good; In his presence is fullness of joy,
Psalm 16. ult. They have a perpetual spring, a constant summer, never
understanding what an antumn or winter means; The Christian who enjoys God
but imperfectly, (as all Saints on earth) does but in part enjoy these
privileges. His life is a Vicissitude of day and night, of light and darkness,
of good and evil. Evil cannot hurt him, but it may fright him. He may taste of
the chiefest good, but his full meal is reserved till he comes to his Fathers
house.

1. God is able to free a man from evil: 1 Able to f^ee the soul from evil.
the Greeks call an happy man (...), one that is not subject to death and
miseries.

That which is the happiness of man, must be able by its power to secure him
against all perils; but creatures cannot afford this help; therefore cannot be
our happiness. He that trusts to second causes, is like him that being on the
top of a tree, sets his feet on rotten bough's, which will certainly break
under him; or like the passenger who in windy stormy weather, runs to some
tottering out-house, which falls upon him. But God is the almighty guard.

The Schoolmen tell us the reason why Adam in his estate of innocence felt no
cold, though he were naked, was because of his Communion with God. God is the
Saints shield to protect their bodies from all blows, Genesis 15.1. He is
therefore compared in Scripture to such things and persons as shelter men in
storms, defend them in dangers. Sometimes he is called a wall of fire, because
Travelers in a Wilderness by this means are secured from wild beasts. 2 Zach.
5. those creatures fly from fire: Sometimes to a River of broad waters, because
a City well moated and surrounded with waters, is thereby defended against
enemies Isa. 33.21.

A good Sentinel is very helpful to preserve a garrison in safety. God is
therefore said to watch and ward. I the Lord do keep it, least any hurt it: I
will keep it night and day. Isa. 27.3. And though others when on the Guard, are
apt to nod and sleep (and so to give the enemy an advantage) He that keeps
Israel never slumbereth nor sleeps; Psalm. 121.4.
he is so far from sleeping that he never slumbereth. Some Naturalists tell us
that Lions are insomnes; possibly because their eyelids are too narrow for
their eyes, and so they sleep with their eyes partly open; but its most true of
the Lion of the tribe of Judah. As Alexander told his Soldiers, He wakes that
they might sleep in safety. He is compared to a refuge. Psa. 142.5. Thou art my
refuge and my portion. A Metaphor from a strong hold, or Castle, to which
Soldiers retreat, and in which they are secure, when beaten back by an
over-powering enemy. But instead of all, he is called the Lord of Hosts or
General of his people, because a faithful Commander goes first into the
field, and comes last out of the field. God looks danger in the face before
his people, and sees them safe out of the field, before he departs, The Lord
will go before you, and the God of Israel will be your rereward. Isa. 25.10.

Travelers tell us that they who are at the top of the Alps, can see great
showers of rain fall under them, but not one drop of it falls on them, They who
have God for their portion are in an high Tower. and thereby safe from all
troubles and showers; a drift-rain of evil will beat in at the creatures
windows, be they never so well pointed; All the garments this world can make
up, cannot keep them that travel in such weather from being wet to the skin:
No creature is able to bear the weight of its fellow creature, but as reeds
break under and as thorns run into the sides that lean on them. The bow drawn
beyond its compass breaks insunder, and the string wound above its strength
snaps in pieces; such are outward helps to all that trust to them in hardships.

But Christians being anchored on this rock of ages, are secure in the greatest
storm. They are like Sion which cannot be moved. The Church, according to the
Motto of Venice, Immota manet. In time of trouble he hides them in his
pavillion, and in the secret of his tabernacle he sets them upon a rock, Psalm.
27.5. Gods Sanctuary is his hidden place, Ezekiel. 7.22. and his Saints are his
hidden ones, Psalm. 83.4. and there he hides them from whatsoever may hurt them:
therefore he calls his children, when it rains abroad and is stormy, to come
within doors out of the wet; Come my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and
shut thy doors upon thee, and hide thy self, as it were, for a little moment,
until the indignation be over past, Isai. 26.20.

The Christian therefore is encouraged against evils, because God is his guard;
he knows whilst he has this buckter, he is shot-free, not to be pierced by
any bullet; He covers him with his feathers, and under his wings does the
Saint trust, Psalm. 91.4. As the Hen secureth her young from the Kite and
ravenous fowls by clucking them under her wing, and sheltering them there: so
God does undertake to be the protection of his people; and through his strength
they can triumph over trials, and defy the greatest dangers. At destruction
and famine they can laugh, Job 5, 22. and over the greatest crosses through him
they are more then Conquerours, Romans 8.35.

2. As God is able to free from all evil, so to fill the soul with all good, 2
God can fill a soul with all good.
therefore is its happiness. That which beatifieth the reasonable creature,
must undertake the removal of what is destructive, and the restoring to him
whatsoever may be perfective. Weak nature must be supported, and empty nature
must be supplied. Now the whole creation cannot be man's happiness, because it
is unable both to defend him from evil, and to delight him with good. The
comfort which arises from creatures is like the juice of some plums, which
does fill with wind, but yields no nourishment. He that sits at the worlds
table, when it is most largely spread, and fairly furnished, and feeds most
heartily on its fare, is as one that dreameth he eats, and when he awakes lo
he is hungry. The best noise of earthly Musicians can make but an empty sound,
which may a little please the senses, but not in the least satisfy the soul.
The world has but small choice, and therefore makes us but small cheer; for as
sick and squeazie stomachs, we are presently cloyd even with that which we
called so earnestly for. Hence it was, that those who esteemed their happiness
to consist in pleasing their brutish part, did so vehemently desire new carnal
delights. Nero had his officer that was stilled Arbiter Neronanae libidinis An
inventer of new pleasures. Sueton. cap 43.
Suetonius observes the same of Tiberius, and Cicero of Xerxes for these men
like children were quickly weary; Omnibus Error immensus.
of that for which they were but now so unquiet. And the reason is given us, by
the Moralist, because error is infinite.

The thirst of nature may be satisfied, but the thirst of a disease (as the
dropsy) cannot. The happiness of the soul consists in the enjoyment of good
commensurate to its desires, which no creature is, nay not all the creatures.

But God is the happiness of the creature, because he can satisfy it; The
Hebrews call a blessed man Ashrei, in the abstract and in the plural number,
blessednesses Psalm. 32.1. because no man can be blessed for one or another
good, unless he abound in all good.

The soul of man is a Vessel too capacious to be filled up with a few drops of
water, but this Ocean can do it; Whatsoever is requisite, either to promote
decayed, or to perfect deficient nature, is in God. The Lord is my shepherd; I
shall not want. Psalm. 23.1. Where is all wealth there can be no want. My God
shall supply all your need. Phil. 4.13. One God, answers all necessities,
because one God includes all excellencies. He is bonum comprehensivum; in him
are all the treasures of Heaven and Earth, and infinitely more. The God of all
comforts is his name. 2 Cor. 1.3. As all light is in the Sun; so all comfort,
all good is in God. Theodoret calls Moses an Ocean of Divinity; Some have called
Rome the Epitome of the world; Its true of God, he is an Ocean of all delights
and blessings, without either bank or bottom, and the Epitome of inconceivably
more, and incomparably better then all this worlds felicities.

The God of peace fill you with all joy, Rome 15.19. Observe, here is joy which
is the cream of our desires, and the overflowing of our delights; it is the
sweet tranquillity of our minds, the quiet repose of our hearts; and as the
sun to the flowers, it enlarges, and cheereth our affections. Joy is the mark
which all would hit; And is by the Philosopher well observed to be the dilation
of the heart for its embracing of, closing with, and Union to its most beloved
object. 2 Here is all joy; Variety of what is excellent adds much to its
luster and beauty. The Christian sits at a banquet made up of all sorts of rare
and curious wines, and all manner of dainties and delicates; He may walk in
this garden, and delight himself with diversity of pleasant fruits and flowers.
All joy. One kind of delight like Maryes box of Ointment, being opened, fills
the whole house with its savor; what then will all sorts of precious perfumes,
and fragrant ointments do? 3. Here is filling them with all joy; Plenty joined
with variety of that which is so excedingly pleasant, must needs inhance its
price; there is not a crevice in the heart of a Christian, into which this
light does not come. Its able to fill him, were he a far larger Vessel then he
is, (as they filled the pots at the feast of Cana) up to the brim (with this
water or rather) with this wine. The joy arising from the creature is an empty
joy like the Musician in Plutarch, who having pleased Dionysius with a little
vanishing Music was recompensed with a deceived hope of a great reward; but
this is a satiating satisfying joy, fill you with all joy. But 4. On what root
does such a variety and Plenty of lovely luscious fruit grow? Truly this light
of joy does not spring out of the earth; its Fountain is in heaven; The God of
peace fill you with all joy. The Vessel of the creature runs dregs, it can
never yield such choice delights: This pure River of water of life, proceeds
only out of the throne of God. Rev. 22.

CHAP XI. God the happiness of Man, because of his sutableness to the Soul.
THis delight and joy in God arises from his sutableness to the nature of the
heaven-born Saints (as I shall discover in the next heads) and their propriety
in him. God is a sutab^e good to Man^ Soul.


Secondly, God is a proportionable good. That which makes a man happy, must be
suitable to his spiritual soul. All satisfaction arises from some likeness
between the faculty or temper which predominateth, and the object. The cause of
pleasure in our meats is the sutableness of the saline humor in our taste to
that in our food. Therefore silver does not satisfy one that is sick, Aristot.
Eth. lib. 10 cap. 7.
nor raiment one that suffers hunger, because these are not answerable to
those particular necessities of nature. The Prince of Philosophers observes
truly, That those things only content the several creatures, which are (...)
accommodated to their several natures. Birds and beasts, and fish, do all live
upon and delight in that food, which is proportionable to their distinct
beings. The Ox feeds on grass, the Lion on flesh, the Goat on Bough's; some
live on the dew, some on fruit, some on weeds; some creatures live in the Air,
others sport themselves in the waters; the Mole and Worm are for the earth: the
Salamander choseth rather the fire; Nay in the same plant, the be feeds on
the flower, the bird on the seed; the sheep on the blade, and the swine on the
root; and what is the reason of all this, but because nature must have its rest
and delight from that only which is suitable to its own appetite and desire.
Hence it is that though God be so perfect a good, yet he is not the happiness
of evil Men, or evil Angels, for he is not suitable to their vitiated depraved
natures. The carnal mind (which bears sway in unregenerate men) is enmity
against God, and Devils are as contrary to Gods nature, as fire is to water.
Hence it is, that spiritual men place and enjoy happiness in the Father of
Spirits, because he is the savoury meat which their souls love. Though the
sinner can live upon dregs, as the swine on dung; yet the Saint must have
refined Spirits, and nothing less then Angels food and delights.

It is an unquestionable truth, that nothing can give true comfort to man, but
that which has a relation and bears a proportion to his highest and noblest
part, his immortal soul (for his sensitive faculties were created in him, to be
subordinate and serviceable to their Master Reason; therefore he is excelled in
them by his inferiors, as the Eagle in seeing, and the Hound in scenting;
nature aiming at some more sublime and excellent design, the perfection of the
rational part, in those lower particulars was less exact) therefore the
blessed God alone being a suitable Good to the heavenly spiritual soul of man,
can only satisfy it. Philosophers tell us the reason of the irons cleaving to,
and resting in the lodestone, is, because the pores of both bodies are alike;
so there are effluxes and emanations that slide through them and unite them
together. One cause of the Saints love to, and delight in God, is his likeness
to God. Creatures, are earthly, the soul is heavenly, they are corporeal, the
soul is spiritual, therefore (as when friends are contrary in disposition) the
soul cannot take up its rest and happiness in their fruition; but God is
suitable, and therefore satisfying, I am God All sufficient, Genesis 17.1. Some
derive the word Shaddai from Almighty, Alsufficient, from shad a dug; for as
the breast is suitable to the Babe nothing else will quiet it, so is God to his
Children.

A man that is hungry, finds his stomach still craving; something he wants,
without which he cannot be well: Give him music, company, pictures, houses,
honors, yet there follows no satisfaction (these are not suitable to his
appetite) still his stomach craves; but set before this man some wholesome
food, and let him eat, and his craving is over. They did eat and were filled, O
miserabilis h^m^a cord^^, and sine Ch^isto O^n^um omne ^uod vivi^ ^l^^e om.
Epit. Nep. Tim 1. p. ^5.
Neh. 9.25. So it is with man's soul as with his body; the soul is full of
cravings, and longings, spending it self in sallies out after its proper food;
give it the credit and profits, and pleasures of the world, and they cannot
abate its desire; it craves still (for these do not answer the souls nature,
and therefore cannot answer its necessity) but once set God before it, and it
feeding on him, it is satisfied; its very inordinate dogged appetite after the
world is now cured. He tasting this Manna, tramples on the Onions of Egypt; He
that drinks of this water, shall thirst again; but he that drinks of the
water which I shall give him, shall never thirst, John 4.

CHAP. XII. God the Saints happiness, because of his Eternity and the Saints
propriety in him.
permanent good: That which makes a man happy, must be immortal like himself:
as man is rational, so he is a provident creature, desirous to lay up for
hereafter; and this forecast reaches beyond the fools in the Gospel for many
years, even for millions of ages for ever, by laying hold on eternal life. He
naturally desires an immortality of being (whence that inclination in
creatures, say Philosophers, of propagating their kind) and therefore an
eternity of blessedness. The soul can enjoy no perfection of happiness, if it
be not commensurate to its own duration. For the greater our joy is in the
fruition of any good, the greater our grief in its amission. Eternity is one of
the fairest flowers in the glorified Saints garland of honor. Its an eternal
weight of glory: 2. Cor. 4.17. Were the triumphant spirits ever to put off
their Crown of life, the very thought thereof would be death, and like leaven
would sower the whole lump of their comforts. The perpetuity of their state,
adds infinitely to their pleasure. We shall ever be with the Lord. 2. These.
4.16. Here they have many a sweet bait, but there God will be their
standing-dish, never off the Heavenly Table.

The creature cannot make man happy, La^itia saeculi cum ma na expect ^o^e
sperat^r ut venini^t, and ^o^ ^^test ten^r^ c^nvenit. Aug. tract. 7 in Job.
because (as it is not able to fill him so,) it is not fast to him; like the
Moon in the increase, it may shine a little the former part of the night, but
is down before morning. Man is not sure to hold them whilst he lives. How
often is the candle of outward comforts blown out by a sudden blast of
providence? Many (as Naomi) go out full, but come home empty; some disaster or
other as a Theif meets them by the way, and robs them of their deified
treasure. The Vessel in which all of some men's wealth is embarked, while it
spreads fair with its, proud Sails, and danceth along upon the surging
waters, when the Factor in it is pleasing himself with the kind salutes he
shall receive from his Merchant, for making so profitable a Voyage) is in an
instant swallowed up of unseen quicksands, and delivers its Fraught at
another Port, and to an unknown Master. Those whose morning has been sunshiny
and clear, have met with such showers before night, as have washed away their
wealth. However if these comforts continue all day, at the night of death, (as
false lovers serve men in extremity) they leave us the knife of death, which
stobs the sinner to the heart; Lets out the blood, and spirits of all his joys
and happiness. But God is the true happiness of the soul; because, he is an
eternal good; As this Sun has no mists, so it nevey sets; so that the rest of
the Soul in God is an eternal Sabbath; like the new Jerusalem, it knows no
night. Outward mercies in which most place their felicity, are like land
floods, which swell high, and make a great noise, but are quickly in again,
when the blessed God, like the Springhead, runeth over, and runs ever.

Fourthly, Because of the Saints propriety in this God; though God be never so
perfect, suitable, sure a good; Yet its little Comfort, to them that have no
interest in him; Another man's health will not make me happy, when sick. What
Happiness has a beggar in the shady walks, pleasant garden, stately
buildings, curious rooms, costly furniture, and precious jewels of an Earl,
when they are none of his; A Crown and scepter may be as suitable to the nature
of a Subject, as a Sovereign; yet the comfort of them extends not to the
former, for want of this propriety in them. The leaving out one word in a Will,
may mar the estate and disapoint all a man's hopes; the want of this one word,
my (God) is the wicked man's loss of heaven, and the dagger which will pierce
his heart in Hell to all eternity. The degree of satisfaction in any good, is
according to the degree of our Union to it, (hence our delight is greater in
food, then in clothes; and the Saints joy is greater in God, in the other
world, then in this, because the Union is nearer) but where there is no
propriety, there is no Union; therefore no complacency; now this alsufficient,
suitable, and eternal God is the Saints peculiar portion, and therefore causes
infinite satisfaction. God is my portion for ever. God even our God shall
bless us, Psalm. 67.7. The Pronoun my, is as much worth to the soul, as the
boundless portion; All our comfort is locked up in that private cabinet. Wine
in the glass, does not cheer the heart, but taken down into the body. The
propriety of the Psalmists in God was the mouth whereby he fed on those
dainties which did so excedingly delight him. No love potion was ever so
effectual as this Pronoun. When God says to the soul, as Ahab to Benhadad,
Behold I am thine, and all that I have, who can tell how the heart leaps with
joy in, and expires almost in desires after him, upon such news! Others like
strangers may behold his honor, and excellencies; but this Saint only, like
the wife, enjoys him: Luther says, Much Religion lies in Pronouns. All our
consolation indeed consists in this Pronoun it the is the cup, which holds
all our cordial waters; He undertake as bad as the devil is, He shall give the
whole world (were it in his power) more freely then ever he offered it to
Christ, for his worship, for leave from God to pronounce those two words, my
God. All the joys of the beleiver are hung upon this one string; break that
asunder, and all is lost. I have sometimes thought, how David rouls it as a
lump of sugar under his tongue, as one loath to lose its sweetness too soon. I
love thee O Lord my strength; The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my
deliverer, my God my strength, my buckler, the horn of my salvation, and my
high Tower: Psalm. 18.1, 2. This pronoun is the door at which the King of
Saints enters into our hearts with his whole train of delights and comforts.

CHAP XIII. The first use. The difference betiwxt a sinner and a Saint in
distress.
THis Doctrine may be useful, by way of inference, and by way of trial, and
counsel, and by way of Comfort.

First, If the comfort of a Christian in his saddest estate be this, namely,
That God is his portion; It informs us of the difference betwixt a sinner and
a Saint, both in their conditions, when trouble comes, and in their portions.

1. In their conditions, when in affliction.

The Saint in the sharpest winter sits at a good fire; when abused by
strangers, he can complain to, Use inform. 1.
and comfort himself in his Father; though stars vanish out of sight, he can
rejoice in the Sun; like the prudent Dame whithersoever he travelleth, (knowing
how liable he is to fainting-fits) he carries his bottle of strong water
along with him. When thou passest through the fire, I will be with thee, Isa.
43. But the sinner, when a storm comes upon his head, has no to cover; when a
qualm comes over his heart; he has no cordial, for he has no God. Ephe.
2.12. Without God, without hope, Strangers to the Covenant of promise. A
godless man is hopeless. If he be robbed of his estate, and have little in hand,
his case is dreadful; for he has less in hope. The promises are the clifts of
the rock, whether true doves fly; and places of shelter, where they are safe
from ravenous fowls; but he is a stranger to these; when the floods comes he
has no Ark, but must sink like lead in the midst of the mighty waters.

The godly man in the lowest ebb of creatures may have an high-tide of
comforts, because he has ever the God of all Consolations. As Jezabel her
idolatrous priests, so in the greatest outward famine God entertaineth his
people at his own table; and surely that's neither mean, nor sparing: As their
afflictions abound, their consolations by Christ superabound: 2. Cor. 1.5. The
world lays on crosses, and Christ lays in comforts. Men make grievous
sores, and God provides precious salves. The Lord is my portion, says my soul,
therefore will I hope in him, Lamen. 3.24. If you mind the season, you may a
little admire at the Churches solace; The whole Book is but a pathetical
description of her Tragical condition; and is generally concluded to be written
by Jeremy in the time of the Babylonish Captivity, when her Land was wasted,
her people enslaved, her Sabbaths ceased, and her Temple profaned; yet this
Bird of Paradise sings in a Cage, and in this hard winter, The Lord is my
Portion, says my Soul, therefore will I hope in him.

The Godly man may be robbed of his possessions, but he is well so long as he
has his happiness, his portion. Lazarus was happy when ( sine domo, because he
was not sine domino) without Goods, because he was not without God. As he in
Plutarch said of the Scythians, Though they had neither wine nor music, yet
they had the Gods. The Prophet when the ponds were dried up, fetchd his water
from the Fountain, Habakkuk 3.16, 17. Although the Fig tree shall not
blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vine; the labor of the Olives shall
fayl, and the fields shall yield no meat; the flock shall be cut off from the
fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls; yet will I rejoice in the Lord,
and I will joy in the God of my Salvation. Its considerable that he expresses
not only things for convenience, as the Vine and Fig tree, but things for
necessity, as the meat of the field, and flocks of the stall; and supposes the
total loss of both: yet in the want and absence of such comforts of life, he
supports himself with God, the life of all his comforts. But the ungodly is
not so; when afflictions come, they hit him upon the bare, for he is without
armor; He is as a naked man in the midst of venomous Serpents, and stinging
Scorpions. When troubles come like so many Lions, they tear the silly Lamb in
pieces, having none to protect him; I am greatly distressed (says Saul, and
well he might, for) the Philistines are upon me, and God is departed from me. 1 Samuel 28.15. Alas poor Soul, had the Philistines been his burden, and God
strengthened his back, all had been well, he might have gone lightly under it;
but when Enemies approached, and God depaated, he must needs be greatly
distressed. The Creature may well be full of frights and fears, that stands in
the open fields where bullets fly thick and fast, without any shelter or
defense. David's foes had proved their conclusion to the full, had their medium
been true, Persecute and take him, for God has forsaken him. Psalm. 71.11. If
God leave a man, dangers and Devils may quickly find him. No wonder that Micah
cried out so mournfully, Ye have taken away my gods, and do you ask me what I
ail? At the loss of his false God, much more will the loss of the true God make
men mournful. As it was said of Coniah, Write this man childeless, Jer. 22. ver.
ult. It may be said of every godless Man, write this man comfortless, helpless,
hopeless, and that for ever.

Vast is the difference betwixt the case of the good and bad in distress; the
former as clothes died in grain, may keep his color in all weathers; the
latter like quick silver may well be ever in motion, and like a leaf tremble at
the smallest wind. Naturalists observe this difference between Eagles and other
Birds are in want, and distress, they make a pitiful noise; but the Eagle when
in straights, has no such mournful note, but mounteth aloft, and refreshes
her self with the warm beams of the Sun. Saints like true Eagles when they are
in necessity, mount up to God, upon the wings of Faith and Prayer; and delight
themselves with the golden rays, and gracious influences of his favor; but
the sinner if bereft of outward comforts, dolefully complains. The snail, take
him out of his shell, and he dies presently; the godless person is like the
Ferret which has its name in Hebrew from squeaking and crying, because he
squeaketh sadly, if taken from his prey: when the godly man (as Paulinus
Molanus when his City was plundered by the Barbarians) though he be robbed of his
earthly riches, has a Treasure in Heaven; and may say, Domine, ne excrucier ob
aurum and argentum; tu enim mihi es omnia. Lord why should I be disquieted for
my silver and gold? for thou to me art all things: having nothing yet He
possesses all things. 2. Cor. 6.

CHAP. XIV. The Difference betwixt the Portions of Gracious and Graceless
persons in this World.
2. IT informs us of the difference in their portions. The wicked man has a
portion of goods; 2. Use informs the difference betwixt the sinners and
Saints Portion.
Father, give me the Portion of goods which belongs to me Luke. 15. and 12.
But the godly man only has the good portion. I shall instance in three
particulars, wherein the Portion in this world of a sinner differs from the
Saints.

First; Their Portion is poor; The Sinners Portion is Poor.
It consists in toys and trifles, like the estate of mean women in the City,
who make a great noise in crying their ware, which is only a few points or
pins, or matches. But the portion of a Saint lies (though he do not proclaim
it about the streets) as the rich Merchants, in staple commodities and jewels.
The worldlings portion at best is but a little airy honor, or empty pleasure,
or beggarly treasure. But the Christians is the beautiful Image of God, the
incomparable Covenant of Grace, the exceeding rich and precious promises of the
Gospel, the inestimable Savior, and the infinitely blessed God. The sinners
portion is nothing; ye have rejoiced in a thing of naught. Amos 6.13. a
fashion, a fancy. 1 Cor. 7.29. Acts 25.23. but the Saints portion is all
things; All things are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor.
3.22, 23. As Abraham gave gifts to the sons of his Concubines, and sent them
away, but he gave all he had to Isaac: so God gives common gifts of riches, or
friends, or credit to wicked men (which is all they crave) and sends them
away (and they are well contented) but he gives grace, glory, his Spirit, his
Son, himself, all he has to his Isaacs, to the children of the promise, Genesis
25.5, 6. He gives earth into the hands of the wicked, Job 9.24. All their
portion lies in dust, rubbish and lumber; all they are worth is a few ears of
corn, which they glean here and there in the field of this world; but he gives
heaven into the hearts of the godly; their portion consists in gold, and
silver, and diamonds, the peculiar treasure of Kings, in the love of God, the
blood of Christ, and the pleasures at his right hand for evermore. Others, like
servants, have a little meat, and drink, and wages; but Saints, like sons, they
(are a congregation of the firstborn, and) have the inheritance. O the vast
difference betwixt the portion of the prodigal and the pious! the former has
something given him by God (as Peninnah had by Elkanah) though at last it will
appear to be little better then nothing, when he gives the latter (as Elkanah
did Hannah) a goodly, a worthy portion because he loves them, 1 Samuel 1.4, 5.

Their portion is piercing.
2. Their portion is piercing; as it is compared to broken cisterns for its
vanity, so to thorns for its vexation, Jer. 2.13. Matthew. 13.22. A sinner
lays the heavy lumber of his earthly portion on his heart, and that must
needs oppress it with care, and fear and many sorrows, whereas the Saints
portion, the fine linen of his Saviors righteousness, lying next his flesh,
is soft and pleasing. The abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep,
Eccles. 5.12. his portion hinders his peace: his riches set him upon a wrack:
His cruelty in getting it, his care to increase it, and the secret curse of God
accompanying it, do like the importunate widow allow him no rest day or night:
When the Godly man's portion makes his bed easy, lays his pillow soft and
covers him warm; I will lay me down in peace and sleep, for thou Lord make me
to dwell in safety. Nay such an excellent sleeping pill is this portion, that
by the virtue of it David, when he was pursued by his unnatural son, and was in
constant danger of death, when he had the earth for his bed, the trees for his
curtains, the stars for his candles, and the heavens for his canopy, could
sleep as sweetly, as soundly as ever he did on his bed of down, in his royal
palace at Jerusalem: Thou, O Lord, art a shield for me, my glory, and the
lifter up of mine head; I laid me down and slept, I awaked, for the Lord
sustained me, Psalm. 3.3. and 5. Psalm. 4. ult.

The sinners portion is termed wind, Hos. 8.7. If wind get into the bowels of
the earth, it causes concussions and earthquakes; his riches, and honors, and
friends lie near him, are within him, and thereby cause much anxiety and
disquietness of spirit; his portion, like windy fruit, fills his belly with
pains. It is smoke in his eyes, gravel in his teeth, Sine Deo omnis copia est
egestas. Bern.
wind in his stomach, and gripes in his bowels. The Saints part is his joy and
delight: Then shall I go to the altar of God, to God my exceeding joy, Psalm.
43.4. It is music to his ears, beauty to his eyes, sweet odours to his scent,
honey to his taste, and melody (...) his heart. In the presence of his portion
is fullness of joy, and at his right hand are pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.
ult. He sits at an inward heart-chearing feast in the greatest outward famine;
when the worldling in the midst of his gaudy show of wealth is but a book
fairly gilt without, consisting of nothing but tragedies within; his portion is
too narrow a garment then that he can wrap himself in it, and too short a bed
then that he can stretch himself on it.

The vanity of the sinners portion makes it full of vexation to him, because it
cannot fill him, therefore it frets him: In the midst of his sufficiency he is
in straights, Job 20.22. Though his table be never so well spread, he has not
an heart to use it, but pineth himself with fear of poverty, and runs hither
and thither, up and down like a beggar, to this and that door of the creature
for some poor scraps and small dole. He may possess many pounds, and not enjoy
one penny, Eccles. 6.2.

But the portion of the Saint affords him a comfortable subsistence. Though the
whole be not paid him till he come to full age, T^n^um h^bet quantum vul qui
nihil vu t nisi qu^d habet. Seneca.
yet the interest of it, which is allowed him in his minority, affords him
such an honorable maintenance, that he needs not borrow of his servants, nor
be beholden to his beggarly neighbors; he has enough constantly about him to
live upon, and therefore may spare his frequent walk to the creatures shop for
a supply of his wants.

Their portion is perishing
3. Their portion is perishing: This fire of thorns at which carnal men warm
their hands (for it cannot reach the heart) after a small blaze and little
blustering noise goes out. Carnal comforts, like Comets, appear for a time, and
then vanish; when the portion of a Saint, like a true star, is fixed and firm. A
worldlings wealth lies in earth, and therefore as wares laid in low damp
cellars, corrupts and moulders; but the godly man's treasure is in heaven, and
as commodities laid up in high rooms, continues sound and safe. Earthly
portions are often like guests which stay for a night and away; but the Saints
portion is an Inhabitant that abides in the house with him for ever.

It is said of Gregory the Great, that he trembled every time he read or
thought of that speech of Abraham to Dives, Son, remember that thou in thy life
time had thy good things, Luke 16.25. To have his all in time, and nothing
when he entered upon his eternity; to live like a prodigal one day, and be a
beggar for ever; Surely it was a sad saying. The flower sheds whilst the stalk
remains; the sinner continues when his portion vanishes: The sinners portion,
like his servant, when he dies, will seek a new Master. Thou fool, this night
thy soul shall be required of thee, and then whose shall these things be? Luke
12.20. Whose? possibly the poors, whom he had wronged and robbed to enrich
himself; it may be his childs, who will scatter it as prodigally as he raked
it together penuriously: but whosesoever it was, it could be none of his, and
then, when parted from his portion, what a poor fool was he indeed? not worth a
farthing. But the Saints wealth will accompany him into the other world; the
truth is, that is the place where he receives his portion: Blessed are they
that die in the Lord, they rest from their labors, and their works follow
them, Rev, 14.13.

When men go a great journey, as beyond the seas, they carry not their tables,
or bedsieads, or any such heavy luggage and lumber along with them; but their
silver, and gold, and jewels. When the sinner goes the way of all the earth,
he leaves his portion behind him, because it consists wholly in lumber; but the
Saints portion consisting wholly in things of value (in wisdom which is better
then silver, and grace which is more worth then pure gold, and in God who is
move precious then rubies, and all that can be desired is not to be compared to
him) he carries all along with him.

It is said of Dathan and his companions, that the earth swallowed them up, and
their houses, and all that appertained to them: so when the earth shall at
death swallow up his person, it will also (as to his use) swallow up his
portion, Numb. 32.33.

This whole world must pass away, and what then will become of the sinners
portion? surely he may cry out as they of Moab, Woe to me, I am undone, Numb.
21.29. but even at that day the Saint may sing and be joyful at heart; for till
then he shall not know the full value of his inheritance.

It is as sad a speech as most in Scripture, whose portion is in this life,
Psalm. 17.14. All their estate lies, as the Reubenites, on this side Canaan.

CHAP XV. The difference betwixt the Sinners and Saints portion in the other
world.
BUt there is a farther difference betwixt the portion of a sinner and Saint
(and still the farther we go, the worse it is for the one, and the better for
the other) and that is in the other world.

The sinners portion here, as poor as it is, is a comparative heaven, but there
a real hell: Their portion is cursed on earth, but what is it then in hell?
Job 24.18. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares; fire and brimstone, and an
horrible tempest; this is the portion of their cup, Psalm. 11.6. The words are
an allusion to the Jewish custom at meals, wherein every one had his allotted
portion of drink, his peculiar cup. Gen 43.34.
Suitable to which the godly man can tell you what Nectar and Nepenthe he shall
meet with, when he sits down at that Banquet from which he shall never rise up.
The Lord is the portion of my cup, thou maintainest my lot, Psalm. 16.5.

But look a little into the sinners cup, and see what a bitter potion is
prepared for him; I think we shall scarce find a drop in it, but is infinitely
worse then poison: (Reader, take heed thou never come to taste it:) It is
indeed a mixture of such ingredients as may make the stoutest heart alive to
tremble, and faint away if it come but within the scent or sight of it. Snares,
fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest. The Lord poured on the Egyptians
such a grievous rain, as had not been in Egypt since the foundation thereof,
Exodus, 9.18. but this potion of the sinner is far more bitter then that plague.
Plin Not. Hist. lib 2. cap. 56
Pliny tells us, that amongst the Romans, when M. Acilius and C. Porcius were
Consuls, it rained blood; but what is that to fire and brimstone? Observe 1.
the extremity of pain, which will be caused by this portion: Upon the wicked he
shall rain fire and brimstone: Fire is dreadful to our flesh, though it be but
applied outwardly. (What miswerable torment did Charles the second King of
Navarre endure, Heyl. Geogr. p. 42.
when he was burnt to death in a flaming sheet steeped in Aqua vitae?) but much
greater torment will it cause when taken inward. Fire in the belly, in the
bowels, will pain the creature to purpose. The inward parts are more tender,
and so more liable to torture: But this drink, like poison, will diffuse it
self also into all the parts, that none shall be free from pain. It was an
unknown punishment which the drunken Turk underwent, when by the command of the
Bashaw he had a cup of boiling lead poured down his throat: who can think what
he felt? but sure I am, as bad as it was, it was but a flea-bite to this cup of
fire which the Lord has prepared for the sinner fire and brimstone: Fire is
terrible of it self, but brimstone makes it to burn with much greater violence:
besides, brimstone added to the cup of fire will make it of a most stinking
savor. The sinner now burns in lust, but then in a flaming fire: now he
drinks his pleasant julips, but then his loathsome potion. Fire is the most
furious of all Elements; nothing in this life is more dreadful to nature; but
our fires are but like painted ones to true, in comparison of this rain of fire
in hell. Nebuchadnezzars furnace, Damnati exqui^ t^ssi^^os dolores sen^ (...),
qu^ bu^ m^j^r^s nec dari nec cogita^i pos^unt. Gerh. loc. com.
though heated seven times more then ordinary, was cool to this fire. O who can
fry in such a flame as the breath of an infinite God does kindle! Fire and
brimstone. Three drops of brimstone (says one) lighting on any part of our
bodies, will make us cry and roar out for pain: what then will befall the
sinner, when he shall both ever drink and ever live in this lake of fire and
brimstone, when he shall drink this cup of pure wrath, of poisonous dregs, of
fire and brimstone, though there be eternity to the bottom! Who can dwell in
everlasting burnings? Isai. 33.14.

Observe secondly the certainty of the punishment. Videtu significare veni^s
ur^ntes q ales illi in Africa, q^i arenas ard^ntes calore solis excitant and
ho^ines involutos ita adurunt, quasi ^d ignem corpora essent tosta, ^^ii vertun
spiritum procellarum ce^ turbinum, quiae procellosis v^ntis excitantur
tempestates, quas postea sequitur fulminatio, cujus hic est descriptio. Moller.
in loc. vide Calv. in loc.
Upon the wicked he shall rain an horrible tempest. Some read it a whirlwind, a
horrible blasting whirlwind, which carries all before it; but its properly,
says Ainsworth, a hideous burning tempest, named by the Greeks (...), Acts
27.14. It is an allusion to the boisterous wind Turbo, which casts down and
overthrows all that is near it; which as it is hot and fiery is named
Prester, and burns and lays along whatsoever it touches and encountereth.
The sinner thinks that he is sure, but this horrible tempest will overturn
him: His squeazie stomach (used to rich wines) nauseates this loathsome nasty
water. When God puts this cup into his hand, O how his heart will rise against
it! but he shall be forced to drink off this cup of fire and boiling brimstone
whether he will or no.

Observe thirdly the suddenness of this plague and potion: Upon the wicked he
shall rain snares: when they are asleep and little dream of it, then this
horrible tempest steals them away in the night: What a doleful screech and
dreadful cry will this cause (as amongst the Egyptians at midnight, Exodus
12.29.) Job 27.20. Snares take men at unawares: The sinners woe shall come
without warning. As the fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as birds that
are caught in the snare, so are the sons of men snared in an evil time, when it
comes suddenly upon them, Eccles. 9.12. The fish looks for a good bait when it
is caught by the hook; the bird expects meat in the snare in which it is taken
and murdered. When Abner expected a kiss, a kind salute, behold then he meets
with a sword which kills him. When Belshazar was carousing in his cups, and his
head full of wine, then the cup of trembling is given him by the handwriting
on the wall. When the sinner, like the Dolphin, is leaping merrily, then he is
nearest his endless misery: Upon the wicked he shall rain snares. When it rains
he expects silver showers to refresh him, but lo gins and snares to entrap
him. The wicked man's cloud drops not fatness, but fury and fire.

Now let us cast up the account, and see what the worldlings portion amounts
to, and how much he will be worth in the other world: The liquor in his cup is
most painful and loathsome, fire and brimstone. (All his estate lies in the
valley of the shadow of death:) Scalding lead were a wonderful favor, if he
might drink that instead of boiling brimstone. No heart can conceive what a
terrible potion that is, which a God boundless in wisdom, power and anger,
does prepare: yet though it be dreadful, if it were doubtful, the sinners grief
would not be so great; but as the liquor is most loathsome, so the cup is most
certain; God will pour this dreadful drench down his throat. He cannot abide
it, neither can he avoid it. Infinite power will hold his person, whilst
infinite anger gives him this potion. And it is not the least aggravation of
his sorrows that they shall come on a sudden. This rain of fire and brimstone,
which will cause such matchless mourning, will come (as on Sodom) when it is
least expected, after a sunshiny morning.

But there is one thing more in the cup, which, beyond all the former, makes it
infinitely bitter, and that is this, It is bottomless, Luke 8.31. The sinners
fire is eternal, Trim^ mors animam dolentem pellit de corpore, secunda mo^^
animam ^olen^^m ten^ in corp ^e Aug de civit. de^ lib. 21. cap. 31.
and the smoke of his brimstone ascends for ever and ever, Jude 7. Revel.
14.7. If a purging potion, which is soon down, and in some few hours out of
his body, go so much against the hair with him, what wry mouths and angry faces
will he make, when he shall come to drink this bottomless cup of fire and
brimstone? His cup is like the Ocean, which can never be fathomed; this rain
may well be called wrath to come; for it will be ever to come, and never
overcome. His darkest night here may have a morning; but there his portion will
be blackness of darkness for ever. There will be no end of his misery, no exit
to his tragedy: He will be fetterred in those chains of everlasting darkness,
and feel the terrors of an eternal death.

But the portion of a Saint is (like the wine which Christ provided for the
wedding) best at last; he shall never know its full worth till he appears in
the other world, and then he shall find, that as money answers all things, so
his portion will protect him from all misery, and fill him with all felicities,
and answer all the desires and necessities of his capacious and immortal soul.

The cup which he shall drink of, is filled out of the rivers of Gods own
pleasures; and how sweet that wine is, none can tell but they who have tasted
it. The thought of it has recovered those who have been dying, and recalled
them to life; what then will a draught of it do? All the men in the world
cannot describe the rich viands and various dainties which God has for his own
provided diet: Nay the most skilful Cherubim can never count nor cast up the
total of a Saints personal estate. Till Angels can acquaint us with the vast
millions that the boundless God is worth, they cannot tell us the utmost of a
Saints portion.

It is said of Shusa in Persia, that it was so rich, that (says Cassiodorus)
the stones were joined together with gold, and in it Alexander found seventy
thousand talents of gold: This City if you can take (says Aristagorus to his
soldiers) you may vie with Jove himself for riches. But what a beggarly place
is this to the new Jerusalem? where pure gold is the pavement, trampled under
the Citizens feet, and the walls all of precious pearls; who enters that
City may vie with thousands of such Monarchs as this world can make, and with
all those heathenish Gods for Riches. The Infinite God, quantus quantus est, as
boundless a good as he is (to whom Heaven and earth is less then nothing) is
their portion for ever: But of this more in some of the following Chapters.

CHAP. XVI. A Use of Trial, whether God be our portion or no, with some marks.
2. The second Use by way of Trial, whether God be our po tion or no.
THe Doctrine may be useful by way of trial: If the comfort of a Christian in
his saddest condition be, That God is his portion; then, Reader, examine thy
self whether God be thy portion or no. I must tell thee, the essence and heart
of Religion consists in the choice of thy portion; nay thy happiness
depends wholly upon thy taking of the blessed God for thine utmost end and
chiefest good; therefore if thou mistakest here, thou art lost for ever.

I shall try thee very briefly by the touchstone which Christ has prepared:
Where your treasure is, there will your heart be also, Matthew. 6. Now Friend,
Where is thy heart? is it in earth? is it a diamond set in lead, or a sparkling
star fixed in heaven? Are thy greatest affections like Readiness person among the
stuff and rubbish of this world? or do they, like Moses, go up into the Mount
and converse with God? Do they with the Worms crawl here below? or like the
Eagle soar aloft and dwell above? A man that has his portion on earth, like
the earth, moves downward, though he may be thrown upward by violence (as a
stone) by some sudden conviction, or the like; yet that impressed virtue is soon
worn out, and he falls to the earth again; but he who has his portion in
heaven, like fire, tends upward ordinarily, though through the violence of
temptation he may (as fire by the wind) be forced downward, yet that removed,
he ascends again.

It may be when thine enemy Death beats thee out of the field of life, thou will be glad of a God, to which thou may retire, as a city of refuge, to
shelter thee from the murdering piece of the laws curse; but what thoughts have
thou of him now, whilst thou have the world at will? Do thou count the
fruition of him thy chiefest felicity? Is one God infinitely more weighty in
the scales of thy judgment then millions of worlds? Do thou say in thy
prevailing settled judgment, of them that have their garners full and their
floeks fruitful, Blessed is the people that is in such a case; or yea rather
happy is the people whose God is the Lord, Psalm. 144.13, 14, 15.

Every man esteems his portion at an high price: Naboth valueth his earthly
inheritance above his life, and would rather die then part with it at any rate:
God forbid that I should sell the inheritance of my fathers, says he. O the
worth of the blessed God, in the esteem of him that has him for his portion!
His house, land, wife, child, liberty, life, are hated by him, and nothing to
him in comparison of his portions he would not exchange his hopes of it and
title to it for the dominion and sovereignty of the whole world. If the Devil,
as to Christ, should set him on the pinnacle of the Temple, and show all the
honors, and pleasures, and treasures of the world, and say to him, All this I
will give thee, if thou will sell thy portion and fall down and worship me: Who
can tell with what infinite disdain he would reject such an offer? He would say
as a Tradesman that were bid exceedingly below the worth of his wares, You were
as good bid me nothing, and with much scorn and laughter refuse his tender.
This man is elevated to the top of the celestial orbs, and therefore the whole
earth is but a point in his eye: whereas a man who has his portion in outward
things, who dwells here on earth, heavenly things are little (the glorious
Sun it self is but small) in such a man's eye, earthly things are great in his
esteem.

Reader, let me persuade thee to be so much at leisure as to ask thy soul two
or three Questions.

1. In what chanel does the stream of thy desires run? Which way and to what
coast do these winds of thy soul drive? Is it toward God, or toward the
world? A rich Heir in his minority, kept under by Tutors and Guardians, longs
for the time when he shall be at age and enjoy the privilege and pleasures of
his inheritance. Thou cravest, and thirsts, and longest, and desire;
something there is which thou would have, and must have, and can not be
satisfified till thou have it: Now what is it? Is it the husks of this world,
which thou inquire so earnestly for somebody to give thee? or is it bread in
thy Fathers house which thou hungrest after? Do thou pant after the dust of
the earth, according to the Prophets phrase, Amos 2.7. or with the Church, The
desire of my soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee! Thou art
hungry, and thirsty, unquiet, unsatisfied; what is the matter, man? Do thou
like the dry earth, gape and cleave for showers to bring forth corn and wine?
Is the voice of thy heart, Who will show us any good? or is it, Lord, lift up
the light of thy countenance on us? Physicians can judge considerably of the
state of their Patients bodies, by their appetites; they who long only for
trash, speak their stomachs to be foul; they who hunger after wholesome food are
esteemed to be in health. Thou may judge of the state of thy soul by thy
desires; if thou desire chiefly the trash of the world, thy spiritual state
is not right; thy heart is not right in the sight of God; if thou can say
with David, Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I
desire in comparison of thee: Blessed art thou of the Lord, thou have a part
and lot in this boundless portion. Observe therefore Friend, which way these
wings of thy soul, thy desires, fly. He who thirsts after the kennel water
of this world has no right to the pure river of the water of life; but he who
hungreth after the dainties of the Lambs Supper, may be sure the scraps of this
beggarly world are not his happiness: The true Wife longs for the return of
her Husband, but the false one cares not how long he is absent.

2. What is the feast at which thou sit with most delight? Is it at a table
furnished with the comforts of this world? Are the dishes of credit and profit,
of relations and possessions, those which thou feedest on with most pleasure?
Or is it a Table spread with the Image of God, the Favor of God, the Spirit of
God, and the Son of God? are those the savoury meat which thy Soul loves?

If this Sun of righteousness only causes day in thine heart, when he arises;
and if he be set, notwithstanding all the candles of creatures, it is still
night with thee, then God is thy Portion. O how glad is the young Heir, when he
comes to enjoy his Portion! with what delight will he look over his woods, view
his grounds, and walk in his gardens. The Roman would tumble naked in his
heaps of Silver, out of delight in them; but if thy affections only overflow
with joy (as the water of Nilus) in the time of wheat harvest, when the world
flows in upon thee, the world is thy Portion. He who like a Lark sings
merrily, (not on the ground) but when he is mounting up to Heaven, is rich
indeed. God is his; but he who like an horsefly delights in dunghils, feeds
most on, and rellisheth best these earth ly offalls, is a poor man; God is none
of his God; its an undeniable truth, that, that is our Portion which is the
Paradise of our pleasures. The fool who could expect ease on his bed of Thorns,
Soul take thine ease, thou have goods laid up for many years, had his Portion
in this life; but Moses whom nothing could please but Gods gracious presence,
had him for his Portion. If thy presence go not with us, carry us not hence, I
beseech me show me thy glory.

Thirdly, What is the calling which thou followest, with greatest eagerness and
earnestness? Men run and ride and toil and moyl all day, they rise early and go
to bed late, and take any pains for that which they count their happiness and
portion. The Worldling whose Element is Earth, whose Portion consists like
the Pedlars pack, in a few pins, or needles, or peuter-spoons, or
brass-bodkins, how will he fare mean, lodge hard, sleep little, crowd into a
corner; hazard his health, and life and soul too, for that which he counts
his Portion! like a brutish spaniel he will follow his Master the world some
hundred of miles, puffing and blowing, breaking through hedges, and scratching
himself with thorns and briers, running through ponds of water, and puddles of
dirt; and all for a few bones or scraps, which is all his hope and happiness.
The Christian who has the blessed God for his portion, strives, and labors,
and watches, and prays, and weepeth, and thinks no time too much, no pains
too great, no cost enough for the enjoyment of his God. As the wise Merchant he
would part with All he has, all his strength and health, all his relations and
possessions, for his noble Portion. Reader, how is it with thee, thou
travellest too and fro, thou weariest thy self, and want thy rest, thy head
is full of cares, and thy heart of fears, and thy hands are always active;
but whether does all this tend? what is the market to which thou art walking
thus fast? Is it gold that thou pursuest so hot? The people labor in the fire;
and weary themselves for very vanity. 2. Habbak. 13. Or is it God that thou
pressest after (as the Hound the Hare, so the word signifies. Phil. 3.12.
(...)) with so much deligence and violence. My soul follows hard after thee.
Ps. 63.6. Thus have I laid down the characters briefly of such as have God for
their Portion. Thy business is to be faithful in the trial of thine estate.

If upon trial thou find that God is thy Portion, rejoice in thy privilege,
and let thy practices be answerable. Like a rich Heir, delight thy self in the
thoughts of thy vast inheritance. Can he be poor that is Master of the Mint?
Can thou be miserable who have God for thy Portion? I must tell in thee that
thou art happy in spite of Men and Devils. If worldlings take such pleasure
in their counters and brass farthings, what joy may thou have in God, to whom
all the Indians Mines are worse then dross! nay if all the gold of Ophir, and
of the whole world were melted into one common stream; and all the Pearls and
precious stones lay on the side of it as thick as pebbles, and the quintessence
and excellencies of all other the creatures were crumbled into sand, and lay at
the bottom of this channel, they were not worthy to make a Metaphor of, to set
forth the least perfection in this Portion. Shall Esau say, he has enough and
be contented, when the narrow field of some creatures was the utmost bounds of
his estate? and will thou complain as if thou were pinched with poverty, when
the boundless God is thy Portion? Art not thou an unreasonable Creature, whom
the infinite God will not satisfy? for shame Christian bethink thy self; and
let the world know by thy cheerfulness and comfort, that their mites are
nothing to thy millions. Consider though the whole world turn bankrupt, thou
art rich; for thy Estate does not lie in their hands. Do not ^ine thy self
therefore with fear of penury, but keep an house according to thy estate which
will afford it, in the greatest plenty; Let thy practices also be suitable to
thy portion. Great heirs have a far different carriage from the poor, who take
alms of the Parish. Thou ough'st to live above the world; Eagles must not
stoop to catch flies; the stars which are nearest the Pole, have least circuit.
Thou who art so near God, need'st not wander about this world, but should
live as one whose hope and happiness is in a better world. When one was asked
whether he did not admire the admirable structure of some stately building: No
(says he) for I have been at Rome where better are to be seen every day. If
the world tempt thee with its rare sights, and curious prospects, thou may
well scorn them, having been in Heaven, and being able by Faith to see
infinitely better every hour of the day; but if upon examination it be found
that God is not thy portion, think of it seriously, thou art but a beggar; and
if thou die in this estate, shall be so for ever. It may be thou art worth
thousands in this world, but alas they stand for ciphers in the other world;
how little will thy bags of silver in thy chest be worth, when thou enterest
into thy Coffin! It is reported of Musculus, that when he lay upon his
deathbed and many of his friends came to see him, and bewaild the poverty such
an eminent Minister of Christ was brought to, one of them said, O quid sumus!
Musculus overheard him and cried out Fumus. When thou come to die, the whole
world will be but air and smoke in thine own account. What (man) will thou do?
whither will thou go? the God that thou will cry to in distress, weep, and
sob, and sigh to at death, is none of thy God. Thou rejectest him now, and
can thou think that he will affect the then, either make a new choice, or
thou can never enter into peace.

CHAP. XVII. An Exhortation to Men, to choose God for their portion.
THe third use which I shall make of this doctrine, shall be by way of
Exhortation. 3. Use, choose God for thy Portion.
If the comfort of a Christian in his saddest condition be this, that God is
his portion; let me then persuade thee Reader, to chose God for thy portion. I
look on thee as rational, and accordingly shall treat thee in this use, not
doubting, but if reason may be judge, I shall prevail with thee to repent of
thy former, and resolve on a new choice. Thou art one who have chosen the world
for thy portion; but have thou not read what a poor, what a pitiful, what a
piercing, what a perishing portion it is? why then do thou spend thy strength
for what is not bread, and thy labor for what will not satisfy. Hearken to me
and eat that which is good; and let thy soul delight it self in fatness. I
offer thee this day a portion worthy of thy choicest affections, a portion that
if thou acceptest, the richest Emperors will be but beggars to thee, a portion
which contains more wealth then Heaven and Earth; nay ten thousand worlds are
nothing in comparison of this portion. If a man should offer thee a bagg of
gold, and a bagg of counters; a bagg of pearls, and a bagg of sand; which
would thou choose? surely the former. The world in comparison of God is
infinitely less then brass to gold, or sand to pearls, and will thou not
choose him for thy portion? Did thou never laugh at Children for their folly,
in choosing rattles, and babies, before things of much greater worth. And art
thou not a bigger child, and a greater fool to choose husks before bread, a
mess of pottage before the birthright, the blessing! to choose a seeming fancy,
before real felicities! a little honor (which is but a farthing candle that
children can puff out with one breath, and blow in with another blast) before
the exceeding and eternal weight of glory! to choose broken Cisterns before a
fountain of living waters, dirt before Diamonds, vanity before solidity, drops
before the Ocean, and nothing before all things! Man, where is thy reason!
Samuel said to Saul, Set not thine heart on asses; for is not the desire of all
Israel to thee? Friend, why should thou set thy heart on asses, or thy
flock, or shop, or any treasure, when thou have the desire of all Nations to
set thine heart upon? As Christ said to the woman of Canaan, If thou knew
the gift of God, and who is that speaks to thee, thou would ask of him,
and he would give thee living water. John 4.10. So say I to thee, If thou
knew the blessed God, and who it is, that is offered to thee (the sweetest
love, the richest mercy, the surest friend, the chiefest good, the greatest
beauty, the highest honor, and the fullest happiness) thou would leave the
colliers of this world, to load themselves with thick clay, and turn Merchant
Adventurer for the other world; thou would more willingly leave these frothy
joys and drossie delights for the enjoyment of God, then ever prisoner did the
fetters, and bondage, and misery of a goal, for the liberty, and pleasures, and
preferments of a Court. Austin speaks of a time when he and his mother were
discoursing together of the comforts of the Spirit: Lord, says he, thou
know in that day how wisely we did esteem of the world, and all its
delights. O Reader, could thou but see the vastness, the sutableness, and the
fullness of this portion, I am confident thou would suffer the natives, the
men of this world, Psalm. 17.14. to mind the commodities which are of the growth
of their own Country, and would fetch thy riches (as the good housewife her
food) from far.

The cause of thy wrong choice (I mean, thy taking the world all this while for
thy portion) is thy ignorance of the worth and excellency of this object which
I am offering to thee. It Is in the dark that men grope so much about present
things, 2 Pet. 1.9. Knowing persons prefer wisdom before silver, before choice
gold, nay before rubies, Prove. 3.14, 15. Every one will sell his heart to that
chapman which bids most: now the Devil he courts man for his soul with the
brutish pleasures of sin: the world wooeth for the heart with its proffer of
treasures and honors, which like it self are vain, vexatious and perishing:
God comes, and he offers for the heart, the precious blood of his Son, the
curious embroydery of his Spirit, the noble employment and honorable
preferment of Angels, fullness of joy, and infiniteness of satisfaction, in the
fruition of his blessed self to all eternity. Now what is the reason that the
Devils money is accepted, and the worlds offer embraced, and Gods tender (which
is farther superior to theirs, then the glorious heavens where the King of
Saints keeps his Court, and shows all his State, and Royalty, and
Magnificence, is to a stinking dunghill) should be rejected? Truly nothing but
this, Men know not the worth of what God bids them for their wares. The
money which the devil and world offer are their own country coin, and a little
of this they sooner take because they know it, then much more of another
Nations, the value of which they do not understand. Swine trample on Pearls
because they know not the worth of them. None look off the world, but they that
can look beyond it.

The Turtle, says the Philosopher, brings forth her young blind. The most
quick-sighted Christian brings forth blind children; now they not being able to
see afar off into the other world, prefer these poor things, which they may
have in present possession, before these unsearchable riches which are offered
them in reversion. Hence it is also, that the Devil (as the Raven when he
seizes the carcass) as soon as he lays hold on any person, Prove. 33.17. 2
Cor. 4.4
the first thing he does is to peck out his eyes, knowing, that as soon as they
come to see the blessed God, and the happiness which is to be enjoyed in him,
they will quickly turn their backs on these shadows, and face about toward
this eternal substance. O how dull would the worlds common glass be in his
eye, who had once beheld the true Crystal! The loadstone of earth will not
draw man's affections whilst this Diamond of heaven is in presence. When Moses
had once seen him that was invisible, how low did the price of the honors, and
treasures, and pleasures of Egypt fall in his judgment! Knowledge is by one
well expressed to be Appetites taster; for as he that has eaten sweetmeats
cannot relish the strongest beer; so he that has fed on the heavenly banquet,
cannot savor any thing else.

A man that is born in a dark dungeon, and there continues a long time, when
he comes, after twelve or fourteen years to see a candle, he wonders at the
excellency of that Creature; what delight will he take in beholding it, and
enquiring into the nature of it? But bring this man afterward into the open
air, and let him behold the glorious Sun, his admiration of the candle will
cease, and all his wonder will be at the beauty and glory of this great
Luminary of the World. Every man is naturally in darkness: hence it is, that
when he comes to behold the candles of creature comforts, he is so ravished and
taken with them: but let him once come to see the Sun of righteousness, the
Alsufficient and Eternal God, he despises those glimmering rushes, and all his
wondering is at the excellency and perfections of this Glorious being. That
which was glorious before, has now no glory in comparison of this glory that
excels. All things are small and little in his eye, who has once had a
sight of the great God. The great Cities of Campania are but small cottages to
them who stand on the top of the Alps.

Philosophers observe, that lumen est vehiculum influentiae: Light is the
convoy of heat. Certain it is, Reader, that this light of knowledge would
quickly cause heat in thy affections. Could thou but see God with an eye of
faith, thine eye would so affect thine heart, that (as some, who have beheld
Mahomets Tomb, have put out their eyes, least they should be defiled with
common objects after they have been blessed with so rare a sight) thou would
shut thine eyes at those gilded poisons, and wink ever after on those specious
nothings. Could thou see this God as he is visible in the glass of the
Creatures; Could thou compass the earth which he has made, the several
Islands and Continents which are in it; Could thou, like the Sun, so surround
it, as to see all the Nations in it, their several languages, carriages,
customs, their number, order, natures, and the creatures in every Kingdom and
Country; the various plants, birds, minerals, beasts, and savage inhabitants in
wildernesses, their multiplicity, variety, dispositions, subordination, and
serviceableness each to other, and all that concerns them; what thoughts
would thou then have of this God for a portion? Could thou behold at one
view the vast Ocean, discern the motion of the huge waters, in the cause of its
ebbing and flowing, all the storms and tempests which are there raised, and
all the persons and goods which have been there ruined. Could thou see how
those proud waves are laid with a word; how when they swell and rage, it is but
Peace, be still, Matthew. 8 (as a mother will hush her crying Infant) and all is
quiet! how they are kept in with bars and doors, and for all their anger and
power cannot go beyond their decreed place: Could thou dive into it, and see
the many wonders that are in that great deep, the vast riches which are
buried there out of the sight of covetons mortals: the Leviathan, whose teeth
are terrible round about him, whose scal^s are his pride, shut up together as
with a close seal; by whose neesings a light does shine, and whose eyes are the
eyelids of the morning; whose breath kindles coals, and a flame goes out of
his mouth; who esteems iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood; who makes
the deep to boil like a pot, and the sea like a pot of ointment? Could thou
behold the innumerable fish, both small and great, that are there; Good Lord,
what would thou think of having the Author and Commander of the Earth and
Ocean for thy portion? Could thou ascend up to the sky and fully perceive
the beauty, glory, nature, and order of that heavenly host, how they march in
rank and file, come forth when called in their several courses; know the time
of their rising and setting; could thou know the Sun perfectly in his
noonday dress, and what influences those higher Orbs have on inferior
bodies; what would thou then give to enjoy him who gave them their beings,
who appoints them their motions, who knows the number of the stars, and who
calls them all by their names, for thy portion? But Oh! were it possible for
thee to hold aside the vail and look into the holy of holies, to mount up to
the highest heavens, and see the royal palace of this Great King, the stately
Court which he there keeps, the noble entertainment which he there gives to his
Friends and Children; Could thou know the satisfying joy, the ravishing
delight, and the unconceivable pleasure which the spirits of just men made
perfect have in his favor and fruition; Could thou see him as he is there
visible (like a pure sweet light sparkling through a christal-lanthorn) in the
glorified Redeemer, and know him as thou art known of him; then, then, Reader,
what would thou think of this God for a portion? what poor apprehensions
would thou have of that beggarly portion which thou now admirest? what dung,
what dogs-meat would the world be to thee in comparison of this God? As
Alexander, when he heard of the Indies, and the riches there, divided the
Kingdom of Macedonia amongst his Captains; so thou would leave the swine of
the earth to wallow in the mire of brutish comforts, the foolish children of
disobedience to paddle in the gutter of sensual waters: and would desire that
thy portion might be amongst Gods Children, and thy heritage amongst his chosen
ones: Then, then, Friend, all thy love would be too little, and no labor too
great (would thou think) for such a peerless and inestimable portion. How
willingly should the Ziba's of the world take all, so thy Lord and King would
but come into thy soul in peace! How earnestly, how eagerly would thou cry
with Moses (after he had known somewhat of Canaan) O Lord God, thou have begun
to show thy servant thy greatness and thy mighty hand: for what God is there in
heaven or in earth that can do according to thy works, and according to thy
might? I pray thee, let me go over and see the good land that is beyond Jordan,
that goodly mountain, and Lebanon. Lord, though others be put off with common
bounty, let me partake of special mercy; though they feed on husks, give me
this bread of life. Let me not for this whole world have my portion in this
world, but be thou the portion of my cup, do thou maintain my lot; whatsoever
thou deny to me, or howsoever thou deal with me, give me thy self and I shall
have enough. Though strangers and enemies to thee scramble for the good things
which thou scatterest here below, and desire no more, yet let me see the
felicity of thy chosen, rejoice with the gladness of thy nation, and glory with
thine inheritance. O Friend, it is eternal life to know this only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom he has sent, John 17.3.

Were I able to set this God forth in the thousandth part of that grace and
glory wherewith he is clothed, as with a garment; could I present him to thee
in any degree suitable to his vast perfections, and give thee eyes to behold
him, it were impossible but that thou should choose him for thy portion: but
Alas, all the Angels in heaven cannot draw him at length: surely then we who
are clogged so much with flesh, know less of this Father of Spirits. Simonsdes
being asked by Hiero, What God was? required some time to consider of it, and as
much more at the end of that time, and double at the end of that: Of which
delay Hiero asked a reason; he answered, Quo magis inquiro, eo minus invenio;
The farther I search, the more I am at a loss. There can be no finding God
out, there being no equal proportion between the faculty and the object: If I
had been in heaven and seen him face to face, I should know him to my
perfection, but could not know him to his perfections: But suppose I had been
there, and seen those infinite beauties and glories, according to the utmost of
my capacity, yet my tongue would not be able to tell it thee, nor thine ears
to hear it. O what an unspeakable loss am I at, now I am speaking of this
infinite God! my thoughts run into a labyrinth; I am as a little cock-boat
floating on the Ocean, or as an infant offering to reach the Sun: My
meditations please me exceedingly; (O how sweet is this subject) I could dwell
in this hive of honey and happiness (Lord let me) whilst I have a being. How
pleasant are thy thoughts to me, O God, thou true Paradise of all pleasure,
thou living Fountain of felicity, thou original and exact pattern of all
perfections! how comely is thy face, how lovely is thy voice! While I behold
(though but a little) of thy beauty and glory, my heart is filled with marrow
and fatness, and my mouth praises thee with joyful lips. My soul follows
hard after thee: O when shall I come and appear before thee! When will thou
come to me, or when rather will that blessed time come that I shall be taken up
to thee! Sinners miss thee walking in the mist of ignorance: Ah did they know
thee, they would never crucify the Lord of glory! When they come once into
that blackness of darkness, where they shall have light enough to see how good
thou art in thy self, and in thy Son to immortal souls, and to see their misery
in the loss of an eternal blessed life; how will they tear their hairs, and
bite their flesh, and cut their hearts with anguish and sorrow for their cruel
folly and damnable desperate madness in refusing so incomparable and
inestimable a portion! Saints bless themselves in thee, and rather pity then
envy the greatest Potentates, who want thee for their portion; having not seen
thee, they love thee, and in whom, though now they see thee not, yet believing
they rejoice, with joy unspeakable and full of glory.

But Reader, Whither do I wander! I confess I am a little out of my way: but
I wish (as Austin, when preaching, forgot his subject he was upon, and fell to
confute the Manichees, by which means Firmus, at that time his Auditor, was
converted so) that my going a few paces astray may be instrumental to bring
thee home. What shall I say unto thee, or wherewith shall I persuade thee?
Could I by my prayer move God to open thine eyes (as the Prophet did for his
servant, 2 Kings 4.) to see the worth and worthiness, the love and loveliness
of this portion, thou should not an hour longer be alienated from the life of
God, through the ignorance that is in thee. But be of good comfort: Read on, he
that made the seeing eye, is willing to open the eyes of the blind, and thou
may possibly, before thou art come to the end of the book, meet with that
eye salve of the Sanctuary which may do the work.

What I have farther to offer to thee in relation to this choice, shall be to
encourage thee to it by four properties of this portion. In the handling of
which, I shall put the world in one scale, with all its mines of gold, and
allow them as many grains as can be allowed them, and put this One God in the
other scale, and then leave thy own reason to judge which scale is most weighty.

CHAP XVIII. God is a satisfying and a sanctifying portion.
Motives to choose God for our port^on. God is satisfying.
FIrst, God is a satisfying portion. The things of this world may surfeit a man,
but they can never satisfy him. Most men have too much, but no man has
enough: As ships they have that burden which sinks them, when they have room
to hold more. He that loves silver is not satisfied with silver, nor he that
loves gold with increase, Eccles. 1. Worldlings are like the Parthians, the
more they drink, the more they thirst. As the melancholy Chemist, they work
eagerly to find the Philosophers stone, rest and happiness in it, though they
have experience of its vanity, and it has already brought them to beggary. The
world cannot satisfy the senses, much less the soul: The eye is not satisfied
with seeing, nor the ear with hearing.

As the Apes in the story, finding a Gloworm in a frosty night, took it for a
spark of fire, gathered some sticks, and leaped on it, expecting to be warmed
by it, but all in vain: so men think to find warmth and satisfaction in
creatures, but they are as the clothes to David, when stricken in years,
(though covered with them) not able to give any heat. Where shall contentment
be found, and where is the place of satisfaction? The depth says, It is not in
me: and the earth says, It is not in me: nay heaven it self, were God out of
it, would say, It is not in me.

Reader, thou longest for the things of this world, and think, could thou
have but a table full of such dishes, thou should feed heartily, and fill thy
self: but do thou not know they are like the meat which sick men cry so much
for, that when brought to them, they can taste of (possibly) but not at all
fill themselves with. The pond of the creature has so much mud at the bottom,
that none can have a full draught. The Sun and Moon seem bigger at first
rising, then when they come to be over our heads. All outward things are great
in expectation, but nothing in fruition. The world promises as much, and
performs as little as the Tomb of Semiramis: When she had built a stately
Tomb, she caused this Inscription to be engraven on it; Whatsoever King shall
succeed here and want money, let him open this Tomb, and he shall have enough
to serve his turn: which Darius afterward (wanting money) opened, and instead
of riches found this sharp reproof, Unless thou had been extremely covetous
and greedy of filthy lucre, thou would not have opened the grave of the dead
to seek for money. Thus many run to the world with high hopes, and return with
nothing but blanks: hence it is, that worldlings are said to feed on lies, and
to suck wind from this Strumpets breasts, both which are far from filling,
Hosea 10.13. Hosea. 12.1.

Reader, since the controversy is so great amongst men, whether rest does not
grow on the furrows of the field, and happiness in the mines of gold; whether
creatures wisely distilled may not have happiness drawn out of them, let us
hear the judgment of one that enjoyed the world at will, and had prudence
enough to extract the quintessence of it; who was thoroughly furnished with all
variety of requisites for such an undertaking, who did set himself curiously to
anatomize the body of the creation; And what is the result? Vanity of vanities,
all is vanity, says the Preacher. Mark,

1. Vanity in the abstract, not vain, but vanity.

2. Plurality, Vanity of vanities, excessive vanity, all over vanity, nothing
but vanity.

3. Universality, All is vanity: every thing severally, all things
collectively: Riches are vanity, Eccles. 2. Honors are vanity, Pleasures are
vanity, Knowledge is vanity, all is vanity.

4. The verity of all this, says the Preacher; one that speaks not by guess,
or hearsay, but by experience, who had tried the utmost that the creature
could do, and found it to come far short of satisfying man's desire: One that
spoke not only his own opinion, but by divine inspiration; yet the total of the
account which he gives in, after he had reckoned up all the creatures, is
nothing but ciphers, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity, says the Preacher.

Men that are in the valley, think, if they were at the top of such a hill,
they should touch the beavens: Men that are in the bottom of poverty, or
disgrace or pain, think, if they could get up to such a mountain, such a
measure of riches, and honors, and delights, they could reach happiness. Now
Solomon had got to the top of this hill, and seeing so many scrambling and
laboring so hard, nay riding on one another necks, and pressing one another
to death to get foremost, does seem thus to bespeak them; Sirs, ye are all
deceived in your expectations; I see the pains ye take to get up to this place,
thinking, that when you come hither, ye shall touch the heavens, and reach
happiness; but I am before you at the top of the hill, (I have treasures, and
honors, and pleasures in variety and abundance) Eccles. 2.12, 13. and I find
the hill full of quagmires instead of delights, and so far from giving me
satisfaction, that it causes much vexation; therefore be advised to spare your
pains, and spend your strength for that which will turn to more profit: for
believe it, you do but work at the labor in vain; Vanity of vanities, all is
vanity, says the Preacher.

We have weighed the world in the balance and found it lighter then vanity;
let us see what weight God has. David will tell us, though the vessel of the
creature be frozen, that no satisfaction can be drawn thence; yet this Fountain
runs freely to the full content of all true Christians; The Lord is the
portion of my cup, and inheritance; thou maintainest my lot. The former
expression, as I observed before, is an allusion to the custom of dividing
their drink at banquets; the latter to the division of Canaan by lot and line,
Psalm. 78.55. according as the lot fell, was every ones part. Now David's part
and lot fell it seems (like the Levites under the Law) on God; but is he
pleased in his portion, and can he take any delight in his estate? The lines
are fallen to me in a pleasant place; yea I have a goodly heritage Psalm 16.5,
6. As if he had said, No lot ever fell in a better land; my portion happens
in the best place that is possible; my knowledge of thee, and propriety in thee
affords full content and felicity to me. I have enough, and crave no more; I
have all, and can have no more. Though creatures bring in an Ignoramus to that
enquiry concerning satisfaction, yet the Alsufficient God does not.

If it were possible for one man to be crowned with the royal Diadem and
dominion of the whole world, and to enjoy all the treasures, and honors, and
pleasures that all the Kingdoms on earth can yield, if his senses and
understanding were enlarged to the utmost of created capacities, to taste and
take in whatsoever comfort and delight the Universe can give; if he had the
society of glorious Angels and glorified Saints thrown into the bargain, and
might enjoy all this the whole length of the worlds duration; yet without God
would this man in the midst of all this be unsatisfied; (these things, like
dew, might wet the branches, please the flesh, but would leave the root dry,
the spirit discontented) once admit the man to the sight of God, and let God
but possess his heart, and then, and not before, his infinite desires expire in
the bosom of his Maker. Now the weary Dove is at rest, and the vessel tossed up
and down on the waters, is quiet in its haven. There is in the heart of man
such a drought (without this River of Paradise) that all the waters in the
world, though every drop were an Ocean, cannot quench it. O what dry chips are
all creatures to an hungry immortal soul! Lord, says Austine, thou have made
our heart for thee, and it will never rest till it come to thee; A g. Confess.
and when I shall wholly cleave to thee, then my life will be lively.

There are two special faculties in Man's Soul, which must be answered with
suitable and adaequate objects, or the heart (like the sea) cannot rest. The
understanding must be satisfied with truth, and the will with good. For the
filling of these two faculties men are as busy as Bees, flying over the field
of the world, and trying every flower for sweetness; but after all their toil
and labor, house themselves like wasps in curious combs without any honey. The
understanding must be suited with the highest truth; but the world is a lie,
Psalm. 62. and the things thereof are called lying vanities, they are not what
they seem to be. Jonah. 2.8. and hence are unable to satisfy the mind; but God
is aeterna veritas, and vera aeternitas, eternal truth, and true eternity. All
truth is originally in him; his nature is the Idea of truth, and his will the
standard of truth; and its eternal life and utmost satisfaction to know him,
because by it the understanding is perfected; for the Soul in God will see all
truth; and that not only clearly (I speak of the other world where the
Christians happiness shall be completed) face to face, but also fully.
Aristotle though an Heathen, thought happiness to consist in the knowledge of
the chiefest good. If Arichimedes when he found out the resolution of one
question in the Mathematics was so ravished that he ran up and down crying I
have found it, I have found it. How will the Christian be transported when he
shall know all that is knowable, and all shadows of ignorance vanish as the
darkness before the rising Sun. The will also must be suited with good and
according to the degree of goodness in the object, such is the degree of
satisfaction to the faculty. Now the things of this life, though good in
themselves, yet are vain and evil by reason of the sin of man. Romans 8.20. And
likewise are at best but bodily, limited, and fading good things; and therefore
incapable of filling this faculty. As truth in the utmost latitude is the
object of the understanding; so Good in the universality of it is the object of
the will. Further that good which satisfies, must be (optimum) the best, or
twill never (sistere appetitum) the Soul will otherwise be still longing; and
maximum the most perfect, or twill never (implere appetitum) fill it. But God
is such a good, he is essentially, universally, unchangeably, and infinitely
good; and therefore satisfies. When I awake I shall be satisfied with thy
likeness. Psa. 17. ult. When my body has slept in the bed of the grave, till
the morning of the resurrection, and the sound of the last trump shall awaken
me, O the sweet satisfaction and ravishing delight which my Soul shall enjoy in
being full of thy likeness, and thy love! Nay in the mean time before the
happiness of a Saint appear to his view in a full body, it does like the rising
Sun, with its forerunning rays, cast such a lightsome, gladsome brightness upon
the believer, that he is filled with joy at present; and would not part with
his hopes of it for the whole world in hand. They shall be abundantly satisfied
with the fatness of thy house (while on this side Heaven) and thou shall make
them drink of the rivers of thy pleasures. Psalm. 36.8. Though the wedding
dinner be deferd till the wedding day, yet before hand the Christian meets with
many a running banquet. He has not only pleasures, fatness of thy house, but
also plenty of it here below. They shall be abundantly satisfied.

The World is like sharp sauce which does not fill, but provoke the stomach to
call for more; the voice of those guests whom it makes most welcome, is like
the daughters of the horseleech, Give, Give, but the infinite God like solid
food does satisfy the soul fully. (In my Fathers house is bread enough) and
causes it to cry out, I have enough.

Secondly, God is a sanctifying ennobling Portion. 2 God is a sanctifying
portion.
The World cannot advance the Soul in the least; things of the World are fitly
compared to shadows; for be thy shadow never so long, thy body is not the
longer for it; so be thy estate never so great, thy soul is not the better for
it. A great letter makes no more to the signification of a word then the
smallest. Men in high places are the same men (no real worth being thereby
added to them) that they are in low ones.

Nay, its too too visible, that men are the worse for their earthly portions.
If some had not been so wealthy, they had not been so wicked. Most of the
Worlds favorites like aguish stomachs are fuller of appetite then digestion;
they eat more then they can concoct, and thereby cause diseases; nay by feeding
on this trash of earth, their stomachs are taken off from substantial food, the
bread of Heaven. The Soldiers of Hannibal were effeminated, and made unfit for
service by their pleasures at Capua. Damps arising out of the earth, have
stifled many a Soul. A^ist. Probl. se^. 23.
Aristotle tells us of a Sea wherein (by the hollowness of the earth under it,
or some whirling property) ships used to be cast away in the midst of a calm.
Many perish in their greatest prosperity; and are so busy about babies and
rattles, that they have no leisure to be saved, Luke 14.17

That which does elevate and ennoble the Soul of Man, must be more excellent
then the Soul. Silver is embased by mixing it with lead, but ennobled by gold,
because the former is inferior to it, but the latter excells it. The World and
all things in it are infinitely inferior to the Soul of Man; and therefore it
is debased by mingling with them; but God is infinitely superior, and so
advances it by joining with it. That coin which is the most excellent metal,
defiles our hands; and is apt to defile our hearts; but the divine nature
elevateth and purifieth the Spirit.

The goodliest portions of this life, are like the Cities which Solomon gave to
Hiram. And Hiram came from Tire to see the Cities which Solomon had given him;
and they pleased him not. And he said, What Cities are these which thou have
given me my brother! and he called them the land of Cabul (that is displeasing
or dirty) unto this day. 1 Kings 9.12, 13. The pleasantest portion here lies
in the land of Cabul, its displeasing and dirty; it does both dissatisfy and
defile, when the heavenly portion does like honey both delight and cleanse; both
please and purify.

Outward things (like common stones to a ring) add nothing at all to the worth
of a Soul; but this sparking Diamond, this pearl of price, the infinite God
makes the gold ring of the Soul to be of unspeakable value. The heart of the
wicked is little worth. Pro. 10.20. His house is worth somewhat, but his heart
is worth nothing, because its a ditch full only of dirt; his earthly portion
has possession of it; but the heart of a godly man is worth millions, because
its the Cabinet where this inestimable jewel is laid up. The righteous is more
excellent then his neighbor (Pro. 12.26.) because he partaketh of the divine
nature. God like gold enricheth whatsoever he is joined to; hence it is that
things which excel, in Scripture are usually said to be things of God, as the
garden of God. Ezekiel. 28.13. The hill of God. Ps, 61.15. The mountains of God.
Ps, 36.6. a city of God. Jonah 3.3. the cedars of God. Ps. 80.10. That is, the
most excellent garden, hill, mountain, city and cedars. God is the perfection
of thy Soul; and therefore would (if thy portion) advance it to purpose. O what
an height of honor and happiness would thou arrive at, if this God were
thine! Now like a worm thou crawlest on, and dwell in the earth, the meanest
and basest of all the Elements, that which brutes trample under their feet; but
then like an Eagle thou would mount up to Heaven, contemning these toys, and
leaving those babies for children, and as an Angel always stand in the
presence of, and enjoy inspeakable pleasure in him, who is thy portion. Thy
life at present is low, little differing from the life of a beast, consisting
chiefly in making provision for (that which should be thy slave) the flesh, but
thy life then would be high and noble, much resembling the lives of those
honorable Courtiers, whose continual practice is to adore and admire the
blessed and only Potentate.

Do thou not find by experience that earthly things obstruct holiness, and
thereby hinder thy Souls happiness! Alas the best of them are but like the
wings of a butterfly, which though curiously painted, foul the fingers; but if
thine heart had but once closed with God as thy portion, it would be every day
more pure, and nearer to perfection. Thou have (it may be) gold and silver;
why, the Midianites camels had chains of gold, and were they ever the better?
Judge. 8.26. Many Brutes have had silver bells; but their natures brutish still;
but O the excellency which God would add to thy Soul, by bestowing on it his
own likeness and love!

CHAP. XIX. God an universal and eternal portion.
3. G^d a perfect or univ^^sal portion. Opera^i seq^t^r esse.
THirdly, God is a universal portion; God has in himself eminently and
infinitely all good things; and Creatures are bounded in their beings, and
therefore in the comfort which they yield. Health answers sickness, but it
does not answer poverty. Honor is an help against disgrace, but not against
pain; Money is the most universal medicines: and therefore is said to answer
all things, but as great a Monarch as it is, it can neither command ease in
sickness, nor honors in disgrace, much less quiet a wounded spirit. At best
Creatures are but particular beings, and so but particular blessings. Now man
being a compound of many wants and weaknesses, can never be happy till he find
a salve for every sore; and a remedy which bears proportion as well to the
number as nature of his maladies. Ahab though in his Ivory Palace, upon his
Throne of glory, attended with his noble Lords, and swaying a large Scepter,
was miserable because the heavens were brass. Haman though he had the favor of
the Prince, the adoration of the people, the sway of 127. Provinces, yet is
discontented because he wanted Mordecai's knee. If the worlds darlings enjoy
many good things, yet they (as Christ told the young man) always lack one
thing which makes them at a loss.

But God is all good things, and every good thing; he is self-sufficient,
alone-sufficient, and all-sufficient; nothing is wanting in him, either for the
Souls protection from all evil, or perfection with all good. Reader, if God
were thy portion, thou should find in him whatsoever thine heart could
desire, and whatsoever could tend to thy happiness. Art thou ambitious? he is a
crown of Glory, and a royal Diadem. Art thou covetous? he is unsearchable
riches, yea durable riches and righteousness. Art thou voluptuous? He is rivers
of pleasures, and fullness of joy. Art thou hungry? He is a feast of wine on the
lees, of fat things full of marrow. Art thou weary? He is rest, a shadow from
the heat, and a shelter from the storm. Art thou weak? In the Lord Jehovah is
everlasting strength. Art thou in doubts? he is mavelous in counsel. Art
thou in darkness? He is the Sun of righteousness, an eternal light. Art thou
sick? He is the God of thy health. Art thou sorrowful? He is the God of all
consolations. Art thou dying? He is the fountain and Lord of life. Art thou in
any distress? His name is a strong tower; thither thou may run and find
safety. He is (...), an universal Medicine against all sorts of miseries.
Whatsoever thy calamity is, he could remove it; whatsoever thy necessity, he
could relieve it. He is silver, gold, honor, delight, food, raiment, house,
land, peace, wisdom, power, beauty, father, mother, wife, husband, mercy,
love, grace, glory, and infinitely more then all these. God and all his
creatures are no more then God without any of his creatures. Quid quaeris extra
illum? quid desideras praeter illum? quid pl^cet cum illo? Bern. sermon. de
misce. com
As the Jews say of Manna, that it had all sorts of delicate tastes in it, it
is most true of God; he has all sorts of delights in him. This tree of life
bears twelve manner of fruits ( Revel. 22.2.) every month. There is in it
both variety and plenty of comforts. The former prevents our loathing, the
latter our lacking.

One being desirous to see the famous City of Athens, was told, Viso Solone
vidisti omnia, see but Solon, and in him you may see all the rarities and
excellencies in it. Reader, would thou see all the wealth and worth of sea
and land? would thou be upon the pinnacle of the Temple (as Christ was) and
behold, and have the offer of all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of
them? nay, would thou view heavens glorious City, the royal Palace of the
Great King, the costly curious workmanship about it, and the unheard of
rarities and delights in that Court, which infinite embroydered Wisdom
contrived, boundless Power and Love erected, and infinite Bounty enriched! thou
may both see and enjoy all this in God; See but God, and thou see all;
enjoy but God, and thou enjoyest all in him.

As a Merchant in London may trade for, and fetch in, the Horses of Barbary,
the Canary Sacks, the French Wines, the Spanish Sweetmeats, the Oils of
Candie, the Spices of Egypt, the artificial Wares of Alexandria, the Silks of
Persia, the Embroyderies of Turkey, the Golden-wedges of India, the Emeraulds
of Scythia, the Topazes of Aethiopia, and the Diamonds of Bisnager; so might
thou (were but this God thy portion) fetch in the finest bread to feed thee,
the choicest wine to comfort thee, oil to cheer thee, joy to refresh thee,
raiment to cloth thee, the jewels of grace to beautify thee, and the crown of
glory to make thee blessed, nay all the wealth of this and the other world. If
all the riches in the Covenant of Grace, if all the good things which Christ
purchased with his precious blood; nay if as much good as is in an infinite God
can make thee happy, thou should have it. If David were thought worth ten
thousand Israelites, how much is the God of Israel worth?

This one God would fill up thy soul in its utmost capacity; it is such an end,
that when thou attainest thou could go no further, should desire no more,
but quietly rest for ever. The necessity of the creatures number speaks the
meanness of their value, but the universality of good in this one God,
proclaims his infinite worth. As there are all parts of speech in that one
verse, Vae tibi ridenti, quia mox post gaudia flebis: So there are all
perfections in this one God. What a portion is this Friend?

Fourthly, God is an eternal Portion: 4. God is an eternal po^tion.
The pleasures of sin are but for a season (a little inch of time, a (...), a
season is a very short space, Hebr. 11.) but the portion of a Saint is for
ever: God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. The greatest
estate here below is a flood soon up and soon down; but if God once say to thy
soul as to Aarons, I am thine inheritance (Numb. 18.20.) neither men nor devils
can cozen thee of it. The Lord knows the days of the upright, and their
inheritance shall be for ever, Psalm. 37.18.

The Prodigal wasted his portion, and so came to poverty; the Glutton
swalloweth down his portion, burying it in his belly; the Drunkard vomiteth up
his portion; the ambitious person often turns his portion into smoke, and it
vanishes in the air; those whose portion continues longest, will be turned
out of possession, when Death once comes with a Writ from Heaven to seal a
Lease of ejectment; for all these portions are dying gourds, deceitful brooks,
and flying shadows. But ah! how contrary hereunto is the portion of a believer!
God is an eternal portion. If he were once thy portion, he would be for ever
thy portion: When thy estate, and children, and wife, and honors, and all
earthly things should be taken from thee: He is the good part which shall never
be taken from thee, Luke 10. ult. Thy Friends may use thee as a suit of
apparel, which when they have worn thredbare they throw off, and call for new:
thy Relations may serve thee as women their flowers, who stick them in their
bosoms when fresh and flourishing; but when dying and withered, they throw
them to the dunghill; thy riches, and honors, and pleasures, and wife, and
children, may stand on the shore and see thee lanching into the Ocean of
Eternity, but will not step one foot into the water after thee; thou may sink
or swim for them; only this God is thy portion, will never leave thee nor
forsake thee, Hebr. 13.5. O how happy would thou be in having such a friend!
Thy portion would be tied to thee in this life, as Dionysius thought his
kingdom was to him, with chains of Adamant; there would be no severing it from
thee. The world could not; thou should live above the world whilst thou
walk about it, and behave thy self in it not as its champion but conqueror;
He that is born of God, overcomes the world, 1 John 5.9. Satan should not part
thee and thy portion; thy God has him in his chain; and though, like a
Mastiffe without teeth, he may bark, yet he can never bite or hurt his
children: I have written unto you young men, because ye have overcome the
wicked one, 1 John 2.13. Nay it should not be in thine own power to sell away
thy portion; thou would be a joint heir with Christ; and coheirs cannot
sell, except both join; and Christ knows the worth of this inheritance too
well to part with it for all that this beggarly world can give. Romans 8.17. The
Apostle makes a challenge, which men nor devils could never accept or take up;
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress,
or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or sword? nay in all these things we
are more then conquerours through him that loves us, Romans 8.35, 36, 37, 38.
Nay, at death thy portion would swim out with thee in that shipwreck: death,
which parts all other portions from men, will give thee full possession of
thine: Then, and not till then, thou should know what it is worth; yea even
at the great day, the fire which shall burn up the world, shall not so much as
singe thy portion; thou might stand upon its ruins and sing, I have lost
nothing, I have my portion, my inheritance, my happiness, my God still.

Other portions, like summer-fruit, are soon ripe, and soon rotten; but this
portion, like winter fruit, though it be longer before the whole be gathered,
yet it will continue. Gold and silver, in which other men's portion lies, are
corruptible; but thy portion, like the body of Christ, shall never see
corruption.

When all earthly portions, as meat over-driven, certainly corrupts; or as
water in cisterns quickly grows unsavory: this portion, like the water in
Aesculapius his well, is not capable of putrefaction.

O Friend, what are all the portions in the world (which, as a candle, consume
in the use, and then go out in a stink) to this eternal portion! It is reported
of one Theodorus, that when there was music and feasting in his Fathers house,
withdrew himself from all the company, and thus thought with himself, Here is
content enough for the flesh; but how long will this last? this will not hold
out long: then falling on his knees, O Lord, my heart is open unto thee. I
indeed know not what to ask but only this, Lord, let me not die eternally: O
Lord, thou know I love thee, O let me live eternally to praise thee. I must
tell thee, Reader, to be eternally happy, or eternally miserable; to live
eternally, or to die eternally, are of greater weight then thou art aware of;
yea of far more concernment then thou can conceive: Ponder this motive
therefore thoroughly. God is not only a satisfying portion, filling every crevis
of thy soul with the light of joy and comfort, and a sanctifying portion
elevating thy soul to its primitive and original perfection, and an universal
portion; not health, or wealth, or friends, or honors, or liberty, or life, or
house, or wife, or child, or pardon, or peace, or grace, or glory, or earth,
or heaven, but all these and infin^tely more; but also he is an eternal
portion. This God would be thy God for ever and ever, Psalm. 48.11. O sweet word
Ever! thou art the crown of the Saints crown, and the glory of their glory;
their portion is so full, that they desire no more; they enjoy variety and
plenty of delights above what they are able to ask or think, and want nothing,
but to have it fixed; may they but possess it in peace without interruption or
cessation, they will trample all the Kingdoms of the earth as dirt under their
feet; and lo thou art the welcome Dove to bring this olive branch in thy
mouth, This God is our God for ever and ever. All the Arithmetical figures of
days, and months, and years, and ages, are nothing to this infinite Cipher,
ever, which though it stand for nothing in the vulgar account, yet contains all
our millions; yea our millions and millions of millions are less then drops to
this Ocean Ever.

If all the pleasures of the whole creation cannot countervail the fruition of
God, though but for one moment, how happy should thou be to enjoy him for
ever! If the first fruits and foretasts of the Christians felicity be so
ravishing, what will the harvest be? Friend, little do thou think what
crowns, scepters, palms, thrones, kingdoms, glories, beauties, banquets,
angelical entertainments, beatifical visions, societies, varieties, and
eternities are prepared for them who choose God for their portion. If the Saints
cross in the judgment of Moses (when at age, and able to make a true estimate
of things) were more worth then all the treasures of Egypt (and he chose it
rather) what is the Saints crown, eternal crown worth?

To conclude this Use, Reader, take a serious view of this portion which is
here tendered to thee, and consider upon what easy terms it may be thine for
ever. The portion is no less then the infinite God; Behold the nations are as
a drop of the bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the balance; all
nations before him are as nothing, and they are counted to him less then
nothing and vanity, Isai. 40.15, 17. Other portions are bodily; he is
spiritual, and so suitable to thy soul. Other portions are mixed, like the
Israelites pillar, which had a dark as well as a light side; but he is pure;
there is not the least spot in this Sun; he is a sea of sweetness without the
smallest drop of gall. Other portions are particular; there are some chinks in
the outward man which they cannot fill, besides the many leaks of the soul,
none of which they can stop; but he is an universal portion. All the
excellencies of the creatures, even when their dregs and imperfections are
removed, are but dark shadows of those many substantial excellencies which are
in him; He made all, he has all, he is all; the most fluent tongue will
quickly be at a loss in extolling him, for he is above all blessing and
praises. Other portions are debasing, like dross to gold, an allay to its
worth: but he is an advancing portion, as a set of Diamonds to a royal Crown,
infinitely adding to its value. Other portions are perishing; they may be lost,
they will be left when death calls; thy cloth will be then drawn, and not one
dish remain on the table; but he is an everlasting portion; the souls that
feast with him (like Mephibosheth at David's) eat bread at his table
continually; In his presence is fullness of joy, and at his right hand are
pleasures for evermore. Now is not here infinite reason why thou should
choose this God for thy portion?

Consider the terms upon which he is willing to be thy portion; he desires no
more then thou would take him for thy treasure and happiness. Surely such a
portion is worthy of all acceptance. Be thy own Judge; may not God expect, and
does he not deserve as much respect as thine earthly portion has had? Can thy
esteem of him be too high, or thy love to him be too hot, or thy labor for him
too great? O what warm embraces have thou given the world? throw that strumpet
now out of thine arms, and take the fairest of ten thousand in her room. What
high thoughts have thou had of the world? what would thou not formerly do or
suffer to gain a little more of it? Now pull down that Usurper out of the
throne, and set the King of Saints there, whose place it is; esteem him
superlatively above all things, and make it thy business, whatsoever he call
thee to do or suffer, to gain his love, which is infinitely better then life it
self. Do but exalt him in thy heart as thy chiefest good, and in thy life as
thine utmost end, and he will make a deed of gift of himself to thee. Is it not
rational what he desires? why should thou then refuse? Here is God, there is
the world; here is bread, there is husks; here is the substance, there is a
shadow; here is Paradise, there is an apple; here is fullness, there is
emptiness; here is a fountain, there is a broken cistern; here is all things,
there is nothing; here is heaven, there is hell; here is eternity, I say,
eternity of joy and pleasure; here is eternity, O that word eternity, of sorrow
and pain; choose now which of the two thou will take, and advise with thy self
what word I shall bring again to him that sent me, 1 Chronicles. 21.12.

CHAP XX. Comfort to such as have God for their portion.
FOurthly, The Doctrine may be useful by way of Consolation: It speaks much
comfort to every true Christian; God is thy portion; thy portion is not in
toys and trifles, in narrow limited Creatures, but in the blessed boundless
God: He cannot be poor who has my Lord Mayor to his Friend, much less he that
has God to his portion: A portion so precious and perfect, that none of the
greatest Arithmeticians ever undertook to compute its worth, as knowing it
impossible; a portion so permanent, that neither death, nor life, nor the
world, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
can part thee from it. This cordial may enliven thee in a dying estate. None
can part thee and thy portion. The winter may freeze the ponds, but not the
Ocean. All other portions may be frozen and useless in hard weather, but this
portion is ever full and filling. Hagar, when her bottle of water was spent,
wept because she did not see the fountain that was so near her. The absence of
the creatures need not make thee mourn, who have the presence of the Creator.

Thou may have comfort from thy portion in the most afflicted condition. Do
men plunder thee of thy estate? thou art rich toward God, and may suffer the
spoiling of thy goods joyfully, knowing that thou have a more enduring
substance, Hebr. 10.34. Do they cast thee into prison? though thy body be in
fetters, thy soul enjoys freedom; no chains can so fasten thee to the earth,
but thou may mount up to heaven upon the wings of meditation and prayer. Do
they take away thy food? thou have meat to eat which they know not of, and wine
to drink which makes glad the heart of man, Isai. 32.24. Is thy body sick? thy
soul is sound, and so long all is well; The inhabitants shall not say, I am
sick; the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquities. Is thy
life in danger? If thine enemies kill thee, they cannot hurt thee; they will do
thee the greatest courtesy; they will do that kindness for thee, for which
thou have many a time prayed, sighed, wept; even free thee from thy
corruptions, and send thee to the beatifical vision. When they call thee out to
die, they do but (as Christ to Peter) call thee up to the Mount, where thou
shall see thy Savior transfigured, and say, Let us build Tabernacles; O it is
good to be here. Though Saul was frantic without a Fiddler, and Belshazar,
could not be cheerful without his cups, yet the Philosopher could be merry
(says Plato) without music, and much more the Christian under the greatest
outward misery. What weight can sink him who has the everlasting arms to
support him? What want can sadden him who has infinite bounty and mercy to
supply him? Nothing can make him miserable who has God for his happiness.
Blessed is the people whose God is the Lord. O Christian, thou may walk so,
that the world may know, thou art above their affrightments, and that all their
allurements are below thy hopes.

In particular, the Doctrine is comfortable against the Death of our Christian
Friends, and against our own deaths.
First, It is a comfort against the death of our friends. God is a godly man's
portion, therefore they are blessed who die in the Lord without us; and we are
happy who live in the Lord without them.

Its a comfort that they are happy without creatures; what wise man will grieve
at his friends gain? In the ceremonial law there was a year of Jubilee, in which
every man who had lost or sold his land, upon the blowing of a trumpet had
possession again. The deaths-day of thy believing relation is his day of
Jubilee, in which he is restored to the possession of his eternal and
inestimable portion. Who ever pined that married an Heir in his minority, at
his coming to age, and going to receive his portion? Their death is not
paenall, but medicinal; not destructive; but perfective to their Souls. It does
that for them which none of the ordinances of God, nor providence of God, nor
graces of the Spirit ever yet did for them. It sends the weary to their sweet
and eternal rest. This Serpent is turned into a rod with which God works
wonders for their good. The Thracians wept at the births of men, and feasted at
their funerals; if they counted mortality a mercy, who could see death only to
be the end of outward sufferings, shall not we who besides that see it to be
the beginning of matchless and endless solace? A wife may well wring her hands,
and pierce her heart with sorrow, when her Husband is taken away from her, and
dragd to execution, to hell; but surely she may rejoice when he is called from
her by his Prince, to live at Court in the greatest honors and pleasures;
especially when she is promised within a few days to be sent for to him; and to
share with him in those joys and delights for ever.

Some observe that the Egyptians mourned longer (for they mourned 70 days) for
old Jacobs death, then Joseph his own Son; and the reason is this, because they
had hopes only in this life, when Joseph knew that as his fathers body was
carried to the earthly, so his Soul was translated to the heavenly Canaan. I
would not have you ignorant concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow
not even as others that have no hope. 1 These. 4.12.

As they are happy without us, for God is their portion; so we are happy
without them. We have our God still; that stormy wind which blew out our
candles, did not extinguish our Sun; Our Friend when on his or her deathbed,
might bespeak us, as Jacob his Sons. I die but God shall visit you, I go from
you, but God shall abide with you. I leave you, but God will find you, he will
never leave you nor forsake you. Reader, If God live, though thy friends dye, I
hope thou art not lost, thou art not undone. May not God say to thee, when thou
art pining and whining for the death of thy relations or friends, as if thou
were eternally miserable, as Elkanah to Hannah, Am not I better to thee then
ten Sons? Am not I better to thee then ten Husbands, then ten Wives, then ten
thousand worlds? O think of it and take comfort in it.

2. Its comfort against our own deaths.
Secondly, It is comfortable against thy own death. God is thy Portion, and at
death thou shall take possession of thy vast estate. Now thou have a freehold
in law, a right to it; but then thou shall have a freehold in deed, make thy
entry on it, and be really seized of it: Its much that heathens who were
purblind and could not see afar off into the joys and plesures of the other
world (the hopes of which alone can make death truly desirable) should with
less fear meet this foe then many Christians. Nay 'twas more difficult to
persuade several of those Pagans to live out all their days, then it is to
persuade some amonst us to be willing to die when God calls them. Codrus could
throw himself into a pit, Plut. in vit. Vtic. Ca.
that his Country might live by his death. Cato could against the entreaty of
all his friends with his own hands open the door at which his life went out.
Platinus the Philosopher held mortality a mercy, that we might not always be
liable to the miseries of this life. When the Persian King wept that all his
army should die in the revolution of an Age, Artabanus told him, that they
should all meet with so many and such great evils, that they should wish
themselves dead long before. Lysimachus threatened to kill Theodorus, but he
stoutly answered the King, that was no great matter; the Cantharides a little
fly could do as much. Cleombrotus having read Plato of the Souls immortality,
did presently send his own Soul out of his body to try and taste it. The bare
opinion of the Druides that the Soul had a continuance after death made them
hardy in all dangers (says Caesar) and fearless of death. C^s. lib. 6. de bell.
6.


Christians surely have more cause to be valiant in their last conflict; and
its no credit to their Father that they are so loath to go home. The Turks tell
us, that surely Christians do not believe Heaven to be so glorious a place as
they talk of; for if they did, they would not be so unwilling to go thither.
It may make the world think the child has but could welcome at his Fathers
house, that he lingers so much a broad; certainly such bring an ill report upon
the good land.

Christian, what is it in death that thou art afraid of? Is it not a departure,
the Goal delivery of a long prisoner, the sleep of thy body, and a wakening of
thy Soul, the way to bliss, the gate of life, the portall to Paradise? Art thou
not sure to triumph before thou fightest, by dying to overcome death, and when
thou leavest thy body, to be joined to thy head? The Roman general in the
encounter between Scipio and Hannibal, thought he could not use a more
effectual persuasion to encourage his soldiers then to tell them that they
were to fight with those whom they had formerly overcome, and who were as much
their slaves as their enemies. Thou art to enter the list against that
adversary whom thou have long ago conquered in Jesus Christ, and who is more
thy slave then thine enemy. Death is thine, 1 Cor. 3.30. thy servant and slave,
to help off thy clothes, and to put thee to thine everlasting happy rest.

Is it the taking down of thine earthly tabernacle which troubles thee? Why,
Do thou not know that death is the workman sent by the Father to pull down
this earthly house of mortality and clay, that it may be set up a new,
infinitely more lasting, beautiful and glorious? Did thou believe how rich
and splendid he intends to make it (which cannot be unless taken down) thou
would contentedly endure the present toil and trouble, and be thankful to him
for his care and cost. He takes down thy vile body, that he may fashion it like
to the glorious body of his own Son, which for brightness and beauty excels the
Sun in its best attire, far more then that does the meanest Star.

Is it the untying of the knot betwixt body and soul which perplexeth thee? It
is true they part; but as friends going two several ways shake hands till they
return from their journey; they are as sure of meeting again, as of parting;
for thy soul shall return laden with the wealth of heaven, and fetch his old
companion to the participation of all his joy and happiness.

Is it the rotting of thy body in the grave that grieves thee? Indeed Plato's
worldling does sadly bewail it: Woe is me, that I shall lie alone rotting in
the earth amongst the crawling Worms, not seeing ought above, nor seen! But
thou who have read it is a sweet bed of spices for thy body to rest in, all the
dark night of this worlds duration, may well banish such fears. Have thou
never heard God speaking to thee as once to Jacob, Fear not to go down into
(Egypt, into) the grave, I will go down with thee, and I will bring thee up
again. Genesis 16.4.

Besides, thy Soul shall never die. The heathen Historian could comfort himself
against death, with this weak cordial, Non omnis moriar, All of me does not
die; though my body be mortal, my books are immortal. But thou have a stronger
julip, a more rich cordial to clear thy spirits; when thy body fails, thy soul
will flourish; thy death is a burnt offering; when thy ashes fall to the earth,
the celestial flame of thy Soul will mount up to Heaven. Farther, death will
ease thee of those most troublesome guests, which make thy life now so
burdensome; as the fire to the three children, did not so much as singe or sear
their bodies, but it burnt and consumed their bands: so death would not the
least hurt thy body or soul, but it would destroy those fetters of sin and
sorrow, in which thou art entangled: Nazian. Orat.
Besides the sight of the blessed God (which is the only beatifical vision)
which at death thy soul shall enjoy. Popish Pilgrims take tedious journeys, and
are put to much hardship and expense to behold a dumb Idol. The Queen of Sheba
came from far to see Solomon and hear his wisdom; and will thou not take a step
from earth to Heaven (in a moment in the twinkling of an eye, thy journey will
be gone, and thy work be done) to see Jesus Christ a greater then Solomon? Have
thou not many a time prayed long, and cried for it? have thou not trembled
least thou should miss it? has not thine heart once and again leapt with joy
in hope of it? and when the hour is come, and thou art sent for, do thou
shrink back? for shame, Christian, walk worthy of thy calling, and quicken thy
courage in thy last conflict. As the Jews when it thunders and lightens, open
their windows, expecting the Messiah should come: O when the storm of death
beats upon thy body, with what joy may thou set those casements of thy Soul,
Faith and Hope wide open, knowing that thy dearest Redeemer who went before to
prepare a place for thee, will then come and fetch thee to himself, that where
he is, there thou may be also, and that for ever!

FINIS.
Some Scriptures that are occasionally opened.
1 Samuel 30.6. p. 106. 2 Samuel 23.5. p. 64. Ester 7.6. p. 47, 48. Job 7. ult. p.
67. Psalm. 11.6. p. 133. Psalm. 16.5, 6. p. 161. Ps. 17. ult. p. 164. Psalm. 27.5.
p. 111. Psalm. 91.4. p. 112. Psalm. 121.4. p. 110. Psalm. 142.5. p. 110. Eccles.
1.2. p. 160. Eccles. 8.8. p. 34. Eccles. 9.12. p. 136. Isai. 25.10. p. 111.
Isai. 27.11. p. 111. Isai. 27.3. p. 110. Isai. 40.6, 7. p. 14. Zachar. 2.5. p.
110. Habak. 3.16, 17. p. 124. Matthew. 6.21. p. 138. Romans 15.19. p. 114, 115. 1
Cor. 15.57. p. 65, 66. 2 Cor. 1.3. p. 123.
A Table of the chief heads treated of in the foregoing Book.
A.
AFflictions not to be born without divine help. p. 9. The vast difference
between sinners and Saints in Afflictions. 123, 124, 125. The more men's
affections are crucified to the world, they die with the more comfort. 88.
B.
The great folly of men in minding their bodies above their souls. Blessedness,
vide Happiness.
C.
The necessity of an interest in the Covenant of Grace. p. 63. The comfort of a
Christian in God. p. 105, 179. The need sinners stand in of Christ. p. 63, 64,
75. The Excellency of Christ. p. 73, 74. The terms upon which sinners may enjoy
Christ. p. 78, 79.
D.
Death will seize on all. p. 14, 15. Neither height nor holiness will excuse
from dying, p. 13. 39, 40. Nor strength in our youth. The corruptibility of
man's body, natural cause of death. p. 16, 17. Sin the moral and meritorious
cause of death, p. 19, 20. Gods fidelity the supernatural cause of death, p.
17, 18. Counsel to prepare for death. p. 29, 30, 31. Death is certain. p. 34,
35. Death is often sudden. p. 36, 37. Death will try men. p. 43, 44. 45, 46.
Death strips men of outward comforts. Spiritual enemies busy in an hour of
death. p. 47, 48. When death comes, it is too late to prepare. p. 40. Death
gain to a Christian. p. 18, 19, 182, 183. 56, 57. The misery of sinners at
death. p. 50. What is requisite to prepare for death. p. 61. to 70. Comfort
against the death of Christian friends. p. 180. Comfort against our own death.
p. 182. To familiarize death is one means of dying with comfort. p. 92,
E.
Godly men are apt to envy prosperous wicked men. p. 3, 4. The cure of envy. p.
5, 6. God an Eternal Good. p. 119, 131. When a Christians evidences for heaven
are clear, he dies with the more comfort. p. 85.
F.
Faith necessary. p. 62, 63. Flesh no fit judge of Gods providence. p. 8.
Flesh why put for corrupt nature. Ibid. Man's folly in providing for the flesh.
p. 23, 24.
G.
God a Christians strength. p. 10. God a Christians comfort. p. 105, 106. God a
Christians happiness. p. 106. 107. God a perfect good. p. 108. God the
Christians defense. p. 109, 110, 111. God a suitable good. p. 115, 116, 117. God
an eternal good p. 119. God the Saints peculiar good. p. 120. Gods great
condescension to sinners. p. 77. Who is a godly man. p. 140. to 143. Choose God
for thy portion. p. 147. God, vide Portion.
H.
Happiness what it is. p. 114. Wherein the Happiness of man consists; Vide
God. Hell its extremity and eternity. p. 136, to 139. Humiliation necessary. p.
69, 70.
I.
Ignorance, the cause of man's love to the world, and his neglect of God.
Justification. p. 62.
K.
Knowledge of God requisite in all that would choose him for their portion. p.
151, 152, 153.
L.
Saints sick of Love to God. p. 8, 9. Christ to be loved above all. p. 78, 79.
P.
The excellency of the Saints Portion. p. 7, 11, 105, 139. Why God the best
portion, vide God. The difference of the Christian and the Worldlings portion.
p. 127. The sinners portion is poor. ibid. it is piercing. p. 128, 129. it is
perishing. p. 130, 131. Characters of those that have God for their portion. p.
139. They are known by their desires after God. p. 141. their delight in God.
p. 142. their endeavors for God. p. 143. God is a satisfying portion. p. 158.
a sanctifying portion. p. 165. an universal portion. p. 168. an eternal
portion. p. 171. Portion, vide God. Prosperity of wicked men a stumbling block
to the godly. p. 3. The causes of wicked men's prosperity in the opinion of the
heathen. p. 5. Saints have a propriety in God. Psalms of David famous. p. 2.
S
Saints gain by death, vide Death. Scriptures famous for their verity. p. 1.
Sin the cause of death, vide Death. The misery of sinners at death. p. 49; 50,
51. The difference between a sinner and a Saint in affliction. p. 123, to 127.
God wooeth sinners. p. 73, 74. Sinners warned to prepare for death. p. 29, 30.
Folly of men in neglecting their souls. p. 24, 25, 26, 27. Saints must labor
to die with courage and comfort. p. 63.
T.
Time present to be husbanded well. p. 40. Men ought to try themselves. p. 139.
Death will try men to purpose. p. 47, 48,
V.
Understanding of man satisfied only with God the supreme truth. p. 163.
W.
Will only satisfied with God the chiefest Good. p. 164. Worldly comforts
unsatisfying. p. 159, 160. poor. p. 127. uncertain. p. 119, 120. The world is
defiling. p. 166.
ERRATA.
PAge 13. line 16. for unto read into: p. 41. l. 12. for Demetrius Aster r.
Demetrius Afer: p. 48. l. 9. for fool r. foe: p. 62. l. ult. He seems to
every person, r. he seems to say to every person: p. 67. l. 14. for lingering
r. linger: p. 106. l. 26. for that pipe r. the pipe of its: p. 108. l. 11. for
strength r. stream: p. 123. l. 15. for no to cover r. no cover: p. 126. l. 1.
add when other birds are in want: p. 139. l. 15. for his own provided: r.
provided for his own: p. 149. l. 8. for wisely, r. vilely.


