A CHRISTIAN WOMAN'S Experiences of the glorious working of Gods free grace.

Published for the Edification of others, by KATHERINE SUTTON.

Luke 24: 24. And they found it even so, as the Women had said.



AT ROTTERDAM, Printed by HENRY GODDAEUS, Printer in the Newstreet, Anno 1663.

COURTEOUS READER.
WHEN our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST had fed many with a few Loves, he
commanded his Disciples to gather up the Fragments, that nothing he lost, John.
6. 12. And when God was pleased to pour out of his Spirit upon some of his
faithful Servants in our Generation, he had also some of his Handmaides, who
gathered up the Crumes of that spiritual Bread, which the Lord blessed and
distributed among his Disciples: Of which Number this holy Marron was one. Now
there are three Arguments where by it may appear, that God would not have these
Fragments (which she has gathered into her Basket) to be lost, viz. First,
Because, God made them (by his Bl^ssing) food to her soul in the gathering, and
receiving them into her own heart, and also to the souls of several young
Virgins in her family, unto whom the Lord made some of these Crumes the bead of
eternal Life. Secondly, Because when she had lost the manuscript (where in
these and many other of her Experiences were written) in a sea storm wherein
she suff^^ed Shipwreck, yet God, who preserved her life, did also preserve
these ^xperiences in her heart, where it seems they were written, not with
ink but by his holy Spirit. Thirdly, Because she being presled in Spirit to
Communicate them more publicly, the Spirit of the Lord did bring them ag^in to
her remembrance, and she has been made willing to publish them as her
Testimony and witness of the free grace, and fresh Anoyntings of the Lords
Spirit, whom he has promised to pour forth upon his servants, and Handmaides
in the last days, Joel 2: 28, 29, 31, 32. Now for as much as this little Book
is presented to thee, CHRISTIAN READER, as a Basket full of Fragments, be not
offended with the broakenness of any matter, which thou may meet with in the
Reading thereof: considering, that God, who has made them a blessing to
others, may bless them unto thee. Thou may take notice of three Things in
this little Book, which I judge wo^thy of every Christians observation, to wit,
first, Her extraordinary Teachings of God by his holy Spirit and Word, when she
could not enjoy the ordinary means of his own appointments. This godly Woman
(after God has begun the good work of grace in her soul) would not loose any
opportunity she could get either in public or private for her p^ecious so^l,
but would often break thorrow some difficulties and, endure some hard, hips to
enjoy such opportunities; and this she did at that time, when many professors
slighted and neglected (Ogr^evous Sin! yea contemned the Ministry of the word.
Now obs^rve, That a^ she followed the Lord, and waited upon him in the use of
the means of Grace, when she could enjoy it, so the Lord was pleased (of the
exceeding Riches of his free Grace) not only to so her soul good by his
p^esence and power therein: But also (when she could not ^njoy the ((...) meme^
of grace) the Lord waited to be graciou^ unto her soul, and followed her with
the (...) teachings of his holy Spirit, and word, as she has witnessed in many
particulars in this her Book. And if thy experience, COURTEOUS READER, cannot
seal unto the Testimony, that she gives of those Spiritual Teachings: Yet do
not st^mble at them, do not judge her, for she has received an Unction from
the holy One, and is taught of God. In the Reading of her Book, thou will meet
with some sudden and unexspected Transition from one thing to another, (and
thou may think it to be some what abruptly) yet Censure not too rashly, but
rather consider, that even this also may, yea does hold some proportion unto
the course of Heaven and Heavenly communications. The Husbandman will not
wonder to see showers and shinings, bright and dark Clouds succeed each other,
knowing that the Rain which comes from Heaven has its seasons and its measure
too. Will the Mariner marvel to see the seas swell and rage in a great storm,
or admire the stil^ness and smoothness of the deep watters in a great calm. Or
will any who live supon the sea coast think the frequent Ebbing and flowing of
the tide a strange thing. Neither will any experienced Christian marvel at the
sudden Ebbing and flowing of joys, and sorrows in the hearts of Saints. The
operations and Administrations of the Spirit are various, 1. Cor. 12: 4, 5, 6,
7. Some times the Spirit is poured out upon the souls of Believers (as floods
upon the dry ground) And those spiritual showers and shinings do make a spring
of Grace in the wilderness of their hearts. Where of the Lord has spoaken by
his Prophets. Isa. 51: 3. and 44: 3, 4. and 32: 15, 16, 17. Ier. 31: v. 12. But
at other time the glory of the Saints comforts, joys, and light is so clouded,
and eclipsed, that they are under great desertions, Isa. 54: verse. 7, 8, 11.
Yea and may for some time walk in dakness and have no light, Isa. 50: 10.
Secondly, Another thing I judge worthy the Readers observation in this Book, is
this Christian woman's Experience of the presence and power of God, accompanying
her conscientious endeavors to do good unto the souls of others both in her
own family especially, and also in some other families, where she so journed
some time. I mention not this for her praise, who desires that God alone may
have all the Glory of whatsoever he has done for her or by her; (she needs no
Epist^es of Commendation from men) But seeing her Experiences are made so
public, my hearts desire is, that Parents and Governors of families would
follow her Example therein: Endeavoring (as she did) the Conversion and
sanctification of them, whom God had committed to their charge, by
Instructions, council, and reproose, which she administered, with so much love,
wisdom, zeal, and tenter heart^dness, that they proved by Gods blessing an
effectual means of the conversion of many, some of whom are yet living
witnesses of the truth hereof, and also of many other her Experiences related
in this her Book. She was not only a Governesse, but (as it were) a Prophetess
in her family, for she prayed constantly with her children and Maidens, she
also read the holy Scriptures daily unto them, and so spoke from them, that
many of them, who heard her (in her family duties) believed and turned to the
Lord. She opened her mouth with wisdom, and in her tongue was the Law of
kindness, a Solomon spoke of the virtuous woman, Pro. 31: 26, 27, 28, 29. She
did so Chatechise the young children, and instruct the elder maidens, that they
all learned to know, and many of them to do their duty to God and man. Thirdly,
there is yet one thing more, which I would have thee, Courteous Reader, to
ponder in thy heart, to wit, the gift of singing spiritual Songs and Hymns,
whih she pr^sents thee with some instances of in her Book, here and there
occasionally touching, which Administration I am willing for thy ^dification to
say: 1. That singing of Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs (b^ing an
Ordinance of Gods worship) ought to be performed by a gift, and the assistance
of the Spirit, as well as prayer 1. Cor. 14: 12, 15. What is it then? I will
pray with the Spirit, etc. I vvilising with the Spirit, etc. Now as to take a
book and r^ad a prayer out of it, or to say a prayer without the Book, is not
to pray in the Spirit, so to read a Psalm in a Book, and sing it, or to sing
the same Psalm without the Book is not to sing in the Spirit: If the singing
of Psalms be a part of Gods worship (as doubtless it is) then it ought to be
performed by assistance of the spirit, for the true worshippers ought to
worship God in spirit and truth, John. 4: 23, 24. 2. That Christians ought to
sing Spiritual Songs and Hymns, as well as Psalms, unto the Lord; And that
with grace in their hearts, Col. 3: 16. for the melody (which the Lord loves)
i^ in the heart, rather then in the voice, Ephesians. 5: 19. 3. They who perform
this part of Gods worship, whether they speak unto themselves in private, or
unto others more publicly, ought to have the word of Christ, to dwell richly
in them, yea and to be filled with the Spirit, as the Apostle testifies,
Ephesians. 5: verse 17, 18, 19, 20* and Coloss. 3: verse 16. I have known some other
Godly and gracious Christians (besides this grave and holy Matron) who have
this gift of Singing: and I my self have some experience of this kind of
Anointing of the Spirit of praise, which will (I hope) ere long be powered forth
upon the sons and daughters of Zion. And then they will praise Jehovah, singing
to the Lord a new Song, and his praise in the Congregation of Saints, as is
prophesied, Psalm. 149: 1, 2, 5. and Isai. 51: 11. and 52: 1, 8. etc. The holy
Spirit can dictate the Matter, yea and words of praise and singing, as well as
the matter and words of prayer: And why may not the Lord assist a poor gracious
humble soul to sing in the Spirit, as well as to pray in the Spirit: seeing
there nothing too hard for God, to do? It was by many (and is still by some)
denied, that there is any such thing as a Spiritual gift of prayer, save only
that which is acquired. And yet the gracious experience of many Godly persons
does testify that there is such a gift of the Spirit, called a spirit of
supplication, which is powered forth upon the Lords people. And although many
nay most Godly Christians do not believe there is any such Spiritual gift of
^^nging as I have here intimated, yet some few poor gracious humble souls have
good Experience, that there is sometimes a measure of the holy Spirit powered
upon them, where by they are so filled with the Spirit, that they break forth
into singing: Pray therefore that thou may sing, and praise the Lord, when
the Redeemed of the Lord shall return and come with singing to Zion, Isa. 51:
11. And the Children of Zion be joyful in their King. Psalm. 149: 1. Unto whom
be glory and dominion for ever, AMEN. So prays he, who waits for his
Kingdom and Coming.

HANSERD KNOLLYS.

ERRATA.
Page 1. Line 8, 9. read forbearance; line 16. r. sinned; l. 19. r. petty. Page
3. line. 1. r. I was stirred; line. 3. 4. r. to me toward Heaven; Page 4. l.
7. r. stumblest; Page 6. l. 1. r. heed; Page 7. l. 6. r. Christening; Page 8.
l. 25. 26. r. unbelief: Page 9. l. 12. read renewings.

These and some other litteral mistakes the Reader is desired to mend in the
perusal of this Book.

Christian Woman's experiences of the glorious working of Gods free Grace.
I Had once hard thoughts of the people of God, yet being on a time persuaded
to go to hear them, I went though not out of love to them, but to vvatch what
I could observe; and being then over persuaded against them, and the Ministers
Text (that then preached) was Romans 2: 4, 5, 6. or Dispisest thou the riches of
his goodness, and forbeacance, and long suffering, not knowing that the
goodness of God leads thee unto repentance; but after thy hardness and
impenitent heart treasurest up to thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and
revelation of the righteous Judgment of God, who will render to every man
according to his deeds.

Verily at this opportunity the dread of God did much smite upon my heart, that
I had so long sinnend against his patience and goodnesz. He had this passage,
that the sword of the Lord hung as in a twine thread, to cut of all pity
swearers; and I having been one that durst not swear great oaths, (but small
ones I was addicted to) I thought it met with my particular condition: Then had
I little acquaintance with any that feared the Lord; unless it were one family,
and they were much afraid of me for a season, because I had been so vain.

Then was I cast upon the Lord alone, who did much support me by his grace,
blessed be his name; yet the very first night after he began to work upon my
heart, I fell under this temptation, that I should not eat any more, but rather
die, and then I should cease from sinning against the Lords goodness; I then
cast away my prayer book, for it did not reach my necessities, and I cried unto
the Lord alone to teach me to pray; Then did I endeavor to keep close to the
best teaching ministry I could find; I was very ignorant, yet did search the
Scriptures diligently: but found them very dark to me, I daily saw a more
clear discovery of my sinful nature, and then began to be sorely perplexed with
feavs that I could not be a child of God, because I knew not how to get victory
over my sin, and though I used all means I could, yet my corruptions would
sometimes break forth, which made me often times ready to dispare, and to cast
of all.

But one day amongst the rest the Lord made me resolve, though he killed me,
yet I would trust in him; he made me also desire of him that if he would not
save me, yet that he would not let me go back again into sin (for the sense
of Gods goodness was much upon my heart.)

Then in several Sermons God was pleased to speak peace to my poor soul, yet
after through the violence of temptations, I often questioned my condition;
sometimes I was tempted to murder my self, sometimes to starve my self; yet the
Lord upheld me, for I could not make my case known to any but God for the
space of two years, all which season I was wonderfully kept by the power of God
alone. In this time was I called by my friends into a darck corner of the land
full of ignorance, yet I was sorely troubled, especially when I was overtaken
with any sin, still I fell down before ^he Lord bewailing my sins; then did the
Lord give me much comfort from this place of Scripture. Jer. 31: 20. Is
Ephraim my dear son is he a pleasant child, for since I spoke against him, I do
earnestly remember him still: therefore my bowels are troubled for him; I will
surely have mercy upon him. says the Lord.

Now in the place where I was were many Papists, and they much endeavored to
have me of their judgment: But God kept me in a thirsting frame of spirit
after the preaching of the word, and often cast in my mind, that I should,
Matt. 6: 33. First seek the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and
all other things should be added.

We had in that place a bad Minister, but to God I made my supplication, and
used what means I could to obtain a better, and God was pleased to answer my
desires, and sent a better to that very place, who remained there the time that
I stayed,. under whose honnest teachings I often met with sweet refreshing.

Then was stirred up by my friends to change my condition, to be married to an
husband; upon which I did earnestly beg of God that I might have one that did
fear the Lord, that he might be a furtherance to heaven, and indeed so he was.
For I married with a man that was much in practical diuties, yet some
difference there was in our judgments, which often caused no small trouble in
my spirit: but it had this effect, it caused me to cry to God, and to search
the Scriptures, so much the more, using all means for a ^ight understanding in
the things and ways of God, and it became helpful to me. And in this time of
my earnest seeking of God alone, he was pleased to discover to me by dreams
and visions of the night, the uggliness of sin in a far greater manner then
ever I saw it before: and in dreams brought many Scriptures to mind that did
answer some questions, and satisfy some doubts, that were in my heart: and so
did cause darkness to become light before me at that time: and this did the
Lord do in the absence of other means, soon after I gained information where
the word was powerfully preached: but it being something far from me, I had
some difficulty to get to it; yet it being (through grace) more to me then my
ordinary food: I keept close to opportunities of the word there preached; which
in an especial manner God was pleased to make very useful unto me. And I
enjoying often many sweet tastes of the presence of God in his ordinances, was
carried out through all weathers to wait upon him; and this I can truly say
from real experience that the worst wheather I went through the more of God, I
met within his ordinances, I remember one very wet day, I had much comfort from
these words; (let this encourage others,) Joh. 1: 2, 3. Now are we the sons of
God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be: And afterward while my
meditations were something upon Hebrews 6: 5, 6. I was much stirred up to mind,
how far an Hypocrite might go in Religion: And I began to consider, whether or
no I had gone any further then such a one might go, for I saw plainly that a
person might go very far, and yet be in a sad state, though they may be
^nlightened and taste of the heavenly gist, and be partakers of the holy Spirit,
yea and taste of the good word, and also hear the best Preachers gladly, as
Herod did John the Baptist, and as Agrippa did Paul, and yet be but almost a
Christian.

Then I being at a Sermon, the words of the Text were: Marc. 6: verse 20. And he
did many things: That Minister then showed, that an Hypocrite or a reprobate
might do many things: but yet a true child of God can do more; he named two
things in which a child of God goes beyond an Hypocrite.

First, that he does as much desire to be holy as happy.

2. That he does as earnestly fet himself against all sin as some.

Then was I exceedingly taken up in my thoughts about this thing; but being
carried out to seek the Lord earnestly, he was pleased to give in this answer;
Thou tumblest so much at the stone of assurance that thou forgetest to build,
then did God let me see that the foundation and topstone is Jesus Christ, and
that I must cease from my own works, and take Christ upon his own terms, and
then entered I into some rest.

Oh, what a knotty piece was I to work upon! for until he put forth his mighty
power I could not believe; and I found nothing stronger then free grace to
stricke at the root of my sin.

Also on another snowy day I going many miles to hear, I was refreshed much
from these words, 2 Cor. 12: 9. My grace is sufficient for thee.

And on another day from these words: Luke 10: 20. But rather rejoice, because
your names are written in heaven. And another time abundance of comfort from
that Scripture: 1 Cor. 2: 9. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard neither, has it
entered into the heart of man, to conceive the things which God has prepared
for them that love him. It was a very sore day when I went to this opportunity
and a very bitter Journey I had, but God made it exceeding sweet unto me.

Also I had a very great fit of a fever, by reason of the trouble of
conscience I was under; and in the time of that great fever, the Lord was
pleased to set that Scripture upon my heart: Rev. 22: 17. The Spirit and the
bride said comm, and let him that hears say, come; and let him that is a
thirst come; and whosoever will, let him come, and take of the watters of Life
freely: Which did administer so much comfort and refreshing to me from a sense
of the freeness of Gods grace, being set upon my heart, with so much power of
the Spirit that I was (contrary to the Judgment of Physicians) soon raised to
my health again. For indeed I had at that time been exceedingly troubled in my
spirit about my sins, which I had been looking back upon; for I had made a
Catalogue of them, and spread them before the Lord for pardon: But thinking
them to be so many, that God would not pardon them; I did much desire I might
die, and go out of the body, and not live any Longer in it, to increase mine
iniquities. And although at this time a good Minister did endeavor to comfort
me, yet I put comfort from me, and said, it did not belong to me till the
God of all grace was pleased to give it in by the power of his Spirit, as
besore mentioned, and then after our good God had given me a taste of the
riches of his pardonning love and grace in Christ Jesus: I was also carried out
to pity others, and beg that God would let them also taste of the same; and a
particular person was set upon my heart to beg of God for, and in a short
time the Lord was pleased to answer my desire in working a work of grace in
that soul.

Then I was called by providence to remove into a dark family, where I had
lived some time beofore; and I then finding much opposition against me, was
not willing to go thither again, but set my self to pray, not that I might be
willing to submit to the will of God, but that I might not remove into that
family, though had I then understood it, my call was clear enough, being
earnestly desired there unto by my husband, and invited by the family, who now
professed they could not be without me, though (when I was there before) they
did not affect me well, being lofty, and could not bear such admonitions that
sometime letting fall among them, but upon the importunity of my husband and
this family; I then at length set my self to seek the Lord, that my heart might
be made to submit to his will, what ever it were; and that if I did go, I might
some way or other be useful to him in that place. Now that which made me so
unwilling to go unto that family, was because of the opposition, that I had met
with before in the ways of God, and then a want of the means, both of
preaching the word and fellowship with the Saints.

But upon my earnest seeking, to know the mind of God, and to be brought to
submit unto it, my heart was soon made willing to go, which accordingly I did;
and I had not been long there before, it pleased the Lord to work upon one of
the family (to my great comfort and refreshing) who was one that I looked upon
as unlike as any in the family.

Also the Lord was pleased by death to take away a child from me, which was to
my casting down, and for some time I was under a cloud, and questioned whither
I were a child of God? and whither my child were saved? In that time a good man
labored to comfort me, telling me before, the Lord gave me a son, he gave
me his own son; Oh, said I, that I could see that! why said he, if you will
see that, take head of a cursting law, a slandring devil, and an accusing
conscience; all which the Lord has delivered you from, and therefore now wait
upon the Lord I am confident the Lord will appear in this thing.

And the Lord was pleased after seeking of him, to set it upon my heart, that
that child was well with him, and that he had such another mercy for me on
earth, which he gave me faith in, notwithstanding great oppositions against at
that present: yet after some half a years waiting upon the Lord I was assured
of it.

A fit of desertion.
After this the God of comfort was pleased to withdraw and leave me in a
deserted condition, which I found to be very sad, and I was very much perplexed
in my spirit, but could not speak of it unto any: But going to hear a Sermon,
the Minister was upon that Text: Lord forsake me not utterly (that is to say)
not overlong least the spirit should fail before thee: he then showed what
desertion was; and why God does sometime seem to leave his own people.

Because (said he) throug some pride, they thougt they could walk alone, and so
neglected their watch, then God hide his face, that they might see their own
insufficiency: and know that all their peace, strength and comfort is in and
from him: And this (through mercy) was a great help unto me at that time.

Further, while I was under that ministry, God was pleased to convince me of
the falsness of their Worship, which in that place then was used, and having an
opportunity to go with others to the communion (as they call it) I could not
kneell as the rest did, but sat down as if I had kneeled; and as I there sat,
it came upon my heart to think thus (as if it had been spoken to me) why
dissemblest thou a worship before the Lord, he that commands thee to kneel
there, may as well command thee to kneel at an Altar, (although at that time
there was nothing known of setting up of Altars) which thing I made known to
that Minister, and did warn him that if Altars should be set up, that he would
not (for filthy lucre sake kneell at them himself, nor compel others so to do:
But he told me he could not believe any such thing should be: but if it should
be so he promised me he would not conform to them. But in a short time after
he found il too true, for Altarts were reared up, and he poor man (contrary to
his promise) did comform himself in that thing, and compelled others so to do:
but the first time he did so, it pleased the Lord to smite him with a sore
languishing disease, that he went out no more.

Soon after I was at the Christenig of a child (as they call it) at which time
God was pleased to convince me of the evil and falseness of that piece of
Worship also.

Then was there in the nation a public fast proclaimed, and by man's invention
there was a form of prayer made and appointed to bo read in every assembly that
fast day, and this was a third conviction that I had about their formal outside
way of worship; I had then an opportunity to come into one of those assemblies
that fast day while that prayer was reading, at which present this thought came
strongly upon me: Is this a worship in spirit and truth which thy soul (when
it is upon the wing with God) cannot join with all; for I could not join with
the words then read in that foremost prayer.

Upon which I even melted in my spirit, and fell into shedding of tears,
resolving to separate from, and come no more to join in such a way of worship
until I had very diligently searched into the true way of Gods worship, as it
is written in his blessed word; and in order there unto I made use of all the
best books I could get, that were then published to that purpose, and also
called in the help of many Godly Ministers of several judgment: but when all
this was done I was still unsatisfied in that behalf: And then did I cry unto
the Lord to teach me, and it was by the Lord set upon my heart, that I must
not do any thing in the way of his worship but what I had ground for in his
holy word; and that Gods Servants were always to observe his pattern in all
that they do to him, and that Scripture was much set upon my heart. Rev. 22.
verse 18, 19. For I testify unto every man that hears the words of the
prophesy of this book, if any man shall add unto these things, God shall add
unto him the plagues that are written in this book; and if any man shall take
away from the words of the Book of this Prophesy, God shall take away his part
out of the Book of life, and out of the holy City, and from the things which
are written in this book: well still I was put upon it to continue seeking the
Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and the promise that all other
t^ingt should be added unto me.

Then did I with some others seek the Lord by fasting and prayer, for council
what we should do, and wheter we should go to enjoy communion with the Lord, in
the way of his pure worship, and the Lord was pleased in love to answer my
desirs in a wonderful manner, for being then entangled with a house of which my
Husband had a lease for some years; and upon that account was unwilling to
remove, not knowing how to dispose of that house: But yet the Lord was pleased
in a short time to make him willing that I should remove if I could get of that
lease, and some goods I had; which the Lord soon holp me in, by sending one
unexpectedly the very next day, after my Husband declared his willigness for my
removal upon those conditions, who took of the lease of the house of our hands
with those goods, and so I was made free; So forth with I removed to a place
where I did enjoy the heating of a good man preach, and had the sweet benefit
of some private meetings, which was much refreshing unto me: but yet two
things I was very earnest with God for.

1. One that I might be filled with the clear witness, and full assurance of
the eternal Spirit.

2. And the other, that I might enjoy more full and close communion with God
in all his blessed ordinances in both, which God was pleased to answer me
in some measure; as to the first he did let me see that I had sinned against
him, in that I again questioned that assurance which before he had given me
in; and then he brought (with most wonderful renewing power) those
Scripturs, which many years before at several times under several ordinances
were, set with much power and evidence upon my heart: But first God was
pleased to show me that it was only unbeief that had caused me (at the
appearance of temptation and corruption) to question his love and doubt about
his kindness, and so to conclude against my self: But the Lord did show me
that all this doubting was from my evil heart of unbelief, the sense of which
one morning especially God did set upon my spirit to the breaking of my heart;
so that for three days together I was greatly afflicted in my spirit: and
continued crying unto God, as one that could not be anij longer contented
without the Light of his countenance with a renewing seal of his Love, long
sought with sighs, prayers and tears, and in the third day morning he did
send the comforther the Spirit, which with inward light, life, and power
set upon my heart these follovving Scriptures: 1 John. 3: 2. Now are we the
sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be.

But rather rejoice, because your names are written in heaven. Luke 10: verse 20.

And whosoever will, let him come and take of the watters of life freely.
Revel. 22. 17.

And my grace is sufficient for thee. 2 Cor. 12: 9.

Oh! I cannot utter the joy that then was in my heart by the mighty operation
of the spirit: And then after that, this word came upon my spirit, and grieve
not the holy Spirit, whereby thou art sealed unto the day of redemption; and
then God did answer me, that there was sufficiency in his grace in Christ, to
pardon all my sins past, present, and to come.

Then as to my other desire which was aftet more communion with God in his
ordinances. After waiting, the Lord was pleased to set it upon my heart, to
believe that my habitation should be removed, and that I should enjoy my desire
by (the time called) Easter, and so it was accordingly; and I through mercy,
after I had gotten the renewigs of the seal and clear witness of the Spirit,
lived for about a quarter of a year as it were in Heaven upon earth, but then
began a cloud again to araise, and I was under the buffetings of some sore
temptations, God with drawing in a great measure (though not the witness of the
Spirit yet the com forts of his Spirit which before I did enjoy; and I conceive
this might be the cause of it (which I wish all others may take heed of, for it
cost me dear) under that swe^t soul refreshing communion I had with our
heavenly Father, I gave way to some doubtings and questionnings, whither there
was not a delusion in the thing I then enjoyed.

This temptation lasted some six days, and I had no peace, day nor night when
I was awake, to think that I should grieve so good a God, and cause him to
depart from me.

And Satan not changing his weapons, made me think that there was something in
me that I did not so fully resist him, for when our dear Lord Jesus was
tempted, he by his powerful resistance made him to change them.

So I lay mourning before the Lord, but could not set to praying for the
violence of this temptation. Then mysleep d^puted, and I grew sick, and then
God gave me to mind that Abraham's w^r^ lay before me, when he went to offer
sacrifice he was to drive away the fowls, Genesis 15. this work the Lord directed
me to do by laying hold upon Jesus Christ, who had prayed for me, though I
could not now pray for my self. Jo. 15: v. 17, 19. And so soon as my heart was
brought to believe this, I was presently delivered, and in all this temptation
the Lord hid not his face from me, blessed be his name.

And then as the Lord carried me over the Sea, where I did enjoy further and
fuller communion with himself in his ordinances, he gave me another occasion
for the exercise of says and Patience.

For whilst I was upon that voyage, the vessel that I was in was pursued with
enemies, and troubled with contrary winds, so that we were in great straits.

But God gave me to believe that he that delivered Paul out of his straits,
would also deliver us out of ours, and so it was, blessed be his name; and so
very safely was I carried unto that place that the Lord called me unto*

But presently after I was there arrived the Lord was pleased to exercise me
with several afflictions.

First by taking away a child by death, and then by laying upon my self such a
distemper that my joints and sinnews were by fits bound up, that I could not
stir them, nor take any rest while it lasted, my pain was so great, no Doctor
could do me any good (though several physicians consulted what to do for me)
But concluded, there was no help but I must dye.

But when I heard that, I said, there is yet help in God, and it was set upon
me to believe, that if I could but touch the hemm of the garment of Jesus
Christ, that is believingly go to him, I should be healed, being also put in
mind of that promise, that whosoever forsake any thing for his sake and the
Gospels, Mat. 19: 29. should receive an hundredfold; then I cried, Lord give me
to be healed of this distemper by thee seeing thou art pleased to deny help by
man.

And one day our Pastor called in to visit me, as he was going to the meeting,
whom I did desire to pray for me, and to stir up the brethren to join with
him, and I much encouraged him that they should pray in faith, believing for
what they asked, telling him that by faith and prayer he would assuredly heal
me, and verily according unto my faith it was done unto me, for ever blessed be
God for J. Christ, for as they were praying in his name the distemper departed.

Next the Lord was pleased to lay his afflicting hand upon another of my
children, then did I much desire that all afflictions might be sanctified
rather then removed, and that by all I might be made more conformable unto
Jesus Christ was I helped then to read and mind thad place in Job, Job 34: 32.
That which I see not teach thou me; if I have done iniqu^^y, I will do no more.

Then our Pastor coming again to visit me, I asked him how we should know the
mind of God in these many afflictions, he answered me, that a man having an
orchard or vineyard walks therein, and among all the trees he makes choice it
may be of some one tree, whose standing is more pleasant and conveni^nt then
others; and that tree he chops, and hacks and makes an Arbor to sit in for his
delight, and said he, if God will do so by you, will you not there with be
content? Oh! yes said I: if that be the good will of my heavenly father; and
blessed be God I did find it so; for though I have sowed in tears, I have
reaped in joy, and have found the times of greatest outward trouble, and
affliction have been the only times of greatest inward and spiritual joy and
soul consolation, verily I cannot express with tongue nor pen the large
experience I have had upon this account.

And this I have found, that when a poor soul is faithful and single hearted
for God walking up to the light id has received, this is the very way to enjoy
the presence of God and his blessing upon him, in what state and condition so
ever he is in; for this I can declare from mine own experience that lose is the
way to gain, troublet is the way to peace, sorrow is the way to joy, and death
is the way to life; he that loses his life for my sake, says Jesus Christ,
the same shall find it, through the valey of tears lies the way to the
mountain of joy; for whilst I set my selfin good earnest to seek the Lord for
instruction into the truth as it is in Jesus, I met with many difficulties; but
yet out prayer hearing God was pleased to come in by degrees; having through
his grace given me faith in his son (who was exalted as a Prince and a Savior
to give me repentance) made me also willing to be baptized for the remission
of sins.

Now that which made me willing to obey the Lord, in this Ordinance was the
Command of Jesus Christ in Mat. 28: 19. and Act. 10: 48. and the example of
Christ and the practice of the Apostles, and p^imitive Saints, together with
the promise of the gift of the Holy Ghost anexed thereunto Acts 2: 38. And
indeed this truth a last was so set upon my heart by the Lord, that though many
difficulties lay in the way, yet the Lord carried me through them all: and
after I had obeyed the Lord therein (in very faithsulness I must declare that I
did enjoy the incomes of God in a more plentisul manner then before: But Satan
for some time labored to hinder me in obeying the Lord in this piece of
service, with this temptation, that by this means a death (in all likelihood
and in an eye of reason) would fall upon my livelihood, but God made it a
furtherance to me and to others also, so that many of us were at that time
(after waiting on God by fasting and prayer) baptized together.

And after that the Lord was pleased to bless me in my employment that
following year, with more then ordinary success, by which the Devil was proved
a liar.

But afterward I had some fears, that my employment might be a suare unto m^e
(as the world is to many) and that I should be too earthly in it, for this
Scripture did follow me very much, (which I desire to give good heed unto) Oh!
Earth, Earth, hear the word of the Lord. And often in prayer I did cry unto
God, saying, speak Lord, for thy servant desires to hear; and was very desirous
to know, what the Lord would have me to understand by this word; and when I had
considered I found some thing in my employment sinsul, and a hinderance unto my
spiritual enjoyments, to convince me of which, the Lord wa^ pleased to with
hold his blessing upon that employment, which before I had found therein; to
the convincing and converting of some to himself, so finding something in it
contrary to his will, I was constreined to leave it of, and after much seeking
of the Lord for council, these Scriptures were much with me, Math. 7: 7. Ask,
and it shall be given you: seek, and ye shall find: knock^, and it shall be
opened unto you.

If ye then being evil know how to give good gifts unto your children, how
much more shall your father, which is in heaven, give good things to them that
ask him. Math. 7: 11.

And on my servants, and on my hand maidens will I pour out of my spirit, and
they shall prophesy. Acts 2: 18.

These promises did dwell with me for a long season, so that I was much
stirred up to pray to the Lord, that he would please to accomplish them upon
me, and pour out of his blessed Spirit upon me. And after long seeking
(esp^cially one day) being very earnest and importunate with the Lord, after
which I went out to walk, and on a sudden I was endued with the gift of
singing, in such a way and manner as I had not been acquainted with before; and
immediately this following song came in (as fast as I could sing) as follows:
it was in the year 1655. in the Month of February.

Come home, come home, thy work is done,
My glory thou shall see;
Let all the meek ones of the earth
Come home along with thee.
Cast of the world, it is too base
And low for thee to dwell;
I have redeemed thee from the pit,
And lowest place of Hell.
Admire, admire my love to thee,
Which took thee from so low,
And set thee in high places free,
Where thou my love might know
VVing thou aloft, and cast thy self
Into mine Arms of love;
Look up, look up, and thou shall see
My glory is above.
Let not the wicked know thy joy:
But let my servants hear
What I have done for thee my love,
Since thou to me drew'st near.
My servants walk in clouds and bogg's,
They do not see my light:
The day draws near, and will appear,
That I will shine most bright.
I will appear in my glory, and be a perfect light.
Admire, admire, the thing that I will do,
All nations shall it hear, and know
What I am doing now.
I will a habitation be
To them that fear my name;
They shall lie down in safty, and
Give glory to the same.
All they that in high places sit,
And takes their honors low,
Shall be made tremble, quake, and pine,
When they my Justice know.
Come hide, come hide, come hide with me,
Come hide thee in the Rock;
Come draw thy Comforts high from me,
I my treasures unlock.
Also it was agreed upon by some of the Lords people, with whom I was then
present, that we should appoint and keep a day of solemn seeking the Lord by
fasting and prayer; that we might know what was the duty Gods poor Children
ought to be found in at that time: but after this was agreed upon, and the day
appointed: I was before the time came removed about 30 miles from them, and so
that thing went out of my mind: but God by his Spirit set me upon the same
work, by five in the morning the same day, and about the middle of the day God
brought to my remembrance that agreement, so we were at the same work at the
same time, though far distant one from another; and indeed the Lord was
graciously present, pouring out much of the spirit of prayer and supplication;
after which earnest seeking of God, was this following prophesye given in unto
me: Shall light appear, and darkness done away:
Shall Summers green be clothed all in gray:
Shall a bright morning set in shadowees dark,
Oh! England, England^, take heed thou do not smart.


And after this prophesy was set upon my heart that notable promise: 2 Chro. 7:
14. I^ my people, which are called by my name, turn from their wicked ways;
then will I hear from heaven, and forgive their sin and will heat their Land.

Next morning, about four of the clock, being in my bed, I had this laid before
me, that God would affict that nation with great afflictions: but I (not
knowing what God would try the Nation with) did desire this of the Lord, that I
might choose with David, rather to fall into the hands of God, then into the
hands of merciless men: it was much upon my heart at that time; that the Lord
would turn a fruitful land into barreness, for the wickedness of them that
dwell therein.

Then the Lord was pleased to lay upon me a sore affliction, which I finding
my self very unable to bear, did as it were repent me that I in any measure
had chosen my condition, and did not rather wholly submit to the will of God;
but the Lord did me good by it, and his strength was made persect in my
weakness.

Then was it much set upon my heart to consider what then were the sins of the
nation, for which there was cause of great humiliation; and indeed the
consideration of these following evils was much set upon my heart.

1. That great sloathfulness, deadness, and unfruitfulness under the means of
grace which we enjoyed, for which the Lord threatened of old, Isa. 5: verse 5,
6. To lay his vineyard wast, to pluck up the hedge and break down the wall
there of.

2. That great abounding sin of unbelief (notwithstanding the large experiences
we had of Gods power for us, and love to us.) And this I saw did cause persons
to seek themselves and the world. Unbelief cut them and us short of that rest
that many (yea the most of us) promised to our selves, As this unbelief of old
cut Israel short of rest, Heb. 3: 10, 11.

3. That Idolatry which me thought I saw abounding in the nation in a
threefold sense.

1. First in respect of false ways of worship, contrary to the rule of the
Gospel and primitive exemple.

2. Secondly in respect also of resting upon duty, and so not resting upon
Jesus Christ that Rock of ages; this also was one of poor Isreal's evils, crying
out the Temple of Lord, etc. Ier. 7: 4.

3. In respect of coveteousness, this in Scripture is called Idolatry also; Oh!
that too too earnest desire! that was in some after the Foulish vanities of
this present evil world, and in others after the vain profits of the world, and
in others also after the vain glory and preferment thereof: these things were
much upon my heart, and this was that for which God was angry of old with his
people, and smote them; and hid his face from them. Isa. 57: 17.

4. Fourthly, That pride that I saw abounding in the lives of many, and I fear
was in the hearts of others. Which appeared in their slighting the Council of
Gods Spirit: and their persifting to go on in seeking and setting up self,
nothwithstanding the hand of God against them.

These sins being very much set upon my heart, with a deep consideration of
many Scriptures: some of them was very great and sore threatenings: and other
some were most sweet and precious promises to such as repent and depart from
all iniquity; one of which I remember was that very remarkable place, 2 Chronicles.
7: 14.

Then I looked upon it as my duty to make this known, that people might be
warned to depart from sin, that so they might not partake of the great wrath
and sore displeasure of God, which I much feared, was coming.

Then soon after I had an oppertunity to declare this to some that then were in
high places, and in the very entering I had this added, which I also declared.

Did thou not hear a voice from on high,
Deny your selves (take up the cross) or verily you shall die?
And this was approved on by some, and received as a very sluitable and
seasonable word; but pour souls, for not hearkening unto council in departing
from sin they were soon brought down, and laid low, yet there is mercy with the
Lord that he may be feared, and he will manifest his love to all them that
truly repent, and we may all make a good use of this experience; therefore let
others harms become our warnings. Also about the year 1658. to the best of my
remembrance. [for having lost my book, in which I had set them down in order, I
now wait only upon the Lord, and as he by his Spirit helps me, so I give an
account of these things) It was given in with abundance of power upon my
spirit, these few words following.

Awake therefore to righteousness, This was again brought to mind in January
1662. The Lord is near at hand: And will afflict now very sore By sea and like
by land.

And this seems to agree with, and is a further addition to what wa's given
me in before in the Year 1657. which is as follows.

There is a time approaching near at hand,
That men shall be in fear by sea and land:
There is a time, there will be alteration;
And this same time does hasten to this nation;
Let now my children hearken to my will,
And they shall see I will be with them still.
These with many more such things came upon my spitit, and then after seeking
the Lord he was pleased to show me by degrees what was the work of the day
(for I am a stranger and a Pilgrim, therefore I seek sor a Kingdom whose
Buylder and Maker is God. I desire not to set up the Idol of covet^ousness, but
to have it to be my meat and drink, to do the will of my Father, which is in
heaven; and it is my only desire to deny my self, and to honor him) seeking to
know the present work of the day: some Scriptures with many waity
considerations were set upon my heart, Hezekiahs prayers and tears, which were
accepted of God, when his heart was broaken; A broaken and a comrite heart is
acceptable in the sight of God, and he will dwel^ with such. Isa. 57: 15. rend
your hearts and not your garments, and turn to the Lord; indeed when much of
the sorm of Godliness appears, but the power is waming, then it is a time to
mourn, and in some it has been so in all ages, theresore Gods Prophet was b^d
cry aloud, and spare not, Isa. 58: 1. When sinlies hiden in the heart, nothing
is accepted, Isai. 58: 2. Yet yoe seek me early and desire to know my ways as
a nation that did righteousness; read and mind the whole Cnap. Isa. 15: 16.
Cease to do evil, says the Lord, and learn to do well, etc.

But unto the wicked, God says, what have thou to do to declare my statutes,
or that thou should take my covenant in thy mouth, seenig, thou hate to be
ref^rmed? then it came upon my heart that the duty of the present time was for
the people of God to be very much in these following things.

The work of the day.
1. First, to be watchful that the ca^es of this world, and the deceitfulness
of riches make us not to forget the coming of Christ, and the glory that shall
then be revealed.

2. Secondly, be moderate in all things, the Lord is at hand; be patient, and
act much faith; be much in prayer, do good, lay up treasures in heaven; these
be all very weighty things.

3. Be much in humiliation, seek not great things for your selves, in a day
when God is pulling down.

God pronounces a (...) to them that are at case in Sion, that put far away
the evil day, and cause the seat of violence to come near; A mos 6. verse. 3, 4,
5, 6. that lie upon beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their couches,
and eat the lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of the
stall, and so fill themselves in seasting, delighting in Music, and drinking
wine in bowls, but are not grieved for the afflictions of Joseph.

And the same evil the Prophet Isaiah complains of also in the 22 of Isa.
verse. 5, 9, 12, 13, 14. In that day the Lord God of H^asts called to weeping
and mourning, and to baldness, and girding with sack^loath, and behold joy and
(...), sl^ying ox^n, and killing of sheep, etc. In what day was this, you may
s^e in the 5, and 9 verses; it was a day of trouble, and ^teading down and
pe^plexity: But see how the Lord takes notice of this their contrary ^^^riage
in the 14 verse: he charge it upon them, as such an iniquity, as he tells
them, shall not be purged from them till they dye verse the 14.

It is said, when the Judgments of God are abroad in the earth, the inhabitants
thereof shall learn righteousness.

But it is threatened, they shall have no peace who go on in the ways of sin
and wickedness, but all that would have peace, must come from sin unto Jesus
Christ, and walk in the way of peace, by this way we hide in the rock, and
enter into the secret chambers, where God had promised to keep us till his
indignation be over past.

Then, benig troubled in my spirit, the Lord was pleased to give in these
following promises as special comforts against those great and public
calamities, which were coming.

I even, I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and
will not remember thy sins. Isai. 34, 25.

I also will leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor people, and they
shall trust in the name of the Lord. Zeph. 3: 12.

And they shall be mine, says the Lord, in the day that I make up my Jewels,
and I will spare them as a man spares his own son that serves him. Malachy 3:
17.

And the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought,
and make fat they bones, and thou shall be like a wattered garden, and like
springs of watter whose watters fail not. Isa. 58: 11.

And Moses said unto the people, Fear ye not, stand still, and see the
salvation of the Lord, which he will show to you to day; for the Egyptians,
whom you have seen to day, you shall see them again no more ^or ever. Exodus 14:
13.

The name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the Righteous run into it, and is
safe. Prove. 18: 10.

They, that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strentgh, they shall mount up
with wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary: and they shall walk and
not faint. Isa. 40: 31.

Also the Lord set it upon my heart, how the people of God ought to ca^ry it in
such a day of calamity; namely, that they ought to have upon their hearts a
deep sense of sin, which is the cause of sorrow, as Lots righteous soul was
grieved with the unclean conversation of the wicked; therefore God took care of
him, and he was preserved when others were destroyed with the fiery storm of
Gods.

Also God is pleased to set a mark upon the foreheads of them that mourn for
the abomination of the times.

Also it was given me in to believe, that God would be a wall of fire about his
people; with this promise: That all things shall work together for good, to
them that love God, who are the called, according to his purpose. Romans 8: 28.

And the Lord said, All things were made for himself, and nothing shall be
destroyed without me.

And God appeared unto Abraham, saying, I am God alsufficient, etc. Genesis 17: 1.

Let my word be a light to thy feet, and a Lanthorn to thy paths, for I will
keep them in perfect peace, whose minds are stayed on me, because they trust
in me.

And the Lord is the portion of his people.

And they are to him as the apple of his eye. Zech. 8: 2, 8. And as a gsigne /
upon his right hand: And he to them is a strong tower, a buckler, and shield, a
Captain, and leader of his people, and it is written; When ye see these things
begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up your heads, for your
redemtion draws nigh. Luke 21: 28.

If you had but so much faith as a grain of mustered seed, you should say unto
this mount^in, be removed, into the Sea; Christ reprove Peter, for the smalness
of his faith; All things are possible to them that believe.

Fear not them that can kill the body: but f^ar him that can destroy both body
and soull in hell. Math. 10: 28.

Fear not little flo^k, it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the
Kingdom. Luke 12: 32.

See that you be not troubled, for these things must be; but the end is not
yet, nation shall rise against nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom; and ye
shall hear of wars and run ors of wars: but he that watches over Israel
neither slumbereth nor sleeps.

He that believes on me, as the Scriptures has said, out of his belly shall
flow rivers of living watter; but this s^ake he of the spirit, that they, that
believe on him, should receive: and is promised to be poured out in the latter
days.

After these promises and instructions followed thi^ so^g, in the year 1658.
Oh, (...) my soul! give glory to the Lord.
(...) this rich merry he does thee asoard;
He made the hearens, and ordered every light;
He takes the hearts up of his people q^ue.


And as I was on a Journey, this also was given in: When that this green shall
blosome bear,
And bi^ds shall pleasant sing;
Then shall there be a kn^ll most sad,
In every place, beard ring.


Then did the Lord pour out upon me much of the spirit of prayer, and
praising, with the knowledge of other things, which he is bringing to pas^: In
so much that I was much broaken before him, to see my own unworthyness, and his
goodness, a sense of which I lay under for some season, not long after I had a
great sit of sickness; and I was inquiring of God, what his mind should be in
that affliction: he showed me, it was because I did not declare to the Church
with whom I walked; those things he had made known unto me.

But benig troubled at my own insufficiency; and they benig unacquainted with
such things; and indeed my self did question at the first, whether it were the
guilt of God or no? (the guist of singing.) Then the Lord was pleased to set it
upon my heart, that as those prophesyes were true, and should come to pass, so
should I know that this was the true guist of God, given in unto me.

And it was so when the spring came on, then began that sickness of agues and
feavours, that have continued ever since, little or much, and there followed
two dry summers one after another, and also we had many light appearances; but
they set in dark shadows, tili Christ our light shall appear, and in great
mercy take away and remove our dark and sad afflictions, and sorrows; well now,
I was at last so moved in my spirit, that I could not tell how to keep in these
things any longer, and therefore went to the Church to that end, but I then
could not find him that I would have spoken of it unto, for him to declare unto
the rest, so I returned, and did it not.

Then the Lord afflicted me again, and then I besought him again, and he gave
me to mind that I was justly afflicted for neglecting, to make it known, then
being raised up again, I did declare something, but not so fully as I should;
and indeed would have done fearing, it would not be born, for which I was
mourning before the Lord: and as I was mourning, I was put upon singing, as
follows:

Cease thou thy mourning, and see thou do praise,
For thou shall do my will in all my ways:
Thy work shall be praises now sor to sing,
Because thou have chosen Christ to be thy King.
Lift up your heads redemption draws near,
Do not at all possess thy heart with fear:
Lift up your heads, and look to heaven high;
For God will make his people glorisy.
Draw water from the wells that are so deep:
You shall drink flaggons of my love, when others are astheep.
Then still sought I God what I might do to honor God in my generation; and
about three days after it was set upon my heart in the night, that I must
writ my experiences; but then I thought, oh, how should I remember thirty
years experiences! but then presently came in these promises.

Fear thou not, for I am with thee; be not dismayed; for I am thy God, I will
strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will up hold thee with the
right hand of my righteousness. Isaiah 41:10.

Fear not, thou worm Jacob, I will help thee, says the Lord, and thy Redeemer
the holy one of Israel. verse. 14. Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also in
him, and he shall bring it to pass. Psalm 37:5.

Great things have I laid up for them that fear me among the sons of men.

The next day I set my house in order, that I might go about this work that the
Lord had called me unto, and until I went about it, this word followed me; be
instructed least my Spirit depart from thee; and as soon as I set upon my work,
it left me, and I found the Lord (according to his promise) mightyly assisting
me, in bringing things to my remembtance and I wrig them down, and had some
thoughts to put them in print; but yet through the corruptions of my heart, and
the advice of a friend, I was not willing they should be published whilst I am
living: my reason was, because I am a poor weak worthless worm, and have not
the parts and gifts that some others have.

And because I am an old fruitless branch, my memory fails, and my
understanding is so dull, that I am (and was at the best) a poor empty one,
which I cannot but acknowledge with tears and brokenness of heart.

Oh, that the Lord should be so good to me! and I can bring no more glory and
honnour to him; but yet notwithstanding I must give glory to God, for that he
has been pleased to pour out of his Spirit upon me, and since that, to fill
my soul with very sweet choice, and heavenly enjoyments from himself.

The most large measure of the spirit of prophesy was upon me at two
particular times, the one in the year one thousand six hundred and fifty five.

And the other in the year 1658, but at many times God was pleased to give me
much of the spirit of prayer and praise.

Then by his hand of providence I was removed again out of England into
Holland, and I brought the papers of my experiences with me: which (the Ship
being cast away) were lost, with the trunck in which they were: Then was it
much set upon my heart, that God was displeased with me, for not putting them
in print, and then the gift of singing and praising was much ceased, and I was
troubled; for the which I sought the Lord, and did begg', that if he were
offended at me, for not printing, and leaving them behind me, that he would
pardon it unto me; and that, if it were his good pleasure, I should write them
again. I did pray, that he would let his Spirit come to enable me again in
singing and prayer, as it was wont to do, and be my remembrancer to write
again: and indeed it did so, not long after, in the night; both in song, and in
prayer.

But then I having not time, was much hindered? yet notwithstanding (according
to the time I had) I set my self to do it; and the Lord was pleased to assist
me, in bringing again to my remembrance things of long standing.

Now before I departed from England, I was satisfied in my spirit, that I had a
clear call from thee Lord so to do; for indeed more then a year I had such a
motion in my spirit, backed with many Scriptures for its furtherance.

Yet nothwithstanding in this Voyage we met which some diffciulty, for the Ship
I came over in was cast away; but in the time of the greatest trouble the Lord
gave me in these promises; that he would be with me in six troubles, and in
the seventh he would not forsake me.

Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will hear thee, and deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify me.

With this sweet word also, thou shall not die, but live, to see the mercy I
will show unto thee.

It was in the night, and after some time (the Ship being a ground, and in
great danger, and so were all the persons in it) one asked me, if I were not
afraid? I answered, the God of heaven my Father has brought me hither, and if
he may have more honor in drowning of me, then by preserving me, his will be
done.

Then, when the mast was cut down, and the Master with some others said, we are
dead persons, and like to loose our lives, yet I had much hope in the Lord,
because of his promise, and after that I (and some others in the Ship with me)
had committed our selves unto God by prayer, I being in the Cabbon, laid me
down to sleep: but I had not (it seems) lien half an hour, but they called us,
and said, there was Land not far of, if we would seek for help? which
accordingly we did.

But it being but about the break of the day, we did wander over the sand^,
but could find no way out of the sea, as it were, compassing us above round;
then we all returned to the Ship again, and some concluded we must go in an
perish there; so they went in again.

But we said, if we must perish, we would be still seeking to save our
lives.

And as our God (to whom we had committed ourselves) guided us, we went another
way on the sands, and as I was going (looking to God to be my Pilot) not
knowing whether we went, for the sea was one both sides of us, and we had
but a small way on the sands to walk in; and as I was begging of the Lord,
to keep in the seastill we found out a place, not only for our own escape,
but that we might see deliverance for our friends in the Ship also, the Lord
was pleased to set this upon my heart.

As thy deliverance is, so shall Englands be, when they are brought to
greatest streights, then will deliverance be from God.

A hint of some night meditations and effects of prayer.
I being awake one night, and very full of trouble in my mind, because I was
no more spiritual, for I had found my self very dead-hearted in prayer over
night; for the which I was very sadly afflicted in spirit; and indeed then
vvanting place of retirement (to send up strong cries unto the Lord) did much
deaden my spirit, for I found it was the practice of Jesus Christ, sometime to
be in the wilderness, sometime in the mountain all night in prayer alone, and
sometimes alone in the gardin; and I find prayer in secret much accept^d with
God, according to that word, Pray to thy ^ather in secret, and he will reward
thee openly: Math. 6: 6. indeed so full of sorrovv was I that I uttered no
words, but sig^d and groaned to the Lord.

Then this came in,
Upon the (...) thou shall live,
(...) of ^o^e I will the (...):
(...) be made all times to see,
(...) flows in me.
Then did I groa^e before the Lord, that he would give in some promise: the
Lord cast in this that the grace or prayer was before the guist of prayer, and
that this was the grace of prayer to give up our selves in faith to the
guidance of the spirit, and so by ^aith to have communion with the Father and
the Son, in the Spirit, for Christ t^ld the Woman. John. 4: v. 21, 22, 23.
Neither in thus mountain no^ in Jerusalem shall m^n worship the Father but the
^our is coming, a now us, when the true worshipp^rs shall worship the Father in
Spirit and i^ truth, sor the ^ather s^^keth such to worship him; God is a
Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in Spirit and in truth: This
Woman then could say, that Christ would teach all things; why should not we
look for the teachings of the Spirit now, seeing Christ has not only been
with us in the flesh, God and man, but had also promised us the pourings out
of the Spirit, to teach us all things: and to bring all things to our
remembrance.

Then further I was mourning that I could not enjoy the ordinances of God ^n
their purity; and the Lord shevved me that I must offer up my (...): And when
Abraham went to do that, he left his servants below the hill; and consulte^
not with flesh and blood.

Also afterward I had such wonderful experience of communion with God,
through the Spirit, as I am not able to utter it.

I avvaking another night, was greatly complaining, that the flesh did so
(...) in the Spirits work, that when I world do good, evil is present. ^^en
did the spirit put me upon uttering many heavenly complaints in a way of
singing, and after that, with the help of the Spirit, to pray with much
enlarg^dness.

And after that there was by the same spirit, with very much power this
word: Be silent before me all flesh.

Oh! and then follovved the wonderful speakings of God by his blessed Spirit
to my poor soul, which I cannot utter as to the manner of them, b^t the nature
of them was exceeding comforting to my self; and also filled (...) with great
hopes to all the people of God.

And now hereby do I know, that it was the Spirit of God and of truth that did
work at this time, because it did lay me low, and flat before him, that is
holy, and made me see my own insufficiency, and his great al sufficiency, which
did much humble me, and broak, and melted me exceedingly, then was this
promise given in; That they that waiton the Lord shall renew their strength,
they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, and
they shall walk and not faint.

And my heart was very much drawn out to wait upon God, in a way of believing,
both for my self and people of God, having that word as it were whispered in my
ear: If thou can believe, all things are possible.

Another time I was considering, that though I had been a Professor many years,
yet I though! indeed I was but a babe in Christ, then that word came upon me:
Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings thou have ord^ined praise.

And indeed I can encourage the most simple and weak, to wait on the Lord, for
his grace is sufficient.

At this time I was taught by the spirit, that prayer was another thing then
some take it to be; it is of a divine nature, and they only, whom God helps,
can pray, for it is not words that is always needful, for a soul may pray and
utter no words, and have sweet communion with God by faith; yet words sometimes
affect the heart, and I have sometimes found the voice cannot be kept in, the
heart may be so filled. Therefore I blame none, but desire to be tender of all,
for God accepts what himself gives, outward performances is as the shell
without the kernel; if the spirit act not, but what of his own spirit is in any
duty that God does accept. And we read of the poor woman in the Gospel, who met
with some discouragements, yet by the power of faith being enabled to hold on;
oh! how greatly he commended her faith, and answered her desire, though her
words were but few, only, Lord help me, etc.

And Hannahs prayer was heard, who did but move her lips: And although she was
a woman of a sorrowful spirit before, yet she went away believing, and also
rejoicing that God had heard her prayer.

So the desires of them that fear him shall be answered, and he will hear their
cry.

Daniel, before he made his supplication, was answered, the groaning of the
spirit before the Lord is a loud cry, the prayer of faith does save the sick.

The Lord is a very present help in the time of need.

They that trust in him, shall not be disappointed.

Nay he takes pleasure in them that fear him, and that hopes in his mercy.

Therefore let them that call on the name of the Lord depart from iniquity.

Further, my heart being carried out long to wait for, and expect there
teachings of the spirit more fully to be given me: and therefore, if any thing
comes in further, it is not of nor from my self, but the Spirit of Gods working
in and upon a poor weak creature, who though I be very unfit to publish any
thing of this nature to the world, yet according to my measure I would with
that poor woman do what I can with willingness and cheerfulness, for God loves
a cheerful heart in his work, and the Apostle says, if there be first a
willing mind, it is accepted, according to that a man has, and not according
to that he has not.

Yet I am much encouraged to believe that this work is of the Lord, for I have
found the flesh exceeding opposet thereunto, and when I have neglected it, God
has withdrawn himself from me, and when I set to it in good earnest, then God
returns and let me enjoy sweet communion with himself: And the more, the Lord
appeared at the first comings in of these things upon my soul, the more his
love broake my heart, that I was wonderfully affected to behold the freeness of
his grace to such a one.

And verily the more watchful I was against sin and unto duty, the more of his
divine presence was affoarded, which is so gloriously sweet to enjoy, that the
more I had, the more still I would have, and still longed for, not only in the
day, but in the night also, hearkening what God spoke, and in the night his
way to my soul has been to come in with many svveet seasonable and powerful
instructions, stirring me up to pray, teaching me how to pray, and what to
pray for, increasing my faith and considence, to believe for that I have prayed
for, both for my self and others (and also stirring me up to praising him) and
I find that giving my self wholy to the disposing of God in prayer, is a very
good thing: also this fear has been upon me sometimes, that I should offer
unto God that which cost me nothing, that is, to lay ont the choicest, and
most of the day about the world, and then bring the sleepy head to God for a
sacrifice: I minding the spirituallity of true prayer, and my unfitness for it,
I have found the council of our Lord Jesus Christ very useful, where he says,
VVatch and pray. Math. 26: 41.

And the Apostle says, VVatch unto prayer. Pet. 1: 4, 7. yet I have found
often, when I have been to pray unto God, my heart have been very dead, and I
could not get it into so spiritual a form as I would, yet durst not neglect
the daily waiting upon God in that duty: but even then made it my work to
petition the Lord, to compose my spirit and quicken me by his grace and holy
Spirit, that I might not offer the blind the halt, and lame in sacrifice unto
God: And indeed then God has so, come in upon my spirit, that I ha^^ had more
communion with him self yea more then at some other time, when I have been apt
to think my self more fit.

At other times when I have not found God coming in to help me, I have gone a
way and waited his time, for unless God enlarge our hearts, it is not good for
us to en large in words, for God is in heaven and thou on the earth, therefore
let thy words befew (thy words mark that) and bodily exercise prositeth
nothing, my son give me thy heart, says God. Eccles. 5: 2.

The poor man that said, God be merciful unto me a Sinner, went a way more
accepted or rather Justified then the Pharise, in the time before the coming of
Christ in the flesh, if Gods people could not bring a lamb fo ra sacriffice, if
they brought but two pigeons, or a little flower, if it were brought to the
Priest, it was accepted, so if we come to him that Justifies the ungodly, and
has promised to do all our works in us, and for us beholding his
alsufficiency, and submit to him, and be content with that he will give us, as
well in spirit uals as in temperals, the Lord will accept of us, only
believing we must flee unto the horns of the Althar.

And I have found, when I have neglected prayer, my heart has been very dead
and full of unbelief: And again, I have found it no comfort to rest upon
duties, for that is a dangerous evil to set up such an Idol in the heart; but
here in lay my comfort, when I by faith could have communion with God, and
coming near to him, could cast my burden upon him, and go away quiet in my
mind, that Christ would do all for me; and when I was vvilling, God shtould
do what he pleased with me, and my will was brought to his will; then
have I had the mercy I have asked, and more also many times.

I have found retired places and watchings, the best opportunities and
greatest advantages unto prayer.

Also I have had many temptations against prayer, but the best way to overcome
them, is to mind the command of Jesus Christ, which is that we should vvatch
unto prayer, and pray alvvayes, keep close to the duty in the strength of
Christ, and loose not the motions of the Spirit neither grieve the Spirit by
sin, but vvatch against all appearances of evil, for I hahave found that the
neglect of watchfulness against sin: and being overcome by it, does greatly
deaden the heart to duty; keep your eyes upon the promises by faith, look up
unto Christ in prayer, and let all take heed of setting up prayer, or any other
duty, above, or in the room of Jesus Christ.

I^ God assist you to pray for a mercy, though he give it not in presently, yet
hold on if your asking be according to his will, and your end the glory of God,
and ye find enlargment from the Spirit of life, you may be sure he will be
answer you in that thing or else in some thing better for you in his own
season.

My self sought the Lord 20 years, for one thing, before I had an answer, but
at last being at prayer, after I had done, God gave me in a most gracious
answer, and set down the very time of deliverance, and did accordingly
accomplish it at the very time; to him be the praise.

And many other things I have sought the Lord for, and he has been pleased to
grant my desire, especially when he has made me earnest and importunate, and
have assisted me to hold on, and given me a spirit of faith, to believe for the
thing prayed for.

Another time I sought the Lord for a relation of mine, who was thought to be
near unto death, and this was given in, call upon me in the day of trouble, I
vvil h^ar and deliver, and thou shall glorify me, and from that time that
person amended, and life was continued.

Also I knew another young person that was, by the word preached, convinced of
her sinsul state, and set upon the performance of some duties: but not being
acquainted with the wiles and temptations of Satan, afterward some deadness
ceasing upon her spirit, began to neglect her duty; but one in the family
perceiving of it, advised her to present her self before the Lord, and although
she found her self dead, yet to pray that she might pray, whose conucel she
took, and she continuing diligent, the Lord came in by the mighty witness of
his spirit, fully satisfying her soul in a very short time.

Further: oh! let all that fear God be encouraged to continue in, and not
neglect family duties, for I have found by good experience many wrought upon by
instructions and prayer, when their lot have been cast into those families,
where reading, praying, and Catechizing, and such duties have been faithfully
performed; o, many young ones have been brought home to God, by his blessing
upon this means!

And amongst many more I remember one who was very strongly assalted with many
temptariones to keep her from coming to, and clossing with Jesus Christ, and
this t^mptation was most upon her, that she was too young, and it would be time
enough afterward, why should she expose her self to scorn and reproach by
being called a Puritan, and so become a luaghing stock to others: but the Lord
was pleased to overcome her, and bring her to himself.

X Another also who set her self against them in the family, that wished her
souls good, and used all means to g^t out of that family, to which end also
she raised some lies, which very evil the Lord set upon her heart, and then she
came to be convinced of her sad sinful state, and was also brought home to God
through his rich grace in Jesus Christ.

And another who by this means was wrought upon that, was a young maid, a
Ministers Daughter, and had been well instructed and educated from a child,
whereby she was informed of the evils of scandalous sins and avoided them,
and was also very constant in the performance of duties; and indeed so vvalked
as none could see ought a mise in her conversation, yet notvvithstanding the
poor heart was ignorant of her self, and of Jesus Christ; but she being under
a family Catechizing, and instruction was (by the mighty power of the eternal
Spirits vvorking) convinced of original sin, and then she savv that (for all
her formality) she was a sinner, and had need of a Savior, and so was
brought home to close with Jesus Christ,

This also I have found, that a constant close secking of God has been crowned
with his presence, for I my self was with some others desired to pray to the
Lord for council, and direction for them; but they would not tell me in what
it was that they sought direction, yet notwithstanding I did not know the
thing, I set my self to seek God for them, and he was pleased to show me what
it was, (this was Anno 1657.) and I did pray God to let me know his mind in
that particular, and the Lord put it upon my heart to go and read, and the
place of Scripture handed to me, was quite against their work (at that time)
which they had upon their heart to do, then I sought the Lord again, and the
second answer was; go in and ^ead; then I looked up to the Lord as I did
before, and said, Lord, show me where I shall read, and that Scripture also was
flat against their work; and just so I had a third answer also: And the next
day as I was at my work my heart and meditations were above, and my secret
desire still to God for the further teachings of his good Spirit, and these
following lines (with much more) came in as a further answer from the Lord:

As for the work of Babylon,
It is a mighty work, and strong:
But yet my power shall it complete,
For my wisdom it mighty great:
They must sit still, behold my power,
Which works for them hour by hour.
And now my dear Christian friends, into whose hands this my poor mite, shall
come I desire you take notice of that great love and wonderful grace of God,
which he has been pleased to manifest in giving in such sweet returus of
prayer, let him alone have the praise, and be ye all encouraged and stirred up
to pray continually, and be very watchful, that if at any time God do move you
to do any thing, do it with all your might, according to the assistanco the
Lord gives you; for I have found it a great grieving of the spirit to put it of
with delays, through carnal reasonings of the flesh, which indeed would have
hindreed me in offering of these few experiences to the view of the world:
but when God was pleased to give me a heart to it, and I set upon it with a
resolution in his strength to go through it, not with standing all opposition:
Oh! then, was the Lord pleased to come in again, and fill my soul with peace
and joy unspeakable, and full of glory; which was to my great refreshment I
being then in a strange Land (Holand) separated from Country, kindred, and
fathers house; yea there, and then did our good God (according to what I had
wont to have) give into my spirit heavenly Allelujas, both night and day, with
many sweet Instructions from him self (when it was with us as it were a time of
famine of the word) our Teathers being removed into corners, and thrown into
prisons (in the Year 1662.) O! how was I then stirred up by the teachings of
that good Spirit, often to praising, and often to very earnest prayer (as for
my self, so for his poorasslicted persecuted people) and then also I found my
heart much enlarged to love, and to do good, and lay out my self for sa ints of
all persuasions, yea and all others also as I had opportunity. And upon this
ground because my dear Redeemer, the Lord Jesus, has set me a pattern to do
good to all, and what talent soever we do recieve, we must lay it out to his
praise (if it be but one) and it shall be increased: this I have had experience
of, be not backward to improve thy talent, because another may have more then
thou, that springs from a root of pride, and negligence is the way to loose
what thou have, but look up to God for a blessing upon the right use of what
thou have received, and if he sees it good that thou may better honor him
with more he will give in thee in his own way and time, for then shall ye know
if ye follow on to know the Lord. Hose. 6. 3. It is also promised, that they
who be planted in the house of the Lord like a watered Gardin shall they grow
and flourish, and bring forth fruit in their old age: Psa. 92: 12, 13. Further,
o! let all the beloved of the Lord take a specialcare of every Gospel ordinance
and commandment of our Lord, to hold forth what light you have received, for
there is non of the ordinances of the Gospel to be slighted, for they hold out
unto us those choice privileges that were purchased for us with the precious
blood of Jesus Christ, I have found great peace, and enjoyed much of Gods
presence in waiting upon him in the way of his appointments, and I have found
the Lord (not leaving but) teaching of me, when I out of conscience have
forborne where they were not tobe enjoyed, according to the rule of the
Gospel, and expose my self to any suffering to enjoy them in the purity of them,
and indeed God does take special notice of them who they be, and where they
dvvell, Revel. 2: 13. that in sore persecuting and suffering times hold fast
his truths, and do not deny his name, Mal. 3: 16, and has promised that they
who keep the word of his patience shall be keept in the hour of temptation.

And when he has humbled us, he will show us the pattern of his house, the
goings out, and the comings in thereof, and the fashions, Laws, and ordinances
thereof, that we may do them. Ezekiel. 43: 11.

And the time does hasten that God will turn to the people a pure Language.

And all shall know the Lord from the least to the greatest.

And he will lead the blind in a way that they know not, he will make darkness
become light, and crooked things straight, and bitter things sweet, and hard
things easy; and this he will do, and not forsake us.

Further let none be discouraged to do their duty, though never so weak, yet if
thou be acted by the Spirit of God, weak means often times becomes
effectual to accomplish great things, for by experience also I know when some
persons have been praying together, that one being senceable of the state of
the other, and mourning over their sin before the Lord, God have made use of
those very mournings and breathings, to convince the other of their sinful
state, with the danger of it, and thereby have been caused to turn from sin
unto the Lord, whose eyes were never opened before.

One Maid who by this means was convinced, and said nothing at present, but
after prayer retiring herself to her Bible, with a purpose to see what word of
comfort she could find there, and it pleased God to hand to her that place,
Romans 8: 13. For if ye live after the flesh ye shall die: but if ye through the
Spirit do mortisy the deeds of the body, ye shall live: which word God did make
very powerful and effectual to help forward his work upon her soul.

All these speak forth the freeness of Gods rich grace, therefore who ever
reads and under stands what is in this free workings of God, good Spirit,
let him alone have all the praise and glory; and the Lord inclined my heart
every day more and more to praise him: for his unchangeable love in Jesus
Christ, therefore let them that read this give God praise for this undeserved
mercy; and let me have a share in your prayers, that I may be filled with a
spirit of praise: for none have more cause then I to speak well of his great
and holy name, and that I may honor God that little time that I have to live
upon the earth, and that in all changes.

For if God sees affliction to be good for me, I desire not to despise his
chastizements; for I have found more strength in a great affliction then in a
little one, and my soul has been filled with joy out of measure.

Therefore if we be brought to this, take joyfully the spoiling of our goods,
knowing we have a better inheritance, and the giving up all to the will of God,
who gave all to us, we shall have all given to us with advantage, oh! the
fullness of him that fills all in all, but I am nothing, and can do nothing,
no longer then he does assist, therefore praise him for ever more.

And since I was taken of from my encumbrances in the world, and had more time
to spend in the ways and work of God: waiting on him for more of himself, the
Lord (according to his promise) has revealed himself more abundantly, and I
have found that a cheerful watchful diligent spirit in ones general and
particular calling is a great help to prevent mispending time, for of idleness
comes no good, therefore it has been my practice, that if I can do no good,
nor receive good, not to stay in that place long.

Oh! let us be wary how we spend our precious time, for it hat a lock before,
but none behind: I am of a fearful timorous spirit naturally, but I find it a
great help to dash Babilons brats in the first rice.

I was about 14 years in the pangs of the new birth before I received the
witness of the spirit, in which time I was exceeding troubled with my
unbelieving heart through entertaining false fears: and indeed some thing of
Jesus Christ was in me all that while: Althoug sometimes I could not with
comfort be hold him through that thick cloud of my many Iniquities and I never
found Satan more foiled, and my own corruptions more subdued, then when I by
faith could look up unto Gods unchangeable love in Jesus Christ, though I be a
poor changeable creature, and verily I have found great gain in true Godliness.

And now friends, give me leave to tell you these are mine experiences, and I
fear it would be burden some to you, if I should be larger, which I could be:
but give me leave to tell you the conclusion of all what I endeavor after,
which is to press after the mark of the high calling, to deny my self, and look
up to him that is perfect, and who presents all his perfect without spot or
wrinkle.

Not to him that works only, but to him that believes, for he is holy, I
desire to observe all the Commands of Christ as my rule of life, but I am not
here by justified, but alone by a righteousness out of my self, there fore I
say none but Christ, not by works of rightcousness that we do, but by faith
are we saved, and that not of our selves it is the gift of God, for he that
kindles a fire and composeth himself about with the sparks thereof, he shall
lie down in sorrow, Isa. 50:11. for a man may do much in outward performances,
and yet not have a heart right with God: the foolish virgins had lamps of
profession as well as the wise, but they had not oil; so the young man in the
Gospel said to Christ, he had observed all the Commandments from his youth,
what lacked he yet, but to deny himself, and to part with what he had for
Christ, to take up the cross and to follow him, which he could not do, except
Christ had given him a righteous heart for all his outward seeming
righteousness?

So the Scribes and Pharisees blamed Christ for all his righteous actions, but
could not see the Idol in th^r own hearts, for all their righteousness sprung
not from a right root, nor was done by a right rule, nor to a right end.

1. First, they had not grace in their hearts.

2. Secondly, neither did they do what they did by the rule of the word of God,
but by their own rule.

3. What they did was for their own glory to get them praise from men, and not
to the glory of God, Amos 4: 4, 5, 6. the which is an abomination to the Lord;
this sacrifice God is weary of, it is as the ^ffering of Swines blood, and the
cutting of a Dogs neck before the Lord, this made Cains sacrifice to be
unacceptable in the sight of God; man's righteousness is as monstrous clothes,
and filthy rags, that comes ^ot not from a heart sanctified where Christ
dwells; al though it be garnished with never so much parts and gifts, the Lord
looks upon the inward righteousness of the heart.

Parts and gifts may cease, but the least measure of true grace shall hold out
to the end.

And what soever is parts and not grace, bear not these following Characters
upon them, such have not the spirit, now the spirit is Truth, light, and love.

1. First, the spirit of truth joins with the word of truth; if an Angel from
heaven should bring any other doctrine, we are not to receive it, and them that
believe and trust in the promise it leads into all truth, wait for the
accomplishment of the promise of the spirit, to teach you all things, and bring
all things to your remembrance, which he has promised shall remain with us
always, John 14: 16.

This is a good antidote against error, this teaching for the most part, abides
and forms the soul into it self.

The more of this truth and light comes in, the more a soul abhorres it self,
sees it is own emptiness, and Christ's fullness.

The more of this light comes into the soul, the more it thirsts after light.

The more knowledge it has of God, the more it loves God, which conformes it
into his image, and the more it delights in God, and loves them most that have
most of God in them, Ps* 16. all my delight is in the Saints, and them that are
excellent in the earth.

The true spirit delights in all the commands of God, which shows true love to
God, if you love me keep my Commandments; Jo. 14: 15, 16. and I will pray the
Father and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for
ever.

It is a meek and a quiet spirit, it hates pride and lifting up; it sees enough
in it self daily to humble it; Its full of love to all that God loves, though
differing from them; by this shall all men know that you are my Disciples, if
you have love one to another. Joh. 13: 35

We know that we are passed from death to life; because we love the brethren.
1. Joh. 3: 14.

Now the reason why we should cherish this grace of love to God, his people,
and all men are these.

First, because without love, which is charity, we are but as sounding brass or
tinckeling Cymbals, all we do without this is nothing. 2 Cor. 13.

Secondly, because Christ has said, because Iniquity shall abound, the love of
many shall wax cold in the last days. Mat. 24. 12.

Thirdly, because it is one of Christ's last and great Commandments. John. 13:
34. 1. of Joh. 2. 7. 8.

Fourthly, it renders us much like unto our Master Christ Jesus, Acts. 10: 38.
who went about doing good to all; let us labor to follow his example, show
pity to them, that God has not yet showed so much pity to, as he has done
unto us; do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that dispitefully use
you. Mat. 5. 44: 45.

These were Gods teachings to me in the absence of faithful Teachers, when
they were removed into corners; Which was a sore affliction to me, but I look
at what mercy God afoards me in all afflictions, seeing I am unvvorthy of the
least mercy, for it were a righteous thing with God to cut us of, and I
marvailed at his patience and long suffering with me, and all others.

I find by experience that reading the Scripture before prayer many times
quickens the heart to Christ.

And to meditate on Gods mercies to our souls and bodies; and what great
things Christ has suffered to purchase these mercies for us: is a great help
to stir up to that heavenly duty of praising and thankfulness: which is a maine
duty I would stir up my self and others unto, because our hearts are apt to be
very backward unto it; and secondly, because it is a duty to be done at all
times. In all things give thanks, yea in afflictions: For God has promised,
all shall work together for good to them that love God. Thirdly, to be filled
with the Spirit of praises, makes the soul to live in heaven while it is on
earth: verily, we had need be stirred up to this duty; for he that offers
praise glorifies God. Psalm. 50. last verse.

And Jesus Christ complains against the neglect of it, in that place where the
ten Leppers were cleansed, and but one did return thanks: says Christ, was
there not ten cleused, but where are the nine? O! athankful frame does compose
the heart to great contentedness in every condition: it is of a divine nature:
it stirs up the graces of God in the soul, as love and faith with hope in God
and charity to others.

Therefore pray for the Spirit of God, to put the heart into a praising frame
for there is need of the exercise of much heavenly wisdom in the performance of
this duty: for ^t is a spiritual work.

Another experience I have had that it is our duty, and very profitable to
watch against all evil thoughs: these ften grieve the holy Spirit of God; as of
old he complained, how long shall vain thoughts lodge within you, and God
looking upon man, beholding what was in his heart, and seeing his thoughts to
be evil only, and continually, and it repented the Lord that he had made man
on the earth, and it grieved him at the heart; and God said, I will distroy man
whom I have created from the facre of the earth, Genesis 5: 6. And then down comes
the flood of Gods displeasure upon the old world, not for sinful actions only,
but thoughts also: Therefore keep your hearts with all diligence, Prove. 4: 23.
For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: And in the multitude
of words is sin.

I would desire all to take heed of idle words: and mind well what ye speak,
when and how; avoid all needless speeches: and put far away all vain foolish
jesting; an evil, which my self was some times very prone too, and as too many
do harm by, I endeavored to make my self and others merry: but alas, 't is
sinful mirth, and it will bring sadness here, or else which is worse, end in
sorrow hereafter: thus was I convinced of this ev^l being upon a joyrney,
meeting one that was a stranger to me, thinking to make him and my self laugh:
spoake jestingly to him; but he presently fella swearing and cursing, and
railing; which when I heard, wounded me to the heart, that I by my folly should
provoke the poor man so to sin against God, my mirth soon turned into mourning.
And while I mourned before the Lord over this my great evil, which had produced
such a sad effect, God was pleased to set this upon my heart. Cannot I make
thee more merry with heavenly and spiritual joy, then thou can make thy self
with such foolish vain and sinful mirth. And the Lord has since filled me
with that sweet refreshing joy: that is a thousand times better to me then all
sinful mirth.

Further, in reference to words, I would commend unto you some Scripture rules:
Iam. 1: 26. compared with Math. 12: 27. from whence we may observe, that when
any person does utter words that be vain, earthly, or froward, it does plainly
manifest that there is an earthly, vain, and froward heart; which is an
abomination to the Lord, Prove. 11: 20. and in Iam. 1: 19. The Apostle does
persuade Christians to be swift to hear, but slow to speak, and slow to wrath.
And Jesus does exhort his followers that their yea should be yea, and their nay
nay; saying, that what soever is more is evil: And Iams 1: 21. bids us lay
apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness: that is to say, what ever
is more then needful in words, apparel, and diet; yea, and in all things, and
what ever profession any person may make, if they bridle not their tongue, they
deceive themselves and their Religion is vain; has God through his free grace,
passed his distinguishing love upon a little Remnant: doubtless 't is their
duty then to distinguish themselves from others, in their words habit, and in
their whole conversation so to walk as becomes the Gospel: Phil. 1: 27.
Surely if persons were awakened by the voice of God, that speaks loud in the
present afflictions, they would so do* 't now is not a time for any of Gods
Children to continue their superfluities, when many do want necessaries: Let me
entreat such to read, and mind what is written in Romans 12: 1, 2. And 1 Pet. 2:
11. If we could but be moderate in the use of all things: what good Stewards
should we be of the manifold blessings of God; which he has betrusted us with,
and we must give an account of in the day of the Lord.

Prosperity has made many to glory in the flesh; and exalt themselves, in,
which vain glory some still do continue: although the great Eternal God has
and does testify from heaven against it, but if it be not repented of, and
departed from, God will turn it into shame, Hosea 4: 7. As they were increased,
so they sinned against me, therefore will I change their glory into shame: its
now a trying time, and all persons by their conversations will discover what
they are, and were ever the deeds and works of the flesh appear, and are
allowed, 't is evident there is not the Spirit of God in them: And they who have
not the Spirit of Christ are none of his: And 't is not a talking of, but
walking in the Spirit, will help against the fulfilling the lusts of the flesh,
and manifest who are the true Children of God. Oh! that persons were wise, to
consider their latter end, then surely they would not neglect the knowledge of
those things that belong to their peace: but choose that better part, that shall
never be taken from them. Which would make them happy for ever.

Oh! that all would be persuaded to commune with their own hearts, and consider
their own ways: And to mind the dreadful Judgments of God, and his vials of
wrath that shall be powered out against sin and sinners, surely they would see
it is high time to depart from pride, vain glory, coveteousness, oppression,
hypocrisy, malice, and all sin: For verily, God is visiting for these things,
and for persons still to continue therein, may it not be feared and justly
exspected, that God should increase his Judgments, and punish seven times
more: Leit. 26: 21, 24. They who depart not from sin God will depart from
them: and how sad that is let souls consider: read Hosea 9: 11, 12, 14.

Therefore who ever would not be eternally separated from God, let them in
time separate from all sin: And let poor souls take special heed they live
not in any known evil, nor neglect any known duty, but put on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and make no provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof; for if
ye live after the flesh ye shall dye: But if ye through the Spirit do mortify
the deeds of the body, ye shall live, Romans 8: 13. let me propound but this on
question, and I vvish all young and old, Rich and poor to mind it, whether or
no it is not better to separate from sin, then that sin should separate thee
from God for ever.

Oh! what need is there, that all who love God and their own souls, should
hate, abhor, and depart from all sin, because 't is that which God does so
hate, as he will punish it where ever he finds it. Yea, if a David, a Man
after Gods own heart do commit any sin, he must be reproved for it; and God
will so frovvne as it may cost many sigths, prayers, and tears, before God
restore unto him the joy of his salvation, and though secretly committed, yet
God will punish openly that others may hear and fear. 2 Samuel 12: 12.

Oh! how have I found by sad experience, that pride is a breeding sin, and
spiritual pride is indeed the very vvorst, when persons come to have a little
knowledge of the things of God, and have set a fevv steeps in his vvayes: Many
be too prone, then to be puffed up with self conceit, and to judge all others
to be in errors, who are not just of their persuasion; and so to judge
censure, and condemn them for Heretics: and to persecute them at least with
the tongue, but though sometimes Paul did thus; he acknowledges it was from a
Pharisaical spirit, which we had all need to take heed of: and judge not; and
ye shall not be judged. Alas! our heavenly Father have many children, but there
be babes and some strong men: they are not all of an age, nor cannot all see
alike, not act alike; let all the beloved of God (cease smi^ing and) manifest
true love one another. And what ever their persuasion be all who are humble
and holy, and do faithfully walk up to the light they have received, let them
be beloved for the Fathers sake. Oh! that we may be filled with that grace of
true Charity; for that is a special antidote against all pride, malice and any
evil thoughts, and evil speakings, and prejudice, and offenses one against
another. 1 Cor. 13: 1, 4. etc. There we may read at large of the excellency of
true charity. Oh! the more any one is filled with the good Spi it of God, the
more shall they be enabled against all the works and fruits of the flesh;
therefore I would counsel persons when they awake, vvait for the teachings
of the Spirit, and for the accomplishment of that promise made to the last
days. And what the Spirit teaches do ye commit to the Spirits keeping: and
they, with whom it is the day of Gods power are made vvilling both to hear
the Spirits voice, and obey it.

And I would have all to endeavor diligently for the enjoyment of the Spirit,
and hearken every one that has an ear: what it speaks, for the teachings
thereof are very glorious; it makes a soul live as it were in heaven while on
earth. Surely when Daniels faith was made strong by the enjoyment of this
blessed Spirit of God, so as nothing could hinder him from the worship of God.
Oh! what svveet communion did he enjoy with God, and although thrown into
the lions den, yet there wonderfully and comfortably preserved, I have found
this, that we are too ready to despise or slight the Spirit of God, when it
appears in something beyond us, or out of our reach, but let us take heed of
this evil also.

This good Spirit of God is that which will enable us to choose to suffer
rather then to sin, and in all our suffering it will wonderfully assist and
uphold us, and carry through the forest fiery trials, and if we be thrown into
sufferings for Christ sake, be sure he vvil make one with us to uphold us in
the furnis; and we need not study how we shall be delivered from our
ennemies, for God will deal with them as he did with Daniel, and the three
Children; for he will recompense the wickedness of the wicked upon their own
heads; therefore fear not, but stand still and vvait, and you shall see the
salvation of God. And I do not think that these things be given in to me from
the Lord for my own sake only, but for your benefit, to whom it may come;
and I hope I am so far from having high thoughts of my self, that the more I
see of God, and enjoy from God, so much the more cause I have to be humble; and
if others find theirhearts as bad as I have found mine, they will see cause
enough to use all means with them; and when allis done; it must be faith in
Jesus Christ must remove this mountain; faith will carry us out of ourselves
unto Christ, and cause us to rest on him to do all our works for us, and in
us, do ye cherish a holy fear against sin, and an holy bouldness to come to
God, and a holy confidence in him for what we come for, and let not the fear
of man hinder from any duty God calls thee unto; to conclude, I only commend
unto you that word in Micha 6: 8. So shall I leave this to the blessing of the
Lord, and the consideration of the wise.

COURTEOUS READER,
IF these my Experiences suit not with thy condition, yet let it have a patient
view of thee, and pass by what is of the flesh, Own what is of the spirit, and
Judge not, what thou shall meet with of the truth: because thou art not yet
acquainted in that way, for the secrets of God are sometime with pore weak ones
that sears him, and what is come to pass I hope you will believe; If it was not
out of obedience to God, it should not have com'd to your view, neither would I
have put my name to it, if I could have avoided it, for fear of the rash
Judgment of some, Least it should be thought, I did it out of pride, or to own
a prophetical spirit, which I know not, But I own a Prophetical voice of
Christ, which if he pleases to speak, he can make me to hear, yea to believe,
this I have Experience of: And if these Crumes which I have gathered from my
bountiful Lords table, you cann^t find it savory to you, leave it to the hungry
broaken hearted Christians, to wh^^ ever crumbe of mercy is sweet, when it
comes out of love from our blessed Savior. And let not this be despised,
because it is the Spirits working in the weakes^ vessel; for Christ did not
reject the woman though weak, ignorant, and sinful; and where he has forgiven
much, he makes them love much, and follow him to the las^, especially if they
keep the word of his patience, holding fast to every truth of God, though it be
in an evil time when truth is despised.

Mary followed Christ to the last, and the Lord did so assist her with his
Spirit, who showed her strong affections to him, gonig early in the mornning to
the sepulcher, and Christ put this honor upon her, that she must bring the
first glad tidings of the Gospel of the resurrection unto the Disciples.

And his appearance to her in that season, when she knew not where to seek him.

Christ herein showed his great Love to sinners; for she being a poor ignor ant
woman, though full of affection, did as many of us do now a days, seek the
living among the dead: but where Christ keeps up the affections of a soul to
himself, he manifests more of the knowledge of himself; and Christ does testify
in John. 4. Th^^ it was his meat and drink to do his fathers will, and that was
to teach the poor t^^ knowledge of his will. And when he made known himself to
that poor woman, (...) affections where so enlarged that she goes and calls
others ver. 34. thus Christ finished the work of his father, to take care of
the weakest of his stock, that as the woman was first in the transgression, she
might have first knowledge of the resurrection* the gift of the well of watter,
which springs up unto everlasting life: and this gift God is pleased to give
it unto women as well as unto men.

And he does require that they should honor him as well as men, for the free
grace of God in Christ as wel^ to the one as the other, and 't is his free
grace that I am what I am; and if this small mite be not accepted (by all,) I
shall take it as an high honor to suffer for well-doing; for though in my self
I am low, and find the flesh would hinder, and my memory bad, yet I can through
grace say, the spirit has been my remembrance, and in the simplicity of my
heart I have done this, and out of obedience to my good God, which makes the
Son of righteousness to shine on the weak and on the strong. And truly I have
nothing to glory in, for I never did see my self so weak as now, and since I
had communion night and day with God, I never was so much in self-loathing and
abhorring as now; therefore praise the Lord with me, for I am a poor sinful
creature, and I desire that all that fear the Lord, to whom this shall come,
would pray earnestly to God for me, that I may stand fast in this evil day, and
may walk humbly, blamelesly, and very harmlesly toward all: so that I may
honor him which has honored me, with his Son, to whom be glory and praise
for ever.

Now, to testify to all that I have received (from the Lord) that gift of
singing as well as the gift of prayer, and any other, therefore I shall present
to your view some of those Hymns and spiritual Songs: with an account how and
when they were given in; and so shall leave it to the spiritual to Judge.

As I was waiting on the Lord, in that Ordinance of the Lords Supper, this
following short Hymn was immediately given in.
O Now my soul go forth with praise,
For God excepteth thee always;
Thy life is bound up now in me,
My precious death has set thee free.
This Testimony I thee give,
At this bread was broaken, so was I,
That thou in me might never dye:
My blood does justify the same,
That thou may praise my holy Name.
My Covenant I have made with thee,
So that thou art now whole set free:
Sin nor Sa^han cannot thee charge,
Because my love has thee enlarged,
So sure as I am plas 't above,
So sure art thou now of my love.
Your waiting shall be upon me, till I your souls has filled; and in the way
of righteousness you shall be made to yield.

Another time I having been waiting on the Lord in breaking bread: And soon
after was given in this following.
THE Spring is come the dead is g^ne,
Sweet streams of love does flow:
There is a Rock, that you must knock,
from whence these stream do go.
The Banquets s^t, the King is come,
To entertain his Guest:
All that are weary of their sins,
He waits to g^ve them rest.
Then come, and take your fill of love,
Here Is joy enough for all,
To see our King so richly clad,
And g^ve so loud a call.
Here Is Wine without money or price:
Here Is milk to nurish babes:
You may come to this banquet now,
And f^ede of it most large.
Then comf^rt you your selves in him;
It Is sweet to see his love,
That they, that are redeemed by him,
May live so free above.
And while the afflicting hand of God was upon me in some measure, this
following was given in one evening, as a song of instruction.
AFflictions are not from the dust,
Nor are they in vain sent:
But they shall work the work of him,
That is most nobly Bent.
Then let thine eyes look upon him,
Which works in the dark;
And let thine heart embrace his love,
Least thou from him should start.
Although thou can not see his work,
Yet wait on him with joy;
For none shall hinder now his work,
Nor none shall him Anoy.
Thou must be willing to take up
The cross, to follow him,
And wait till he will make his cup,
To flow up to the brim.
Seeing thou art now called unto
The purpose of his will,
Let not afflictions trouble thee,
Believe, and stand thou still.
If that the Lord did not thee love,
He would not this pains take,
To let thee see his grace in thee,
And also thee awake.
It s^owers away the dr^s^^ from thee,
And takes away thy tin:
It makes thy soul sit for to hear
The voice of thy sweet King.
It makes the soul further to know
The Sonship of his grace;
And weanes the soul from things below,
That it may seek his face.
It puts the wise to see his work,
And puts him in the way,
That he may forthwith seek the Lord,
Without further delay.
It mak^s him now resolve upon
Obedience to his grace;
And watchful in the way he goes,
That he may seek his face.
It makes him look for strenght from God,
To heal his sliding back:
It makes him look up to the Rock,
For that which he dot lack,
This was November the 20. in the Year 1656.
ZION is God's precious plant,
The Lord will vvatter it every day:
O! Zion is God's holy one,
It shall not whet her nor decay.
Zion is that fenced well,
A Tovver that none shall throvv dov^n:
O! Zion is that glorious hold,
That God will keep both safe and sovvnd.
Zion is that pleasant Plant,
That God will hedge about each hour;
O! Zion is Gods heritage,
And he will keep it by his power.
Therefore let not thy heart now faint,
For Zions sake hold not thy peace;
For our God will hear Zions Plaint;
Therefore give thy God now no rest,
Till thou with Zion he has blessed.
Let Zion know her time draws near,
She may look up now without fear:
Let Zion know her God does live,
That has her portion for to give.
Let Zions Children now rejoice,
And let hem praises sing:
O! let them lift up pleasant voice,
In honor to their King.
Let Zion know her God is true,
That will her mercies now renew,
She shall receive great things from him,
Who is her glory, and her King.
Althoug afflictions should hold on,
And troubles should arise;
Yet God will own his precious one,
Their prayers he will not despise.
Our King shall reign in righteousness,
His glory shall shine forth;
He will come forth in Judgment then, For the confirmation hereof do ye mind
these two Scriptures Esai. 45: 13. and Psalm 89: 19.

For his poor saints comfort.
Our King shall reign in glory then,
He shall himself come up,
His ennemies then shall fall with speed
And be made but a puf.
Then let my people quiet sit,
And vvait on him with joy;
There is a time draws near at hand,
Nothing shall them Anoy.
THE poor then of the flock shall find a rest;
And I their God, and portion, will them bless:
And they shall to me for a refuge fly,
And I will be their help continually.
Then shall their souls alone in me rejoice,
That I have made of them my only choice;
I will sill them in that day with my power,
So they shall vvait on me then every hour.
Their soul shall be as vvattered plants with dew,
And I my mercy will to them renew;
Their heats shall be engaged with my love,
For I will move in them from power above.
This is the portion that I now will give,
Unto all those that strifes humbly to live;
Therefore rejoice in God your only guide
Which in this day of trouble will you hide.
END.
Awake, awake, put on my strength,
And mine own comelyness,
Look upon me for I have
Wroght thy deliverance.
Thou art black, but comely in
Mine eyes, that does behold
Thee swearing mine own righteousness,
Which glory can not becould.
I waited long on thee, to see,
When thou would me ^mbrace,
And when thou would look up to me,
To see my glorious face.
And now, what say thou unto me?
Have I not done thee good?
And have not spared to set thee free,
(...) own Sons precious blood.
Therefore let all thy life be now
A sacrifice of praise,
And to my holiness give up
Thy self in all my ways.
Let not the World so sad thy heart,
Nor cast thee down solow,
For ^f thou wait upon my grace,
My secrets thou shall know.
Be watchful, and keep do close to me^
Thy Garments: do not stain;
And that will be to thy poor soul,
A certain heavenly gain.
Take heed of glorying in my love
But walk humbly and low,
^or it is only my fullness,
That makes thee thus to flow.
There is by paths to wander in,
That Satan would advance,
But I will keep thee by my power,
And be thy deliverance.
Be watchful and keep close to me,
My Garments do not soil,
For they are thine to cover thee;
Be watchful then a while.
OH! where shall I find now
A people quickened still,
That seek all times to live on God,
And eck to do his will.
A people that deny them selves,
And eck the cross up take,
That does delight in God alone,
And eck the World for sake.
A people that abhor themselves,
And over their sins weep,
A people mourning o'r the Land,
And does him daily seek.
A people that believes in God,
By faith draws virtue still;
Lay hold on promise which is true
Contented with his will.
A people that the word esteem,
Keeping close there daily,
And for a rule the same does take,
When others from it fly.
Their hearts are fastened on the Lord,
They for are fuge fly,
That God would now help by his power,
In their extremity.
Their cries are now unto the Lord,
Thy seek in him to hide,
To take of now his heavy hand,
And not let wrath abide
With such a people would I spend,
My life and days now here:
Oh! think upon thy servant Lord,
And to me now dravv near.
I assure you COURTEOUS READER these are not studed things, but are given in
immediately.

FIN.

