Numb. 1. Mercurius Academicus: Communicating the Intelligence and Affairs of
OXFORD to the rest of the Passive party thorowout the Kingdom.
From Monday in Easter-week, to Saturday the 15 of April, Anno 1648.
Et Spes, and Ratio Studiorum in Caesare tantum.
IF loosers have leave to speak, Academicus needs no Apology or Preamble to
stuff his sheet, and make full measure (as the fashion is) with vantage and
thumb breadths to inch it out. And therefore to hold the Loyal and honest
hearted in suspense no longer (who would hear from their Mother, I presume) we
shall endeavor the like speed in relating, as our Visitors in acting
Mischiefs; not letting our phant'sie loose, or dancing about the Matter as we
might do, which on evident symptoms of her Recovery, we shall in a more
compacted style and elevated vein attempt hereafter. In the mean while, it is
worthy out observation what a seasonable time they pitch on to set forward
their Reformation-journey: For having begun on March 27, (his Majesty's
Coronation-day) they have proceeded ever since most vigorously. And lest that
Antichristian and Heathenish custom of being in charity with all the world at
Easter should continue as heretofore, they make choice of this time on set
purpose to interrupt and take men (...) beautiful and glorious object before
their eyes, even a full body of Regulating members met together.

Where first, that they might establish and promote Christ's Kingdom (which a
long time has been their promise to the world) to do it the nearest way, they
fall upon his Church with might and main: For, meeting on Easter. eve in
Christ-Church-Hall to summon the members of that Foundation to appear on monday
in Easter week in the Deans Lodgings, accordingly the game began very early
upon that morning (such an Holy Day makes mischief relish) when by a posted
Paper they ordained that Doctor FELL should immediately remove his family and
household goods, and yield up possession to Master EDWARD RAINOLDS (a Visitor)
as his lawful successor by Vote in Parliament: But finding the Religious
Matron his wife unwilling to part with all for asking it, who therefore with
her young ones kept under Lock and Key to avoid the expected Tyranny of their
Oppressors, they resolve now, vi and Armis, to subdue her spirit, and make her
yield, having the Soldiery at their back to help them forwards, ( Independents
to settle the Directory, i^ very pretty!) who with directions given from
Engineer-Vulcan- Rogers, and their own acquired Dexterity in the trade, brake
open the dissenting Doors; where entering into the choicest rooms, they
expected obedience unto their Summons: But that Royal Foundation could
acknowledge no Visitor but King CHARLES, which by a general absenting
themselves the mock- Visitors might perceive; although the Founder and they may
seem of kin, and the very same Motto serve to know them both, (Ego and Rex
Meus) which the Cardinal (as well as they) even unto this day is famous for.

Having cooled themselves by sitting still uninterrupted by any company but
their own all-knowing Consciences, and a domestic Cat or two, they express
their discontents in writing, and post it in public view, as follows.

WHereas many members of this University have by studied delays endeavored to
retard the great work of Reformation intended by the Parliament; we the
Visitors of the said University, having information given us that some Members
pretend to have taken no Arms up against the Parliament, but upon constraint;
and others to have been Soldiers only in this Garrison for the preservation
thereof, and therefore desire the benefit of the sixteenth Article concluded on
at the surrender of Oxon; do hereby allow such persons until Friday the 7 of
April, to bring in their several Pleas and Pretensions (whereby they conceive
themselves capable of receiving favor) under their own handwriting, to any
one Visitor that shall be present; to be adjudged of by any five at their
Convention. But if any one shall refuse this so fair an offer, we know not what
Apology to make for them when we shall be called upon (we cannot tell how
soon) to give a just account of our Proceedings; where we desire all to take
notice, that no frivolous or vain pretenses will avail in this so weighty a
work of Reformation.


This was no sooner pulled down, but a second supplied his place, which ran in
these words, as follows.

WE the Visitors, appointed by several Ordinances of Parliament, and special
Order under the Great Seal, for the visiting, regulating and reforming the
University of Oxon; do hereby cite to appear before us, all Governors,
Masters, Fellows, and Graduates that claim any right of Vote in
Convocation-house; more particularly, Doctor Potter, late President of Trinity.
College; Doctor Newlin, President of Corpus Christi- College; Master Waring
of Christ-Church, Master Hunt of Magdalene- College, late Proctors of the
University, with all the D^ligates elected in the pretended Convocation on the
first of June last past, to make their appearance on Friday the 7 of April, to
give in their Pleas and Scruples in behalf of the University, and deliver up
all the Insignia of the late Vice Chancellor and Proctors, with the Beadles
staves, unto us: Of which fail not, as you will answer at your perils.


But these Paper-Kytes were so hooted at, that they appeared thereby more
ridiculous: whereupon they got up on horseback to conduct the renowned
Chancellor to do the feat; who on Tuesday the 11 of April came amongst us
accompanied with such Tag rags for his followers, that one would swear he came
Ambassador from New England by their Rabbinical Monkey faces, or that old
England made a general Muster of all her Spawns at once.

The Master of the Revels was no sooner come, but Orlando Furioso CHEYNEL
begins the Play, who stood ready at Merton-Colledge provided with a Speech to
entertain him, (which his Lordship and his horse did understand alike:) After
that, a most costly Bible was presented him, and a Gratuity from the Mayor and
Aldermen: the later he accepted, and gave them thanks; but the former he
thought a jeer put on him, and bequeathed it to his Chaplain to make his best
of.

In the evening, Orders were given out that a Convocation should be the day
following, and the new made Beadles to acquaint the Gown men with it; who
having got a copy of the form to divulge it in, proclamied it in false Latin
most significantly.

Which the Rabble took notice of more then others, and repaired accordingly to
see the sight, which in earnest was worth their labor: for his Lordship with
his immediate substitute, and their adjutants Cross and Button, with the
Visitors and their appurtenances, being come omnium gatherum into the
Convocation-house, proposed a new Creation to the world, but was not heard by
reason of the noise and hissing, such as never was before in that place, since
Adam was first created.

This caused his mouth to open, after admiration of his learned silence; who
now told them the common way was broken down, and as the case now stood was
useless, they having got by conquest all the Power, and adventured their
dearest blood to purchase it; Proctor Cross confirming the same in the Speech
he read aloud, with tautological and more schol^stick Anglicisms, then the mixed
multitude could understand with patience, who sufficiently exploded his
unbeseeming ignorance, and went their way.

But the work of Creation must go forwards; and therefore Proclamation was made
to all persons whatsoever, that had laid aside their Allegiance and Learning
for the seven late years of trouble, and been occupied in employments of any
other nature, to nominate what degree they stood for, and 'twas their own;
provided they continued in the same opinion still, to be faithful to their
Creator and his Nursery, which may be famous in aftertimes, and flourish. Nay,
the two factions did so claw each other in this Assembly, that the Officers (to
make them Gentlemen) (though Independents) were created Masters of Arts, the
Governor himself not excepted; so that now they may preach by their authority,
who have railed against them in their Sabbath-workings ever since Frank Cheynel
and Master Erbury fought their Scripture-Duel.

This Comedy was no sooner ended, but a Tragedy succeeds upon it. For coming
with all the train to Christ-Church, they enter the Vice-Chancellors house with
expedition, where Earl Philip (without an oath) professing 'twas for his
Countries good, the Virtuous and Heroic Gentlewomen were desired to quit their
quarters; but refusing the kind proposal, were conveyed out in a chair by
Soldiers; one of them using this expression without the least sign of
discontent, that though now she was carried away in a chair, she doubted not to
come thither hereafter upon her own legs again.

And because the head cannot suffer singly, unless the members partake and
share with it, while their hand is in, they obliterate these following Doctors
from being Canons; viz. Doctor Hammond Orator to the University (whom Corbet a
Visitor succeeds in Office, and would speak if he had a spoon, or words to
utter) Doctor Gardener, Doctor Isles, Doctor Pain, Doctor Morly, and Doctor
Wall; whose places are filled up with these unanimated clods of earth, Aaron
Rogers, Superviser of New-Inne-Hall, and Visitor, viz. Henry Langley
Comptroller of Pembroke-Colledge, Henry Wilkinson of Magdalen-Hall, a Visitor,
John Mills Judge-advocate to the Army, and Visitor, Toby Cornish the squeaking
Lecturer of Alhallows. These are the hopeful quick-sets newly grafted, for
which the goodly Cedars must be removed and hewn down; the delicate Mushromes
of this age, that in one day grow up to their maturity, and like Medlars are
reserved in State-pickle, most esteemed of for being rotten.

From Christ-Church they go to Mary Magdalene-Colledge, which having had the
preeminence of that sanctified Hall adjoining to it, to the ineffable heart
breaking of the godly members appertaining thereunto, must part with their
learned President Doctor Oliver, and admit of that creeping Mole-catcher old
Wilkinson, with Cate his Doxy, to govern and bear rule over them. Who no sooner
had got possession, and took leave of their ancient Pigeon-house, but they
snugg'd it together lovingly all that night, and dreamed not of Naboths
vineyard taken from him; for he never was guilty of too much
Scripture-knowledge, who so often paid forty shillings to have his course
supplied at S. Mary's, while himself staid at home (good soul) in meditation
and serious study how long the mellifluous Sugarsops would be in preparing for
him.

S. John's is the next they visit, whereof that gallant learned man Doctor Bailey
is President; who knowing his doom before, was so far from fleeing that he took
occasion to meet half way with his antagonists: where after a Pass^do
complement with his Chancellorship, they require a submission to their Power,
and admission into his lodgings presently; but received this answer from the
Doctor, that for active obedi^nce unto them, without palpable breach of Oaths
he might not nor would do it, yet willingly would be passive, that his
conscience might not suffer shipwreck by it: which made his Honor scratch his
periwig and noddle too, to pump out a moving argument; but his brain-pan put
out of order, at last he cried out in plain English, Master Doctor, Resign
your keys, that we may enter: which he refusing to do, the fledges and Iron
Crows were called for. At entrance his pretty children stood, which a Jew would
have taken compassion of, many of them being aguish, who therefore had double
mercy showed to them; first, a months time to remove for Master Cheinels coming
in, and then unintendently their agues frighted from them.

But learned Doctor Shelden (Warden of All souls) speaking his mind home unto
them, and beating them with their own retorted weapons, for which many
opprobrious terms were put upon him. We cannot omit one passage worthy
laughter, to see how their shadows frighted them. The discourse being hot about
the Cause, and the Doctor maintaining no Parliament without his Majesty the
Creator of it, Sir Nathaniel puts in, and tells him that his Lordship would Sol
that Quaere: which enraged him so on sudden, that he began to open, and make
way for his distracted answer: What meat you by this (says Earl Phil.) you
intend not to entrap me, do you? To my knowledge the chair stands ready, and
his Majesty may sit there if he please: I come not as Chancellor now, or
Visitor, (ye are mistaken) but by immediate order from the States, and those I
will live and die with. Being mum on the sudden all, and put to silence, the
Doctor must pay for's learning that had thus worsted them, and therefore was
forth with sent with a guard of Musketeers to prison, yet accompanied with the
peoples prayers to guard him better, who followed him in whole troops, and
bestowed their blessings on him.

'Twere endless to relate all quarrels with Governors and Heads of Houses;
as, for not opening the gates to admit his Highness, who is too lofty (by the
head) to get in at a door or wicket, for which Doctor Potter of Trinity
College was ejected by him, that Patriark Harris a doting Visitor might enjoy
both his house and Profits.

I desire you will not expect I should give you the Speech his Lordship made in
the Convocation to the Visitors; for I hear you have it from a more dexterous
hand.

And now let the world take notice what a blessed Reformation is like to be,
when the executioners and their adherents are the only gainers by it; when the
most eloquent Heads in Europe are cut off, that the informers against them, and
the same men their ejectors, may succeed them, when (as Bishops and Calveskins
received their doom in one day, so) by the same command our University and the
States close-Stool-house must be in the same week voided.

And therefore the tribe at New-Inne, with the brethren of ^^e same cut, to
evidence their obliged gratitude to the Privie-Counsellor and Academical
Gold-finder by his Office, are printing a Book of Poetry upon his coming; one
copy whereof coming lately into my hands (through a mistake) I shall (for the
Authors reputation) here insert, that the Reader may judge beforehand of the
rest, and save the expense of three pence to buy the whole.

Phi, malus, and Lippus, scripsisti in Versibus, Owen,
Pembrochia negat hoc, (fallaris ergo) Comes:
Nolo Philippenses atque Hebraeos recitare
Tam male, Spurcanti Carmine, nescio quid.
Nil piget, intuitus nostrum si quando Libellum
Exclumes, -- Paucos hic ut Orb bonos:
Quod si Pembrochius maculetur Carmine, Cancel-
larius, and Mendax Presbyter, and Nebuloes.
Englished thus:
Owen, thou say that Phi and Lippus are
Two words of Ignominy; have a care.
How could thou quite forget (that dwell'st so nigh)
Philip of Pembroke and Montgomery?
We Hebrews and Philippians, to our power,
Will vindicate our Lord and Chancellor.
Nor had we been so moved if one had said
There Is not a good verse in the Book we made.
If then your verse our Chancellor did mean,
We say you are a knave, and lie, again.
Why this is a vein indeed befits the matter: if those other in the holy
language should be so quarrelsome not one Volume will contain them all, for
fear they should fight for sheet and seniority in taking Places, until severed
they be blown to th'Mercers shop to wrap up Pepper and ^allow-Candles in.

That in a loathsome manner they may die,
As will their Rebel-subjects's Memory.
FINIS.

