THE CIVIL WARS OF SPAIN, In the beginning of the Reign of CHARLES the 5t,
Emperor of Germany, and King of that Nation.

Written originally in the Spanish-tongue, by Prudencio de Sandoval, Doctor of
Divinity, and Abbat of the Monastery of St Isidro el Real, in Valladolid, of
the Order of St Bennet, His^^^iograph^r (...) ^HILI^ the Third; never yet
Translated, now put into English by Captain J. W.

DEUS: PROVIDEBIT
IVSTVS VIVET FIDE
R^Y


LONDON, Printed by William Du Guard* and are to be sold by John Holden in the
New Exchange, 1652.

PROGENIES DIVVM QVINTVS SIC CAROLVS ILLE IMPERII CAESAR LVMINA ET ORA TVLIT.
AETAT SVAE XXXI. ANN. M.D. XXXI. Impenum oceano: famam qui lerminat astris.
^ombart Sculpt^^^^^^


To the Honorable, Colonel HERBERT MORLEY ESQUIRE; One of the Members of the
High and Honorable Court of PARLIAMENT, and of the Council of State; chief
Lieutenant of the County of Sussex. TO THOMAS CHALONER ESQUIRE; A Member of
the High Court of PARLIAMENT, and of the Council of State, etc. And To JAMES
CHALONER ESQUIRE; A Member likewise of the said Court of Parliament, the Supreme
Authority of the Three Nations.
Noble Gentlemen!
I Have long repined that my gratitude should be limited within the narrow
walls of my breast, when your favors that gave it being, have daily shown
themselves in such fresh and frequent testimonies; but it has now got a little
more elbowroom, and gladly take's occasion to tell the world as well as you, of
my happiness in such a Triumvirate of Patrons; yet in this I may rather seem to
have studied a secure convenience, then an ingenuous acknowledgment, since this
History cannot shroud it self within a safer shelter, then what your
acceptance and clear judgment is able to allow it; but you want no Candor, and
therefore I no Confidence that you will gently conserv the intentions and
endeavors of

Your humble servant JAMES VVADSVVORTH.

Upon this Choice and Remarkable piece of History.
AMong those various delights and advantages which accrue to a Reader of
History, one is, That no modern accident can seem strange unto him, much less
astonish him: He scarce can wonder at any thing, in regard he may remember to
have read of the same, or much like the same, that happened in former times;
therefore he does not stand staring like a child at every sudden spectacle,
like that simple American, who, the first time he saw a Spaniard on horsback,
thought the Man and the Beast to be but one Creature, and that the horse did
chew the Rings of his Bit.

Now indeed, not to be an Historian, that is, Not to know what Foreign
Nations, and our Forefathers did, Hoc est semper esse puerum, as Cicero says,
this is still to be a child, who gazeth at any thing; whence may be
inferred, There is no knowledge that ripen's the judgment, and put's one out of
his nonage sooner then History.

If I had not formerly read the Baron's Wars in England, I had more admired
that of the Liguers in France. He who read the near upon fourscore years Wars
in Low Germany, never wondered at those thirty two years late Wars in High
Germany. I had more wondered that Richard of Bourdeaux was knockd down with a
halbard, had not I read formerly that Edward of Carnarvan died of a hot Iron
that was thrust up his fundament; It was strange that Murat the great Ottoman
Emperor should be lately strangled in his own Court; yet considering that
Osman his predecessor had been knocked down by an ordinary slave not many
years before, it was not strange at all. The blazing Star in Virgo, 33 years
since, did not seem strange to him who had read of that which appeared in
Cassiopea, and other constellations some years before, and how portentous they
proved to poor Mortals. Hence may be inferred, that among all other kinds of
contemplations, History may be called the great Looking Glass, through which
we may see with Ancestrall optiques, not only the various Actions of men, and
odd Accidents of time, but also discern the Constitutions, the Humors, and
Genius of Nations.

This faithful piece of Story will displaie the very intrinsecals of the
Castillian, (who entitle's himself to be the prime Spaniard) and make that
opinion a mere paradox, whereby he is cried up to be so constant to his
principles, so loial to his Prince, and so conformable to Government: for it
will discover as much levitie and tumultuarie passions in him as in other
people; Which may be the reason why these Annals were suppressed, and called
in, in Spain, yet procured by a Gentleman of quality and of exquisite
knowledge, and now made English, with much exactness and fidelity; Therefore
most worthy of the perusal, being a pure maiden-storie, never blown upon
hitherto; for to my knowledge she never traveled over the Pyrenean Hills, or
crossed the Seas in any language till now.

James Howell.
TO THE READER.
COurteous Reader! if likeness breeds liking, and if in Histories, as in Humane
bodies, may be admitted any Sympathetical operations, I cannot but promiss my
self, that this Narration will not be unwelcom to your curious eyes, in regard
it does punctually relate the no less strange, then ^rue transactions, betwixt
Charles the fifth in his Minority and his Subjects in Spain, which had so much
similitude to diverse late passages in this our Nation, that had not those in
Castilla had the privilege of many years before us, we might have been said to
have been their pattern, although the successes are different. The Author was a
man of no mean eminency, neither for knowledge or extraction, and who (though
somewhat violent in his terms against the Commonaltie by reason of his
dependence on the Court of Spain) wrote so plainly, and with such
impartialitie, that all his books were suppressed by especial command from the
King, whose Historiographer he was, which rendereth the truth of the History
less questionable: Herein, as in our troubles, you shall find the Clergymen
on both sides no less busy in distracting peoples minds, then in fomenting
and aggravating their unhappie dissentions: Herein you shall see besides the
policies, and subtle correspondencies betwixt the several Cities of that
Country, the Statutes and Decrees enacted by the Commissioners or Substitutes
of the Commonalties assembled in Parliament, after their King's departure into
Germany, whither they were sent to be ratified by him, his answer, and their
proceedings afterward. The names of places, as well as men, are left in
Spanish, because they cannot be so well rendered in any other language, as in
their own, and some terms likewise, whereof though our tongue admits not of a
simple, and direct version, you shall find them paraphrastically expounded in
the margents, therefore I hope you will not impute this as a fault to the
Translator, and in case your more penetrating judgment should discover any
other defects, my humble supplication is, that you will not be a Captious, but
a Cautious Reader, and careful of the reputation of him, whose chief aim, in
this labor, was to procure you both profit and pleasure, as being

Your affectionate Servant J. W.

THE CIVIL WARS OF SPAIN. THE FIRST BOOK.
SECT. I.
IN the year of our LORD 1500, which was (according to the Hebrew account) five
thousand four hundred sixty and one years after the Creation of the World:
from the Universal Deluge, three thousand eight hundred and five: from the
Coming of Tubal to inhabit, and people the (then desolate) Country of Spain,
three thousand six hundred sixty and three: from the Conquest of Caesar, one
thousand five hundred thirty and eight: from the Entry of the Goths into
Spain, one thousand eighty and six: and lastly, from the Dominion of the Moors
in that Country, seven hundred eighty and six years, Alexander the sixth then
being Pope of Rome. The Christian King Don Fernando and Donnia Isabel having
reigned twenty seven years, converted the Mezquitas, or Moorish temples, into
Ch^istian Churches, and purged the whole Kingdom of Paganism and Jewish
Ceremonies, being also the year of Iubilee at Rome: for their comfort, and to
dry up the tears which sorrowful Spain ceased not to shed, for the decea^ of
t^eir Prince, Don Iuan, or Io^n, (only Son to the Cathol^^k King, and Donnia
Isabel, his Queen) and ^he Infanta Donnia Isabel, their eldest Daughter, (who
was married to Don Iuan, or John the Second, King of Portugal) in the City of
Gant, upon the Apostle ^t Matthias his day, being mundaie 25 Feb^uarie, was
born Charles the fifth, The birth of the Emperor Charles the Fifth.
Emperor and King of Spain, begotten by Don Philip, or Philip, surnamed El
Hermoso, or the fair, Archduke of Austria (on to the Emperor Maximilian the
First, and Donnia Ma^ia, sole daughter and heir to Charles Duke of Burgundy,
who had for her por^ion, besides the said Duchy of Burgundy, the Dukedom of
Brabant, Flanders, Limbourg, Haynaut* H^lland, Artois, Zealand, and Cueldres,
with other places thereunto belonging) and Donnia Iuana, second daughter to the
fore-na^ed Don Fernando and Isabel. The Prince Don Miguel de la paz, son to Don
Iuan of Portugal, and Don Fernandos eldest Daughter, Isabel (who by the right
of his mother was to inherit the Crown of Castilla) was yet living, when
Charles the Fifth came first into the World; the news of whose birth, with the
particulars of the place and time, being carried into Spain, his grandmother
Donnia Isabel (I know not by what prophetic spirit) presently said, Cecidit
sors super Matt^iam, meaning, that the succession of those Kingdoms should fall
upon Charles (who was born upon that Saint's day) as it did, and he became the
most potent Prince of the Christian World. For Don Miguel de la paz, dying in
Julie following, in the same year 1500 the inheritance of the Crowns of Spain
descended to Donnia Iuana, mother to the fortunate Prince Don Charles, His title
being a Child.
or Charles, then bearing the title of Duke of Luxembourg.

SECT. II.
IN the year 1501, the Catholic Queen, Anno 1501.
Don^ia Isabel, of Castilia being fallen into a langu^shing diseas, and past
hopes of ^ecoverie, she desired to see Don Philip, and Donnia Iuana (^er
daughter) before her deceas. Whereupon they took their way through France,
where they were received, and feasted in a Princely manner, by King Lewis the
Twelfth, who treated with them concerning the marriage of his Daughter Claudia,
to their son Charles. One of the Articles was, That in case the said marriage
should not be consummated t^rough any default of the said King of France, the
Emperor should invest and settle the Dukedom of Milan upon their son Don Carl^s
Duke of Luxembourg: And it so happened afterward, that the said match was
broken off by the said King Lewis, which is a great Plea for the Crown of Spain
against the Kings of France, in the pretention of Milan. Being arrived at
Toledo, Philip the (...) ^w^rn P^i^ce of Sp^in.
where the Catholic King and Queen exspected them on Sundaie, 22 May (in the
Cathedral Church* they were s^orn Princes of Castilia and Leon:) Don Fernando*
and Donnia Isabel assisting at the Ceremony, with the Cardinal Don Diego
Hurta^o de Mendosa, Don Fray Francisco de Xmenez Archb^shop of Toledo; Don
Bernardino de Valas^o Lord h^gh Constable of Castilia and Leon, the Duke del
Infantad^, Duke of Alva, Duke of Bejar, Duke of Alburquerque, and a mul^itude
of other noblemen: after which solemnity the King went to Saragosa, and the
Queen with her Daughter, and Don Philip went to Torisos, Fuens^lida, Cas^
Rubios, and thence to Madrid; from whence, The b^rth of ^he I^fante F^rdinand.
after ^om time, Donnia Iuana went to Alcala de Hena^es, where she was brought
to bed of the Infant Don Ferdinando, or Ferdinand he was baptized with
exceeding great solemnity, by the Arch Bishop of Tol^do; the Duke of Naxara
and the Earl of Villena were his Godfathers, and Madame de Luin his Godmother.
Which Ceremony being past, and Donnia Iuana thoroughly recovered, she and her
husband (whose presence was most earnestly desired in Flanders) repaired both
thither, by the way of France; And being at the City of Lions, he concluded
the Peace betwixt his father Maximilian the Emperor, Don Fernando King of
Spain, and Lewis the French King, who again moved him about marrying the Duke
of Luxembourg with his daughter Clavia, who was to inherit the Dukedom of
Britanie, yet he was the first occasion of breaking that agreement.

SECT. III.
Anno 1505.
IN the year 1505, a Parliament being called at the City of Toro, in presence
of the King Don Fernando, with all the Grandees of the Kingdom, The death of
Isabel Queen of Spain.
and the Commissioners or Burgesses ( Donnia Isabel the Queen being deceased
at Medina del Campo) the Princess Donnia Iuana, then being in Flanders, was
decla^ed Queen of Castilia and Leon, and her son Don Carles heir and successor
after her to those Kingdoms, which pacified diverse turbulent ^pirits, and stopped
the current of many troubles and mischiefs, that was like to overflow that
Country. This news was brought to Donnia Iuana, then newly brought to bed of
the Infanta Donnia Maria, who was afterward married to the unfortunate King of
Bohemia, Lewis son to Uladislaus; after whose death she was Governess of
Flanders for many years, and proved nothing inferior to her Brother in
courage, and other princely endowments, only she was a woman: Don Philip
remaining still in Flanders with his Queen, there grew such differences betwixt
him and Don Fernando, Ferdinand's design to get the Kingdom of Castilia to
himself.
that finding an advantage in their absence, Don Fernando sent Don Rodrigo
Manrique his Ambassador to the King of Portugal, desiring him to give in
marriage La Excelente, otherwise called La V^ltraneja, thinking by virtue of
her right, and his powerful assistance, to oppose Don Philip, and make himself
King of Castillia (which argued no less weakness then Ambition in the Catholic
King.) But the King of Portugal was so discreet, as not to satisfy his
desires, and although he had given his consent La Veltraneja would never have
condescended thereunto, for besides that she was well stricken in years, she
was altogether given to her devotion, and valued not the vanity of any
earthly Crowns. Having received this repuls, he agreed with Lewis King of
France, that he should make the match betwixt him and Madam Germana, daughter
to Gaston de Foix, and to the said French King's sister, which was concluded
upon this condition; That King Lewis, in stead of her Dowry, should grant and
pass over to Don Fernando the right which he pretended to the kingdom of
Naples, and that if the Queen should die before him without issue, he should
succeed and inherit the same title; but if she should survive Don Fernando,
that Lewis should repossess the said claim: These Articles being confirmed,
they made a Peace betwixt France and Spain, for a hundred and one years, (but
it scarce continued so many weeks) and Don Iuan de Silva Earl of Cifuentes,
with the Vice Chancellor of Aragon went into France, to attend and conduct her
Majesty into Castillia.

SECT* IV.
THe Castillians in mean time, being very desirous to have their Natural
Sovereign amongst them, importuned by frequent messages and invitations, Donnia
Iuana and her husband to return, and bring their Children with them into Spain.
Whereupon Don Philip having provided a Fleet for the purpose, they departed
Flanders, leaving the Prince Don Carles under the care and tuition of the
Emperor Maximiliano and Donnia Margarita, widow to the Duke of Savoye; and at
last (though tossed with much storm and tempests by the way) they landed safe
at the Groyne in Galicia. Don Fernando hearing of their arrival went to meet
them, betwixt La Puebla de Sanabria and Asturianos. This interview occasioned
no small discontent betwixt these Princes; for Kings will admit of no
competitors, or Companions (no not of their own ch^ldren) in matters of
Government and Command. Whereupon Don Fernando (forsaken by all, but only the
Duke of Alva and the Earl of Altamira with some few others) took his way to
Villafafila, and Tordesillas, and King Philip with his Queen to Venauente,
attended by all the Nobles and flower of Castillia, besides strangers, to the
number of above two thousand horse. One cause of their discord was about the
title and inscription of Commissions, Patents and other dispatches Roial, which
at last was determined, and agreed, that all things should pass in the names of
Don Fernando, Don Philip, and Donnia Iuana: But this style was soon altered by
the unexspected death of Don Philip, which happened at Burges: he had but seven
days of sickness (which was thought to be a surfeit) and past from this life
to the eternal on fridaie the fifth of September, The death ^f Phil^p the Fair
Duke of Burgu^die* an^ A^^^-Duke of Aust^i^.
anno ^^0^, being aged but twenty eight years, and having enjoied the Kingdom
of Castillia a year and ten months, lacking one day; he commanded that his
heart should be carried to Bruxels, his body to Granada, and his bowels to
remain there. His death was much lamented by the Emperor his Father; for,
besides that he was his only son, he was one of the handsomest men of his
time, therefore he was called Philip the Fair; and the nobleness of his mind
was answerable to the feature of his body. Donnia Iuana his Queen was so
sensible of his loss, that with the extremity of sorrow, and her incessant
weeping, An old woman's Prophecy of him.
she became in a manner distracted. An old woman in Galicia seeing him at his
landing, and being told who he was, said, That he should be a longer time,
and travel more leagues in Castillia, being dead then living; which proved so;
for the Queen carried his body with her, from place to place, What Children.
He left.
and would not suffer it to be buried for many years after. He left two
sons, Don Carles, and Don Fernando, both Emperors; and three daughters, all
mighty Queens: Donnia Leonor first reigned in Portugal, and afterward was
married to the King of France: Donnia Catalina was wife to Don John the Third,
King of Portugal, Aunt, and Mother-in-law to Philip the Second of Spain: And
Donnia Maria had for her husband Lewis King of Bohemia and Hungaria.

SECT. V.
IN mean time Don Fernando, being married to the Queen Germana, and distasted
in Castillia, retired himself into Aragon; from thence being upon his ^ournie
to Naples, the Castilli^ns gave him notice of Don Philip's death, and of the
neces^itie that there was of his Roial presence; but he refused to return,
being incensed against some of them for their ingratitude to him. By the death
of Don Philip, and the absence of King Fernando, diverse tumults and seditions
arose in the kingdom, the people refusing to obeie the Magistrates and Officers
of Justice; and the Nobles wanted not factions and partialities amongst them to
trouble and disquiet the Country, and almost every City throughout the
Kingdom was infected with the same contagion: Some crying up Charles, or Don
Carles; others Fernando; no small number stood for Maximiliano, but very few
made any mention of Donnia Iuana, who, whether out of a sens of her own
disabilitie, or overcom with melancholy for her husbands deceas, had retired
her self at Tordesillas, refusing to govern or trouble her head with
State Affairs. Whereupon, with the consent of most part of the Peers and Nobles
of the Realm, the Cardinal Ximenez Don Bernardino de Velasso Lord high
Constable, and Don Pedro Manrique Duke of Naxara took upon them the
administration of Government for the present; they made Don Alonso Suarez
Bishop of Iaen, President of their Council, assisted by Doctor Tello, el
Licenciado Polanco, and other learned Lawyers. They called a Parliament, wherein
they ordered to send to Don Fernando, desiring him in the name of the Queen and
the whole Kingdom to return, and undertake the Government for his Daughter and
Grandchilde. Which he, being more ready to accept then they to offer, did
not refuse, but returned answer, that having settled the business which had
called him to Naples, he would satisfy their desires: And after some time,
leaving Don Iuan de Aragon Earl of Ribagorsa, his Viceroy, he embarked
himself for Spain with his Queen Germana, Don Gonsalo Fernandez de Cordova,
commonly called the gran Capitan, and a great train of Spanish Gentlemen that
attended him in his voyage. Being arrived at Valentia, the Queen Donnia Iuana
went to meet him, whom he received with signs of much affection and fatherly
tenderness, which she answered with all the honor and due obedience that could
be exspected from an observant Daughter; for although the excess of sorrow had
weakened her intellectual faculties, yet she never lost her respect to her
Father, but paid him with all humility and filial duty; neither was she
ever heard to utter any mis becoming words, which is common to people tainted
with her infirmity. The eighth of October the King and Queens came to Arcos,
where Donnia Iuana desiring to stay, Don Fernando went with his Court to
Burges, leaving her a good number of Noblemen and Ladies, besides guards,
suitable to the dignity of her person. Some years after, Don Fernando left the
troubles of this transitory life to enjoie the quietness and bliss of the
eternal, The manner of King Ferdinand's death.
in the sixty fourth year of his age, having reigned and governed as King,
forty two years complete. Some say it was the Dropsy that brought him to his
end; others report, that his young Queen, to quicken his Spirit, and thaw the
ice that contracted the blood in his aged veins, gave him a certain provocative
potion; which, instead of raising a part, cast the whole body into the grave.
After his death, arose many differences amongst the Grandees concerning the
Government. Adriano (Dean of Lovain, and Tutor to Don Carles) produced a
Commission, which the young Prince had given him to succeed Don Fernando in the
Government, until his coming into Spain; this was opposed by Cardinal Ximenez,
Dispute about the Government of the Kingdom.
who alleged, that by virtue of his Catholic Majesty's last Will and
Testament, he was to be Governor of the Kingdom, until the Prince should com
himself, or give some special order to the contrary* that Adriano's Commission
was dated long before Don Ferdinando's deceas, therefore not valeable; besides,
that he was a foreigner, which was sufficient reason to bar his pretensions.
But at last they agreed to govern both together, until they received further
order from Don Carles. This joint-Government continued a great while, during
which time, several Grandees of the Kingdom were much discontented, and
murmured, that a Friar, and a stranger (in a manner of the same stamp) should
be raised to such a height above them, as to rule and command the whole
Kingdom, and them: they alleged that Don Fernando had no power to substitute,
or appoint any one to administer the Government of that kingdom, in regard
that since the Catholic Queen's death, he was not King, but only Governor
thereof himself: and that considering Donnia Iuana would not undergo the
trouble of the Crown, according to the Laws of that ^and, they agreed that the
Duke del Infantado* the Lord High-Counstable, and the Earl of Venavente should
examine the Cardinal, by what authority and power he took upon him to be
Governor of those kingdoms: Whereunto he boldly made them answer, By the Power
of his Catholic Majesty: And they replying, that the Catholic King had no
authority ^o to do, Resolute car^iage and answer of Cardinal Ximene^ to the
Nobles o^ Spain.
he led them to a brest-work, which he had made about the house where he then
lodged, and showed them a great rank of Artillery, commanding his servants to
discharge them all; which don, he told them, this is the power by which I do,
and will govern Spain, until the Prince our Lord com to take charge of it
himself: they were not very well satisfied with this answer, neither did that
manner of discourse bode any good to the Kingdom. Notwithstanding the
oppositions and murmurations of the Grandees and others in Castillia, the
Cardinal continued at the helm in despite of all, until his Majesty's coming
into Spain, Charles the Fi^^'s coming into Spain.
which was anno 1517. At which time, the Cardinal finding himself indisposed,
was retired into a Monastery of his own Order at Aquilera; whither his
Majesty (being received at Valladolid) sent him a letter, thanking him for
his former services, and requiring him to repair with those of the Council to
Mojados, where he might consult with him concerning the present settling of
his affairs; after which he should be eased of the weighty burden of that
troublesome emploiment, and have liberty to solace and retire himself. This
Letter was said to be penned by the Bishop Mota, who (envious of the
Cardinal's power, and studying nothing more then which way to eclips his
greatness) persuaded his Majesty to write to him in those terms; which his
Eminence having perused, it struck him into a high distemper; and the violent
passion of his mind, joined with the infirmity of his body, increased his
fever, in such manner, that he rendered his soul into the Creator's hands
within eight days after, and was buried at Alcala de Henares, C^rdinal Xim^^es
buried at Alcala, anno 1517.
in the College of St Illefonso, whereof he was Founder. After whose death,
the Archbishopric of Toledo was given to Guillermo de Crouy, Bishop of
Cambray, and nephew to Monsieur de Xeures, his Majesty's chief favorite, which
bred no small discontent amongst the Castillians, seeing the principal Jewel of
their kingdom bestowed upon a foreigner. Some were of opinion that he was
poisoned.
Yet the general report was, that the Marquis of Villena, with other Grandees
of Castillia, desired and earnestly importuned his Majesty so to do; and that
of himself he had no such Intention, neither did Monsieur de Xeures ever
mention it: And, it is not to be thought, that those Noblemen took pleasure
in seeing any stranger advanced above them in their own Country; But they
were induced hereunto, out of hopes to ingratiate themselves thereby to the
Flemings, and chiefly to Xeures, who had the King's ear above any at that
time. Such is the force and power of over-swaying Ambition, which so
bastardiseth, and adulterate's the hearts even of Noblemen, that they will
descend, or stoop to any thing, Charles the Fift's age when he was received
into Spain.
to currie favor with a Prince's Minion. Don Carles at that time, could not
reckon above seventeen years and a half at most, from his Nativitie, which was
a very tender age, to undergo so weighty a charge, as was that of ruling so
many, and so considerable Countries; especially, those of Spain, where,
according to their Laws and Customs, it never had been seen, that a Youth so
young, and one that had been born and bred in foreign parts should sit in their
King's Throne. He understood no Spanish, neither was he acquainted with the
inclinations, and dispositions of the people: therefore (although he was very
ingenuous, His Disposition.
and of as excellent and sweet a nature, as could be desired in a truly
Christian Prince) he could do no less then suffer himself to be advised, and
guided by some of more mature years and experience. And having been bred and
tutored from his infancy, Who Xeures was.
by Guillermo de Crouy Lord of Xeures (who was Duke of Sora, in the kingdom of
Naples, and afterward Duke of Arschot in Brabant, a man of ripe age, solid
Judgment, and eminent parts answerable to his birth, being descended of the
illustrious stock of the Kings of Hungary, and recommended to be his
Governor, by his Grandfather Maximilian the Emperor) he committed himself with
the management of all State Affairs, wholly to his wisdom; and Xeures in
matters concerning Spain, (being a stranger to that Country) was led by
Maestro Mota, a Native of Burgos, Bishop of Badajos, and some other Castillians,
who were more ambitious then virtuous.

SECT. VI.
AFter the reception of the Prince Don Carles in Valladolid, (which was most
splendid and magnificent) all the Procuradores del Reyno, or the Commissioners
of the Kingdom, were summoned to assemble in Parliament; wherein the Castillians
were highly distasted, because the Lord Chancellor (a Fleming) assisted as
President for his Highness, and that other strangers were admitted to sit in
Parliament; Some of the Commissioners took the oath of Allegiance to his
Highness, Differences about the acknowledging of Cha^ls, King of Spain.
as King; others refused to acknowledge him to be their King, as long as his
Mother Donnia Iuana was living, (who was right heir to the Crown) and that he
first should swear to maintein and observe the fundamental Laws and Customs of
the Kingdom; especially, that no Offices, or places of Benefit or Trust, either
Ecclesiastical or Temporal, should be conferred upon any, that were not
Natives of that Country; But at last, all being agreed, both the Grandees and
Commissioners of the kingdom took the Oath; the Cerimonie was in this manner:
The form of swearing Allegiance to him.
On Sundaie the 7th of February, 1518, the Prince accompanied by all the
Ambassadors, and Nobles of his Dominions, having heard Mass in St Paul's Church
at Valladolid, was seated in a chair before the Altar, and Adriano, Cardinal of
Tortosa, holding the Evangelists in his hands, Don Garzia de Padilla read with
a loud voice the contents of the Oath; which don, the Infant Don Fernando
swore first upon the book, then went to kiss the King's hand; but the King
refusing to give his hand, embraced him, and laid his cheek to his brother's;
After that the Infant took his Sister Donnia Leoner by the hand, and led her
to swear, and afterward to kiss his Majesty's hand, but the King arose, and
kissed her cheek, then they passed on the King's right hand, and Don Fernando
stood close to his chair bare headed. Immediately came the Infant of Granada,
with the Archbishop of Santiago, the Bishop of Granado and other Prelates to
take the Oath; after them followed the Grandees, and Nobles there present, to
whom the Infant Don Fernando held the Book: Don Garzia read the Oath to the
Nobles, and likewise to the Commissioners of the several Cities; who having
sworn, went all to kiss his Majesty's hand. After all which, the King swore
upon the same holy Evangelists, The Oath (...) took.
to keep and fulfill all, and every thing, and Article, which he had
promissed, and agreed of with the Commissioners. Moreover was added, if at any
time it should pleas God to restore the Queen Donnia Iuana, his mother, to her
perfect health and ability, to rule her Kingdom, that he should desist from
the Government, and that only she should reign; That in all Writings,
Letters, Commissions or public Acts whatsoever, during the said Donnia Iuana's
life, her name should be set in the first place, and then his: And that he
should be styled only Prince of Spain. This don, Te Deum laudamus was sung
with great solemnity, and variety of musical Instruments.

The Commissioners of the Kingdom, being all assembled in Valladolid, made a
very discreet speech to the King, in answer to that which the Bishop of
Badajos, and Don Garzia de Padilla had propounded in his Majesty's name,
intimating, that amongst themselves, they should seriously consider, and weigh
those things which were important to the good preservation and increasing of
those kingdoms. The Commissioners desired with very valid and good reasons,
That his Majesty would put in execution the holy and Catholic Propositions,
which he had expressed in favor of his kingdom, and the Subjects thereof. And
that they might enjoie the fruit of his so virtuous and holy desires, they
came to put him in mind, how, by a decree and express order from Heaven he
was chosen, and called to be King, whose office was to govern well, and to
govern well was to administer Justice, giving to every one that which is his;
and they desired that his chief ends and intention might tend thereunto; for
although Kings do possess diverse other qualities and things recommendable, as
their lineage, dignities, power, honor, riches, delights, estimation, etc. none
of all these make a King according to right, but only the administering of
Justice; And for this only, and in the name thereof the holy Ghost has said,
That kings do reign; That Justice and the ruling therewith, do require, that
when the Subjects sleep, their kings should watch. And that it was his part so
to do, for in effect he was as an hireling to his Subjects: for that cause did
they give him part of their fruits and estates, and serve him with their
persons, if (need requiring) it be his pleasure to call them: That by a
certain tacit contract the King is obliged to do Justice to his people; which
is a thing of such excellency and Dignity, that God has made it one of his
own attributes, calling himself the Just Judge; that God, being so great a
friend, and lover of Justice, would likewise be a friend to him that should
be careful in preserving and administering thereof. That the charge of him that
is to judge, being of such high importance, he whom God has called to manage
a Scepter, has need of some assistant; therefore it is necessary that the King
should have some inferior Ministers, that may bear a part of that weighty
burden and incessant cares, which accompany the Roial dignity, the supreme
Power still remaining in his own hands. That a good King ought to choos and
seek out such men for his Ministers, as Moses did, when he received a command
from God to elect seventie and two men out of his people, who might assist him
in the Government, and eas him of a part of the care and troubles, wherewith
he was surchar^^d: those men were to be wise, of mature years, fearing God,
enemies to Covetousness and all other passions, which may blind and pervert
the understanding. That although they doubted not to find all these
perfections in his highness, yet they humbly desired him to ratify the ensuing
Articles.

1. That the Queen Donnia Iuana, his mother, might have a Court, and attendants
suitable to the Dignity of her person, as being the Queen and Lady
proprietarie of those Kingdoms: whereunto he answered That he thanked them,
and assured them that he had nothing in greater recommendation, then what
concerned that particular, as they should find by effects.

2. That he would be pleased to marry with what convenient speed might be,
it being very requisite for the good of the kingdom, that he should leav a
prosperous issue to rule many years over them: the King replied, That he
would consider thereupon, and do that which shall be most conducing to his
honor, the benefit of his Kingdoms, and the succession thereof.

3. That the Infant Don Fernando might not go out of the kingdom, until he
were married, and had children: the king made answer, That he was not more
careful of any thing in the world, then of the advancement of his brother, the
Infant, and that he would order nothing to be don concerning his person, but
what should be for his advantage, and the good of those kingdoms.

4. That he would be pleased to speak Spanish; for by practicing he would
the sooner learn, and better understand his Subjects, and be understood by
them. He answered, That he was well contented, and would strive so to do, and
the rather, because they desired it in the name of the Kingdoms: so, afterward
he did speak Spanish with them and others.

5. That he would not alienate any thing from the Roial Crown, and if any
should desire Justice of him for their grievances, that he would give order to
have it don them. He answered, That he would do therein according to his
Oath, and would redress all those that came to complain.

6. That whatsoever the Catholic King and Don Philip, his father, had given
away by way of Dowry or Legacy, he would command to be fulfilled, for the
repose and discharging of their consciences: He answered That he would;
provided, that it might be don without prejudice to the Roial Patrimony.

Sixty seven more Articles they propounded, which, because they are more at
large specified hereafter, I shall forbear to trouble the Reader with them in
this place; His Majesty gave so gracious an answer to them all, (thanking the
Com^issioners in a very courteous manner) that they remained very well apayed
and satisfied.

The Subsidy which they granted him in this first Parliament (according to Fray
Antonio de Guevara's relation) was one hundred and fifty millions of
Marauediz; 34 M^^auediz make 6d. A Du^ket make's 5^ 6d.
And Pero-Mexia says, it was six hundred thousand Du^kets, t^ be raised the
three first years. The Parliament being ended, there was celebrated a Just, or
Turnam^nt Royal in the chief market place of Valladolid, five and twenty
against five and twenty; Some Spaniards, and some Flemish Noblemen, who strove
to out-view each other, as well in the ric^ne^s of their habits and liv^ries, as
in feats of arms; Seven of them were killed, and some hurt; therefore it was
commonly said, That for a Combat in earnest the loss was not great, but, for a
jest it was too much. After this solemnity, which ^ontinued certain days, the
King having visited his mo^her, Donnia Iuana, and the Queen Germana, leaving
all things in good order in Castillia, departed ^ith his Court for Aragon,
taking his sister, Donnia Leonor, and the Queen Germana with him. He made the
town of Aranda in his way, whither his brother, The Infante's dis^on^e^tment.
the Infant Don Fernando, was returned with small contentment, because they
made such haste to pack him out of Spain. There the King remained some few
days, during which time, the Infant was dispatched for Fland^rs, as was
before determined; for the King (^ot being yet arrived in Castillia, some men
of note about the In^ante's person, put thoughts into his head of succeeding
his grandfather in the Crown; and it was greatly to be fea^ed that the
Cas^illians would have declared for him, to the prejudice of Don Carles, he
being of their Country, and his brother a Fleming: besides, his name,
Fernando was enough to gain him the affection and hearts of all Spain, for his
Grandfat^ers sake, whose memory was held in great honor and adoration amongst
them; But God disposed it otherwise for the good and quiet of those Kingdoms.
Don Fernando being fitted with attendants, and all necessaries for his voyage,
the King continued his progress into Aragon, Charles the Fifth received at
Saragosa. 1518.
he was received in Saragosa with very great solemnity and joie, the 15 of
May 1518. The Castillians expressed much discontent at the departure of the
Infant Don Fernando, The Castillians and Aragoneses distasted.
and began to murmur every where, they being of opinion, that he ought not to
be sent out of the Kingdom, until his brother were married and had children.
They were likewise distasted, and the Aragoneses also, at the present
Government; for they could not endure that strangers should bear so great swaie
in their Country, that all businesses must pass through the hands of Xeures,
and his friends, who had the name of being over-greedie, and covetous; the
same brand was laid upon the rest of the Flemings that attended his Majesty.
But that was no wonder, for all Prince's Favorites (be they never so just and
well deserving) are generally envied, and abhorred by most people. They said
moreover, that the King was wilful, untractable, disdainful, and gave small
testimonies of affection to the Spanish Nation, with diverse other such like
discontented speeches, which are mentioned more at large hereafter. But to say
the truth, the King was no way to be blamed; for he was so young, that of
necessity he must suffer himself to be directed by those, who had bred him
up from his infancy. Time made the Spaniards plainly see, when he came to
riper years, that he loved, respected, and esteemed them above all other
Nations, which appeared by his placing them in offices of the greatest Honor
and Trust, not only in Spain, but in Italy, Flanders, and Germany.

SECT. VII.
THe King having been some days at Saragosa, the Parliament began, which
continued so long, that he was forced to remain there eight months; there the
grand Chancellor dyed, not much lamented by the Spaniards, who abhorred the
very memory of him, and he cared more for his gold then for their favor or
displeasure. This Monsieur de Laxao left a very bad name behind him; in his
place, by his Majesty's command, Gatinara made Lord Chancellor of Spain.
succeeded Mercurino de Gatinara, a man of singular wisdom and learning, a
friend to Justice and Equity, and a great Iurisconsult. The Grandees of the
Kingdom of Aragon being assembled in the Archbishop's Palace, who was uncle
to the King, they desired him to let them understand his pleasure, for they
were very willing and desirous to serve him, as they had don his Predecessors,
but conditionally, that they might enjoie the ancient Customs and Privileges of
the Kingdom; the King answered, they should; But considering the indisposition
of the Queen, his mother, he willed and required them to acknowlegd him their
King, as those of Castillia had don. Whereunto the Iurados, or Iurates, in the
name of the kingdom, Demands of the Aragoneses before they would acknowledge
Charles their King.
replied, they would, though it was against the Laws, his mother being yet
living; So that his Highness would be pleased to swear the Infant Don
Fernando Prince of Spain, the same day, as they should swear him King; not
that the Infant should remain Prince, and heir to the Crown, but only until
such time as he should be married and God should bless him with some hopeful
issue to succeed him, whereunto, if his Highness would not consent, they would
swear him Executor, and Administrator of the Queen, his mother's estate: and if
he would not condescend to this, they told him in plain terms, that they had
no leav nor power to do otherwise, and although they had, they would not put it
in execution; for that would much prejudice, and damnifie their exemptions. The
King was much displeased at their peremptoriness, and answered them not one
syllable: the Grandees of Castillia being present, grew out of patience at the
Aragoneses sawciness, and the Earl of Venavente told the King openly, that, if
his Majesty would take his Counsel, he should make them com under the yoke,
that he would venture his life and fortune, to serve him in that design; that
his Majesty's only way was, Quarrel be-the Castillians and Aragoneses, about
the receiving Charles as King.
to raise a powerful Army, and subdue that Kingdom by force of Arms, and so he
might impose upon them what Laws he pleased, not such as they desired and
fancied. At which words, the Earl of Aranda answered the Earl of Venavente, in
such harsh and bitter terms, that all the Palace, and the Grandees of the
Court were com almost to daggers drawing: So that the King had much to do to
pacify them, commanding every one of them to repair to their own houses, and
not to stir abroad upon pain of death; But his Commands were not fully obeyed
that time; for night being com, diverse of both parties met in the streets, and
many of them were sore wounded, and questionless, the dispute had been more
bloody, if the ArchBishop had not left his supper, and com out with other
Noblemen to part them. The next day, the King made the Earls of Venavente and
Aranda friends, which don, the Aragoneses were brought to reason, and being
willing to conform themselves with the Castillians, they took the same Oath, and
acknowleged the King to be their King and Lord, jointly with Donnia Iuana the
Queen, his mother, as had been don in Castillia.

SECT. VIII.
IN the beginning of the year 1519, Anno 1519*
the Parliament of Aragon being ended, the King went to visit his Dominions of
Barcelona, and would have don the like in the Kingdom of Valencia, The Empe^or
Maximilian's death in Germany.
if his occasions had permitted. Being at Barcelona, news was brought him that
Maximilian the ^mperor, his Grandfather, died at Belsis the 12th of Januarie
1519, whereat he was not a little troubled; all the Court was forthwith put
into mourning, and his Obsequies celebrated with very great solemnity,
according to the honor and greatness of his person, His conditions.
who was one of the most virtuous, and wel-deserving Emperors that ever had
command in Germany: he was of a most noble and generous disposition, pious
and valiant. The ten first years of his age, he could make no use at all of
his tongue, insomuch that the Emperor Frederick, his father, thought he would
be dumb, or a fool; But coming to mature years, he gave great evidences of
very rich endowments of his soul. He died of a Flux, in the sixty third year
of his age, having governed the Empire twenty five years, after his Father's
deceas. Francis, the First of France, The King of F^ance'^ ambition to the
Imperial Crow^.
stood in competition with Don Carles, for the succession to the Imperial
Crown, and left no way unattempted to corrupt the El^ctors, and make them of
his party. But the major part, after many, long, and serious debates,
thinking it more fit to continue that Dignity to the House of Austria (who were
Natives of that Country) then to transfer it upon a strange Prince, made the
election in favor of Don Carles, Seven El^c^o^s o^ the Empire.
King of Spain, to the great contentment of all Princes, and people of
Germamie. The Electors of the sacred Empire, at that time were, Alberto
Archbishop of Maguncia, or M^ntz, Hertnao Archbishop of Colonia, Ricardo
Archbishop of Tr^ues, C^a^ls the F^^^t elected Emperor.
Frederico Duke of Saxonia, Lewis King of Bohemia, and Hungaria, Ioachim
Marquis of Brandeburg, Lewis Count Palatine of the Rhyne. The Election being
past in Franckfort, and published all over Germany, the Electors sent
Frederick Duke of Baviers into Spain, to his Majesty; in mean time, they
ordered all matters concerning the Empire, and made Casimire of Brandeburg
Captain General of the Imperial forces, until the new Emperor should com to
receiv his Crown. Whilst these things passed in Germany, the King celebrated
in Barcelona, the feast of the Order of the golden Fleece; there the Lord high
Counstable of Castillia, Don Innigo de Velasco, Don Iadrique de Toledo Duke of
Alva, Don Alvaro de Zunniga Duke of Vejar, Don Fadrique Enriquez Lord Admiral
of Castilla, Don Estavan Alvarez Cesorio Marquis of Astorga, received the
Order: H^ughti^ h^militie of the Ea^l V^n^v^n^^, in (...) to be m^de Knight of
the g^lden Fle^ce.
But the Earl of Venavente refused it, saying, that he was a right Castillian,
and cared not for any badges of foreign honor, those of his own Count^ie
being as good, and in his opinion far better The Duke of Cordona in the
Kingdom of A^agon, and the Prince of Bis^^gnano, a Neapolit^ne, stood not upon
those nice terms, but accepted the Order as a particular favor from his
Majesty. About the same time, the Queen Germana (finding more contentment in
the Company of a Husband, then in the solitary condition of a widow,) was
married with great solemnity, to the Marquis of Brandeburg, brother to the
Elector, who (though of a very illustrious extraction) was so incomparably
inferior to the Majesty and greatness of her former husband Don Fernando, that
her judgment was much censured for her chois, and the Courtiers thought so
slightly of her, that diverse would not give her the style of Highness, until
his Majesty commanded it (who assisted personally at the solemnity, thinking
thereby to endeer the Elector of Brandenburg, the more to vote in his behalf.)
At the beginning of Julie, in the same year, arrived at Barcelona, Frederick
Duke of Baviers, brother to Lewis Duke of Baviers, Elector and Count Palatine,
with the dispatches from the Electors; and having delivered his embassage, the
Chancellor Mercurino de Gatinara answered, that his Majesty did receiv very
willingly the ^lection of the Empire, which the seven Princes Electors had
conferred upon him, that he would take that weighty and honorable care upon
himself, out of the great affection which he bore his native Country, and
that he would endeavor with all convenient speed, to settle his affairs in
Spain, and make a voyage into Germany: Thus the Empire being settled upon Don
Carles of Spain, and the King of France deprived of all his hopes
(notwithstanding the vast sums of money and presents, wherewith he thought to
purchase the Elector's Votes) his envy and choler grew beyond the bounds of
moderation, and he resolved forthwith to act what mischief he could, and
interess the power of all other Princes, his Allies, against the Emperor Elect.

SECT. IX.
Whilst the King, or Emperor Elect was at Barcelona, he demanded the
Catalanes to receiv, The Catalanes make difficult^e of acknowledging Charles
King.
and acknowledge him their King, which they refused for a while, neither would
they consent, that he should call any Parlamemt in their Country; but at
last, they were persuaded to reason, and swore Allegiance to him, as Castillia
and Aragon had don. The Emperor upon notice of his Election, and solicitation
of the Princes of Germany for his going hither, had not the leisure to visit
the Kingdom of Valencia, as he intended; therefore he desired, that those of
that Kingdom would swear, and acknowledge him King, Those of Valencia. re^use to
a^knowledg him.
without obliging him to be personally present, in regard it was imposslble
for him to perform that journie, at that time, by reason of his new and
unexspected occasions, which called him another way. But they would not
hearken to any such motion, and scornfully made answer, Their proud answer.
that they were as good as Aragoneses, or Catalanes, and since, he had spent
two years time in those Countries, why could not he stay two months at
Valencia? The Emperor being ready, to depart from Barcelona, sent Cardinal
Adriano to Valencia, to pacify that Kingdom, and gave Commission to the
Infant Don Enrique, and the ArchBishop of Saragosa (both his Unckles) to call
a Parliament in his name, ordering that the money which should be granted him
therein, by way of Subsedie, should be all distributed amongst the aggrieved,
and needy of the Kingdom. Don Alonsa de Cordona Admiral of Aragon, and the
Duke of Gandia, with several other persons of account, gave their Votes to
acknowledge, and swear his Majesty their King* But the rest told the Cardinal
Adriano, and wrote besides to the Emperor, that they would lose their wives,
Children, and Estates, rather then the Liberties and Privileges of their
Country; whereat the Cardinal much displeased, returned to Court, leaving the
City of Valencia in great distraction; the outrages and disorders whereof,
shall be hereafter more at large related.

SECT. X.
IT was agreed, and his Majesty took Oath in the Parliament, at Valladolid,
That no Offices should be given to strangers, nor the kingdom surcharged with
new Impositions, but should continue in the same manner, as was ordered by the
Catholic King, at a Parliament, which he called in Burgos; Yet there was
nothing less observed, or wors kept then these Articles; for the treasure of
the kingdom was publicly exhausted, and Offices were daily given to the
Flemings, who sold them to those that would give most money, and likewise
diverse spiritual livings were so bestowed; which the Castillians seeing, and
taking notice, how small account was made of the Grandees, and Nobles, Natives
of that Country, they began to be distasted, and muttered out many things in
a discontented manner, which ought not to be rehearsed. These murmurings began
from the time of his Majesty's departure, from Valladolid to Aragon, which was
in March 1518. And being in Barcelona, some troubles arose about Segovia, and
Avila, by reason of certain persons, that had farmed the Customs, and Roial
Revenues, which enhaunced the charges of the Country; whereat those Cities
much aggrieved, the contrary having been promised by the Emperor Elect in
Parliament; They acquainted the City of Toledo with their grievances, and
desired, that all the Cities of the kingdom should make a joint-complaint
thereof to his Majesty, and appoint their Commissioners to importune him for a
redress, desiring him to stand to the Ordinances of Parliament, made in
Valladolid, and to grant what he then refused; moreover, that he would visit
the whole Kingdom before his departure into Germany. Whereunto the Lord
Chancellor, in his Majesty's name, made answer, That he would very speedily
send an Express, to give the City of Toledo thanks for their expressions of
fidelity to him, and satisfy them more fully* But the Empire being without
Head, he could not defer his going thither to receiv the Crown, and settle the
Government; which don, he would make all convenient haste back again, into
that Kingdom of Castillia, whose good he tendered in a very particular manner.
The Commissioners being answered, the Chapter of Toledo (as being the Chief
of the Kingdom) presented their grievances to his Majesty, concerning the
Tenth, which the Pope had granted to him, through all the Churches of the
Kingdom, complaining that it was a new, heavy, and intolerable tax, and not
only grievous to the Ecclesiastics, but prejudicial to all his kingdoms; That
in former times, when the said Kingdoms were overrun by Moors and Infidels,
although there were many, and bloody wars, which continued until the blessed
reigns of the Catholic, King Don Fernando, and Donnia Isabel, of glorious
memory, his Gr^ndfather and Grandmother, who conquered the Kingdom of Granada,
and extirpated the Moorish race, which wars were very necessary, and of
extraordinary expense; yet there were no Tenths raised, nor demanded; It
being an unheard of thing, and a request as unjust as insupportable, much less
reason had his Majesty to require any such thing of the Clergy, his case
being far different, and his wars nothing so important. That he should rather
encourage the Clergy, to pray for his good success, then diminish any thing
from their subsistence; Prayers being of more avail, then any Martial
Discipline, as appears by the holy Scriptures; wherein it is read, that the
victory is more certainly obtained by the prayers of devout Priests, then by
the force of Horsemen and Arms. But if his Majesty's temporal Revenue was not
sufficient to maintein a just war, in such case, he might demand assistance of
the Churchmen, as far forth as the present necessity did require; wherein
they would willingly supply his Majesty, making Levies amongst themselves, and
rather abate their own subsistence, then suffer him to be disfurnished, which
they should not be able to do, if his Majesty in the very beginning would
exact a Tenth from them. Diverse other reasons they alleged in their Petition to
his Majesty, whereunto there was no time to give answer.

SECT. XI.
MEan time the Emperor Maxmilian being dead, and Charles the Fifth being long
before he went thither, to to take possession, the People of Austria having
lost all fear, and respect of authority, fell into the greatest disorder and
mutiny that had been, Troubles in Germany.
within compass of the memory of man, turning out, and discarding all ancient
Officers of Justice, and constituting others of their own combination: the like
they did with Ecclesiastical benefices. The Loial Party (which was the fewer
in number) durst not open their mouths, fearing the fury of the seditious
vulgar; who had possessed themselves of all the Arch-Duke's Revenues, and were
grown to such a height of arrogancy, that they sent to the Emperor, being at
Barcelona, to ratify and confirm what they had don for the public Weal and
good Government (as they termed it) of that Country, and to allow the new
Officers of Justice, whom they had constituted. But the Emperor returned them
such an answer, as made them understand that he knew himself to be Archduke
of Austria, and not they. These distractions and perturbations continued in
that Country almost two years; after which his Majesty returning into
Germany, pacified all those dissentions and factious spirits, settled the
Government, and received the Imperial Crown, as shall be expressed hereafter.

Finis Libri Primi.
THE SECOND BOOK.
SECT. I.
IN this and the following Books, I am to relate the the Insurrections or
rising of the People (commonly called Communidades, or Communalties) which
continued in Spain, from the year 1519 to 1522. A Subject, truly, very sad and
unpleasant, and which I would willingly pass under silence, because some
Illustrious Families, Noble Cities, and principal Towns of the Kingdom were
interessed therein, which never had been disobedient to their Kings, but
always esteemed for their loialtie. Neither do I conceiv that they thought
any way to disserv his Majesty, but rather to releas him out of that
oppression (as I may term it) in which his Favorites held him. And, it is
manifest, in that they so earnestly importuned and petitioned, that their King
would not go out of the Kingdom, that they desired, and delighted to see, and
enjoie his Roial presence; which was no sign, that they intended to do him any
disservice: It will appear more evidently in the Progress of this History, and
by the letters which passed between them, whereof some I have set down in the
same manner, as they were written in the originals, because the particularitie
of the History does require it, in a matter of such weight and danger. And
since the Loialtie of Spain come's in question, who have always had their
Princes in so high a reverence, that they honored and respected their very
Statues and pictures, as if they had been their Sovereign's, whom they
represented: I will, before I go any further* declare the ground and reasons,
upon which the Castillians founded their complaints and grievances, as I have
gathered them from those who were eie-witnesses, and have penned all the
several passages, with much discretion, respect, fear of God, and with a mind
free from partiality.

SECT. II.
THe familiarity of Monsieur de Xeures with the King was so great, that he
rather seemed to be the King, and the King his Son, then to be Xeures his
Vassal and Creature, as he was. There was no access, nor speaking with the
King, but when Xeures pleased: if any thing succceded well, Xeures assumed the
glory to himself, giving out that he had don it; if ill, he always laid the
fault upon the King, saying, The King would have it so. And, indeed, this was
the first occasion that begat the innocent Prince the ill will of his People. I
have seen a memorial of these Passages, which a Gentleman (one of the King's
Domestic servants) wrote, and averreth to have been an eie-witness of them.
He report's, that while the King was yet in his minority, and unacquainted
with State Affairs, Xeures would suffer no body to speak with him, unless he
were first informed of the business, that so he might put into the King's
mouth, what he would have him to answer; and if any refused to impart their
business to him, they were so far from having audience, that he would not
suffer them to enter into his Majesty's presence; Thus did he deal with those
that were sent from Toledo, and diverse other Cities. Indeed, at that time all
the Castillians were very much discountenanced, and not treated as their's and
their Predecessor's services had deserved. The Flemings perceived the minds of
the Spaniards disposed for all mischief; much ambition, and little friendship
being amongst them: for some devoted themsel^s particularly to King Ferdinand
the Catholic, others to King Philip the Fair. These were kinds of Factions,
wherewith were possessed for some days the minds of many People.

Mercurino Gatinara Lord high Chancellor was second in the Emperor's favor, and
as the Authority and familiarity with Princes admit of no Competitor, Xeures
and this Chancellor could not endure each other: they both presumed so much,
that each of them would command alone, and ambitioned a Power above the other;
these made themselves the Heads of those two Factions, and added more poison to
their malice and discontents. Xeures favored those of Ferdinando: and the
Chancellor sided with those of Don Philip's Party. And all was ill (as the
Proverb saie's) for the poor Pitcher; for the distressed Country of Spain had
all the sufferings. Xeures was so corrupt and covetous, that he sold all the
King's Favors, Offices, Bishoprics, Honors, and whatsoever he conceived would
yield him money. The Chancellor did the like with all Iustice-ships and other
Offices; so that secluded Justice was enforced to give up her Seat, and Sword
to the Tyranny of overruling Avarice; only money then bore the swaie; no
Right, no Equity was able to counterpoiz the weight of Gold; all things and
places (as in the times of Catiline at Rome) were then put to sale: The
Flemings were much encouraged with this fine gold, and Ingots of pure Silver,
that came from the Indies; and the simple Spaniards so blind, in giving it for
their pretensions, that it became as common, as a Proverb, for a Fleming to
call a Spaniard, My Indian. And, indeed, it was not improper, for the Indians
never gave so much gold to the Spaniards, as the Spaniards did to the Flemings:
this in time grew to such a pass, that it was publicly sung along the streets,
Double Pistol, it is well for thee,
That from Xeures thou art free.
It is reported that a certain Pretendent, or Petitioner who had presented
Xeures with a very handsome Mule, and he being asked by another Gentleman,
where he had gotten that curious beast, answered, That he knew not who had
given it him; being within hearing, and very much aggrieved to see himself so
soon forgotten, and the business he had communicated to Xeures so neglected,
give's forthwith order to have his Mule cried, declaring all his marks, and
describing the furniture he had bestowed on him; which the same Gentleman
hearing of, went presently, and told Xeures, that according to the marks, it
must needs be that this Mule had been stolen; Thus the poor Petitioner
recovered what he had given him, and lost not all, as most men do in such
occurrences: for there is no memory so weak, as that of a covetous man in
Power, who digest's gold with more facililitie, then Estriches do Iron.

SECT* III.
THere was no money to be got in the whole Kingdom, but pieces of nine
Marauediz, which is three halfpence English, for all better coins Xeures had
transported* What shall I say? Besides that which was ship't for Flanders from
Barcelona, being 750 Millions; from the Groyne, 950 Millions; and from other
parts, 800 Millions; so that it exceeded the number of twenty five hundred
millions; which was enough to make him equal to the most powerful and richest
King. But consider in what condition did poor Castillia remain after such a
dreining. Besides all this, the Flemings held the ^paniards in so mean esteem,
that they insulted over them as if they had been their slaves, or rather
beasts; they would break open their houses at their pleasures, abuse their
wives in their own presence, carry away their goods, and no Justice to be had
against them. It happened that a Castillian having killed a Fleming at
Valladolid, took Sanctuare in St Marie Magdalen's Church; Some Flemings
violently breaking in upon him, and stabbing him in diverse places, there made
him a sad sacrifice to their revengeful fury; which don, they went clear away
unchastiled, unquestioned; That which bred the People's greatest dislike of
their King, was, that they could not be admitted into his Presence, treat with
him, nor ^o much as know him: For X^u^es would suffer no body to speak with
him; if at any time he did give audience, Xeures would still be at his
elbow, and in regard he did not thoroughly understand the Spanish Tongue, he
seemed as if he had not been spoken to. This gave the rise of the People's
general ill opinion of him: They presently spoke him a man of a weak
apprehension, and of an ill disposition, they called him Dutchman, and an
Enemy to Spaniards; They said, he wanted Judgment as well as years, neither
was he of a Talent fit to govern: by these prejudicial Censures of their
Prince, which were for some time generally noised abroad amongst the People,
likening him to his Mother: Some that never had seen him, said, It could not be
otherwise; and that, for that respect only, Xeures would suffer no body else
to confer with him, lest he should too much discover his own imperfections.
Others that had been admitted to speak with him, much vindicated his honor in
that particular, protesting, That they found him very discreet, and of no mean
capacity; That he was no way guilty of those pretended weaknesses, but his
Favorites infinitely to be condemned; neither was it to be wondered at, if
he suffered himself to be governed by them, in regard he was but a youth,
and unacquainted with the Customs of that Country, and the dispositions of the
People. Those that have near relations about the Persons of Kings, ought to be
very careful and circumspect, how to avoid the occasions of Murmurings and
Envy, considering, that Kings are like that Sun which diffuseth his light to
all.

SECT. IIII.
THe whole Country of Castillia was imbrued with these factious discourses,
before they ever thought of the departure of their King and Emperor, as will
appear by the Letters, which were interchangeably sent from City to City. But
when they heard of his resolution to be gone, and that his calling of a
Parliament would en^reas their Contributions and Taxes, they out-stript the
bounds of patience. The principal Causses of their Commotions were these three
ensuing: First, to see the King go out of that Kingdom, being always
accustomed to keep their Courts in Spain; for when King Alonso the Wise
deserted it, out of an ambitious covetousness of possessing the Imperial
Scepter, he not only lost that Kingdom, but was encumbered with insurrections,
not of the Common people, but of Kings and Princes, that levied arms against
him. Their second grievance was, To see all Offices, and places of Honor,
Trust, or Profit, conferred upon strangers. The third was an universal crying
out, That the Treasure of Spain was all transported into foreign Nations. And
we may add for a fourth Reason, That in that very occurrence, some evil Star
dispersed the malignitie of it is influence over all Castillia, Sardinia,
Sicilia and Austria, which at one instant were all infected with the same
poison, as if they had all conspired and agreed together. This they made the
ground of their insurrections; because their King left them to live in a strange
Country; because their wealth was exhausted, and their Country impoverished,
to enrich foreigners; and because the high Treasurer-ship was given to Xeures,
and the Archbishopric of Toledo to William de Croy, his Nephew, and all
presentations to spiritual preferments, and other Offices to strangers; But
that which they chiefly resented was the King's going to the Empire, and had
they really wished him ill in his own person, they would not have been so
sensible of his departure.

I cannot let pass with silence the audacitie of a certain gentleman of those
parts, named, The Martial Don Pedro, who refused to swear Allegiance to
Charles, as King, alleging, that in regard he was not born in Spain, nor
descended from the blood of the Castillian Kings, by the Father's side, he was
not obliged to acknowledge him, The Martial Don Pedro refuses the Oath of
Al^g^ance.
but, like a true Castillian, to keep strictly that Oath, and Loialtie to his
Country, and the precedent Kings. Upon which words he was apprehended, his
goods confiscate, and his person committed close prisoner in the Castle of
Atienza. The Emperor after this coming to Valladolid, sent for him, and
promised him, that if he would yet take the Oath, he should not only be
enlarged, but be restored to the quiet possession of his whole estate, as
formerly, which favor being refused, he was thence carried to the Castle of
Simancas, where he ended his life through his own indiscreet obstinacy. Some
men through a desperate fool-hardiness think it a piece of courage and
gallantrie to precipitate themselves into the most eminent dangers.

SECT. V.
THe City of Toledo (extremely discontented at these Passages, especially, at
the Emperor's going away without being known or seen) wrote to the other
Cities of Castillia this ensuing Letter.

A Letter from Toledo to the Cities of CASTILLIA.
Worshipful, Noble, and most Virtuous Sirs!
IN regard sometimes we have written to you in particular, you may wonder why
we now write to you all in general: But considering the imminent necessity
that there is in this case, and the danger that may ensue by deferring any
longer; we shall rather be condemned as being too slack for not doing it
before, then thought importunate for doing it now. You know, and may remember,
how vehemently King Charles our Soeverign Lord's arrival in Spain was desired of
all, and how sudden is his departure from us; his absence now is no less
torment to Us, then his Presence at that time afforded us delight and comfort;
the long continuance of his Roial Person in the Kingdom of Aragon, and the
small time he has vouchsafed to reside in this our kingdom of Castillia, has
been a great occasion that the affairs of this kingdom are yet in so unsettled
a condition: And if his Majesty does go away, as he has determined, the
longer we delaie, the wors our case will be. Therefore (Sirs!) our opinion
is, if you think good, since the damage is universal, That 'twere convenient,
that we should all meet and consult upon a remedy; the business is of no
small moment, besides, in many other particular things (Sirs!) we find an
extreme necessity of your advise, and after your advise we shall have as much
need of your favor, and helping hands. We find three principal things that
require our convening, that we may advise upon some good course for the
expedition of them; It will be needful that we dispatch some messengers to his
Majesty, humbly beseeching him, First not to depart Spain; Secondly, that he
would by no means permit our Treasure to be transported hence; Thirdly, that
no strangers may bear office in this kingdom. Sirs, we beg thus much favor of
you, that having read our Letter, you forthwith send us your answer; for it is
necessary, that those who are to carry our Messages should go together, and
make their Propositions all at once; for our demands being in the names of the
whole kingdom, we shall obtain a more significant and speedy Answer. God keep
his Majesty, and preserv his Noble Person.

From Toledo this 7 th November, 1519.

The contents of this short Letter were much approved of by the Readers; but in
that Occurrence of time they were of dangerous consequence, for the ill
managing of the affairs of Castillia was generally much resented, and this
Letter bred no mean variety of thoughts in the already wounded hearts of the
suffering People; it did this mischief, that all men suspecting wors evils,
unanimously said, Since Toledo lift's up the hand, some great disaster must
befall this Kingdom. They all returned their answers, although the City of
Burgos disapproved their general meeting; Granada answered, that they should do
better to exspect another opportunity, and carry a more specious form.
Salamanca and Murcia were not backwards in their promises and fair offers, but
they did not agree in that particular, touching the general Assembly, yet all
wrote that they would send their Burgesses, as Agents, who in the Parliament
should be conformable to the Toledians. Sevil answered neither yea, nor no.
These answers puffed up the Spirits of the Toledians, and Hernando de Avalos
(brother to Don John de Ribera, who was chosen for Procurador, John de Padilla
was afterward their General, a m^n of noble extraction, and a high Spirit.
that is, Burgess and Commissioner) associating himself with John de Padilla,
were the chief sticklers for that Cause, and although the Emperor wrote to them,
no reason would satisfy, but they answered, that they understood in so doing,
to do him service.

SECT* VI.
SOon after was published through the whole kingdom, the Emperor's determination
to go into Germany, to receiv the Imperial Crown; Every one lamented his
departure, out of a presaging fear, that those so long contracted fogs of
murmuring Discontent, condensing more and more through the privation of his
resplendent presence, might at last break forth into some furious storm of
intestine Commotions, to the ruin of their whole Country; Which Consideration
meeting with the complaints, and general grievances of the whole Kingdom, they
began at length to mutter out their resentments in these following words. That
the King showed very small affection to that Country; and despising it as too
mean for him, would betake himself wholly to Germany. That Xeures had robbed
Spain of all her Treasure; That the King being at Burgos ( Capital City of
Castillia) did not stay one week there. That Xeures would not have the
Parliament to be in Valladolid, although all the Grandees, and diverse others of
the Kingdom had petitioned for it. That Don Pedro Giron had given the King some
unbeseeming Language, which he thought good to put up, because he was not man
enough to punish his temerarious audacitie. That Xeures had called a Parliament,
but for no other end, then to charge the Kingdom with a new Cessment of four
hundred thousand Ducats. From these and such other seeds of discontents sown
amongst the Common People, grew suddenly a multitude of turbulent Imaginations
in their factious hearts; and the seditious Clergy, casting the oil of their,
pretended, Religious Doctrine into the fire of the People's ill-grounded zeal,
made the flame blaze the higher, pricking them daily forwards with their
sacrilegious Exhortations in the Pulpits, in these or like words* Why do you,
that are a Free born Nation, suffer such exorbitancies? Why do you suffer
strangers to reap the fruits of your labors, in your own Country? You have not
yet fully paid the Cessment, that was granted to the King in the last
Parliament; and yet he will impose more Taxes on you, till he has swept this
kingdom clean, and quite beggared us, to enrich his Germane Nation; and there is
Xeures, who was but a private Gentleman in Flanders, has made himself one of
the richest men in the world, by the spoils of us Castillians.

SECT. VII.
THe Emperor being at Valladolid, and the People's minds much distracted with
these several grievances, he sent for the Corregidores, Regidores, and all
other Public Magistrates to his Palace. Upon their appearance he told them
that being then to go into Germany, to receiv the Imperial Crown, he was in
great distress for want of moneys to defraie his charges, to which he desired,
they would not only give their consents, but be assistant in the raising of
three hundred Millions of Marauediz, which might be easily don in Castillia,
by way of Subsidy and Pole-monie, every Town paying according to their
quality and Cessments; Presuming, that if those of Valladolid subscribed, the
other places of the Kingdom, would not be backwards to answer his
exspectation; And in case they did satisfy his desires therein* he promised
to grant them all the Favors their Burgesses or Commissioners should demand of
him in Parliament. There was present at this Conference, the ArchBishop of
Santjago, the Bishop Mota, the Earl of Venavente, the Marquis of Astorga, and
Xeures who was never from the Emperor's elbow. Those of Valladolid desired some
time to give in their answer, but (they said) They could see no possibility of
effecting what the Emperor demanded of them. Thence began tumultuous meetings
in the streets, Conventicles, and outrageous murmurings, insomuch that they
were even ready to rise in arms against the Flemings. At last Valladolid
returned the Emperor this answer, That they humbly desired his Majesty would
be pleased to stay, and make his residence in their Country, and that upon
those terms he should not only command the three hundred Millions he
desired, but they would furnish him with much more, and if need required, they
would not stick to part with their lands and goods, but fell their Children
also to do him service. But, in their opinions, that he should go away and
deprive the kingdom of his Roial Person, besides, that vast sum money which
he desired to carry into foreign Countries, seemed very unreasonable, and
they would sell nothing to further any such design, neither did they believ
that God required they should pay him any such obedience. Upon this answer of
Valladolid, there were several meetings and Consultations, but they prevailed
nothing. But the Emperor's Favorites, (against whom Castillia was chiefly
incensed) Viz. Xeures, Don Garzia de Padilla, and Mota, Bishop of Badajos, went
again to the Magistrates, desiring them that they would consider well upon his
Majesty's demands, since the performance thereof was so important to his
present service, and so easy for them to accomplish: that the necessity of
his going to receiv the Imperial Crown was extremely urgent, and redounded not
a little to the reputation and honor of that Kingdom. That they should look
upon what Castillia had furnished to King Alonso the Wise, when he went into
Germany upon a pretended claim of the Empire, and how much more reason they
had to do the like now, (which they might well do, the Kingdom being in a far
better condition.) That the King undertook not that voyage, as Don Alonso did,
upon a doubtful matter, his business was already most certainly concluded and
agreed upon. This was closely followed, for during the three days time which
the Emperor stayed in Valladolid, The Gentry, Magistrates, and Burgesses of
the Town, with Bishop Mota (whom the Emperor had sent, to entreat them to
condescend to his desires) did nothing else all day and night, but go from the
Court to the Town-hous, and back again; the Bishop of Osma, Don Alonso Enriques
and some of the Magistrates were of opinion, that they should do well to
satisfy his Majesty's desires. Others stood strongly to the contrary, and
turned their Opponents out from their consultation, with many reviling words,
calling them disloial, disobedient, and other injurious names: this being
known amongst the Common People, inflamed amain their fury; Di^^at^s in those
o^ Va^ladolid.
Their boundless Rage suddenly broke into an Ocean of inconsiderate and bitter
expressions. The third day that his Majesty was there, It being divulged to
and fro in the City, that the Magistrates had consented to and subscribed the
Emperor's demands, The People cried out, That ought not to be suffered. The
Emperor being informed of all these passages, was very much perplexed, and gave
order presently to prepare for his departure. It is r^ported that he said, he
desired no more then that consentment, and those subscriptions which some of the
Magistrates had given in, As for the rest, who had refused, he should take his
time to be even with them. So he departed upon a sudden, though the Townsmen
thought he would not have gone, in regard Valladolid and diverse other Cities of
Castillia, had sent to beseech him with much humility and earnestness, that
he would be pleased to forbear a while, and not leav them so soon, fearing
the disasters which afterward befell them. The Emperor gave them a gracious
answer, thanking them for their good wishes, but (he said) it was expedient
for him to depart without any further delaie, for the good and advancement of
that Kingdom, and he promissed them, that as soon as he had received the
Imperial Crown, he would com back again, at the farthest within three years.
This did not satisfy the Gentry of the Kingdom, nor the Cities, nor the
Commons of Valladolid, who grew excessively out of Temper.

SECT. VIII.
BEfore we pass any farther, it will not be improper to set down what was
don at Toledo in this Interim. We have seen the Letter which they wrote the
last year 1519, to the other Cities of the Kingdom, They wrote another to
Valladolid, bearing date the 8th of June of this year 1520. declaring (to the
same effect as in the former) the great necessity, into which the absence of
their King would plunge the Country, and the great inconveniences that were
likely to proceed from that occasion. That it was expedient, that all the
Cities of the Kingdom should make an Assembly, and consult what were best to
be don in a case of such high consequence; Tol^do write's to Vallad^lid.
That they would consider of the manner and place of meeting; That they would
conform themselves to Valladolid, and that Valladolid should communicate the
matter to the bordering Towns and Cities. That Toledo would presently put it in
execution, for they were and ever would be at his Majesty's service, for the
good of the kingdoms and their Republics. The fifteenth of June, Valladolid
returned this answer, That they would very willingly condescend to such an
Assembly, if they thought they might justly and lawfully do it, and that they
remained well assured of the zeal and good affection which Toledo expressed to
the King's service, Vall^dolid's answer to Toledo.
and the public good; But such kind of meetings (they alleged) were
prohibited by the Laws of the Kingdom, without his Majesty's permission, and
admit they were not forbidden, at that time however they were unlawful in
regard his Majesty was absent, and by reason of the scandal which might arise
from thence, especially there being a Governor for his Majesty in the
Kingdom, and a Person of such note and value, besides the Lord President, and
those of the Council, with whom they and the other Cities of the kingdom might
communicate their necessities and grievances. And Valladolid conclude's thus:
So We beseech your Worships that you would pleas to let these Assemblies ceas,
because out of the desire we have to do you service, It would griev us very
much, that that City should give any occasion of scandal. Because all that
should proceed from thence, would be imputed and laid to the charge of those,
that were assistant at any such Iunta. And if you think that there is any
necessity to provide for, or that you desire to remedy any thing touching
this Kingdom or that City, send your messengers or Commissioners to the
Governor, and those of the Council, and we will procure them a free arrival
hither, protect them while they stay here, and obtein them a safe conduct back
again, to which we doubt not but the Governor will easily condescend, and we
will also join with them in all that is just and lawful. And because we believ,
according to your great Prudence and Virtue, you will receiv our Intention with
the same zeal and affection, as we declare it, we enlarge our selves no
further in this particular. So God keep you, etc.

SECT. IX.
THese private Treaties increased daily the public resentments, and the more
in respect of the King's demands, and his so unexspected determination to leav
that Country. The principal of those that declared themselves in Toledo, with
demonstrations of the greatest zeal to the Common good, John de Padilla, Don
Pedro Lasso, and Hern^ndo de Avalos, principal Actors for the Commons in Toledo.
were John de Padilla, Don Pedro Lasso de la Vega, Son to Don Garzilasso de la
Vega Chancellor of the Order in the kingdom of Leon, and Hernando de Avalos,
all gentlemen of noble extraction, and allied to the chief Nobles of Spain.
These gentlemen who were chief Commissioners in the Iuntas and Assemblies,
which were held in the City, exclaim^d exceedingly against the ill government,
That the King was carried away by strangers, not considering the miserable
condition in which he left that Kingdom; then they repeated all the Contents
of the Letters, which Toledo had sent to the other Cities, adding diverse other
things that had been produced upon new occasions, which they amplified and
aggravated, with more bitterness then need required: And, That Toledo, which
for her greatness, had been the Metropolitan City of Spain in time of the
Goths, was more then ordinarily obliged to seek out a remedy, and set a Period
to so great evils. They urged moreover that it was most expedidient, that
forthwith Letters should be dispatched to all the Cities of the Kingdom (that
had Vote in Parliament) to incite them to assemble in some place convenient for
their treating upon the forementioned remedies. That there should immediately
be sent a Petition to the King; beseeching him not to depart the Kingdom, but
that he would be pleased to give some Order for the remedying, and better
managing of Affairs. That, in case his Majesty would not, the Kingdom intended
to endeavor it, and would more narrowly see into that which concerned the
Common good. These and diverse such like things were that day there propounded.
And in ^egard they carried a specious appearance of the Public Good, which was
so generally desired, throughout the whole Kingdom, the Major part of the
Assembly was of opinion, That it was most fi^ting and convenient so to do. But
some dissented (though they were the fewer in number) fearing that if the
affairs were carried on in that manner (although under color of the Common
good) they would produce very sad consequents, neither were they satisfied of
the lawfulness of the Citie's assembling such Iunta's, without the King's
license and authority Antonio Alvares de Toledo, an ancient gentleman of that
City, Lord of Cedillo, and some others, which leaned to his faction, were of
this opininion, either out of desire to do the King service, or because they
could not agree with the rest, (for such kind of sidings have produced a world
of mischief in all places) or that like prudent men and free from passion, they
foresaw with clearer eyes, the danger that would ensue th'assembling of the
Cities without the King's Authority; They gave their Votes against writing to
the Cities, declared against all public, or particular meetings in that kind,
and said openly, that in case there were a necessity of rectifying any thing,
they should in an honest and humble manner petition the Emperor to take it into
his consideration. Whereto those of the contrary Judgment made several
replies. After long debate and contention about this matter, at last those few,
which were of the most safe and wholesome opinion, Corregidor is as our Majors
are in England.
protested and required according to that which they had voted, that the
Corregidor and City would take an especial care what they did, Dissentions in
^he A^^emblie at Toledo.
as for their parts they absolutely disapproved of John de Padilla's and the
other Gentlemen's Propositions. The Governor Don Lewis Porto Carrero, Earl of
Palma, being present adhered to this Opinion, but was backwards in expressing
himself, in regard h^e had married the sister of Don Pedro Lasso, who was of
the contrary Party: neither did he answer one syllable to the other's
Protest or Requests. Yet the business was so imbroiled, that no resolution
could be given that day. This difference and contention amongst the chief men
of the City being noised abroad, the people began to mutiny, and divide
themselves into Parties and Factions. Here the Author mislook his ^carms,
speaking like a flattering Fri^r.
But the Major part inclined to the worst Opinion, being allured and drawn on
with the fair pretense of the Comm^n good: Those few, who prudently perceived
the contrary, gave the Emperor forthwith notice of all these passages in the
City, and Antonio Alvarez de Toledo in particular, who had great intimacie
with the Bishop of Palencia Mota. This Advice came to the Emperor's hands, just
upon his departure from Aragon to Valladolid. But soon after at another meeting
in Toledo, the Major part voted that they should write to the other Cities of
the Kingdom, as formerly had been propounded, and that they should send to the
Emperor two Regidores, R^gidores and Iu^ados are in ^he nature of our Aldermen
and Common Council men.
and two Iurados, or Iurates of the City, humbly to demand of him as shall be
set down hereafter. Yet they were contradicted, and the contrary required by
the same men that had opposed them before, but to no purpose. Whereupon the
dispute grew so hot amongst them, That John de Padilla, who stood for the
Commons, and Antonio Alvarez de Toledo, who opposed and condemned his opinion
as wicked and dangerous, drew their daggers at each other in the Assembly. Don
Pedro Lasso de la Vega, Don Alonso Suares, and two Iurates were appointed to go
from the City to the Emperor, who having put themselves in equipage forthwith
departed. Letters were presently dispatched and sent to the other Cities,
although the same distemper and factions were already brewing in diverse of them
before they were delivered. Parliament called in Galicia.
At that same time was brought to Toledo from the Emperor, a Summons to assist
in the Parliament, which he had called in Galicia. And according to the custom
of Toledo, (which is for the Regidores and Iurates, that are present, to draw
lots, and one of each to go (upon whomsoever the lot falls) It was Don John de
Silva's chance (who afterward was Marquess of Monte-Mayor) to go as Regidor of
Toledo, and Alonso de Aguirre, as Iurate. To whom (because they held the opinion
of the contrary Party) The City would not give a full and general Power,
according to the Emperor's Commands, but an especial and limited one, to see
and hear what the Emperor desired, and with an injunction to give them advice
thereof, to the end that from time to time the City might order them what to
do, and that in no case they should grant any Subsidies, or any thing else.
Which Power Don John de Silva would not accept, nor go to the Parliament upon
those terms, exspecting they should give him the full and usual Power, and
that the Emperor should send his Command to that effect. There was such trouble
and opposition in this business, that he could never obtain that Power,
neither did they go to the Parliament.

SECT. X.
THe Emperor returned an answer to Antonio Alvarez de Toledo, and the others,
who had given him notice of the several Passages, thanking them for their
fidelity, and acknowledging the good service they had don him therein,
charging them moreover to persevere, but with the greatest wariness and
discretion that might be. To the Corregidor Don Lewis de Palma he wrote
likewise, reprehending him of his lukewarmeness and small resolution, and gave
him order what to do thenceforwards: but he did not punctually obeie his
Majesty's Orders, nor observe the manner which was most convenient, for he was
a man of too mild a disposition, which suit's very ill with those who are to
govern, especially in cases of that nature. Whereupon some few days after he
gave up his Command, and the Emperor sent Don Antonio de Cordova the ( Earl of
Cabra's brother) to take his place, but he came too late to apply any
remedy to those disorders. Thus the affairs of Toledo wax't wors and wors, and
the audaciousness of the People was grown to such a height, that they made new
Assemblies every day in favor of that, which they called Communaltie, by
consent and order of John de Padilla, The Author ought rather to have said
Promoters of ^he People's good.
and Hernando de Avalos, who were the chief Incendiaries and favorers of these
disturbances. Toledo excepting against the forementioned Commissioners, agreed
to constitute others with an especial power to present certain articles to the
Emperor (which they had by way of Instruction from the City) touching the
general good of the Kingdom. Don Pedro Lasso, and Don Alonso Suares were
appointed to go as Regidores of the City, and Michael de Hita and Alonso
Ortiz, as Iurates. The Contents of their Commission were these. That they
should beseech the Emperor not to depart the Kingdom, representing unto him the
Inconveniences, which might arise by his absence, in regard the Kingdom of
Castillia could not live without their King, being not accustomed to be under
any particular man's Government. That he should not give any Office or
Charge in that Kingdom to any stranger, and that he should take those away
again which he had so bestowed. That he should not take any money out of the
Kingdom for any person in the World, because they had already contributed so
much, that the Kingdom was reduced to great poverty. That in the Parliament,
which he had now assembled, he should not demand any Subsidies, especially,
if he continued in the resolution of departing the Kingdom. That the Parliament
should be adjourned, and held in Castillia and not at Santjago, nor in the
Kingdom of Galicia. That the Offices and Governments should not be vendible.
That some good order should be taken in the Inquisition, which might tend to
the service and glory of God, and that no body should be molested. That the
grievances and wrongs of private Persons of the Kingdom, should be righted and
repaired. These were the principal heads of the demands, Toledo then sent to
his Majesty, but the Commotions increasing gave them the boldness to add new
matter to their Petition, as you shall see hereafter.

SECT. XI.
I Have declared already the combustions that were in Valladolid, and the
Emperor's determination to depart thence, purposing to take his way by
Tordesillas to visit the Queen, his mother. Which being known, and noised
through the City (moreover that he would carry his mother out of the Kingdom
with him) the Citizens, and Common People were so much troubled at it, that
they vented diverse as bitter exclamations as a furious passion could dictate to
their disturbed minds. But the chief Burgesses, Deputies and other Officers
met in Consultation at the Monastery of St Paul, to take order for investing
their Commissioners with a general Power, to grant what the Emperor should
demand in Parliament, to petition his Majesty ^om things in their favor, and to
kiss his hand before his departure. While they were thus assembled on Mondaie
morning, Don Pedro Lasso with his Companions, arriveing the same day at
Valladolid, and being alighted went to visit them. But Alonso Ortiz, his
fellow Commissioner (who resided in Court) said, in regard the Emperor was gone
to Church to pray for his good journie to Tordesillas, that he thought it
convenient for them to go first to the Palace, for perchance his Majesty
being informed of their arrival, would vouchsafe to stay a little, and give
them Audience. In this interim some Inhabitants of Valladolid being told of the
Toledo-Commissioner's coming, went to salute them, desiring that they would
endeavor to procure some Remedy against those miseries and grievances under
which the Kingdom then so much groaned. Hereupon, it was agreed amongst them
that the Townsmen should presently put themselves in a readiness, to oppose and
hinder the Emperor from going out of the Kingdom, or depart that City (in
which attempt Don Pedro Lasso offered to venture his fortune with them, if they
would stand to him,) and that they should seiz upon Xeures, and some Flemings of
the chief of his Majesty's Council, and Bedchamber, binding first those
Townsmen with a solemn oath, not to desert him in that enterprise. Being
pricked with this over-dilligent itch of putting in execution the orders and
Commands which their City had imposed upon them, before they went to kiss the
Emperor's hands (which had been the right way) being accompanied with a gang
of Common People, and some Deputies of the Wards (who by this time were come in
to them) they went directly to the Monastery of St Paul to salute, and
communicate their design with the chief of the City there assembled; To whom
they made a speech, signifying the Causses of their coming, and what they
intended to desire of his Majesty in behalf of their City, justifying their
demands, and coloring them with the most specious pretenses that could be: And
indeed, (as at first their meaning was) their affection and zeal to their
Prince were such, that their thoughts (I believ) differed nothing from their
expressions, until things were brought unto such a pass, that there was no
hopes of remedy, and that those that had the power, or the wisdom, made a
breach through their miseries; as did Don Pedro Lasso and diverse other
gentlemen. And at the last they desired, that (as they had written, and offered
to the City of Toledo) they would send their Commissioners with them, to make
a Joint-demand of the same things, which Salamanca and other Cities desired:
V^lladolid's answer to the Commissioners of Toledo.
for a Petition being countenanced by so many Cities, would be much more
available. Their speech being thus ended, by the general consent of the
Assembly, Don Hernando Enriquez (brother to the Lord Admiral) returned them
this answer; That as yet they were not fully determined what to do, and for
that cause they were there assembled, That they would resolv upon that, which
should tend most to the King's service, and the good of the Kingdom; That they
might do what they saw good. The Commissioners of Toledo perceiving Valladolid
otherways inclined, then they exspected, went forthwith to the Palace, leaving
them in consultation.

SECT. XII.
THey came to the Emperor's Chamber of presence, just as he was risen from
dinner. With his Majesty were the Marquis of Villena, the Earl of Venavente,
the Earl of Miranda, the Duke of Alburquerque the Earl of Haro, the Earl of
Castro, the Earl of Palma, the Marquis of Brandenbourg, the Archbishop of
Santjago, the Bishop of Palencia, Monsieur de Xeures, and Don Pedro Giron, the
Earl of Urenia's eldest son. It happened as those Commissioners came in, Don
Pedro Giron was talking with the King so loud, that every one might hear him:
He said, that his Majesty might remember, that being at Barcelona, the first
of March anno 1519, he did him the honor to give him a writing under his hand,
wherein he promissed, that at his arrival in Castilla, he would command the
Judges to examine, and determine according to Law, the right which he
pretended and claimed to the Estate of Medina Sidonia, as the portion and
inheritance of the Lady Mencia de Gusman, his wife, Daughter to the Duke Don
John deceased, and that his Majesty being since at Burgos, he had again
refresh't his memory by way of Petition, that he had don the like there in
Valladolid, and yet his Majesty was upon his departure, without giving any
order for the performance of that which he had promised under his hand; and
hereupon he fell into a vain of very presumptuous language, such as savored of
too much sauciness and audacitie. Amongst other things he said, That since his
Majesty did not do him Justice, Bold speech of Don Pedro Giron to the Emperor.
he intended to right himself with his own hand, and that for so great an
injury (and without reason, so public, and so known, as his Majesty had made
it to all the world, by suffering him to be so abused against Equity or
Justice, and contrary to that which his Majesty did owe to his own Royal word,
he having so punctually performed all the duties that could be required of
his Loialtie) he had now no more to say or do, but only to let his Majesty
understand, That for fault of the remedy which he did not give him, and for
the great injury which he now did him, he could and would make use of all
those provisions, which the Laws of the Kingdom of Spain did ordain in favor,
and for the redressing of oppressed and injured Gentlemen, and to this effect
it was sufficient to ask his Majesty's permission, as he had already begged
it before as honorable persons, as those that were then present, but could not
obtain it: Speaking these words, he fell upon his knees, and kissed his
Majesty's hand. The Emperor somewhat moved at Don Pedro's, more then bold,
speeches, made this grave reply, Don Pedro you are a discreet man, I do not
think that you would do any thing, that shall oblige mee^ to punish you, for
if you should, my Justice must answer your offense. Don Pedro replied, Sir, in
doing what I say, I do nothing but what I ought, and what is just, if I do it
not my self, your Majesty will not see me righted. Those from whom I
descended, never embraced the thought of doing any thing that ought not to be
don, neither do I intend it. That which I said, Sir, I would do, was to seek
some remedy for my grievances, according to the Laws instituted in this
Kingdom; and if your meaning is, Sir, to have me punished for doing what I
ought, you will see (if you do so) what you ought to do to your self. The
Emperor presently answered, I think to do you Justice, Don Pedro, as I told
you, and I have performed my promise to you. You are my King Sir, said Don
Pedro, and I will not answer you: That which you promised me is herein written
under your own hand, and may soon be seen, and what you concluded in your
Council yesterdaie, this day is known sufficiently: that said, he produced
his paper for evidence. Upon these words the Marquis of Villena bid Don Pedro
forbear, and void the Chamber, so Don Pedro went out, and the Earl of
Venavente, and the Lord High Constable with him (who came in after this
discourse began) all the other Gentlemen presently followed them, and gathering
themselves in a knot together in the King's Antichamber, they descanted upon
these passages, and Don Pedro Giron continued still his fuming, with
exp^essions of much discontent, and sens of injury, because the King had not
made good to him what he had promised him with so much assurance.

SECT. XIII.
DOn Pedro Giron was no sooner gone out of the Presence, but Don Pedro Lasso,
and Don Alonso Suarez advanced to speak to his Majesty, beseeching he would
be pleased to give them audience, for they had diverse things to impart to his
Majesty, which did much conduce to his Service. The Emperor answered them,
that he was upon going, as they saw, and that he had not then the time to
hear them: They replied, but chiefly Don Pedro Lasso: That it was of so much
concernment to his Majesty to hear them, that he would not repent the
deferring of his departure for a little while, especially the weather being
(as it was) very rainie. For they would inform his Majesty of many things,
wherein were interessed in an extraordinary manner, both His service and the
good of the Kingdom. The Emperor knowing already the substance of what they
came to ask, and nothing pleased with their manner of petitioning, answered,
That there was no man in the world more careful, and desirous of that which
might be most expedient for the good of his Kingdoms, then himself; That they
should meet him at the next town to Tordesillas, in the way to Santjago, and
there he would hear them: So they departed his Presence. The Emperor (being
very angry at the importunity, and sauciness of the Toledians, and Don Pedro
Giron) sent presently to call some of his Privy Council, to advise touching the
apprehending of Don Pedro Giron; The Lord High Constable being advertised of
the Emperor's pleasure, came presently to the Palace, and with the rest of the
Nobles there being, he sent to desire Xeures, that he would join with them,
in taking some course for the composing of the matter. While things were thus in
agitation, a rumor began to spread amongst the People, that their Magistrates
had granted what the Emperor did desire, that he was going away, and that he
would carry his Mother out of the Kingdom with him; and as the People are apt
to believ all they hear, this report much troubled them, and being drunk with
passion, they ran madding through the streets; and here and there making stands
(after that Country fashion) they assembled diverse circuler consultations,
saying, that it would be fitting to petition the King not to depart; Being
all up in this confusion without understanding each other's meaning, a certain
Rope-maker, by Nation a Portuguez, inhabitant of that City, seeing that the
King was ready to depart, and that no body would petition him to stay, he
got into the steeple of St Michael (which is a very ancient Parish in that
City, where hung a great bell, commonly called the Counsel-Bell, which used to
be rung only in times of war, uproars, Tumults in V^lladolid.
or upon any Alarm) this bell he begin's to ring, with as much speed as he
could, which as soon as the People heard, without knowing or examining
wherefore, all (except those that were assembled in the Monastery of St Paul)
presently took up arms, to the number of about five or six thousand Common
People. It Is said their determination was to kill Xeures and all the Flemings,
and to hinder the Emperor's departure. Don Alonso Enriquez Bishop of Osma, gave
Xeures notice hereof, yet he would not believ him, thinking that he told him
so, only to ingratiate himself with him; But soon after, hearing a great
hurlieburlie, and the clashing of weapons, and asking what the matter was, Don
Pedro Porto Carero told him, Sir, it is now no time for you to sit in Council,
but endeavor to secure your Person; for the Common cry of the People is, Let
Charles the King live, but let his ill Counselors perish; neither ought you to
think it strange, if in their rage they murder you, since they consider you,
as one that carrie's their King from them. The People seeing themselves so
numerous, many of them (as it appeared) would have stopped the Emperor's
Journie. And this disorder fell out just as the Emperor was in Consultation,
about the apprehending of Don Pedro Giron, but Xeures and the Flemings, being
too well assured of the People's tumultuous fury, hastened the Emperor (all
they could) out of Valladolid, so he departed from his Palace in the cruellest
rain, and thickest sky, that had been seen in the memory of man. Which it
seeme's was a presage and ill Omen of the miseries and disasters, which were
afterward poured upon Castillia and his other Kingdoms. The People stop the
Emperor at the gates of the City.
The Emperor coming to the gate of the City, found there some of the rabble
(they could not all be so soon there, because of the extraordinary foul
weather). who having seized upon the gates, began to shut them, and to
barricado up the way: but the Emperor's Guards made them suddenly quit their
Post, and he continued on his journie leaving Valladolid full of disorder.
Some were troubled for what they had don, others perplexed that they had seen
and suffered such insolences to be committed. And in regard there was no
ground for this tumult, it was presently appeased, and the people were ashamed,
and sorry for the irreverence and disrespect they had shown the Emperor. The
Officers of Justice of Valladolid began to make diligent inquiry, who had rung
the Bell, or who gave order for the ringing of it. But the Portuguez could not
be found, so others paid for him. Some had their feet cut off; Some were
whipped: Some banished and their goods confiscate, Some others had their houses
plucked down. There was whip't amongst others a Goldsmith (a man of good
account, a Citizen of the Town) because it was proved that he had received some
Letters from the said Portuguez: some other Goldsmiths, and some officers of the
Town being also taken, were very much afraid that they should be brought to
the like public shame and punishment. But the Emperor being informed of the
good intention of that City toward him, and that what they had don was not
out of malice, or any premeditated design to do him any injury, he sent an
Order for releasment of the prisoners, and commanded that there should be no
more said of it. The Dean having apprehended, and clap't in prison three
Priests of St Michael's Church, the Judges of the Court in the Emperor's name
required him to deliver them the said Priests, in regard they were accused to
have given their consents to the ringing of the Bell. They were accordingly
delivered and carried upon three great Mules, with Irons upon their legs
through the chief streets of the City, until they came to Fuen-Saldania's
Fort, (which then stood for the King, and was kept by the sons of Don John de
Vivero Viscount of Altamira, because he had unworthily made away his wife) and
there they remained many days until the Emperor was satisfied of the truth.

SECT. XIV.
THe Emperor came to Tordesillas soundly wet and durtie, and no body with him
but Xeures, the rest could not keep pace with him, and having refreshed himself
there one day, he continued on his journie to Villalpando, where he had
appointed the Commissioners of Toledo to attend him. They being com thither
before, met with the Commissioners of Salamanca, who were Don Pedro Maldonado,
(who was afterward beheaded) and Antonio Fernandez, Regidores of that City;
with them were their Messingers also, (viz. John Alvarez Maldonado, and Antonio
Enriquez) who were chi^fly sent to underfeel, what instructions those of Toledo
had in all particulars, and had order to conform themselves in all points to the
Messengers of that City. At Villalpando a Town belonging to the Lord High
Constable, did these Commissioners and others exspect his Majesty's coming.
Upon Sundaie after they had been at Church, they went to the Palace, to the end
the Emperor should give them audience; while they were attending his Majesty's
pleasure in the Hall, came to them Don Garzia de Padilla, and Mo^ta Bishop of
Palencia, who wished them in the Emperor's name (but they thought it was from
Xeures) to tell them the message they had from their City. Don Pedro Lasso,
and Don Alonso answered. That their City had commanded them to speak to his
Majesty, and though they importuned them never so much, they would not declare
unto them their business. Thereupon the Bishop and Don Garzia returned into the
King's Chamber, but after a little time came out again, and told these
Commissioners, that if they would not give them an account, wherefore they were
com, before they kissed his Majesty's hand, they should not have audience. The
Commissioners seeing there was no remedy, con^ented to impart the substance of
their Message to them, which done, it was agreed that at two a clock in the
afternoon, (if they returned to the Palace) they should have audience. They
suspected that this diligence and earnestness of the Bishop's, and Don Garzia'^
to know their business was, because the Emperor at that time being very young,
and not much versed in State Affairs, Xeures (who was very discreet and
politic) had put them on to urge it before they were admitted, to the end he
might prepare the Emperor to give them an answer. The Commissioners returned at
the hour, and delivered their message to the King, but would not consent that
any others should be present, only the Bishop and Don Garzia, the substance
of their discourse was as ^ have said. They insisted chiefly that his Majesty
ought not to go out of the Kingdom, and conluded with this Article, saying,
however, if he did resolv upon his departure, that he would command such
order to be left for the Government, that the Cities of the Kingdom might have
their share therein; And likewise that he would be pleased to demand no
Subsidies at all, and other things reasonable enough; as we shall see
hereafter. Which indeed were so just, that a Dore-keeper named Duranges wep't
to hear them, considering the great reason the Castillians had to complain; But
it availed them little at that time; for they were then discountenanced, and
not treated according as their's and their Ancestor's good service had
deserved. The Emperor told them only, that he had heard them, and would give
order for their answer. The same he said to those of Salamanca, (who spoke to
him afterward) and in effect desired the same things as the Toledians had,
telling him moreover, that they had order from their City to conform themselves
in every thing with the Commissioners of Toledo. To whom the Emperor sent word
by the Bishop Mota and Don Garzia de Padilla, That in regard his Council was at
Venavente (whither he was to go within two days) they should not fail to meet
him there, to receiv their answer, which they did accordingly. The Emperor
being arrived at Venavente, Don Pedro Lasso and his Companion, presented
themselves for their answer. Whereupon the Emperor commanded his Council of
Justice and of State to assemble, who having considered the circumstances and
manner of those Commissioners, jointly gave their opinion, that they deserved
rather to be punished, then to receiv any good answer or satisfaction to
their demands; The Emperor displeased with the Toledians.
wherefore the Emperor sent for them into his chamber, and with a severely
frowning Countenance (as Don Pedro Lasso afterward declared) told them, that
he was not pleased with what they did, and that if he did not consider from
what Parents they were descended, he would have them punished according to
their deserts, for meddling with what they had undertaken, and that they should
go to the President of his Council, who would tell them further what they were
to do. They began to excuse themselves, but the Emperor not willing to hear
them, retired himself. Then Don Garzia de Padilla taking them aside, gave them
a notable schooling, and reproved them sharply for what they had done, telling
them that their boldness in insisting so much to the hinderance of a journie,
which so deeply concerned not only the honor and reputation of the Emperor,
but also the security and preservation of his Estate, was beyond the thought
of pardon. And that the things which they had done, had been the occasion of
disaffecting and disquieting the minds of other Commissioners, and of the
whole Kingdom, by reason of the precedence and Authority, which Toledo had
amongst all the Cities of Castilla, which they should do well to consider, and
seriously to reflect upon. After this they went to the President of his
Majesty's Council (who was the Archbishop of Granada) as the Emperor had
commanded them. The President told them, that what he had to give them for
answer, was that his Majesty was going to hold a Parliament in the City of
Santjago, where all the Commissioners of the Kingdom were to assemble, That
Toledo should send theirs thither, with a memorial of the things they desired,
which being perused and examined, The Emperor would give such Orders as should
be most expedient for his service, and the general good of his Kingdoms and
Subjects, moreover he willed them to desist from meddling any further in those
matters, but to return and deal with their City, to send their Commissioners,
as the other Cities of the Kingdom did, and not to affect such innovations, as
they had begun. Whereunto they made answer, that indeed they were not employed
by the Kingdom, but they desired however that those things might be granted
for the good of the Kingdom, And refusing to follow his advice, but rather
thinking it a point of honor to persist in what they had begun, they followed
the Emperor to Santjago.

SECT. XV.
THe Emperor passing through Leon, Astorga, and Villa Franca del Vierso was in
every place petitioned, that he would be pleased to keep the Parliament in
Castilla, but they availed nothing. And these Commissioners of Toledo, being
arrived at Santjago, solicited very hard the Commissioners of the other
Cities, that were likewise com thither, indeavoring to draw them to their
opinion, pressing them to stand upon the same terms Toledo did, as their
Cities had offered. Those from Salamanca did the like, showing themselves much
of the Toledo faction. The Emperor would by no persuasions be brought to hold
the Parliament in Castilla, but near the Seaside, because Xeures would have it
so; and the Fleming desired it the rather, out of fear, that the People would
murder him, for he knew how ill he was beloved amongst them, and he
perceived that if there were any tumult or uproar, they would begin with him.
Besides, seeing himself very rich, he desired exceedingly to be out of
Spain, and that if there should fall out any mutiny, or disorder in
Parliament, being near the Seaside, he could with more facility secure his
person and goods. As for the Emperor's own particular, it concerned him no more
to call a Parliament at Santjago, then at Valladolid or Burgos, or any other
City of Castilla.

At last being arrived at Santjago at the end of March, with many Grandees
and Nobles of Spain, the Parliament began on Mundaie the first of April
following, anno 1520, whereof was President Don Hernando de Vega Commendador
Mayor de Castilla (Father to Don John de Vega, who was Vice-King of Sicilia) a
person of great note; Don Garcia de Padilla and Zapata were his Assistants. The
Emperor sitting the first day himself in Parliament, commanded that the
Propositions should be made in his own hearing, which declared the just and
great occasions, that pressed him to undertake the Journie he was then upon,
the extraordinary exspences it did require, and the vast charges he had been
at in coming into that Kingdom, besides the great Armies he had raised, and
maintained against the Infidels, and the charges of sending the Infant Don
Fernando, his brother, out of that Country, desiring them that they would
assist him with the accustomed Subsidies, and that in his absence they would
keep the Peace and fidelity, as from such loial and good Subjects might be
exspected. Although some Commissioners would have opposed the granting him any
such Subsidy, The Commissioners of Salamanca refuse the Oath in open Parliament.
they did not however discover their intention that day, only the forenamed
of Salamanca, who openly refused the solemnity of the ordinary Oath, unless
his Majesty would first grant them the things which they desired. Which being
condemned for a great unmannerliness and disrespect, they were forbidden to
come any more into the house. Then Don Pedro Lasso said, that he had brought a
memorial and instructions from the City of Toledo, what he was to do and
grant in Parliament, and that his Majesty might see them, that he could not go
beyond his Commission, but would perform and execute it in that manner, as
should be most agreeable to his Majesty; otherwise he would rather choose to
be cut in pieces, or have his head cut off, then to give his consent to a
thing so prejudicial to his City, and the whole Kingdom. Dissentings in the
Parliament.
This answer was backed by the Commissioners of Sevilla, Cordova, Salamanca,
Toro, Zamora, and Sancho Zimbron, Commissioner of Avila, from which they could
not be drawn. Whereupon the Parliament was adjourned for three or four days,
there being amongst them such jealousies and fears as usually proceed from
discontented minds.

SECT. XVI.
THe Kingdom of Galicia was much distasted at this Parliament, because they had
no Commissioner allowed, and that Zamora spoke for them, notwithstanding
Galicia was one of the greatest and most ancient Kingdoms of Spain, and the
source of the greatest Nobility. The Archbishop of of Santjago, Don Alonso de
Fonseca (who was afterward Archbishop of Toledo) the Earl of Venavente, and
the Earl of Villalva Don Hernando de Andrada, went all together to St
Francisco, where the Parliament was kept, The Galician^ distasted.
and having obtained entrance, they thus spoke to the high Chancellor (who was
President) and the Commissioners there present: It is not unknown that Galicia
is a distinct Kingdom from Castilla, that in former times they had their Votes
in the Parlaments held in Castilla, and that (from a certain time only) they
were subject to the Votes of the City of Zamora (which was of the Kingdom of
Castilla and Leon) which was a great grievance and prejudice to them; therefore
they did desire out of favor, of the Commissioners there present, and (if need
were) they would require them, that they would admit of the Commissioners,
which that Kingdom of Galicia should nominate, who should be ready to obey
whatsoever his Majesty should command them. And in so doing they would oblige
them very much: but in case they were refused, they protested, that they would
not stand to any thing, that the Commissioners of Zamora should deny or
grant; and of that they desired witness. Hence grew some hurlie-burlie and
tumult in the Parliament. For one Garci Ruyz de la Mota (Bishop Mota's brother)
who was Commissioner for Burgos, took upon him to answer, and thwarted the Earl
of Villalva, with language that was much displeasing. This was forthwith noised
in the Court; whereupon the Emperor sent presently the Bishop Mota to qualify
the matter. He was hardly at the gate of the Cloister, where the Parliament was
held, when he met the Archbishop and the Earl coming forth. The Bishop
perceiving the Earl of Villalva much incensed, to pacify his choler, accosted
him with very smooth and civil Language, expressing much sorrow, that his
brother had so much forgotten himself. Amongst other words that passed between
the Bishop and the Earl, Villalva chanced to let slip these, You have a pretty
fellow to your brother, my Lord Bishop, and withal he swore, that (if they
supported him) he would join with Don Pedro Lasso. And in regard Don Pedro
Lasso was so fixed to the interest of the Kingdom (which was not very pleasing
to Xeures, and others that sat at the helm) These words of the Earl's were
presently carried to the Palace; whereupon an Alcalde de Casa y Corte (that is,
an officer in the nature of our Judges of oyer and terminer) commanded the ^arl
to quit the Court within one hour, and not to return to it without his
Majesty's permission. At the houre's end he went from Santjago to the Groyne,
where his house and estate lay. But soon after the Emperor going from Santjago
to the Groyne, readmitted him into his presence and favor.

SECT* XVII.
IN this Occurrence some Grandees of the Kingdom, which followed the Court,
accused Xeures highly to Emperor, and bid him beware that the Fleming did not
counsel him for his own ends. Hereupon there passed some angry expressions
betwixt Xeures, the Earl of Venavente and the Archbishop of Santjago, and they
began to breed factions in the Court. This Archbishop and some others began to
make private meetings, Emulations in the Court.
and consult how they might provide themselves with arms and men secretly. The
Emperor perceived it, and if he had not remedied it in time, he had found it
troublesome enough. The Earl of Venavente and others left the Court
discontented; The Emperor knew the sidings and dissentions that had been in
Toledo, and how they had refused to give a full power to their Commissioners
(Don John de Silva and Aguirre) which considered, the Emperor and his Council
were of opinion, that it would not be amiss to send to some of the chief
Officers that opposed it, to come to Court, and send others, his Majesty's
servants, to supply their places, for taking some out and supplying their
places with others, they might do whatsoever his Majesty commanded. To that
effect were presently dispatched Orders, whereby Hernando de Avalos John de
Padilla, John Carrillo, Gonzalo Gaytan, Don Pedro de Ayala and Pedro de Herrera
(all Regidores and Officers of the City) were commanded under great penalties,
every man of them to make his personal appearance at the Court within such a
time: And Lope de Guzman, Rodrigo Ninio, and Martin de Ayala, were commanded
under the same penalty, to go to supply their places at Toledo, to the end
that these being gone thither, and the others com away, the City might revoke
the powers, which they had given to Don Pedro Lasso and Don Alonso, and give
others to Don John de Silva, and Alonso de Aguirre. These Orders being
signified to the abovenamed, they all excused themselves, only Herrera, who in
obedience to his Majesty's Commands went to the Court. These weeds of
dissension increased day by day in Toledo, and the other Cities of Castilla,
and in the Court it self many bitter words were buzzed up and down,
countenancing and approving these proceedings, and the demands of Don Pedro
Lasso and others, as tending to the general good of the Kingdom.

SECT. XVIII.
THe Messingers and Commissioners of Toledo and Salamanca, with other
associates, made this Request to the Rest; that in regard the Commissioners,
which Toledo was to send particularly for that Parliament, were not yet com, and
those which were there from Salamanca were not admitted, there should be
nothing granted, or determined until those of the one and of the other City
were present. If otherwise, they protested, That it should not be any
Prejudice to their Cities.

This being engrossed very fair, they carriyd it to St Francisco where the
Parliament sat, taking a Notarie with them called Antonio Rodriguez (who was
afterward Clerk of the Iunta) And they demanded Audience. But, notwithstanding
many voted for them, those of Toledo were refused, and forbidden to enter, in
respect they were not Commissioners appointed for that Parliament. Thereupon
they made their Acts and Protests at the door, saying, that the King's
Commissioners could not assemble in Parliament without the Commissioners of
Toledo, The Toledians protest against the Parliament at Santjago.
that their nonappearance proceeded from their own particular negligence, not
any fault of their Citie's, in regard they had their Powers delivered them,
that they being members of the said City did require them not to assemble in
Parliament, until those Commissioners of Toledo were arrived, and against the
contrary they protested. And whatsoever should be enacted in any such
Parliament without them, they declared to be void and of none effect, and
should be no ways prejudicial to the City of Toledo, nor the whole Kingdom.
Many persons of note were witnesses to this Protest, and it occasioned much
scandal in the Court. Don Pedro Lasso and his companion slighted his Majesty's
commands, which were signified to them by the Secretary Covos. Which being
told the Emperor, he gave immediate command to banish them that very day
(being Palm Sundaie); and accordingly in the evening his Secretary Francisco
de los Covos, and John Ramirez Secretary to the Council of Justice, went to
the lodging of those Toledo-Commissioners, and in the Emperor's name signified
to each of them severally his M^jestie's pleasure, commanding Don Alonso de
Suarez the next day (being mundaie) to leav the Court, and that within two
months he should go serve and reside, where that Company of men lay whereof
he was Captain, where he should remain until further order from his Majesty,
under pain of forfeiting his goods, and the said Captain's place. Don Pedro
Lasso was likewise commanded to absent from Court, the same Mundaie, and within
forty days, to go and reside in the Government of the Fort of Gibraltar
(which was his own inheritance) and not to depart thence, without the Emperor's
leav, under penalty of forfeiting that Command, and all the rest of his estate
whatsoever. The Iurates were also commanded to leav the Court immediately. And
there was order given in their lodgings, that they should not entertein them
any longer. They demanded Copies hereof, but were refused, so they went to
John Ramirez chamber, and by much importunity they obtained one, but not
signed. The Toledians being extremely troubled that they were banished the
Court with so much rigor, two hours within night, Don Pedro, and Don Alonso
with the Iurate Ortiz went to the Palace. Ortiz went in to Xeures, and
acquainted him tha^ such gentlemen were come to speak with him. Xe^res bad him
speak to his servants to set up lights in his chamber, and that they should
stay there for him. Xeures being come, they spent above two hours together,
and the result of their conference was: That it seemed they took it very ill
to be thus forbidden the Court; therefore it was agreed that in testimony of
their obedience, they should go only four or five leagues from Santjago, and
should leav some body in their steads, to put him in mind to solicit the
Emperor to revoke their banishment.

The next day, being Tuesdaie, in the morning they went away, l^aving Alonso
de Ortiz only to solicit Xeures, and to put him in mind of what was agreed
betwixt them, and to tell him that Don Pedro Lasso and Don Alonso Suarez were
gone to Padron (four leagues from Santjago) in obedience to his Majesty's
Commands. Alonso de Ortiz returned to the Palace, and meeting Covos, he
desired him to help him to the speech of Xeures. Xeures being com forth, Ortiz
beseeched him to perform what he had promised to those gentlemen. Xeures told
him, that he had moved it already to the Emperor, but could not prevail: And
that (for ought he saw) there was no remedy, but that they must obeie the
extremity of his Commands. Ortiz replied, that they should have a care what
they did therein, and that it would not redound to the Emperor's service, not
so much because those Commissioners were of the chief gentry of the Kingdom, as
that they were deputed and sent by the City of Toledo, who must take upon
their account what trouble or injury soever they suffered, in regard they had
done nothing beyond, or contrary to that which their City had encharged them,
for the good of the Kingdom. Xeures answere^, that they had not shown the
respect which they owe^ to their King, and for that they deserved the
punishmen^ which he had inflicted upon them, and much more. Ortiz replied,
That since he had the greatest privacie and freedom with his Majesty, he was
the more obliged to see to this matter, and to consider with attention, that
the whole Kingdom knew that Toledo had sent those gentlemen to treat of that
which concerned them all, and that seeing them thus banished the Court, they
would not think it was for any disrespect to his Majesty, (for if any such
thing were they deserved double punishment) but that they were turned out of
the Court, that they might not solicit the Kingdom's good, and thereupon they
would be all scandalized, and such mischiefs would ensue, as they would not
be able to remedy when they listed. Whereto Xeures very formally thus replied,
what lightness is this of Toledo, what lightness I say? is the King no King?
why does no body think of putting Kings in and out at their pleasure? Alonso
Ortiz answered again, that he wondered, he should speak so much against
Toledo, it being of such consequence, that it was reputed the best and most
considerable City of the Kingdom, and had the greatest priveleges and
immunities, which the natives did enjoie, for the notable services they had don
to the deceased Kings. Therefore it could not be thought, that Toledo treated
or intended any thing, but what might suit with his Majesty's service;
Moreover, if he pleased to look upon what gentlemen had gone into Flanders, to
serve his Majesty against King Fernando's will (venturing there, not only
their own lives and fortunes, but their friend's and Kindred's also) he would
find that the most of them were of Toledo. And that those of that City, were
the chief means of paying the subsidies to King Phillip. And since that City
produced such gallant men, he ought not to beleiv that It Is intention ever was
other, then to do his Majesty service. The Secretary Francisco de los Covos
heard all this discourse. These and diverse other means the Toledian
Commissioners used by favor of some great one's about the Emperor, to obtain a
revocation of their banishment, but nothing would do, for Xeures and other
Castilians of the privy Council, opposed it. Don Alonso Suarez prudently
considering that their business was foiled, and in danger of being utterly
lost, performed what he was commanded, and never after put himself into those
troubles, neither did he meddle during all the commotions of Castilla, whereby
he lost nothing. Don Pedro Lasso did the like (though late) not understanding
sooner that he disserved the King. Thus ended the Embassage of Toledo, which
was so boldly and courageously performed by these gentlemen.

Before the Emperor departed from Santjago he installed Knight of the Order
the Earl of Santisteuan, the Marquess of Villena's son. The ceremony was
celebrated with great sol^mnity at the great Altar in Santjago's Church.

SECT* XIX.
ON Tuesday in the Holy week before Easter, a Post came from Toledo with an
express to recall their Commissioners; This Post was dispatched before there
was any notice of their being banished from Court. He brought letters to his
Majesty, some from the Assembly of the City, others from the Chapter of their
Cathedral Church, and from the Monasteries and Fryeries, humbly begging therein
a favorable treatment of their Commissioners, not as yet knowing what had
passed. Moreover they mentioned how Don Antonio de Cordoua (the Earl of Cabra's
brother) their Governor, then being at Toledo, had produced certain orders
from his Majesty to John de Padilla, Hernando de Avalos, and Gonsalo Gaytan,
whereby they were commanded to make their personal appearance at Court, within
a certain time, under penalty for default. The reason that Toledo gave, why
these gentlemen did not obey, was, that they were employed about some affairs
concerning the public good, and that their absence would be prejudicial to
the whole City. And therefore they beseeched that his Majesty would suspend
his command for the present. The gentlemen that stayed at Padron, sent this
dispatch, with the instructions they had from Toledo, to Alonso Ortiz, who
remained at Court. He presently went to the Monastery of San Salvador, half a
league from the City (where the Emperor had retired himself for the Holy
week) and desired to enter to deliver the letters to his Majesty, but he
found no admittance. Meeting Secretary Covos, he acquainted him with his
business, and told him that he had letters to deliver to the Emperor from
Toledo, Covos told Xeures this, who forthwith sent for Ortiz, and bad him give
him the letters. But Ortiz desired to be excused, for he had order to deliver
them into the Emperor^s own hands, and to none else. Xeures told him, that the
Emperor having received the Sacrament that morning, was yet at his devotion,
and he could not speak with him. Then they fell to discourse again about those
gentlemen's banishment, and grew so hot at it, that Xeures went away distasted,
and Ortiz remained with small satisfaction. A little after Covos came, and told
Ortiz that Xeures called him. Ortiz went, and Xeures told him, that resolvedly
he could say nothing as touching their banishment, so without any more words
he went into another room. Ortiz stayed behind with Don Garcia de Padilla,
who blaming exceedingly the proceedings of Toledo, said, if his counsel might
be taken, the Emperor should go thither (it would be but ten days work) and
inflict some exemplary punishment upon them, that were occasion of those
troubles, whereby the rest might be deterred and quieted. I wish to God he
would, said Ortiz, for then his Majesty would see the great damages they
suffered, and give order for some redress. So they parted, and Ortiz went that
night to speak with the Lord Chancellor, for he saw there was no possibility
of delivering his letters to the Emperor, nor of speaking with him. The
Chancellor and Ortiz spent a great part of the night, without concluding any
thing to the purpose.

The Emperor remained at Santjago, until the thursday in Easter week, and then
departed for the Groyn, where he made his entrance on Saturday following.
Thither repaired also the Parlament-men and Commissioners to conclude all their
businesses. There were produced the testimonies, supplications and Acts, which
the Regidores and Council of Toledo had made concerning the commanding them to
appear at the Court, and the Power which the City sent to Alonso Ortiz,
charging him to do all the diligences therein expedient, which he did, and
presented himself to the Secretary Ramirez. And moreover were delivered the
second Orders for their appearance, with greater penalties, which had bin sent
to Toledo and notified to the gentlemen there.

SECT. XX.
BY this time Toledo had notice of their Commissioner's banishment, and of the
ill success of their affairs in Court, which, added to the distaste those
Orders had bred in them, so exasperated their minds that their passions grew
beyond the bounds of moderation. Some were seized with fear, others with
vaporing speeches carried it very high, and set themselves to excite the People
against the Judges, and those that showed themselves desirous to advance their
Prince's service, possessing them that this was for the public good, and that
it was their interests and profit, that then was in agitation, especially
Hernando de Avalos, John de Padilla, and some others of their faction. Rather
the chief instrument of the Common good.
It is true, at the beginning of these disorders, John de Padilla was the only
Bouttefeu, Hernando de Avalos and other gentlemen were his Abettors and
Promoters, who added fuel to the fire, being persons of mature age and
experience and had acquired the repute of wise men amongst the Common people.
The Author undervalue's John de Padilla out of passion, for contrary to his
description he was a man of Singular wit, learning and mature judgment and his
Wife was a Lady Nobly descended and the most Masculine, Heroic Spirit that
ever Spain bred.
John de Padilla's fault was, that he was young, not above thirty years of
age, and not very ready witted either, but good natured, and easy to be
persuaded to any thing, they would put him upon: and he wanted no instigation
from these gentlemen and his wife Donia Maria Pacheco, who was one of the
Kingdome's firebrands. They possessed the vulgar with a thousand follies, and
lies intermingled with some trueths. That the Emperor, deserted the Kingdom,
that he left Strangers to govern, that his favorites and Officers had robbed
the Kingdom, leaving the Country lean, poor and dismantled of all it is fruits
and wealth: These things they caused to be published in the Pulpits, And to
the end they might the better communicate their passion, and give every one a
dose of this infectious drug, they advised to assemble the people. In that
City there is a great Congregation or fraternity called the fraternity of
Charity, which used every year to make a Solemn Procession; upon this occasion
there was one ordained to go from St Iusta's Church to the Cathedral. Some
(especially Don Hernando de Silva, Antonio Alvarez de Toledo, and others of
their opinion) knowing to what end this Solemnity was ordained, highly
opposed it, saying that, it was prejudicial to the King, and that it was only
a plot and cunning trick of those that were disaffected, and Don Hernando
required the chief of the Congregation not to make any such tumultuous
meetings (under color of devotion) to disturb the People to the King's
prejudice and dishonor of justice, for if they did, he with his friends and
servants would hinder it. They valued not these words but rejoiced that Don
Hernando de Silva did appear in the business, for that would open them the way
(as they desired) to augment the distemper of the People, and enkindle their
indignation. And it fell out so, for the People resenting and condemning highly
Don Hernando's request, looked on him as an enemy of the Country, and as one
that did not only contradict and hinder the good of the common people; But
also the most sacred practices of devotion. To be short, they did go in
Procession and in the Letanie they prayed that God would enlighten the
understanding and direct the Heart of the Emperor well and piously to rule and
govern those Kingdoms. Don Hernando did not execute his Intention, being
advertised to the contrary by the Governor, to avoid further scandal. In the
Procession there were some things done, more then needed, in scorn and derision
of those that did not follow that opinion, and much murmuring against them.
Wherewith the People generally thence forwards were so infected, and diverse
grew so audacious, that justice had no force nor respect among them. The
disorder and confusion became excessive, and there was nothing in the City
done, for the most part, or concluded in Council or without, but what was
dictated or approved by Hernando de Avalos, and John de Padilla. So Don
Hernando de Sylva resolved to leav Toledo and go to the Emperor.

SECT. XXI.
THe Emperor knew all this, when Alonso Ortiz petitioned concerning the Orders
for the Officers of Toledo to appear in Court, and Commanded to be delivered
the Second Orders, that I mentioned, which were notified. Iuan de Padilla dealt
with two gentlemen (his kinsmen) one called Pedro de Acunia (who married one
of his sisters) the other Diego de Merlo (who married a Cousin-german of his)
both powerful men in Toledo: telling them, they knew that the Emperor had sent
for him and other gentlemen of the City, to make their personal appearance at
Court. And that upon the first and second Orders they had excused themselves,
but the third Command being com, This Plot the Friar writ upon report.
they could not bauk it. They had a thought, (because they would not have their
not obeying seem to be their faults, but rather that they could not go) That
those gentlemen with their Allies, Abbettors, friends and servants, assembling
together should make a kind of mutiny in the City, and apprehending them
should detain them and by no means consent to their departure, whereof having
certificate, they might send it to the Court for their defense, and by that
invention be freed from the Penalties mentioned in the Orders. Those two
gentlemen Pedro de Acunia and Diego de Merlo (who had bin bred at Court)
prudently considering what John de Padilla and the rest of his Consorts
demanded, told them, that Proposition sounded not well in their ears, and they
desired to be excused for not engaging in so rash and unadvised an enterprise.
John de Padilla and the rest, perceiving there was no hopes of bringing these
men to their byas, went and agreed with the Friars of St Augustine and those of
St Iuan de los Reyes, That the general Procession being com from the Cathedral
Church to the Augustines, and the People all assembled, those Friars should lay
hands upon them (whom his Majesty had commanded to appear in Court) (which
they alleged they might safely do, in regard men of their Coat had nothing to
loos, and were exempt besides from any punishment the King could iuflict upon
them.) This being agreed upon, it happened that going in the Procession Hernando
de Avalos and Don Francisco de Herrera, a Canon of Toledo and Chaplain Major of
the King's Chapel (who was afterward Archbishop of Granada ten days only)
fell to words; which occasioned so great a nois and hurly-burly amongst the
People, that to pacify them the former agreement was forgotten, So their
design took no effect. Padilla and his Consorts, seeing they could not
accomplish their desires, That the Emperor departed not the Kingdom as yet, and
that the prefixed time of their appearance at Court was exspired, Neither were
these men such base fellows as he make's them but persons of quality.
fearing least the Governor of Toledo should execute the Penalties specified in
the Orders, or apprehend them and send them to Court* They resolved to accost
certain mean fellows of Scandalous and mutinous dispositions that led a
shifting and discontented life about the City, The chief whereof were one
called Xara, and a Petifogging Solliciter) to whom they promised large rewards,
giving them order, with the rest of their gang, to seiz upon them. These
Fellows knowing that Hernando de Avalos John de Padilla, and the rest, were
great sticklers for the good of the Kingdom, and that particularly for the
benefit of that City they had exposed themselves to so great danger, They
thought themselves obliged to countenance and assist them, and not to suffer
them to go out of Toledo, and were glad of the Emploiment; For besides that of
their own disposition they were seditious, and na^urally affected novelties,
the hope of recompense, and seeing what esteem and value those Gentlemen set
upon them, animated them with a desperate vain courage to do, as follows.

SECT. XXII.
HErnando de Avalos and John de Padilla, seeing their design go forward to
their own contentments, agreed to make a show as if they intended to perform
the Emperror's Commands, in appearing at Court. So being fitted for the
journey they took Witnesses of their departure, the sixteenth of April: John de
Padilla was no sooner out of his house, but a rabble of forty or fifty men (who
had the watchword) met him in the street, and in a violent tumultuous manner
laying hands on him, some cried out, let us keep John de Padilla here, let him
not go to the Court: Others, let us never consent that he or any of the other
gentlemen should go out of Toledo; for that would be the ruin of the
Common People, and it were an exceeding cruelty and ingratitude to let them go
to the Court to suffer there. Tumults in Toledo.
Hereupon the People so flocked from all parts of the City, that in very short
time they exceeded the number of six thousand men; most of them being armed,
cried out with loud voices, kill kill Xeures and the Flemings that have robbed
Spain, and let Hernando de Avalos, and John de Padilla (the Fathers and
Defenders of this Republic) live, let them live: With this tumultuous nois and
hubbub they hurried away John de Padilla prisoner, notwithstanding he
protested and required them (with a cunningly framed dissimulation) that they
would let him go to fulfill the commands he had received from his Majesty.
Having put him into a Chapel in a Part of the Cathedral Church, called the
Bishop Don Pedro Tenoma's Cloister, they made him swear as he was a gentlman,
that he would remain a Prisoner in that Chapel, and not offer to stir out of
it without leav or order from them. then they fetched Hernando de Avalos,
Gonsalo Gaytan, Don Pedro de Ayala and the rest, and committing them all
prisoners in the same Chapel, they set guards upon them. These gentlemen made
protest upon protest against that detaining of them, whereby they were
disenabled to undertake their journie to C^urt, and perform what the Emperor's
Orders imported, but they were very glad within themselves of that invention so
handsomely to prevent their going.

SECT. XXIII.
THis done, the same Mutineers went to the Governor Don Antonio de Cordoua, and
required him to recall and make void the Notification of the Emperor's Orders,
which he had made to those gentlemen, and chiefly that he would command them,
under pain of death, not to obey that summons. The Governor began to show his
courage, and commanded a Proclamation to be read in every street, that they
should all retire to their dwellings and lay down their Arms. But they
slighted his authority and in stead of obeying, they began to cry out, some let
us kill him, others let us turn him and all his Officers out, and choos others
for the Communalty. Seeing himself in this danger, and possessed with a panick
fear, to pleas the People, He did what they required, And sent immediately to
the Gentlemen Prisoners an absolute Command not to go out of the City, but
remain there, for so doing would be more conducing to his Majesty's service.
Hereof they took certificates, which they sent to Alonso Ortiz, that he might
present them to his Majesty in their defense, which he did accordingly, and
spoke to some of the Council about it, believing the matter had been really so,
and urging for instance that his Majesty did not see what was most expedient
for the Kingdome's good, as they desired. Some are of opinion that if the
Governor of Toledo had Punished that seditious tumult in stead of condescending
to their desires (which he might then have don) he had prevented a world of
misery and mischief, that was occasioned by the succeeding war. For the
beginners of that hubbub were not many, and of meanest of the people. And at
that time there were diverse gentlemen in Toledo, who would have assisted him in
the suppressing of them, especially Don John de Sylva with diverse of his
kindred and opinion, although some of them were drawn the other way. The
Governor's timiditie and want of resolution so much emboldned the People, that
they seized on him and others that would have prosecuted against the first and
chief instruments of this commotion. Which had been otherwise carried if the
Governor had had so much Spirit and courage as he ought, but that was so
little, that he retired himself into his house, where he continued some few
days without any power or respect, after which he left the City for fear
least the People should murder him.

SECT. XXIV.
HErnando de Avalos and John de Padilla perceiving that to avoid one mischief
they had fallen into a greater, bethought themselves that (in respect the
Emperor was then ready to go out of the Kingdom, to excuse and free themselves
from the punishment which the Governor (though he deferred it) was to inflict
upon them) It would be most expedient for their purpose to incite the whole
people to rise up in Arms, and having possessed themselves of the justice, the
Fort, and the bridges, to defend themselves against whomsoever. To this effect
they solicited some Friars and Priests to declare with aggravation in their
Pulpits the damages and miseries the Kingdom then suffered, That no Offices nor
Benefices of value were bestowed upon the Natives, but the Flemings enjoied
all* That no places of Trust or Honor were conferred upon them, for either
their's or their Predecessor's merits or services, but must be purchased with
great sums of money. Thus began the Priests to move the People's hearts,
Commending and applauding much what they had don, and urging that the Kingdom
was tyranised over: That the Castilians were debased and vilified. That they
should be loaded with new taxes, That every head of Cattle should pay such a
rate, and every house so much. And that in this respect whosoever would engage
himself in the defense of the Kingdom, with the liberties and freedoms thereof,
should purchase an eternal memory. Hereupon the fire grew so violent that
those who discreetly would not engage in these combustions, for fear of being
murdered, were enforced either to fly from the City, or confine themselves to
their own houses. And the most considerable, amongst whom were some Regidores
and Iurates of the City, took refuge in the Fort with Don John de Rivera, or
Sylva, who kept it at his own charge, and was retired thither, with some of his
Kindred, Children, and servants. Thence he sent to his Tenants in several
places to bring him in provisions, for the sudden and unexspected necessity of
his flying thither did not permit to furnish himself with what was needful. And
those of the Communalty (as they already styled themselves) which was the rest
of the City, following them who took upon them to be the most wise, set
themselves to fortify and repair the walls and places of importance, fearing the
damage they might receive from abroad (for within they feared nothing) and
possessed themselves of the gates and Bridges which were under Don John's
command.

SECT. XXV.
THings being in this condition the Earl of Palma, Don Luis Puerto Carrero
fearing the mischiefs this Commotion might produce, sent an express to inform
the Emperor of the several passages in the City, that h^e might suddenly
provide some remedy. In this interim, Don Pedro Lasso, Don Alonso Suarez, Miguel
de Hita and Alonso Ortiz were com again all to Sant^ago, and although some
gentlemen, their friends had counseled them to be gone in order to his
Majesty's commands, and not to stay any longer about the Court, because the
Emperor (being already incensed at the Audaciousness of the Toledians) might
perchance command them to be punished, as believing them to be the
occasioners thereof. Yet they still continued at Sant^ago without fearing much
what could befall them. The Constable of Castilla and Garci Lasso de la Vega,
Don Pedro Lasso's brother, Seeing this, earnestly desired the King's Soliciter
(who was resident at Toledo) that he would with all expedition go to Sant^ago,
and persuade them to depart thence, because Don Pedro Lasso had but five days
remaining of the forty which were limited him to retire to Gibraltar. The
Soliciter presently took Post for Santjago, and communicated to them what the
Constable and Garci Lasso had injoined him, besides he told them his own
opinion and how rotten the hearts of the People were in Toledo* He prevailed
with Don Pedro Lasso, that he should depart the next day (which he did).
Passing through Zamora he declared there what commands had bin laid upon him,
which troubled and incensed the People, as you shall see hereafter.

SECT. XXVI.
THe Common People of Toledo being thus distempered, they determined to
possess themselves of the Fort as well as of the Gates and bridges of the City.
To this effect a nois was spread amongst them that Don John de Sylva was a
Traitor to the good of the Communalty, and that it was fit to take the Fort
from him and turn him out of Toledo. The Multitude gathered together to assault
it, and in regard during the Reigns of the Catholic Kings there had bin so
much peace and so little use of arms, all Forts and places of strength were
very ill repaired, and unprovided as well of arms as victuals. Don John
perceiving the People's fury and malice (as you have heard) fortified himself
the best he could, taking into the Fort with him diverse gentlemen and others
to the number of about four hundred, all resolved to defend themselves against
the People, if assailed by them. The multitude perceiving this, determined
first to take the Gates and Bridges of the City; so they went forthwith to the
Gate of Visagra, and to the Port of Cambron which they gained without
resistance. One of the Iurates called Miguel de Hita (who the^ was
joint-Commissioner with Don Pedro Lasso and Don Alonso Suarez) was commander of
the Bridge of Alcantara, in whose absence his Lieutenant could not so well defend
the tower of the bridge but that in short time they were masters of it. Thence
they went to St Martin's Bridge, whereof was Commander Clement de Aguayo a man
of great courage, and he had provided himself with some friends and servants to
help him, they assaulted him desperately, and he with no less resolution
defended himself, until by mere strength they forced an entrance into the first
Tower of the Bridge on that side toward the City, Their grounds were good and
had su^^ceeded better if they had not bin betrayed by some of the Nobility.
for such infinites of Common People and gentry flocked thither (many thinking
that rising to be upon better grounds and with a better intention then
afterward it appeared) and the boys flowed in such multitudes thither, that
with brickbats and stones from an eminent place near they made them quit the
top of the Tower. The assault being thus hot from several parts, at last they
made breaches and entered with such fury, that taking the Commander they wounded
him sorely in two places and threatened to hang him, if he would not send to
command the other tower of the bridge toward the fields to be surrendered to
them; but he courageously putting his life to the venture would send no such
Order. He being secured they fell desperately upon the other tower, but they
within seeing the success of the former and their Commander taken, had not the
courage to stand out, but delivered it immediately to the City, Thus they got
all the bridges and Gates into their own hands. Thence they marched in very
great numbers (All armed) to the Fort, resolving to take it by assault if it
were not suddenly surrendered to them. Some religious men grieving much at the
mischiefs and death of diverse persons which must needs ensue so violent an
assayling, became mediators betwixt Don John de Sylva (who defended the Fort)
and the better sort of those that came against it: This treaty continued a good
while; at length Don John seeing diverse of his near kinsmen against him, his
friends and Allies, and considering that he wanted provisions to make any
long resistance, to avoid the damages his standing out might have occasioned,
suffered himself to be persuaded to deliver up the Fort, upon condition that
one of his own servants should remain as Commander having first taken the Oath
of fealty. Thus on Saturday 21 of April Don John and his Children with the
other gentlemen and friends that were retired thither, came out of the Fort,
and went to a village of his four leagues thence, from which place he wrote
again to the Emperor informing him how the People had taken the Fort from him,
and possessed themselves of all the Gates and Bridges of the City, which news
incensed his Majesty very much, yet he did not resolve to send any Soldiery
thither, because every one told him that being a business of no foundation, it
must needs fall again of it self. All this passed before the Governor went out
of the City, or gave up his Staff. So all the Common People, conducted by
their Chiefs, went next unto his house and made him swear that he should hold
his staff, or acknowledge his authority and Office as from the Communalty of
Toledo. He being affrighted with this tumult, condescended to what they would
have him do; the People soon after broke out, and did what they listed, seeing
him so helpless and so void of resolution. The City thus wanting both Governor
and Don John de Sylva, Those of the Communaltie became freemen and Lords of
all, They constituted Deputies, and began to settle a form of government at
their own pleasures, Saying they did it in the name of the King, Queen and
Communaltie. In this manner began the great troubles and commotions of Toledo.

SECT* XXVII.
DOn Pedro Lasso arrived at a village of his, called Cueua, in his way to
Gibraltar, whither he intended to go like a good and Loial Subject in
obedience to his Majesty's Command, although the forty days (he was
limited) were expired. But Toledo having notice of his being there, They sent
to desire him to return to the City. He would have excused himself, Saying
that he was to repair to Gibraltar in Order to that which the Emperor had
commanded. whereupon they ordered a party of Horse to seiz upon him and bring
him thither, He not being able to withstand them, went (though seemingly)
against his will, and got privately into his own house, but could not keep
himself long concealed, for the People gathering presently together went to his
house, and forcing him to com forth, carried him to the Church. He rode on
horsback and the People went on foot by him with great acclamations of joie
applauding and extolling the Valor and resolution he had shown in their
behalfs (for indeed at that time He was beloved and highly esteemed not only
of that People, but of the whole Kingdom)* This favor and honor which every
one did him made him not reflect so soon upon his Error. For Don Pedro was a
very sweet dispositioned gentleman without malice, and, besides his good
nature, a great friend to justice and the weal of his country, and therefore
he engaged so far in those first broils. Whosoever knew what he was, will
acknowledge all this, for the noble blood that ran in his veins would not suffer
him to degenerate from his Ancestor's generositie, who were of the Grandees of
Spain, He being son to Don Garci Lasso de la Vega, Comendador mayor de Leon,
(one of the most renowned gentlemen that were in the times of the Catholic
Kings); Extraction of Don Pedro L^ss^.
Sa^cha de Guzman Lady of Batres, descended from that most illustrious family
of the Guzmans of Leon, was his mother. He was nephew to Don Gomez Xuarez de
Figueroa Father to the first Earl of Feria, and to the Lady Eluina Lasso de la
Vega, sister to the Marquis of Santillana, which two houses Vega and Mendosa,
were of the most Illustrious families of all Spain. This was his extraction,
and it is to be expected that his thoughts and desires to serve his Prince
should be correspondent, as the Emperor and his son King Philip had good
experience of afterward. Who in times very troublesome (when they had need of
men of resolution and loialty) sent Garci Lasso, Don Pedro Lasso's son, their
Ambassador to Paul the fourth about businesses of very high consequence and
great difficulty. I find my self obliged to this digression for the honor of
so noble a person, It being no less then my duty not to suffer such eminent
virtues to be buried in Oblivion, although it does somewhat hinder the Story.

SECT. XXVIII.
IT was generally voted by the Communalty of Toledo (which already gave
themselves the attribute of Holy) for further security of their place and
persons, That it was expedient to turn the Governor and all his Officers out of
the City, notwithstanding he had taken an Oath to Officiate for them. For the
better effecting whereof they raised a mutiny pretending to kill him, and to
take away the staves from Him, his Lieutenant and other Officers, who presently
delivered them for fear of their lives. The Governor, the Lord chief Justice
and the High Sheriff, fled to Don Pedro Lasso's house for refuge, where he
secured them, and Hernando de Avalos with some other gentlemen: The tumult of
the Common People being appeased, they were conducted out of the City on
foot, then they took horse and rode to Alcala de Henares. Whence the Governor
sent one of his Officers, named Don Pedro del Castillo, to inform the Emperor
of these passages in Toledo. The City set guards at all their gates and
Avenues, that no body should go out to give notice of their proceedings, nor
any one com in without being examined who he was, whence he came and what
letters he brought. All this was done by the general command and consent of
all the gentlemen that assisted in this insurrection of the Common People, and
all the Friars and Priests, excepting some few who absented and withdrew
themselves, though with danger of their lives. The Order they kept to conform
themselves in these disorders, was, That every time they were to treat of any
business, the inhabitants of every particular parish were to assemble, and two
public Notaries with them, before whom every man, how mean soever, was to sit
down and declare his opinion.

SECT. XXIX.
THe 8th of May in the same year was published at the Groyn this rising of
Toledo, some were glad of it, others sorry, every one according as he stood
affected. Some advised the Emperor to take post and go to Toledo, and inflict
some exemplarie punishment upon the principal delinquents, which might be a
means to keep the whole Kingdom in subjection. The Emperor being young and
full of Spirit approved of that counsel, but Monsieur de Xeures dissuaded him,
fearing greater disorders if he went thither, and knowing the strength and
situation of that City, besides considering the heat of the people's fury,
and that the mischief would be greater, if they had the impudence to affront
him in Person, as it was probable they would, fearing to be punished for what
they had don already; That their fury being most violent in the beginning
(which time alone could mitigate and appeas) their first impetuosity would soon
be over, as most commonly it is observed in such commotions, which kindled
with a little fire and without any grounds, are allayed again with as little
water. Besides all these allegations Xeures had a longing desire to be in his
own Country, verifying in that this saying, That wheresoever the Treasure is,
there is the heart also. Moreover the Emperor had a particular necessity, for
a thousand reasons which nearly concerned the reputat^on of his person, not to
defer his departure, but rather to hasten it all he could, being exceedingly
urged by the Princes Electors, and that he might not give his enemies any
time to hinder the Election of the Empire, the King of England being then
likewise in expectation of some interest therein. And besides it was of no small
consequence for him to be gone, before the King of France was joined with the
King of England, who were reported to meet the first of June at Calis. These
considerations settled the Emperor's determination of going into Germany, his
Council supposing that the business of Toledo would go no further, no body
imagining what afterward did ensue.

SECT. XXX.
THings being in the condition I have declared, The Commissioners of Toledo
never came to the Parliament, which was concluded by them that were there, who
granted his Majesty the subsidy he desired, which was two hundred Millions
of Marauediz to be paid in three years, whereunto some would not consent, and
those that did had trouble and displeasure enough from their Cities for it.
Salamanca, Toro, Madrid, Murcia, Cordoua, and Toledo opposed, whose
Commi^sioners had no hand in the granting it, neither came they into the
Parlament-hous; One of the Commissioners of Leon refused it, the other
consented. Of those that did allow it, some were induced thereto by their own
particular interests, few out of zeal or affection to his Majesty's service.
The Emperor being ready to depart, only staying for a wind, and his desire
granted for matter of subsidy (although some of his Council were of opinion
that he should not receiv it, as Don Alonso Tells, Lord of La Puebla de
Montalvan, Bishop Mota and Francisco de Vargas) His Majesty sent for those
Grandees of the Kingdom that were then there, who were Don Diego Lopez de
Pacheco Marquis of Villena, Don Inigo de Velasco Constable of Castilla, the
Earl of Venavente, the Duke of Alburquerque, the Duke of Medina Celi, the
Marquis of Astorga, the Earl of Lemos, the Earl of Monterrey, and the
Commissioners of the Kingdom then present, to whom he said he was then ready
to depart, being nearly concerned in the election of the Empire, and that, God
willing, he would suddenly return, In mean time he left governor of those
Kingdoms the Cardinal Adriano Bishop of Tortosa one of his Council, who was a
person eminent for his learning and good conscience, and he required and
commanded them to assist and favor him that his Kingdoms might be well
governed. The major part of these gentlemen disliked this motion for some
reasons, whereof one was that the Cardinal was a stranger, but some approving
it, the Emperor took no notice of the opposers, neither did he admit of any
replies.

SECT. XXXI.
THe Emperor being at the Groyn diverse requests were made to him in the
Kingdom^s name, as follows, That his Majesty would be pleased to return
speedily into those Kingdoms and govern them in his own person, as his
predecessors had done. For nothing that they could ask him would be so
satisfactor^e and acceptable to those Kingdoms as his safe and speedy return,
in regard Spain was not accustomed to be without their King, neither could
they be governed by any other with the peace and quiet which is necessary and
expedient. That as soon as he should com back he would be pleased to marry
for the universal good of the Kingdoms, that they might have the seed of his
Roial Person to succeed him, in regard his age did require it. That the Queen's
Court might be put into such order as was suitable to the dignity of Her
Roial Person and the honor of those Kingdoms. That She might have Officers of
trust about her, who should be well treated and encouraged with good rewards.
That at his return he would be pleased to bring with him no Flemings, French,
or other strangers, to have any Office of importance in those Kingdoms, but
that he would advance and employ the natives of that Country who would serve
him with much loyalty and affection. That those Kingdoms being at Peace and
under his Majesty's subjection, he would not bring any soldiers of Foreign
Countries for defense thereof, or to be guards of his own person. Alleging
that in that Country the People being very warlike and of courage enough to
conquer other Nations, what might they think could be the reason, but his
distrust of them, if he should take strangers for his guard. That He would
govern and settle his house in such order as the Catholic Kings his
forefathers, and other Kings his Predecessors had done. That no wages or
pensions should be given to the Wives or Children of any Courtiers that were
not in service, unless in acknowledgment and recompense of services done by the
Father deceased, he would gratify the surviving Children. That in regard
there were many superfluous Offices added in the Queen's household, which were
not of former times, they should be all taken away again, and no Salaries
allowed for them. That no Grandee should have any office in the King's or
Queen's household as in relation to the Exchequer or Treasury. That whilst
his Majesty was absent the Salaries of his Domestics should be paid out of
his own Revenue. That the Governors they were to have during his absence might
be Natives of either of those Kingdoms of Castilla or Leon. That such
Governors might have pow^er to confer any Offices or dignities of the Kingdom,
except, Bishoprics, Lievtenantships, and Commanderies of Orders. That neither
the King nor any Noblemen should give billets for lodging, and in case they
did that the People should not be obliged to reciev them unless they listed.
But when his Majesty goes his progress, That there should be lodgings and
furniture provided for his family and Court gratis, so that he make no longer
stay then fifteen days in a place, if more, afterward he should pay; And
that his guard and Soldiery be lodged and quartered according to the usual
manner. That there should be one hundred lodgings and no more provided for his
Majesty's family at the Charge of the Place where he shall stay. That there
should be no lodging allowed for those of the Council, Judges, nor any such
like Officers. That the King should not give general or particular billets for
the lodging of any. That the taxes and impositions should be reduced to a
certain number, and the Pole-monie set at a just and moderate rate, whereby the
People might perceiv the grace and favor his Majesty did them. That the
subsidies granted by the Commissioners at the Groyn, should not be received
nor demanded, neither should there be any ^ew taxes or extraordinary tribute
imposed upon the Kingdom without some evident necessity, and that it were
thought requisite for the good of the Kingdom and his Majesty's service. That
the King should not ^end any instructions to the Cities, or form of granting
Powers, nor nominate any particular men for Officers: but that the Cities and
towns should have the freedom and liberty to bestow and confer their Powers
upon such men as they should find zealous for the good of their Republics.
That the Commissioners in Parliament should have the liberty to meet when and
where they pleased, and to discourse and confer freely with one another. That
such Commissioners during their emploiment, should not receiv of the King any
Office, favor or gift whatsoever, for themselves, their Wives, Children or
kindred, under pain of death and confiscation of goods, and that those goods
should be employed for the public reparations of the City or Town whereof
they were Commissioners, to the end that they should be the more careful to do
only that which was most expedient for the glory of God, the service of his
Majesty and good of the Kingdom. That every Commissioner or Burgess should
have a competent allowance from the place whose persons they represented. That
the Parliament being ended, the several Commissioners should return within
forty days to give account of what they had done under pain of losing their
wages and emploiment. That no gold or Silver, coined or to be coined, should
be transported out of the Kingdom under pain of death; In regard the contrary
having been done the Kingdoms were impoverished and destroyed. That there
should be money coined differing as well in value as stamp from that of the
neighboring Countries, and that it should be of a base alloy two Carats under
the rate of the finest gold. That in Weight and value it should be answerable
to the Crowns of Gold which are coined in France: Because that would be a means
that it should not be transported. Many other artickles were given in
touching gold and silver, the particular favors and rewards of the King, and
other matters of justice: But that which they insisted most upon was, that the
Councils should be strictly looked to. That the Chancery and other Courts in
the Kingdom should be visited or reviewed from six to six years, and that all
suits should be dispatched in order, and determined whithin a certain time
without any delay. That there should be no appealing from Court to Court, but
that each case should be decided at it is own Tribunal. That no Counselor or
other whosoever should enjoie two offices, but should apply himself to one
only. These and many other things the Nobles and Commissioners of the Kingdom
desired, but they fell into the hands of Strangers, the King being young and
full of thoughts of his Voyage and possession of his Empire; So they remained.
And in regard these and other such like propositions were slighted and laid
aside (though presented with much zeal and affection) the whole Kingdom burst
out, and slipping in one, they fell into the Precipice of many inconveniences,
(as it is commonly seen). They desired one thing, very Holy, in the Chapter
concerning Ecclesiastical dignities and pensions, That they should not be
conferred upon strangers, and that the acts of Naturalization which had been
made should be revoked. That in the Ecclesiastical Courts there should be no
more duties paid, then in the secular, and that they should observe the same
Statute. (Which I would it were well seen unto in these times.) There were
likewise some complaints and Petitions given in against Pedrarias de Avila, a
gentleman of good note and quality (brother to the Earl of Punio en Rostro) and
who had done great services; yet he was accused by some of his enemies and
charged for having put many to death unjustly at the discovery of the Indies,
and committed diverse Robberies and Tyrannies. There were seven consultations
hereupon, and Pedrarias was quitted by them all; and the Emperor himself
(taking particular notice of the services which he had done at Oran in Africa,
and the taking of Buxia, besides other places in the Indies) freed him
notwithstanding these falls and passionate accusations, and confirmed him in the
government and charge which formerly had been conferred upon him, and gave him
some rewards besides. But all this was not sufficient to stop the mouths of his
enemies, who gave occasion to strangers not only of speaking ill, but also of
writing against this gentleman, who was valiant in his own person, and of
ancient extraction in this Kingdom; And others (not knowing to the contrary)
have followed them in the prejudicial censure of this nation and the Nobility
thereof.

SECT* XXXII.
TO the grief of those gentlemen who took ill Cardinal Adriano's being
Governor, by a general consent of the Council, and Don Antonio de Rojas
Archbishop of Granada, then President, Cardinal Adriano made Governor during
his M^jestie's absence.
He was confirmed Governor of Castilla and Navarra jointly with those of his
Council, who were Don Alonso Tellez Lord of la-Puebla de Montalvan, Hernando de
Vega Chancellor of the order in Castilla, His Council.
Don John de Fonseca Bishop of Burgos, Don Antonio de Rojas Archbishop of
Granada and President of his Majesty's Council of Justice, and Francisco de
Vargas Treasurer general; these were to reside at Valladolid. Antonio de
Fonseca Lord of Coca was appointed Captain General of the kingdom, and Don
John, Brother to the Bishop of Burgos, his Treasurer. Don John de la Nuza was
Governor of Aragon, Don Diego de Mendoza, brother to the Marquis of Zenete,
Viceroy of Valencia. All being thus ordered for the Government of the kingdom,
and the wind coming fair, upon Saturday the 19.th of May at Sunset, The
Emperor commanded to be Proclaimed, That all the mariners and his retinue
should go on board that night, for the next day in the morning he would set
sail. The Emperor imbark's for Flanders.
Sunday the 20.th of May before day he did his devotion and received the
Sacrament, after which he took ship, Don Alonso de Fonseca Archbishop of
Santjago, Don Iuan de Fonseca Bishop of Burgos, Don Inigo de Velasco Constable
of Castilla and Leon, Don Diego Lopez Pacheco Marquis of Villena, Don Alonso
Pimentel Earl of Benavente, Don John Osorio Marquis of Astorga, and diverse
other persons of quality waited on him to the Seaside: Those that embarked
with him were Don Fadrique de Toledo Duke of Alva, the Marquis of Villa Franca
and his son, Don Hernando de Andrade Earl of Andrade, Don Diego Hurtado de
Mendoza, who did great services to the Emperor, and Monsieur de Xeures with the
rest of the Flemings. So with a most harmonious noise of Minstrels and Trumpets
they weighed ancker, and set sail with great acclamations of joy, leaving sad
Spain overcharged with sorrow and misfortunes. They shaped their course
directly for England, and the sixth day the whole Fleet arrived at the Downs.
He arrive's in England
The same day (being whitsunday) The Emperor landed with all his nobility and
servants, where he was received by the Cardinal of England, Cardinal Wolcey
receive's him at his landing.
favorite to King Henry the Eight, and by whom he was much governed. The same
night the King of England came by post thither, the expressions of affection
and the great contentment which the King of England seemed to take in his
Majesty's company, were beyond relation; The next day the two King's went to
visit St Tho: His reception by the King and Queen at Canterbury.
of Canterburie's tomb, where Queen Katherine, wife to King Henry and Aunt to
the Emperor, attended them in a sumptuously adorned Palace, wherein they spent
the three days of whitsuntide with great Jollity and feasting. The holy days
being past, and the Princes having treated sufficiently of what concerned them,
and confirmed a Peace with great testimonies of affection on both sides, the
Emperor took leave of his Aunt and the King, and went to Deal a harbor in the
same Island. And so embarked again and sailed to Flushing. His arrival was
incredibly welcome to the Inhabitants of all those Provinces, the same
expressions of joy were all Germany over (as soon as they knew of his landing)
where he was infinitely desired. He went from Holland into Flanders without
any stay, but in all places where he did pass, he was most Splendidly
entertained, especially at Gant, where Margarita his Aunt, and the Infant Don
Fernando his brother (who was Archduke of Austria) exspected his coming.
Thence he went toward Calis to visit again the King and Queen of England, who
mean time the Emperor was at Sea, met the King of France there, who endeavored
all he could to possess the King of England? with a disaffection of the
Emperor, whose power and greatness he envied and repined at. Having made this
second visit the Emperor returned to Gant, where he put himself in fit
equipage to receiv the Crown at Aquisgran. Where we will leave him for the
present and return to relate the the miseries and troubles of Spain.

SECT. XXXIII.
THe Emperor's departure was diversely resented in Spain, Those that were
honestly minded and of sober and quiet dispositions approved of it, esteeming
it just and requisite, but feared much what after did ensue. But the factious
and Seditious Party were otherwise affected, They rejoiced at it, and hugged
themselves in the fancy and vain hope of increasing their estates and
reputation with these dissensions and alterations, delighting (as the Proverb
says) to fish in troubled water. The Emperor being gone from the Groyn, all
the Nobility and Gentry which stayed behind returned to their own houses,
and the Commissioners or Burgesses of Parliament, repaired to their respective
Cities and towns with fear enough of their Republics. The Cardinal and those
of his Council took their way toward Valladolid, and before they arrived
there, news was brought them of the Commotions of the Cities of Castilla. The
Emperor was very ill advised in not leaving the government of those Kingdoms to
some Nobleman of that Country; as was desired of him in Parliament, whom as a
Grandee of note and power they might fear, and love, honor and respect him as
their Countryman. Or if they had done as (when necessity constrained them)
they did afterward, all had been well; The fault being laid upon Xeures, he
said, That it was not so ordered, that his Majesty thought there were no
Noblemen in Castilla worthy of that honor, but because of the factions and
partialities amongst them, the conferring it upon one should not disgust the
others.

SECT. XXXIIII.
THe Cardinal and his Council being arrived at Venavente, an express from Don
John de Acunia Governor of Segovia came to them purposely to inform them of a
notoriously heinous accident befallen in that City, which was thus, One of the
Commissioners or Burgesses that was sent thence to the Parliament at Santjago
named John or Antony de Tordesillas, Regidor and native of that City, gave his
consent to the granting the Subsidies his Majesty demanded. He brought for
the City the Pole Money to be paid by way of excise and a gratuity of one
hundred thousand Maravediz for reparation of the walls, and for himself he had
procured a very good government and received an office which the Mint or
coining house had given for lost. It is a custom in Segovia every Tuesday in
whitsonweek that the Collectors meet to treat concerning the Revenue of Corpus
Christi Church. It happened that being all together one of them inconsiderately
said, Gentlemen! you know that Don John de Acunia is Governor of this City,
and that he never set foot in it, and yet not satisfied to under value us, he
maintein's here certain Officers to robb us, rather then to administer Justice.
Tumults in Segovia.
And I vow to God, if the former stole away our Cloaks, these strip us to the
very Skins. Moreover know that the Governor has put in here a Deputy, more
fool then valiant: He is not satisfied with the injuries he does us by day,
but he leads a dog to catch men in the night. And my opinion is, That if any
one has done what he ought not to do, He should apprehend him in his house
like a Christian, and not hunt him with dogs in the Mountains like a Moore;
For a man of any credit is more troubled at his being apprehended in the open
street then at his Imprisonment. A certain old man, called Melon, chanced to
be present at these words, who had for many years executed the office of a
Sergeant or Catch-pole (as they call them); and therefore was hated and
abhorred by all the people. This poor man having heard the other out, and
every body else holding their peaces, stood up and spoke these words in favor
of the Justice. Indeed (Gentlemen!) that which this man has said seems to
me not well, and me thinks it is wors that men of such honor and credit (as
here are) should give ear to such a man: for he that will speak in public of
the Ministers of Justice ought to have some respect and moderation in his
tongue; and in an officer of the King's, he ought not to look only at his
person, but to consider what his staff represent's, As touching the dog he
speak's of, that my Master carrie's with him, I swear by this cross, that,
being a young man, he takes him with him more for his pleasure in the day time,
then to catch men in the night; and if it had been so you do not, (I hope)
take me to be so base, but that I should have made it known to the people, for
I am more beholding to my friends and neighbors then I am to Strangers. If the
Officers do any thing against Law and Justice, (which hitherto they have not
done) like Christians and Gentlemen we are obliged to advise and reprove them
in secret, and not defame them publicly; and if this which I say now unto you,
sounds not well in your ears, perchance that which will result hereof will
please you wors; for ill words inconsiderately spoken sometimes are dearly
repented. This speech was so ill taken by them all, that with shouting and
great violence they seized on him, cast a rope about his neck, and with huge
nois and exclamations they dragged him out of the City, but they bruised him
with so many stripes that he was dead before he came to the gallows, yet
they hung up his body upon it. As they returned from hanging this unfortunate
Melon, they met by the way a companion of his, called Roque Portalejo: To whom
one of them said, as they came along, Portalejo! thy Companion Melon remember's
him to thee, there he hang's upon the gallows, and he says he hopes thou will bear him Company there to morrow, and it were no great matter if we made
thee accept of his invitation, for since thou wast his companion in the fault,
it is but reason thou should bear a share of the punishment. Portalejo
replied, God preserve the King my Lord and his Justice, for one day you may
repent you for what you have done and Segovia for permitting it. for the blood
of the Innocent, although men do forget it, is always crying out for
vengeance before God. Hereupon, and because they saw him with a pen and paper,
one of them began to say, that he took the names of those that had killed
Melon, upon which words they all cried out kill him, kill him, So with the same
fury in a disorderly rout, as they had done to Melon, they laid hands on him,
and dragged him to the gallows where they hanged him by the feet, so the poor
man dyed. They spent all that day in execution of those two; The next day being
wednesday The City sat in counsel; the Regidor Tordesillas went thither to
give account of what he had don in Parliament although he was advised to the
contrary. The place of meeting was at St Michael's Church. The People being
told, that Tordesillas had granted the subsidy and that he was at the
Council, a great number of Carders ran in a tumultuous manner thither, and
climing over the doors and breaking in at the windows, they violently laid
hands upon him and dragged him out of the Church. Antonio de Tordesillas
entreating them to forbear, said, Gentlemen! hear me, I come to give you an
account. See here the Articles which I bring, be pacified, and let us go to
some place where you may be informed of the truth. But this satisfied not, the
multitude of Teazers was so outrageous, some cried, let us carry him to Santa
Olalla; and poor Tordesillas said, whither you please Gentlemen. Others cried,
Kill ^im, kill him, Others said, Tordesillas give us those articles. He
answered, Since you will have it so, there, take them; then he drew a paper
out of his pocket, wherein was contained all that he had done in the
Parliament, Which they tore in pieces without ever reading it. And with one
voice they cried out, to prison with him, there we shall see his treason. then
they set him upon a Mule, being clad with a long cassock or gaberdine of
crimson velvet. He had not gone fa^r but some of them crying, Art thou
catched? laid hands again upon him, and having knocked him off the Mule, they
hurried him into the Prison, others cried out, A rope, a rope, let ^im not stay
in prison, let us have him strait to the gallows. And presently with loud
exclamations they cried out all together, Let him die, let him die. And a rope
being brought they put it about his neck, and plucked him down to the ground,
then dragged him along the streets, punching him and giving him great blows
upon the head with the pummels of their swords, and although he cried out to
them with grievous sighs and pitiful groans, saying, Gentlemen! hear me, why
do you kill me? it availed nothing. He desired to confess, and they would
not suffer him. The Dean and Canon^ with their Sacerdotal habits came forth to
them, carrying the holy Sacrament. And (which was most grievous of all)
Tordesilla's own brother, a Franciscan Friar, a very grave man in his habit
ready to say mass, and the holy Sacrament in his hands, with all the rest of
the Friars of St Francis order came out, and kneeling all before this crew,
they begged of them with tears to spare his life for Christ Iesu^s sake.
Ant^nio de Tordesillas R^gidor and Commissioner of S^govia hanged by the People.
But in regard all that Rabble was of the common and baser sort of People, they
made no reckoning of them, nor bore any respect or reverence to the Church.
Then the Friars desired, if there was no remedy but that he must die, that
they would give him leav to make his confession, which they refused. And when
they had brought him to the gallows, half choked already with the rope, they
tied his feet and hung him with his head downwards, betwixt the two others they
had hanged the day before. Thus this poor Gentleman ended his life, and
doubtless his companion John Vazquez had tasted of the same cup, had he not
absented himself, but he escaped being advertised by this disaster.

SECT. XXXV.
THis done the Common People of Segovia elected their Deputies of the
Commonalty, turned out all the King's officers of Justice and authorized others
to officiate for them, then seized upon all the gates of the City. About that
time was come to Segovia Don Hernando de Bovadilla Earl of Chinchon, who had
great power in the City, having the command of the Forts, Gates and Mint-hous;
which place was given his ancestors and him by the King for former services.
The Common People possessing themselves of the Gates, and a house Don Hernando
had within the City, He presently made all his servants and the officers of
the Gates retire into the Forts, that, there might be men enough to defend
them, in case they should be assaulted, and leaving them to his brother Don
Diego'^ charge and care, he went to a Fortress of his own in the Country and
took out all the pieces of Artillery he had there, which he brought with
more servants and other People, to reliev his brother, who was by that time
besieged and straightened in those Forts by the Commons; which siege lasted all
the time of the troubles, and the war was cruel on both sides, Don Diego
defending himself with great dexterity and valor; The generositie and loyalty
of these Gentlemen was so great, that to defend the Forts committed to their
charge by the King, they disarmed their own, choosing rather to leave their own
Towns and Holds openly exposed to be destroyed by the fury of the Common
People, then neglect or forsake that which conduced to the King's service.

SECT. XXXVI.
THis message which the Post brought from Segovia to the Governors, declaring
the cruelty done in that City, possessed them with much trouble and care.
These risings touched the Cardinal to the heart, and hereupon he entered into
consultation with those Gentlemen whom his Majesty had appointed to assist
him. After this the Gentlemen and Regidores of Segovia sent another Messinger
to make their excuse to the Governor, alleging, That they had nothing to do
in the Death of Tordesillas, nor the other two men, neither were they able to
hinder it in regard of the Mutiny of a great multitude of teazers of Wool,
who made that scandalous uproar and outrage, men of strange places, vagabonds,
and who were already dispersed and fled from the City. That if it could be
proved that any man of account or worth in the City was amongst them, or but
any way favored, assisted, or so much as consented to their barbarous
proceeding, they would willingly submit themselves to any Punishment that could
be inflicted on them. The President of the Council Don Antonio de Rojas
Archbishop of Granada grew so choleric and furious, that through excess of
passion he gave the Messengers (whom the Gentlemen Regidores and Citizens had
sent to make their excuses) such reproachful language and high threatenings,
that it spoiled all. For returning to their City much distasted with this
answer, They were all scandaliz^d at it, and those that before were very quiet
and peaceable began to incline to the Mutiniers. The Cardinal being arrived at
Valladolid the 5th of June 1520, the day before Corpus Christi eve, (the
Archbishop being gone thither two days before) He assembled all the Council
and asked their opinions, which were very different concerning this matter. And
because they are of so much importance to the History, I will set down some of
the most remarkable which were then taken in writing. The first that spoke was
Don Antonio de Rojas President of the Council, who declared himself in these
words.

The opinion of Don Antonio de Rojas concerning Segovia.
MY LORDS! we, who are dedicated to the Divine Sacraments, have not the
liberty to speak over boldly i^ matters which concern humane rigors and
chastisements, because our profession is to shed tears for those which
transgress against the God of Heaven, and not spill the blood of those who
offend earthly Kings. You see, My Lords! if the dignity of Archbishop
invite's me to Clemency, the office of President (which is conferred upon me)
constrain's me to Justice. This I say, My Lords, that you may not be
scandalized if I declare my self in this my vote. I deny not that our Lord God
gives a beginning to all things with his Providence, but yet many of them he
persu's and concludes with his rigor and Justice. And this he does, that the
Good may be encouraged to serve him, and the wicked refrain from displeasing
him, According to this saying of the Prophet, Misericordiam and Judicium
cantabo tibi Domine. To com to the Purpose which now is in agitation, This
action of Segovia, for my particular I hold it so heinous and scandalous, that
I cannot think of any Punishment great enough for it. For where the offense is
without weight, the Penalty ought to be beyond measure. Those of the City of
Segovia have offended God in so barbarously putting to Death a man, who better
deserved to live then They. Which wicked action is of no less consequence, then
that it should wreak God's Judgments upon them, for the blood of his Innocence
is no other then the Crier, or Proclaimer of Vengeance. Again, in my sense,
they are guilty of Crimen laes^e Majestatis, and it is very palpable; for they
did not murder Tordesillas for any offense he had done them, but for the
service he did the King in the Parliament. And since for the King he lost his
life, the King is obliged to see him revenged: and in respect his Majesty is
gone out of Castilla, to receiv the Imperial Crown in Germany, It will be
sufficient, if he return in prosperity, that he reward his wife and Children
with some gratuity; And we are to proceed according to Justice, considering
that the offense is as heinous, as if it had been done to his own person. For
if I have served his Majesty, being here present, in giving him good Counsel,
I shall serve him more now, My Lords, in punishing misdeeds in his absence.
Moreover, Since the King our Sovereign took shipping at the Groyn, This is the
first act of disobedience in Spain. Wherefore I judge their crime the greater.
For an offense committed in absence, always argues the more malice, and where
the malice is so great, the Punishment ought to be correspondent. Item, it is
alleged by those of Segovia, that the City in general is not guilty of this
fact, but only some particular men, Carders, did hang Tordesillas upon the
Gallows. I would fain know of them, what was the reason, why they did not
punish those fellows, since they were but few; for there is no such testimony
of Innocence, as to execute Justice upon offenders. In my opinion the City of
Segovia cannot plead Non-Guiltie in this case, for Five Thousand Citizens (if
they had listed) might easily have withstood the furious insolence of Fifty
Teazers, and those Strangers too. But some secretly with their counsels, others
publicly using violence, committed this insolent outrage. For if it be a
crime in Wicked men to murder the good, It is no less crime in good men not to
resist the Wicked. You have seen, My Lords, the peremptoriness of those of
Toledo, The King our Lord being at his Parliament in Santjago and the Groyn:
which was so great and scandalous, that for my part I know not which was more
to be condemned their malic^ in so doing, or Xeures his negligence in not
remedying it. Wherefore I say, that if that which was done, he being here,
has pas't unpunished, and this, which has bin committed in his absence, be
not remedyed, from henceforwards I give all Castilla for lost and ruined. For
this is a General maxim, if Justice once lose her force, presently start's up
insulting Tyranny. Item since his Majesty's departure out of this Kingdom,
This is the first scandal wherein it is requisite that the Council make appear
their Counsel and wisdom. And there is nothing that can give a greater evidence
thereof, then in governing the People in such sort, that we may gain the
affections of the good, and be no less feared by the evil. If the death of
this Regidor be thus smothered, and the insolence of Toledo dissembled, the
Carders of Segovia will think, and the Cap-makers of Toledo will Proclaim,
that we do not let these things pass with our good wills, but that we dare
not punish them. And by this means Justice will be defamed in that she
cover's Fear, and which is worst of all, will lose the credit of being
feared. In sum of all that I have spoken, I say, that my determinate will and
opinion is, that an Alcalde de Corte, (who is in nature of a Judge of Oyer and
Terminer, here in England) should go to Segovia, and what he ought to do in
this (although I know it) my Sacred Orders do not give me leav to express. I
only say thus much, that the Judge ought to do wors to them by Justice, then
they did to Tordesillas without Justice. Let all that I have said in this
consultation be under your most Reverend Lordship's correction: and if these
Lords be of any other opinion, I shall be content to conform my self to them,
for in matters of weight and moment, a man is not to defend his own opinion,
but to follow that which is most expedient for the public good.

SECT* XXXVII.
THe second that was remarkable in this Consultation, was Don Alonso Tellez
Giron, who in those times was esteemed a man of a good Conscience, a virtuous
life, of a generous offspring, and chiefly in the opinion (which he delivered)
very circumspect, for he would never give any counsel, unless he had
considered the matter thoroughly before hand. Don Antonio de Rojas having ended
his speech, Don Alonso Tellez began, Saying.

The discreet Opinion of Don Alonso Tellez Giron.
IT chances oftentimes amongst the most expert Captains, that being upon the
point of giving battle, they differ in the manner and order of their Combat,
and if such men take oath of their dissenting opinions, I say that kind of
discord proceeds not from any particular difference betwixt them, but that
each one of them thinks, that what he says is the best and most secure way
to gain the Victory that day. This I say, most Reverend Lord Cardinal, in
order to my Lord Archbishop and President his Speech, which was very good and
beseeming a Prelate that is desirous of the public good. But if he and I do
differ in the means which is to be used for the remedying of so great a
scandal, we shall not, I am confident, in our intentions be dissenting. I
swear by the faith of a Christian and a Gentleman, and by this Holy habit of
Santjago which I wear, that my soul desires nothing at this present more, then
that we may hit upon the right way of rectifying and providing for Segovia.
For my mind giv's me, that if we miss our aim in this first enterprise, we
shall not be powerful enough hereafter to execute Justice. He that is to give
his sens in such occurrences, ought not only to see to the remedying of
mischiefs, but to be circumspect and wary lest the fulfilling of his Vote
should be the occasion of a greater Inconvenience. For it may be already
(which God forbid) thinking to tile Segovia, we have untiled it, and so
bewetted all Spain. Undoubtedly those of Segovia offended God in destroying his
creature, and the King in murdering him for his cause. They scandalized the
Republic by hanging him in that manner. And accordingly (if it were of no
further consequence) nothing could be more just, then that the more cruel and
barbarous they have showed themselves in that murder, the less pity we should
show in chastising them. I would say in this case, that we are able to punish
Segovia, or we are not able, and so likewise Toledo of their rebellion: and to
speak the truth, to my best sens to chastise Segovia, or correct Toledo is yet
too soon. For being, as we are, but newly come to the government, we should
grant some privileges and liberty to the People at first, to win their
obedience; and afterward chastise them, that we may be feared. Put case we
are not powerful enough (as I believ we are not) to quell that high couraged
stubborn People, (if my Judgment fail me not) I hold for most certain, that if
Segovia lose their respect to us, the like we shall find through all the Cities
of Spain. Moreover you know, my Lords, that it has been averred to us, that
there was never a Gentleman nor Citizen at the murder of Tordesillas, and that
those Teazers which had committed the fact, were fled already. The Judge whom
we shall send thither, to seem that he does something, must rob the Poor,
chastise the Innocent, disquiet the Rich, defame the Noble, and chiefly
scandalize the bordering People, so that the untimely punishing of one man's
death, may be an occasion of destroying all. Item you know, My Lords, that the
King, our Lord, had the ill will of all his Subjects for the ill Government of
his Tutors, and certainly those of this Kingdom desire to express their
discontents. Me think's, we should rather provide for and hinder the
manifestation of the ill intentions of Castilla, then to stand so much upon the
rigorous chastising of the Carders of Segovia, for it is the part of wise men
to dissemble and defer the punishment of faults already past, and forthwith
apply a remedy to a present evil. Item, Segovia cries out and desire's, that
if Fifty or a Hundred weavers committed that outrage, the whole City should
not lose its Innocence. And in my Judgment we should be very injurious and
unjust, if we should declare a whole City Traitors, when but few are guilty,
and I know the King has many faithful servants in Segovia: therefore we
should commit a great offense therein. Besides, it is as much the Property of
Clement Princes to pardon many wicked men, for the respect of some few good, as
it is the Practice of cruel Tyrants to condemn many good, for a few evil. Item,
it is sufficiently known that Toledo is in Rebellion, and being (as it is) so
powerful a City, we cannot exercise Justice upon it. Now, if we do chastise
Segovia, we cannot do it so much damage, as we shall do favor to Toledo
thereby. For all those whom we take now for enemies, we make friends to
Toledo. And by this means there will be many favorers of their Tyranie, and
but few to assist our Justice. Item, it is to be considered that the City of
Segovia and the Town of Medina del Campo, by reason of the Clothes of the one,
and the fairs of the other, Those two People used always to be like Brothers.
My end in saying this is, because the best Artillery the King has in Castilla
is at Medina, and if the business were come to that, They would sooner give it
Segovia for their defense, then to us to punish them. And by this means Segovia
will get the Artillery, and we shall lose Medina. Item, Segovia has not
taken the Fort as yet, nor disobeyed the Justice, nor shut the Gates, nor taken
up Arms; And if a Judge go thither to chastise them, perchance we shall (the
Guilty being fled away for fear of punishment) give occasion of fear to those
that are Innocent, and they put themselves into a defensive posture thereupon.
And this will be the way to make those whom we have as yet for subjects,
declare themselves our enemies, My Lords, I will not extend my self any further
in my discourse, but only that for the reasons which I have alleged, and for
others which I could produce, I do not deny but Segovia ought to be
chastised: But my vote is, that for the present, it should be dissembled. For
prolonging a punishment never did harm: and an over-hastie execution of Justice
never did good.

The Cardinal tak's and followe's the President's advice, which was to chastise
Segovia.

All those that were present approved of Don Alonso Tellez his opinion, yet the
Cardinal agreed to do according to the vote of Don Antonio de Rojas, President.
For he was a man so violently hasty and opiniative, that no body could
persuade him to any thing, neither would he be contradicted.

There were certain Friars, who did much harm in these commotions, some out of
Zeal, others being of turbulent Spirits and too busy, and meddling with
Secular affairs, which suite not with a Religious life.

SECT. XXXVIII.
IN one and the same day rose the Cities of Zamora and Segovia. Commotions in
the City of Zamora.
In Zamora began the fury of the People against their Commissioners, who had
exceedingly incensed them, because when that City had notice that Toledo, gave
limited Powers to their Commissioners, They would do the same. But their
Commissioners told them, they might not do so, and having received their
Orders, they made oath of fealty to the People, that they would not act any
thing, without first giving them notice; of which oath afterward the
Commissioners desired the Emperor to quit them, and they granted the Subsidy.
Whereupon the People were so enraged, that they desired to have them burnt.
They having some inklings hereof, fled to a Monastery a little day's Journey
from Zamora (called Marta). The People in mean time went to their houses, and
not finding them, They resolved to pluck down their houses, but did not, out of
respect to the Earl of Alva, to whom all that City (as they had reason) did
bear particular honor and respect. His Authority prevailed much, and hindered
the Common People from doing a Thousand other mischiefs, but this it could not;
which was, The People not finding the Commissioners, made Statues, that
resembled them, which they dragged about the streets with many reproachful
exclamations against them, proclaiming them Traitors and Enemies to their
Country. After that they caused their pictures to be set up in the
Consistory, with a writing at the foot of each, to signify who they were, and
what they had done against that City, and against the Faith they had sworn to
them. At length, hearing that they were retired into that Monastery, they sent
to the Friars to turn them out, if not, they would go and set fire to the house.
And although they desired liberty to com with saftie of their persons to the
City, and give them account of what they had done in Parliament, the People
would not grant it, but used means to kill them. In that City there were two
great factions, one for Don Diego Enriques Earl of Alva, the other for the
Bishop Don Antonio de Acunia, of whom I shall speak hereafter.

SECT. XXXIX.
THe Governor Cardinal Adriano desirous to go to Valladolid, and to the end he
might make his entrance with the Authority that was requisite for his person
and dignity, required the Lord high Constable, who was at Villalpando, to
accompany him, which he did; and so they entered into Valladolid on Corpus
Christi eve, whence the Constable returned presently. And if the President of
the Council had not gone thither before, and the Cardinal soon after well
attended, doubtless that City had done no less then Segovia and Zamora. For
their Commissioners being returned (who were Francisco dela Serna, and
Gabriell de Santistevan) The People knowing that they had granted the Subsidy,
and hearing how the other Cities had welcomed their Commissioners, they went in
bands and clusters up and down the streets murmuring and grumbling amongst
themselves. Wherefore the Commissioners and the Council of the City agreed not
to divulge the Articles, until the Cardinal and the Council were arrived. And
out of this fear they dispatched a Post to the Archbishop President of the
Council, desiring him to com speedily thither, and this was the reason that he
went before and stayed not for the Cardinal. This was the occasion that
Valladolid refrained for some time from doing what afterward it did. At last it
broke out like the rest of the Cities.

SECT* XL.
THis fire most furiously and strangely spread it self through the other
Cities, as if they had agreed together and corresponded by watch-Towers and
Beakons (as they are wont to do in the frontiers and upon Seacoasts) so many
places burst out into these Commotions at one instant. I have read in a Letter
from Leon Picardo, a servant to the Lord Constable and his Painter, Earthquake
in Burgos.
that feeding his hawk at night in Burgos, there was so grievous an earthquake
that the dishes fell off the shelvs, the tiles off the houses, nay and some
buildings were turned topsie-turvie, and his hawk dyed with the fright, as also
some women with child. Presently after which at the same beginning of June, the
People of Burgos rose with great disorder, many of them armed and crying out
very confusedly. The Common People through the parishes and quarters assembled
at the Chapel of Santa Katherina del Claustro nuevo in the great Church (as
they used to do for the election of officers and other things. The Common
people of the C^tie rise up in Arms.
There they discoursed concerning the risings and Commotions which were much
noised in Castilla, there was nothing resolved amongst them but great clamors
and diverse opinions, and going out with that hurly-burly and disorder as is
usual at such meetings. At last a great multitude of them being assembled at a
middle row of houses close by the Gate of Sarmental, they agreed to rise also,
which they did, and stood upon the same terms as the other Cities had done;
they nominated two chiefs, Anton Cucbillero and Bernal de la Rixa, who with
this rout went to seek Don Diego de Osorio Lord of Abarca, a gentleman of great
quality, inhabitant of the City of Burgos, but met him not until the Evening;
having found him, they brought him by violence into the marketplace with much
nois and tumult, saying, That he must be their Chief, and must govern them:
they put a white staff of Justice into his hand, and upon his left arm a
Target. Don Diego bid them be quiet, and tell him wherefore they brought him
out of his house, and put him in that equipage. They answered, That as a
gentleman he should protect them and free them from that slaverie wherein they
lived. They would not hear him speak, but threatened him, if he would not do as
they required him: they continued pressing of him thus till night, and stayed
for his resolution till next day. Don Diego at that time was Governor of
Cordova, and came thither only to see the Lady Isabel de Rojas his wife and
his children, so he presently got out of their hands, and that same night took
his way toward Cordova, leaving his house to the charge and care of Don Pedro
de Cartagena Lord of Olmillos (who had married the Lady Marie de Rojas his
daughter) to the Dean of Burgos Don Pedro Xuarez de Velasco, and Francisco
Sarmiento, who was his kinsman. These Gentlemen repaired forthwith to Don Diego
Osorio's house, where they found his wife and daughter very disconsolate for his
absence, and fearing the People's threatenings, Their design upon Don Diego de
Osorio's house.
who hearing Don Diego was gone, assembled together and came with intent to
break open the house, plunder it and pluck it to the ground. But these
gentlemen, being advertised of their design, stood all in the gate with their
swords and daggers drawn, threatening to cut in pieces whosoever durst attempt
to break in, and vowing that they were resolved to lose their lives upon that
account. This resolution of their's daunted the Assailers, so that none offered
to stir, but went all quietly away. Don Pedro Xuarez de Velasco went along with
them, for Bernal de la Rixa the Cutler, their Captain, bore him much respect,
because he had received a son of his named Valoradico, to be a singing-boie in
his Church. Don Pedro Xuarez's getting the good will of this Cutler was of such
importance, that by his means he knew all the secret dealings and intentions
of the Communalty, and was admitted sometimes into their Assemblies. They went
by Squadrons up and down the City, committing many outrages and insol^ncies,
like men distracted and without judgment. An humor took them to burn down the
Carthusian's wood, and as they were going with this resolution, Don Pedro
Xuarez met them by the way, and told them, that it would be very well done of
them, indeed, to set that wood on fire, but the world would be so roasted with
the heat, that it were better to keep the wood till winter, and not to burn it
in the field to no purpose; so he turned them back again from St Paul's Bridge.
They were so audacious as to assault the Lord Constable's house, he being
Chief of that City, and having heard that the Duchess Donia Maria de Tobar
Marquess of Berlanga, a Lady of great worth, had threatened them, they came one
day in great number thither, and having environed the house, they shot off a
piece of Ordnance, which beat down a corner of the Tower, so they entered into
the house, and the Duchess was forced to hide her self in some secret by-place.
They went also to Garci Ruiz de la Mota his house, (who had been Commissioner in
that last Parliament, brother to Maestro Mota Bishop of Badajos and Palencia)
with intent to kill him, but not finding him (for he was fled) they burned and
plucked down his house, where were consumed great number of Writings, as Deeds
and Charters, and many other papers concerning the King and Kingdom, which he
had in keeping. That which they burned in Mota's house, was valued above three
Millions, when they carried it to the place where they made the Bonfire, into
which they cast all the movables they could find in the house; as pure linen,
rich tapistrie-hangings, clothes, household stuff, and many chests or trunks
full, all which they burned, without making benefit of any thing (which was a
wonder, considering the condition of such mean people). In the like fury they
went and pulled down the house of one of the King's Harbingers, named Garci
Iofre, who, though he was a Frenchman born, had been a long time in the King
of Spain's service and the Emperor's. He was married, and had his dwelling in
that City: they were incensed against him for no other reason, but because the
Emperor had given him the command of the House and Castle of Lara, which Burgos
pretended was theirs, and they demanded it of him, but because he told them
that he had received that Castle of the Emperor, and that he could not
deliver it to any but his Majesty, they went to kill him* neither stopped
their fury there; for poor Iofre being unfortunately there that day, (being
returned from France, whither he went by the Emperors command with the French
Ambassador) and seeing how they plucked his Houses down, he went to Lara,
saying, That he hoped in God to be revenged, and to build up his Houses much
better with those Rascal's money, then they were when they pulled them down,
and that he should make mortar of their bones, and temper the chalk with their
blood. This being known in the City by the report of a Collier (to whom Iofre
spoke it by the way) they sent some men on hors-back privately after him, who
overtook him in a little village called Vivar del Cid, three leagues from
Burgos, where drawing him out of the Church, they apprehended him, and had cut
him in pieces there, but for some Gentlemen, who qualified them for the present;
yet they would not let him go out of their hands, but brought him to Burgos
back again and clapped him into prison, where with blows and thrusts they soon
dispatched him, and being dead, they tied his feet together, and dragged him
first to his own door, striking and pinking his body with their swords all the
way: then they drew him through all the streets, and at last hanged him with
his head downwards. Don Inigo Fernandez de Velasco Lord High Constable, who was
at Villalpando, being informed hereof by a Letter from the Cardinal (wherein
he desired him for the love of God to go speedily and set some remedy and
order in that City) went presently to Burgos, and out of affection in regard
those of his family for many successions had been born in that City, he took
upon him the staff and office of Governor, which the Inhabitants most willingly
embraced; there he continued some time, whose presence was the only remedy
and means to hinder the enraged people of that City from committing a thousand
other Insolences. What happened afterward you shall hear hereafter.

SECT. XLI.
A Certain Judge named Hernan Gomez de Herrera, whose wife and family was in
Madrid, Up^oars in Madrid.
took that occasion to go from Valladolid thither; but being arrived, the
People began to mutiny, saying, That he was com thither to take examinations
against Toledo; at which nois many People assembled presently together and went
in a tumultuous manner to apprehend him in his house; but he having notice
thereof, used means forthwith to be secretly conveied out of the City; so he
escaped with fear enough; for if the Common People had light upon him, they
would have given him hard measure. Thence the disorderly Multitude went to
Francisco de Varas his house, (one of the Council) and took away all the Arms
they could find; as Fowling-pieces Arquebusses, Cros-bows, Arrows, Pikes, four
hundred Corslets, and many Halberds, which they put into a strong place for
their own defense when occasion should require: they set Guards all the City
over, watching and going their rounds through all the streets and walls, to the
great hinderance of Commerce and destruction of the City. In Siguenca,
Guadalaxara, Salamanca, Mu^cia.
In the same manner rose Siguenca, Guadalaxara, Salamanca, Murcia, and many
other places of importance, where were diverse things committed, not unlike
those which I have already declared, which would be an endless business for
me to describe particularly. The seventh of June, in this present year 1520,
the City of Leon was very quiet, and stood much for the King's service: for
it seemed that Valladolid had written to them to know whether they had received
any Letter from Toledo concerning their business or not: Whereto Leon made
Answer, That as yet they had received nothing in particular from Toledo
touching that matter, and that the City of Leon was fully determined, not to
do, or consent to any thing, for the whole world, that might be any
disservice to his Cesarean Majesty, or contrary to the fidelity they owed
him, especially the most Reverend Cardinal remaining Governor, with the Lord
President and the rest of the Council, to whom that City was so much obliged.
^t had been well for that City if they had continued in that mind.

SECT. XLII.
THe 24 of June, 1520, the Emperor being at Bruxels received information of
all the passages in Toledo and other places, and of the Letter which Toledo
sent to Valladolid, and their Answer: Whereupon he wrote to Valladolid, giving
them a full relation of his Voyage by Sea, how he was entertained by his Uncle
and Aunt in England, and that they had confirmed a most sure League of Peace
and Amity together; That thence he intended about the middle of September to
be at Aquisgran, to receiv his Imperial Crown, with many other circumstances;
and at last, That he resolved, God willing, to return into that Kingdom much
sooner then he had promised at the Parliament, mean time he incharged them
Peace, quietness, and obedience to the Commands of the Cardinal, his Governor,
President and Council, etc. and if there should arise any mutinies or
Commotion in any other Towns, that they, out of their ancient and well
approved fidelity, would endeavor to pacify and suppress them, for they knew
the love and affection which he bore that City, which might sufficiently
appear by the favors he had granted them in former Parlaments, according to
the Copy which he sent with that Letter. There was also a General Letter to
all the Cities and Towns of that Kingdom, who had Votes in Parliament; but
passion had gained such a transscendence over the hearts of the major part,
that they would not believ those Letters to be from the Emperor, but said
openly that they were counterfeited, neither did they any way abate their
resentment of his so sudden departure out of that Kingdom, leaving them (by the
counsel of his Favorites) involved in so great a fire, and with so much
poverty and pain.

SECT. XLIII.
AFter this came news to the Cardinal how the City of Guadalaxara was revolted
in the same manner, and taking up Arms like the other Cities of the Kingdom.
They chose for their Captain the Earl of Saldania, eldest son to Don Diego de
Vega y Mendoca Duke del Infantado, and making use of his horses, The people of
Guad^laxara rise up against their Commissioner^.
they pursued Diego de Guzman, and Luis de Guzman, their Commissioners in the
late Parliament, who, for fear of their lives, were fled from the City; but not
being able to overtake them, they went to their houses, which they razed, and
having plowed up the ground, they sowed it with Salt, saying, That in regard
they were Traitor's houses, they must be salted, lest they should infect the
rest with their infidelity. Thence they went to the Duke, beseeching him to
favor and assist them; if not, they would have him to know, that no Grandee
must stay within that City, which he and his son were enforced to grant to
satisfy them: but the Duke seeing the City in so great disorder, and the
Kingdoms all over inflamed with such Combustions, sent an Express to the
Cardinal, desiring him (since God and the King had constituted him in that
Office) to use all possible diligence and care to stop the current of those
exorbitances, and that without passion or affection he would grant a general
pardon; for if he suffered the sore to fester, he would not be able to cure
it when he pleased. That he would take off the Subsidy. That all Tallages
and Impositions should be reduced to the same estate as they were twenty five
years past. That Offices and benefices should be taken from strangers, and
conferred upon the Natives of the Country: And that all this should suddenly
be performed. The Cardinal was well contented with his Letter, but durst not
do otherwise then was ordered by the Council, until he received further
Commission from the Emperor.

SECT. XLIV.
THe Order from the Council was, that Ronquillo (a famous Judge in those times)
should presently march to Segovia with all the men he could make, and punish
the Delinquents. They sent with him a thousand Hors-men (most of which were of
the Guards) under the Command of Don Luis de la Cueua, and Ruy Diaz de Rojas,
who had Orders in case the Judge was not received into the City, to batter and
beat it down. But when his coming was known in Segovia, those that were quiet
and peaceable before, jealousies and fears distracting their ill-tempered
minds, rose and associated themselves with the others, and in particular, one
principal Gentleman of the City, called Don Hernando, who had written to the
Cardinal, that he kept the City, the Fort and the great Church for the King,
and that he had driven the Commonaltie into the Suburbs, and moreover, that
there was great partiality and difference amongst them; upon whose advice and
intimation the Judge was sent directly thither: but when they heard in what
manner he came, Don Fernando and the Common People agreed so together, that
the Gates were shut against him, and the townsmen all up in Arms. Ronquillo
perceiving their strength and resistance to be great, retired himself to the
Town of Arevalo, and the Cardinal sent to him to return to Valladolid, until
the Council should take further order therein. But the Judge did otherwise, and
from thence went to Santa Maria de Nieva, five Leagues from Segovia, where he
made his Requests and Protests to those of the City, and began by Criers to
publish Acts and Writs against them, requiring them to submit to Justice, or to
appear and give a reason why they would not. Whereunto those of Segovia
('among whom at first there was no person of credit or respect, but only a
furious and indiscreet Rabble) not only not obeyed nor answered, but after some
days spent in par^ying and treating; without fear or wit they sallied out, to
the number of four thousand men, almost all on foot, on purpose to meet
Ronquillo and fight with him, and in this manner they marched toward the place
where he was quartered. He, with his Captains, came presently to encounter
them, and it is affirmed, that he might easily have routed them (for although
they were more in number, they were but ordinary people, and as disorderly as
unskilful. But he was unwilling thereunto, out of respect that many men's
lives might have been lost in the Conflict, or perchance being doubtful of the
Success. So there were only some light skermishes, wherein Ronquillo took some
of their baggage, and diverse of them prisoners; whereof some he hanged, others
he punished otherwise. So that the Segovians retreated with no s^al loss, and
thenceforwards he advanced his Siege, and cut of their Commerce and
Provisions, so that nothing could pass into or out of the City; yet he used
no extremity toward them, because he had still hopes of some accommodation.
Hereupon Segovia mustered up their forces, which amounted to twelv thousand
men, besides women and children who with an unspeakable courage took up Arms to
defend the City against Ronquillo. They made strong Pallisadoes, deep Ditches,
and chained all their streets. The City of Avila assisted them, as if it had
been their own Interest, and both these Cities made a Joint-supplication to the
Cardinal, that he would not proceed against them with so much rigor; but
receiving no satisfactorie answer, they said, Since it must be so, we will
remedy our selves. At length Segovia, finding themselves straightened by the
Siege, wrote to the City of Toledo, declaring the occasion of their Revolt,
excusing themselves of the death of Tordesillas, and imputing it to the
indiscreet fury of some Carders and Teazers, exclaiming against the rigor of
the Cardinal and Council for sending Ronquillo, not as an equitable Judge to do
them Justice, but as a cruel Tyrant to wage War against them; and at last
conjuring and imploring their succor and assistance to raise the Siege, alleging
that the punishment the Cardinal and Council intended to inflict upon Segovia,
was but the Precursor of the destruction of Toledo, in regard they were in the
same Predicament, and declared by the Council for disobedient, as well as those
of Segovia, were condemned for Traitors: In the Close of all, they desired that
City to give credit to the Relation of Rodrigo de Cieca, and Albara de
Guadarrama (the bearers of their Letter) who had Instructions and Orders to
impart matters of higher consequence unto them, which they durst not commit to
paper. Other Letters, to the same effect, they sent to the other Cities of
Castilla, who all returned them great promises and encouragement, and in
effect they sent to the Cardinal and Council, desiring a pardon for Segovia,
all but Toledo, who being less scrupulous, in stead of fair words, sent them
men of Arms to succor the City, as shall appear hereafter.

SECT. XLV.
TOledo, upon receipt of this Letter, sent, to reliev Segovia, four hundred
Musketeers, as many Halberdiers, and three hundred Horse, well Armed, which
were joifully received, and gave them courage to sallie out again upon
Ronquillo. But first they sent to him, requiring that he would let them alone,
depart from Santa Maria de Nieva (where he lay) and that he would meddle no
more with the affairs of Segovia, otherwise they would make him go away with a
Vengeance. But Ronquillo thought to do what he came for, that was, to enter
into Segovia, and punish severely the Delinquents; to which effect he
assembled the whole Country thereabouts, yet could not accomplish his Design;
for all the Cities and Towns that then were up, were wedded so unanimously to
that same Interest, that there was much to be feared. Ronquillo went from
place to place, one night he lay in one Town, the next night in another,
setting out Spies, sometimes catching those that came out of Segovia, and
seeking all means possible to get into it. In the Marketplace of Santa Maria
de la Nieva he made public Acts, Proclamations and Outlaws against the
Segovians; but they scorned and laughed at them, and it is reported that the
Common People set up a great high Gallows, which they swept and watered every
day, saying, That was to hang Ronquillo upon, making show of as much courage
and resolution, as if they had had the whole world on their side; this was when
they saw how forward and ready Toledo was to back them, and had furnished them
with both men and money.

SECT. XLVI.
THe Cardinal seeing the ill success of this business, sent about three hundred
and fifty Lanciers, and some Foot Soldiers, of those which were Garrisoned in
Navarra, to Ronquillo; with whom he scoured the Confines of Segovia. One day
he went to Zamarramala, where he caused to be set up certain papers against
the Segovians, proclaiming them Traitors and Rebels, and summoning them to
appear before him within a certain time; thence he returned to Nieva, where
he commanded a high Scaffold to be built, whereon he caused to be set other
Acts and Writings to the same effect, then gave order to be proclaimed in all
the adjacent Towns and Villages, that no body should dare to carry any
provisions whatsoever to Segovia under pain of death. Segovia seeing Ronquillo
use them so hardly, keeping all provisions from them; three thousand five
hundred of them, very well provided with Corslets, Lances, Halberds and Swords
made another sallie, one of the principal Citizens, named Peralta, was their
Commander in Chief; so with great nois and little order (as Common People use
to do) they marched directly toward Santa Maria de Nieva, but at two Leagues
distance from Segovia they met Ronquillo with his men (who were better
disciplined then they) and made some shots at them, whereupon they soberly
retreated toward their quarters. The Segovians seeing that, and thinking that
they ran away, pursued with great eagerness and in such disorder, that the
others turning upon them, killed some of them, and took Don Diego Peralta their
Captain Prisoner, and they took an Officer, and some of Ronquillo's men. At last
the Combat grew so hot, that Ronquillo quitted his quarters, and left the
Segovians (being far more in number) masters of the place, who presently set
fire to the Scaffold, and burned all the Acts and proclamations he had set up
against them. Upon this came a new supply of three thousand men to them, which
gave them fresh courage, and seeing themselves so strong, they followed
Ronquillo, and made two great shots at him, which killed him two Hors-men, and
they took the Paie-master of his Forces, with two millions of Maravediz
(whereof thirty four make sixpence sterling.) which he carried to pay his men:
this Prize, with other prisoners, they sent to Segovia. Ronquillo still
retreated in good order, and some of his Horse perceiving a Party of about
forty men of the Segovians scattered in a small Village near Nieva, charged
them, and having took some they brought them to Ronquillo, whereof he presently
hanged two, the rest he carried to Coca, where he went to lodge. And the
Segovians having rescued their Captain, returned joifully to their City.

SECT. XLVII.
THe distempers of Madrid (for as I have said, that City rose also) were no
less then those of the other Commonalties of Castillia. Francisco de Vargas a
man of honor and approved fidelity, maintained the Fort against the People,
notwithstanding all the diligences they could make to turn him out, and possess
themselves of it. They required him oftentimes with many threats, that if he
would not deliver it up to them, they would hang as many as they could light
upon, of those that were within. Francisco de Vargas perceiving the straight
he was in for want of men, got secretly out one night and went to Alcala (six
small Leagues from thence) for some assistance. He procured about forty men,
whom (that they might get into the Fort without being discovered) he ordered
to enter by two and two on hors-back. This could not be carried so close, but
the City had some intelligence thereof. Whereupon the People being all
Alarmed, in great have and fury, some on Hors-back some on foot, ran out to
intercept him, taking some Gentlemen to be their Captains. Being in the field
they ranked themselves in better order, and when the Captain of the Fort was
ready to enter with his men, they fell upon him, who being but a small number,
were forced to seek their safety by flight; Francisco de Vargas being
advantagiously mounted, with some others that were able to follow him, returned
to Alcala. The people after that, grew more careful, and kept Spies out and
Guards in all the Avenues of the City, then they fell upon the Fort with great
fury, encompassing it round, but they durst not approach too near, for those
that were within defended themselves very stoutly, welcoming them with many
musket-bullets lets, Cros-bow shot and stones. The Fort being in this
straight, Diego de Vera with his men approached, and faced Madrid. He had force
enough to have relieved the Fort with men and provisions, and ill treated the
Commoners of Madrid. But he was wearied with a tedious march, and discontented
that he had not received of a long time pay, neither for himself, nor his
Soldiers; besides, at the same time Letters were brought him from the City of
Avila (where he was bo^^ and had his estate and family) wishing him to let
those of Madrid alone, and no way to molest them, for if he did, they would
pluck down his house, and set fire on all his goods. Out of this fear Diego de
Vera, dissembling his design, would not enter into Madrid, nor do any thing to
help the one party, or prejudice the other. Madrid finding themselves but weak
in men, and not very well provided with Arms, sent to Toledo for succor, who
forthwith furnished them with five hundred men and thirty Lances, under the
Command of Goncalo Gaytan. Having received this supply, they resolved to
undermine the Fort in four places, which they within perceiving, shot still more
and more fiercely, and killed some of their workmen, which made them leav mining
by day, and labor only in the night, with Blindes and Engines, made like
Carts, which they might go safely under, and for their better security, at the
front of all, they placed the Children and nearest of kin to those that were
within the Fort, to make them refrain from shooting, for fear of killing them;
yet for all this, Francisco de Vargas his wife (who was within) was so ready to
assist, and so wittily cunning to endeer and encourage her men to fight, (lest
her husband should bear any blame) that they still held out, and defended
themselves courageously. The Townsmen sent to require them to surrender the
Fort, if not, they threatened that none should go either in or out, but should
be either killed or taken; whereunto she made Answer, that they troubled
themselves in vain, and she would have them know, That although her husband was
absent, neither she, nor any of the rest with her, were of such low and
unworthie spirits, as, out of fear of their threatenings, to do an act so
prejudicial to his Majesty's service, That they were all resolved rather to
die in their own defense, then commit so High a Treason; for where she was,
her Husband's honor should not suffer in the least. The People hearing this,
broke into a furious rage, crying out with loud voices, Let them die though we
all perish. ^o all being armed, they environed the Fort on all sides, and
planted their Artillery in order against it. Those within stood stoutly in
their defense, discharging all the great Guns they had, which were many and
good, and put in a readiness their Muskets and other Arms, but they wanted men
to plie their small shot, The Artillery began to play on both sides. The Fort
battered down all the neighboring houses, and the Gunners showed much skill
both within and without, yet did not so much mischief on either side, as they
might have done. At last came some Religious men to mediate a peaceable
agreement. And as it was half concluded, a Gentleman stepped in and crossed all,
saying with a loud voice, O you traitors, rogues, Jews of Madrid! What have ye
done? What Agreement is this you will make, so^ prejudicial to the King and
your City? you do it but out of cowardice. This and many things more he
said, insomuch that the people mutinied, and grew rather more distempered then
before; some favored him, others were enraged to kill him, so there grew a great
tumult, and a bloody confusion, dealing blows and thrusts of Swords and Lances
on all sides. But my Gentleman was taken at last by the Common people, whereof
some would have killed him presently, others more discreet, thought fitter to
keep him prisoner, until they knew what moved him to cast that seed of
dissension amongst them, to hinder the Agreement which was then concluding. The
next day, the people returned to assault the Fort, and their Gunner killed the
Gunner of the Fort, and left them none to manage the Artillery. Then they cut
off their water, and their provision of Victuals growing short, at last they
were enforced to surrender the Fort to the Commander of those of the
Commonaltie. The People entered the Fort, with great acclamations of joy and
triumph. In it they found eight hundred complete Suits of Armor, a thousand
lances, a hundred, halberts, four fauconets, three pieces of Cannon of one
hundred pound bullet a piece (according to the list) three hundred bullets of
iron cast, four pieces of ordnance, which they took from Mercado de Fruslera,
twenty thousand pikes, two thousand two hundred firelocks, two thousand
head-pieces, gantlets and Cros-bows, two whole Cannons, seventeen hundred
weight of powder, eight fieldpieces, and five ^housand Corslets. All which
Arms and Ammunition had been laid there by the Catholic Kings, besides much
more which was carried away to the battle of delos Gelves.

SECT. XLVIII.
MAdrid being thus revolted, and in design of possessing themselves of the
aforesaid Roial Fort and Magazine, they sent for succor to Don John Arias, Lord
of Torrejon de Velasco, one of the chief Gentlemen of the Kingdom of Toledo,
and of an Ancient and Noble ^amilie. But he being very dis^reet, and
exceedingly valiant, answered them, That he would have nothing to do with any
such broils, and that he desired to live peaceably at home without engaging on
either side: yet upon better consideration, like a faithful servant to his
King, having gathered one hundred and fifty Horse, with as many Foot, and a
competent quantity of Artillery, he went to reliev the ^ort; which being
known at Toledo and Alcala, by messengers from Madrid, they sent multitudes of
People, who joining all in one body, fell upon his Town of Torrejon de
Velasco, vvhilest he was upon his march toward Madrid: They sacked and
burned it quite down, and hurt diverse of the Inhabitants, some they killed.
This nevvs being brought to Arias, he returned much troubled and incensed to
Torrejon, swearing that he would be revenged, and if he could not get
satisfaction from Madrid, he would not leave one Town there-abouts
undestroyed. Some of his followers advised him to join with Diego de Vera who
was come from Gelves, with whose help and the good provision of Artillery
which he had, he might besiege Madrid, hereupon Don John Arias demanded Don
Diego's assistance, but he ex^used himself saying, that he was tired with his
march, neither would he fight against any of the King's Towns. John Arias did
all the mischief he could in the Towns adjacent to Madrid, and the people were
so fearful of his Soldiers, that they durst not leave their cattle abroad. It
fell out one night, that the Village of Mostoles (which was near Torrejon)
having notice that Io^n Arias would fall upon them, they barricadoed their
streets, and put themselves in a posture of defense, but he entered at another
part, where the inhabitants suspected not, and sacked the Town, and at their
going away again, all laden with plunder, the Townsmen all at once fell upon
them and took all from them again, but killed not a man.

SECT. XLIX.
DOn John Arias de Avila, afterward seeing the inconstancy and fickleness of
the Common People, who neither kept oath nor promise, desiring to serve his
King, and pacify the tumults of Toledo, went with some few servants to the Town
of Illescas, where the chief promoters of those combustions were with diverse
men in Arms, and coming thither to treat of composing the matter in a peaceable
way, he expressed himself in such efficacious terms, and gave them such
undeniable reasons, and friendly exhortations, representing unto them the
dangers whereunto they exposed their lives and fortunes, by withdrawing
themselves from their obedience to their King, that sometimes he prevailed so
far with, them as to harken to an accommodation (but they continued not long in
that mind) for the business depending of so many several People, that which was
concluded one day, was quite broke off the next; and at last they fell into
such a popular madness, that throvving aside all respect, they would lay
violent hands upon Don John Arias, peremptorily bidding him deliver up to them
the places of strength, which he had under his command, and seeing he would
not do that, they demanded the Artillery which was in them; and because he
denied that also, with great nois and tumult they gathered together in the
house where the Assembly was kept, and made an order that John Arias should
presently deliver the Artillery, and in case of default, he should suffer
death as an enemy of the common good. This was intimated to him by a Notary
Public. But John Arias with solid and good reasons ansvveared, that he could
not do it. The People of Illescas hereupon went again into the council, and
ordered, that John Arias should, without reply, deliver the Artillery, or be
killed; whereunto he made answer soberly and undauntedly, That the life he
yet enjoyed was only his own, but the honor and good name descended from his
Ancestors, and should continue as an inheritance intailed upon his Successors,
That it was in their powers to take away his life, but not his honor, for
that he could neither give nor lose, That if they did take his life, it would
cost them many lives, That they had best take heed what they did, and that they
could not take away the loyalty which he owed to his King though he should
lose a Thousand lives, and that this should be his resolution in despite of
their cruiltie. The Common People, seeing the resolute courage and constancy
of John Arias de Avila, suspended for the present the mischief they intended
against him, so he took horse and rode with a stayed serious countenance
through the Town, attended only with those few servants he brought with him,
and thence returned to Torrejon, whereof the People of Illescas presently
repented themselves, and condemned one another of unadvisedness, in that they
had not killed, or at least, kept him prisoner* But John Arias maintained
stoutly three Forts well provided of men and arms in the King's service
against them, which were of great importance for the suppressing and hindering
the outrages of Toledo, and those neighboring places, to the great hazard of
his life and fortunes. And as soon as he heard that the Lord Constable was
Viceroy of Castilla, he sent him the seal of his house and arms, offering
himself wholly to accomplish the obligation he had to his Majesty's service,
for which the Lord-Constable returned him thanks promissing to acquaint the
Emperor with his loyalty, and moreover recommended to his care the charge of
those parts, which John Arias performed with great diligence, skermishing
oftentimes with the Commoners. For this, and other services, and in
consideration of his illustrious extraction, the Emperor gave him the ti^^e of
Earl of Punio en Rostro, and vvrote him very favorable and gracious Lettres,
expressing the great esteem and account he made of his services to his
Majesty. In a hundred small Villages the People rose against the Earl of
Chinchon, but he suppress^d them quickly, and punished them severely. Alcala
was infected with the like disturbances and revolts, with diverse other places
of the Kingdom, imitating their chief Town which was the ringleader of all
those distempers.

SECT. L.
CArdinal Adriano (who was a Saint-like man) sought all means possible to
remedy these disorders, with a sweetness and Clemency answerable to his
Charity, and hearing of a Gentleman that followed the Court, who was a native
and Iurate of Toledo, a discreet man, he sent for him, and being come, he
asked him what course (in his opinion) was fittest to be taken for the
pacifying of that City, saying, That if he could devise any way to do it,
he should be exceeding glad to embrace it, and he would procure his
Majesty's approbation thereof. The Gentleman thanked him in the Citie's
behalf, as being a member of it, and said, He did not certainly know their
intention, but according to his judgment, the only way to cure those
mischiefs, was to apply the same medicine which they desired, viz. That his
Majesty would be pleased to grant to Toledo what their Commissioners had
petitioned him in Parliament; That his Eminence would command Ronquillo, the
Judge, to raise his Siege before Segovia, and return with his men, in regard the
City was much scandalized at his coming in such an hostile manner, they having
sent two Prelates with their submission, and begging pardon of his Eminence;
that he knew how all the chief Cities of the Kingdom, being guilty of the
like Commotions, every one would exspect the like punishment, and out of that
fear, they would rather join all their Forces to succor Segovia, then be
liable to any such rigorous sentence; that he should be very careful in that
point, for if the people once lost their respect, he would not be able to
correct them: That for the present (although there were tumults and Commotions
every where) yet there was no public War declared, only dissentions amongst
the people. But if they joined and assisted one another, it would occasion
great misery and ruin to the Kingdom, as it afterward fell out. These and
some other instances the Gentleman pressed to the Cardinal, who finding much
reason and weight in them, bad him come again to him the next day in the
Evening, in the mean time he would call a Council concerning those
particulars. The Gentleman punctually observing the time appointed, the
Cardinal told him, that he had consulted about that business, but they were
not all of his opinion, so that there could be nothing done but what was
formerly commanded. The Iurate beseeched him to be very wary and well
advised; for some of his Council, he told him, were men o're-swaied with
passion, and more wedded to their private interests, then his Majesty's
service, and that to his knowledge both Toledo and Madrid were raising men to
send to reliev Segovia, and if they went thither, he might easily see what
mischief would ensue. The Cardinal thereupon said, he would call a Council
again about it.

SECT* LI.
TOledo and Madrid (as being nearest) fearing that if Segovia were subdued,
Toledo and Madrid Succor Segovia.
they should be in danger, chose Captains, John de Padillae made Cap^ain of
the Toledians.
and raised men to send to succor it. Toledo pitched upon John de Padilla, to
whom they gave Commission to raise a thousand Foot, and a hundred Light-horsmen
(whereof Hernando de Ayala was Captain) with some pieces of Artillery. Madrid
sent out four hundred Foot, and fifty Horse. The Toledians being joined with
those of Madrid, John Bravo Captain of the Segovian forces
they marched together to a place called Espinar, where John Bravo Captain of
the Segovians, came forth with his men to receiv them; They made all together
two thousand Foot, and one hundred and fifty Horse; after some Conference,
they agreed all three to go to Santa Maria de Nieva, where Ronquillo was
quartered, and do as much mischief as they could, whilst those of Salamanca
and other places might join, Ronquillo refuses to engage in battle.
and come to the succor of Segovia. But Ronquillo and his Captains, persevering
in their design (although they went out into the field, seeming to encounter
the Enemy) would not engage in Battle, but marched soberly and in good order,
another way; the Cardinal hearing of the setting forth and joining of these
Captains, determined to increas the strength of his own forces, and make a
formal Camp, able to suppress and subdue the Contrary Party. To this effect
he sent to Antonio de Fonseca Captain General of the Kingdom, that with the
King's standing forces, and with all the rest he could make of Foot and Horse,
he should go help Ronquillo, and of that Artillery which was at Medina del
Campo, he should take what he thought fitting. Moreover he sent to command
R^nquillo, Antonio de Fonseca commanded by the Cardinal to assist Ronquillo.
that by no means he should give those Captains battle, but should first join
with Antonio de Fonseca, for the better effecting thereof. Antonio de Fonseca's
March could not be kept so private, but Valladolid (where the Order was made)
perceived it. Whereupon (although they were cried up for their Loialtie) they
began to mutiny much more then before they had done, (which was no slight
matter neither) for they made private meetings every day. Yet notwithstanding
the Commotions of Valladolid, Antonio de Fonseca cunningly got out of the
City, and marched with all the Horse and Foot he could raise to Arevalo, where
Ronquillo and the Captains that were with him, met him with theirs, Segovia
write's to those of Medina del Campo not to deliver their Artillery to Fonseca.
and concluded of their journie to Medina. Segovia having notice of their
march, and knowing their intention, which was to bring Artillery thence for
their hurt and damage, immediately dispatched an Express to Medina, with a
Letter to this effect. That by no means they should condescend to deliver the
Artillery to Fonseca, notwithstanding the persuasions of the Bishop of Burgos
his brother, who had been long there soliciting and pressing them to it,
alleging how unjust a thing it were, since Segovia sent their Clothes to enrich
the Fairs of Medina, that Medina should send Cannons to batter and beat down
the walls of Segovia; urging moreover, that if they did so, it would be the
utter ruin of Segovia, and Medina would suffer likewise in their Fall. And in
the Close, they desired Medina to hear and give full credit to their Messenger,
who should impart some things to them which they thought not fit to write.

SECT. LII.
Antonio de Fonseca advances with his forces to Medina to demand the
Artillery.
UPon receipt of this Letter, those of Medina resolved not to deliver the
Artillery. Antonio de Fonseca with the best part of those men that were at
Arevalo, marched thence on Tuesda^e morning the 21. of Angust toward Medina,
with intention to take the Artillery away by force, in case they refused to
deliver it, as already they had upon Ronquillo's demand. They being advertised
by the Letter from Segovia, and other parts, of these preparations against
them, put on a resolution to stand out and not deliver the Artillery. Antonio
de Fonseca having friends within the Town (besides the Corregidor himself,
Gutiere Quijada, being well inclined to the deliverie thereof) began first to
treat fairly with them, showing them the Orders and Power he had to that
effect. But the Townsmen replied, They refuse to deliver the Artilerie.
that they kept the Artillery for and in the name of the King, and that they
saw no reason they had to deliver it, but rather to keep it in defense of their
Town and people. Yet to do his Majesty service, they were willing to deliver
some of it, if need required, upon condition that they themselves might go with
it, and bring it back again, from this contention they grew to higher
language, thence to blows, and planting their ordnance at every street's end,
great multitudes of people presently flocked thither, all in arms. Antonio de
Fonseca seeing this, Fonseca storn. the Town. Is repulsed.
commanded his men to storm the Town; the Townsmen killed some of his men with
cannon shot, and some of theirs were likewise killed, defending the entrance
of the Town. Antonio de Fonseca thought to catch them with a wile (not
intending any such mischief as fell out) which was thus; The unfortunate
burning of Medina del Campo by Fonseca's men
he privately commanded certain firebals of pitch to be made and flung into
St Francis street, thinking that the people would presently run all thither to
quench the fire, and quit the gates, by which means he might enter and seize
upon the Artillery; but it succeeded not according to his exspectation; for
the fire began to rage exceedingly, in so much that St Francis street, and the
linen draperie was quite through of a flame, yet the inhabitants showed so
much courage that (although their houses, goods and children were burning
before their eyes) they would not depart from the Artillery, fighting with
Antonio de Fonseca and his men, until they had driven them quite from the Town.
Fonseca was very angry, and ashamed that he could not effect his intention,
and no less grieved for the great harm and damage the fire had done, which he
intended not. The Monastery of St Francis was burnt to the ground with all the
rich ornaments and library; besides great store of Money, Cloth, Silks
Clothes of Gold and Silver, and other rich commodities, which diverse Genua, and
Segovia Merchants had laid up there, all consumed to ashes. And nine hundred
houses more, in which not so much as one bed was preserved. It was a lamentable
thing to see how the poor people, women and children, went crying, and groaning
up and down the streets, having no house left to go into, nor any thing to cover
their nakedness, calling upon God for justice against Fonseca. In this sad
condition remained Medina, more inflamed with the fire of wrath in their
hearts, then their houses were with the bals of pitch. The Corregidor durst not
stay, because he had been with Fonseca. Whereupon the people began to call an
Assembly of the Commonaltie, and took the same form of government as the other
Cities did. They wrote forthwith to John de Padilla, and the other Captains,
declaring their miseries, and imploring their assistance, to revenge their
losses upon those that had sided with Fonseca against them; and their chiefest
spleen was against the Town of Arevalo, because Fonseca had carried his men
thence. Arevalo feared as much from those of Segovia, and in it self there were
partialities and sidings thereupon, some taking the Commoners part, others the
Contrary. Medina wrote likewise to the other Cities, imparting to them their
calamities: Segovia answered their Letters, expressing many thanks for their
defending so courageously the Artillery, and exceeding sorrow for the great
losses they had sustained,

SECT. LIII.
ADriano the Cardinal of Tortosa (being a holy man) was grieved to the soul
at the disaster of Medina, and in excuse of himself he wrote a Letter to them,
expressing his sorrow in good and Saint-like terms. Whereunto they returned an
answer, giving his Eminence thanks for his resentment of their miseries, and
making a large relation of the cruelties of Fonseca and his Soldiers, besides
the great losses they had sustained by fire, which they esteemed to be of so
high value, that they doubted the King's whole Revenue, for some years, would
not be enough to make them reparation. And at last they desired his Eminence
would be pleased to condemned and declare for Traitors and disturbers of the
Kingdom Antonio de Fonseca, Gutiere Quijada, and that bloody robber (as they
called him) John de Avila, and disband their men, with Command that every one
should repair to their own home, and not burn the houses of his Majesty's
faithful Subjects, for under color of serving the King, they did him great
disservice therein.

Finis Libri Secundi.
THE CIVIL WARS OF SPAIN. THE THIRD BOOK.
SECT. I.
ANger supported on the shouldiers of Authority is like lightning from heaven.
Antonio de Fonseca, Captain General of the Kingdom, was enraged beyond the
measure of discretion against Medina. He burned like a flash of lightning,
their houses and their goods, but he incensed their hearts and wills much more
(like men in despair) to commit a thousand absurdities. And to revenge the
fury of his passion, all the people of the Town took Arms, dispersed Letters
of their grievances through the whole Kingdom, desiring vengeance, and he that
could do most mischief was held the bravest fellow. Amongst these broils and
mischiefs, there was one particularly noted for his courage and boldness, a
Cloth-worker by trade, his name was Bobadilla, a mean fellow, dull, but cruel
of disposition; he was followed, as their Captain, by diverse that were undone,
and therefore grown furiously passionate. First he fell upon Gil Nieto (who
had been his Master) cutting and slashing till he had killed him; then he
killed a Bookseller, called Tellez; next, a Regidor of the Town, called Lope
de Vera. And so he and his Associats served all those whom they knew, or did
but imagine, had any hand in Fonseca's coming to demand the Artillery, or had
consented to the delivering of it. They plucked down the houses which Don
Rodrigo Mexia had there, and committed diverse other cru^lties and outrages.
This active audaciousness of Bobadilla got him very much credit and esteem
amongst the people, and he Lorded it, and took so much upon him, that from
that time forwards nothing was done but what h^e would; so he commanded and
governed as Head of the people. Bobadilla Captain of the people in M^dina.
He presently took a great house, set Porters at his Gates, and gave himself
the style of Lord. Such Heads, as this Cloth-worker was, had the Commonalties
in other places; as Villoria, a skinner in Salamanca, and Antonio Casado in
Segovia, and others such like, who being bold, and without honor or shame,
were followed and esteemed by the common and meaner sort; And indeed diverse
Gentlemen were to blame herein, who did very much harm, some by kindling and
fomenting the fire secretly, others publicly, not with design to do the King
any disservice, but by reason of parties and factions amongst themselves, some
siding with the Commonaltie, purposely to destroy others, so that it was more
their particular factions and seditions, then their disobedience to his
Majesty, that occasioned all these disorders. Medina complain's to Valladolid
of their misf^rtune^.
Medina, soon after this disaster, sent Letters to Valladolid, containing a
most pitiful relation of their unfortunate and deplorable condition, with high
exclamations against the cruelty of Antonio de Fonseca and Ronquillo.

SECT. II.
THe Emperor wrote to Valladolid, giving them thanks that they had preserved
Peace and quietness in that City, and for the good entertainment they had
given, in his absence, to the Cardinal, Valladolid's answer to the Emperor's
Letter.
his Governor, and those of his Council. Whereunto they returned an Answer the
8th Iulie, 1520, with many acknowledgments of his favor, praising God that he
had given them such a Prince and Emperor, who they hoped should conquer the
Holy Land, and be a great Defendor of the Church, as the Emperors and Kings,
his forefathers, had been. And moreover they beseeched, with all humility, his
Sacred Majesty, forasmuch as that City had not only showed their Loialtie,
in serving, with their Arms, the Kings his Ancestors (as Don Alonso the
Eleventh, Don John the Second, and others) but also in advising and counselling
them what was most expedient for their Roial services. And since it was
apparent, that the granting of the Subsidy in the Parliament at the Groyn, had
been the only occasion of so many great Commotions and troubles in the
Kingdom, that his Majesty would be pleased (of his innate liberality and
goodness) graciously to remit and pardon all those that had opposed the levying
thereof, and that it should be no more demanded, which favor would be so
acceptable to the whole Kingdom, that at his return (which they hoped would be
^peedily) they would do him such extraordinary service, that He should thank
them for preferring Him that Petition, and know more clearly their desires to
serve Him. But the burning of Medina del Campo, caused so great scandal in
Castilla, that it revived and made the fire blase more fiercely out amongst the
common people, and infected their Spirits so, that many other Towns, whither
the sore had not yet run, rose up in the like disorder. The next day after
Medina was burnt (as you have heard) they sent Letters with a particular of the
passages, to Valladolid. With no less fury, then Fonseca's firebals consumed
the houses of Medina, were inflamed the hearts of those of Valladolid at the
receipt of those dolorous tidings. And without respect to the Cardinal,
Governor, Tumul^s in V^lla^olid for the burning o^ M^d^na.
the Archbishop, President, Council or other officers of justice, and
forgetting the graces and favors the Emperor had done them by his Letters; they
rang out the bell of San Miguel, whereupon all the people presently took arms,
and ran from all parts of the City to the great marketplace, and all that the
Earl of Venavente, and Don Alonso Enriquez Bishop of Osma could do, or say
(who came out to pacify the people) was to no purpose. And being thus
gathered together, about five or six thousand men, they went to Pedro de
Portillo's house, about twy-light (for at that time he was chief Burgess of the
City) willing him to go along with them to the President of the Council, that
he might provide for certain things, which were necessary for the City. But
Pedro de Portillo displeased them so with his answer, calling them mutiniers
and thieves, that went about to robb and plunder, that in furious madness they
broke open his doors and windows, and he had much ado to get clear of them
by hiding himself; seeing they could not find him, they took a rich cupboard of
plate, that was set against supper, they searched his house all over, plundered
his shop and warehous, and took away many rich clothes and silks (for he was
a merchant) they made a great fire before his door, in which they burned many
pieces of rich cloth of gold and silver, silks, woollen clothes, tapistries,
rich mantles, ermines and other things of great value (for he was a very rich
man) they left not so much as a hen, but they flung it in the fire or stole it
away. And at the carrying away of their plunder, they fell out and fought with
one another. This man's loss was esteemed above three millions of Maravediz.
Not satisfied with all this, they began to pluck the house down, and some boys
that followed their fathers, set fire to a Garret, where was great store of
dry wood and bavins, which burned furiously, but fearing to burn the
neighboring houses, they suddenly quenc^ed the fire again, which if they had
not don, would have endangered a great part of the City. This done, being
enraged with that popular fury which the Devil had sow^d in Spain, with loud
outcries they ran to the house of Antonio de Fonseca, who set fire on Medina,
and in revenge thereof, they burnt and plucked it to the ground, not leaving a
bit of timber, nor a tile that belonged to it, unconsumed. Thence they went to
Alonso Ninno de Castro's house (who was chief Judge of the City) and finding not
him, they plundered it, and plucked down the ^ntrie. The like they did to
diverse of the principal men of the City, which a certain Author, a Native of
Valladolid, and an eie-witness of all these passages, says, was a just
judgment upon the Regidores, and the rest, for their ambitions and disordinate
desires of advancing their particular ends, without regard of the public good,
suffering their Country to be drained of all its treasure by strangers, to
the sum of nine millions of gold, out of Castilla only, which was never
converted to his Majesty's use, but was shared amongst the Flemings* This was
the general complaint of that Kingdom, which people of those times said, ought
to be registered in characte^s of blood* After this, they made themselves
strong, keeping constant watch, and going the Rounds with Minstrels and Drums,
no less then fifteen hundred together at the first* but this was so chargeable,
that they reformed their Rounds to twenty men at a time. Some nights they found
gunpowder mingled with pitch scattered in the streets, which they said, Antonio
de Fonseca had commanded to be done, for anger that his house was burnt. After
that they kept Rounds and strong Guards at the Gates, and they were so afraid
of fire and pitch, that they watered all their houses with vinegar, thinking
there was some design to burn Vallado^^^ as well as Me^ina. They called an
assembly in the Monastery of the Trinity, where they chose new Burgesses and
Deputies. Then they sent for the Gentlemen and Citizens of the Town, whom they
made to swear and take the engagement of the Commonaltie, which for fear of
death they durst not refuse to do. They made the Infant of Granada their
Captain General, which office he was enforced to accept, or die. And they all
swore to obey him, and to do nothing contrary to his command; which charge he
began to exercise with much discretion. But because they knew that Don Alonso
Enriquez Bishop of Osma, and brother to the Lord Admiral, did not like well of
their proceedings, they turned him out of the City, and diverse other Gentlemen
likewise, because they could not trust them. Which done, they presen^lie sent
messengers to Medina del Campo, offering them succor. And to that effect they
listed two thousand Soldiers, and chose likewise six Commissioners, to send to
the Iunta, or Assembly, held in Avila, to which already the gave they
Attribute of Holy.

SECT. III.
THe Cardinal and those of the Council seeing all these passages, were so far
from providing or ordering any thing in this case, that they durst not, neither
did it seem possible for them to meet, and confer of what was to be done. But
as in a storm at Sea, when there is neither sails, mariners nor pilots (all
hope lost) the ship is left to drive at the tempest's pleasure: so the Cardinal
and the Archbishop of of Granada, and those of the Council (having no means to
resist) thought best to let alone that people, who were hurried away with so
violent a storm of inconsiderate fury. The Cardinal made them a thousand
congies, and excused himself saying, that he never commanded Medina to be
burned, nor had any hand in the other mischiefs: quite contrary it grieved him
to the very soul, to hear what Fonseca had done. And being desired by the
City, The C^rdinall disclaime's Fonsec^'s burning of Medin^ and Command's him
to disband his men.
and thinking it to be convenient himself, he commanded to be proclaimed
publicly, that all those that were with Antonio de Fonseca should leav him and
return to their houses, and he sent his express order to the same effect to
Antonio de Fonseca, commanding him to disband his men, reserving only what was
necessary for the guard of his own person, in regard it was not possible to
maintein an Army in those parts, having no means, nor place where to raise
money for their subsistence. Fonseca was enforced to obey, conforming himself
to the time so taking a party of horse with him, he went out of the Kingdom;
for all in that Country were his deadly enemies, and he had no mind to be
surprised by them in Arevalo, or either of his Towns of Coca or Alaejos, but
leaving them well fortified, and his son Don Fernando in Coca, he passed into
Portugal, and thence by Sea into Flanders with the Judge Ronquillo.

SECT. IV.
ABout this time Caceres in Estremadura, and the City of Iaen in Andaluzia
(where as yet the diseas had not broke out) began to cry up the Commonaltie.
Commotions in Caceres and Iaen quieted by the discretion of Don Rodrigo Mexia.
So that Don Rodrigo Mexia Lord of Santa Eufemia, who had a great party,
being born in that City, labored and used all means possible to hinder the
people from the outrages and mischiefs, which were done in other Cities, and
not being able to bridle and restrain their fury otherwise, he took upon
himself the charge of the Justice and Commonaltie. Many other Gentlemen made
use of the like prudent dissimulation, not being able to do otherwise. Badajoz
also, being in the like distemper, was quieted by his good industry, they of
Badajoz took a fort from him that kept it for the Earl of Feria. There is no
reason why the Andaluzians should be held any better then the Castillians, for
in all places the dissentions were much alike, and their demeanors, as if the
common people had agreed and contracted together some years before.

SECT. V.
Factions in u^eda and B^^za.
UBeda and Baeza were divided into two parties between the Venavides and the
Caravajales both noble and ancient families in Castilla, Don Luis de la Cueva,
cozen german to the Duke of Alburquerque, was Captain of the Venavides.
Caravajal Lord of Todar (which is a Village two leagues from Ubeda) commanded
the other party. In these factions there was so much animositie, that one day
Don Luis de Ubeda, coming in a litter (for he was an old man) was set upon by
Caravajal Lord of Todar, attended by an hundred horse, who gave him so many
thrusts with his lance, that he killed him in his litter. This done, he was
carried back to Ubeda, where the manner of his death being related to his son
Don Alonso, and their kindred, to revenge his father's death, they went to the
Village of Todar, where they killed and cut the throats of all they could lay
hands upon, and afterward set fire to the Village in many places, that some
that hid themselves in their houses, were fain to leap out at the windows to
avoid the fire. The destruction and cruelty was so great, that they reckoned
of killed and burned, about two thousand persons, men, women, or children, and
only the ruins of some houses in the village remained. But indeed though
these Gentlemen were Loyal like Noble persons, yet it was so, that in this
there was more of passion and particular grudge and hatred then any matter of
Commonaltie. For neither the Venavides, nor those of la Cueva, ever were
Commoners, or pretended to disserv the King. But in these places, with the
occasion of the Kingdom's being in a hurly-burly, they made use of the Common
Interest to revenge their private passions. And it is apparent, that if these
Gentlemen did follow the Commonaltie, as wishing it well, yet they were none of
their Captains.

SECT. VI.
CUenca, Cuenca riset^ for the Commonaltiee.
in imitation of other Cities, rose also and committed the like disorders; In
this City was Captain of the Commonaltie, one Calaborra, and with him a
Bridle-maker, whom the whole City obeyed as their Lords. And there being a
person of principal note and power in the Kingdom, ( Luis Carrillo de
Albhornoz, Lord of Torralva and Berreta) they so much sl^ghted him, that he
was enforced to dissemble and sum^on all his reason and prudence to persuade
his heart to brook it. Their audaciousness grew to that pass, that he riding
upon his mule through the street, a Rascal of the Common sort struck him over
the buttock, saying, in a scoffing manner, Go thy way Luis Carrillo; he was
glad to let this pass, the times not permitting him to do otherwise. Luis
Carrillo was married to Donia Inez Varrientos de Manrique, a Lady of a
Masculine courage, who desiring to revenge the injuries and affronts done to
her husband, and to stop and take off the opprobrious taunts of the people, she
invited the Captains of the Commonaltie to Supper, and having well laden their
heads with wine, she caused them to be carried to sleep in several chambers,
and being dead with sleep and the vapors of the wine, she commanded her
servants to cut their throats, and hang their bodies out at the windows next
the street.

SECT. VII.
AVila was the seat where all the Cities made their Assembly* Here they did
such disorders, as the loyal City of Avila ought not to have permitted. The
Common people were the only Actors thereof, for the Gentry still persevered
in the fidelity of their Ancestors. And because Antonio Ponce (like a loial
Gentleman) would not swear to follow the Commonaltie, they began to pluck down
his house, but did not, being hindered by some other Gentlemen. The rest, as in
other Cities, did swear and took the Engagement of the Commonaltie, some
willingly, some because they did not rightly understand themselves, and others out
of fear. They would have plucked down the house of Diego Hernando de Quiniones,
because he had granted the Subsidy, being their Commissioner in the last
Parliament, but some good men intervening, hindered the executing of their
Purpose. They had possessed themselves of the Fort, if Don Gonzalo Chachon Lord
of Cassarruvios, (seeing the Commotions in most parts of the Kingdom, and that
Toledo had taken the Fort from Don John de Silva, and Segovia would have done
the like to the Earl of Chinchon) had not prudently and with dissimulation
provided it (he being Governor thereof) with Munition, Arms and men, taking
them in by night, and hiding them by day. The Fort being thus Ammunitioned,
when the Common People ple flocked thither to take it, they found greater
resistance then they exspected. And the City perceiving they might be much
damnified by the Fort, and those of the Fort likewise by the City; they
treated of an Agreement and Cessation of Arms, whereby they might live quietly,
and not to do any act of Hostility to each other. Don Gonzalo Chachon having
informed the Cardinal, Governor, of this Treaty, by his consent it was
concluded, and Articles on both sides were drawn in form, signed and delivered
in presence of the public Notaries of the City. So those of the Fort lived
quietly, leaving the Townsmen to the confusion of their Commonaltie. The
nobleness of the Gentry (in imitation of their Ancestors, desirous to serve the
King) being as a firm Bulwark and secure Guard against their indiscreet fury.
This made Avila gain the renown of Loial.

SECT. VIII.
NOt only the forenamed Cities were infected with this spirit of Sedition,
but diverse other small Towns and Villages were tainted with the same Contagion,
where the diseas raged with such unnatural fury, that there was neither Law
nor respect betwixt Fathers and the Children, some being of one opinion, the
others contrary. In a certain Village called Medin^, The Author b^ing a Friar*
shewe^ himself more a Flatt^rer then the Priest a Fool, for the one prayed
simply* the other writ colloguingly, taking all advantage, t^ advance his
Interest i^ Court*
near the Palomera de Avila, lived a Byscainer Priest, half a fool, who was so
affectionated to John de Padilla, that every Holy day in the Church he used
to say, I recommend unto your prayers, Brethren, The most holy Commonaltie,
desiring God to preserv and support it, that it may never fall. I recommend
unto you likewise, his Majesty the King, Don John de Padilla, that God may
prosper him; as also her Highness the Queen, our Lady Donia Maria Pacheco,
that God may power down his blessings upon her; for verily these are the true
Kings, the rest are all but Tyrants. These prayers continued for three weeks
together, after which John de Padilla, with his Soldiers, passing that way,
some of them were quartered in this Priest's house, who drank him up a little
barrel of wine, killed his Hens, and took away a young wench that he kept, with
them. The Sundaie following, being in the Church, he said to his
parishioners, You know, Brethren, how John de Padilla passing here, his
soldiers quartered in my house, truly Beloved, they have not left me one Hen,
they have eaten up all my Bacon, they have drunk me a whole Barrel of Wine,
and have taken my Katherine away with them, therefore I charge you
henceforwards not to pray God for him, but for our Sovereign Lord Don Carlos,
and the Queen Donia Juana, for They are our true Kings. I do relate some of
these fopperies, that you may see how foolish and blind men were at that time,
and indeed no better could then be exspected; for certainly some malign star
had predominance for two years over those parts, which made men fall into such
unheard of extravagancies.

SECT. IX.
THe City of Soria was engaged in no less mischief then the other Cities, by
the rising of the Common People. If I should undertake to particularize the
riotous disorders of ev^rie several place, my work would never be at an end. In
short, none of those that treated of Commonalties, made any bones of killing
their neighbors, plucking down their houses, and committing a thousand
exorb^tances (like rash unadvised men, without sens or judgment) as to
discompose the form of Government, displace the Officers of Justice, taking
their staves from them, and naming other Judges, without considering or
reflecting upon the end that follows such like disorders, nor how to be
preserved in them. Toro and Ciudad Roderigo declare for the Commonaltie
The City of Toro and Ciudad Rodrigo took likewise the Engagement of the
Commonaltie. They turned out the Officers of Justice established by the King,
and put others in their places; And those Gentlemen that had most power, drove
their Antagonists out of the City. Which factious bandyings one against
another, in revenge of particular grudges and quarrels, were the chiefest
occasion of kindling the people's fury, and it might justly be said, that
they were private seditions and tumults, not Rebellion against their King, for
there was no such word amongst the Gentry, nor the Common people.

SECT. X.
LEon had done wisely if they had continued in the same good resolution,
wherewith they answered Valladolid concerning the Treaty of an Assembly,
which Toledo desired. But (as I have often said) the factions and parcialities
that were in every City, did more harm then any thing else in these
Commotions. The Guzmanes were so highly distasted at their being put out of
Don Fernando, the Infant, his service, that a little thing would have made
them raise a Commotion in that City, where they were very powerful, being of
an Ancient and Noble extraction. They had some difference and spleen against
the Earl of Luna, who was sent Commissioner from that City to the Parliament,
that was held at the Groyne, Factions in ^he City of Leon.
who having consented to the Subsidy, was not well received at his return; and
it is reported that Ramiro Nunn^z de Guzman spoke thus to him; They say, you
have granted the Subsidy, and gone beyond your Commission, if that be true,
you deserve to be severely punished. The Earl hereupon answered Ramiro Nunnez,
I have done what I ought and what I was Commanded to do, neither have I
exceeded my Commission one title. So from one thing to another at last they
fell into a great passion, and Ramiro Nunnez said to the Earl, I will make you
know with this my Sword against yours, how you are a Traitor, and have
Committed Treason against this City. Thereupon they both drew, and this
unfortunate controversy, divided the City into two factions. For these two
families being the chief and most Ancient of the City, had each of them many
friends, kindred and abbettours; but in regard the Earl was out of favor with
the people, and Ramiro Nunnez much beloved and followed by a great multitude,
they fell upon the Earl and his party with such fury, that they killed
thirteen of his men, there were many on both sides wounded. The Earl was
beholding to the swiftness of his horse, or else he had born his dead followers
company. This news was brought to Valladolid, and the Cardinal highly
resented it, but knew not how to remedy it, seeing the fire so generally
kindled throughout the kingdom, that of the eighteen Towns of Castilla which
had Votes in Parliament, fifteen were risen for the Commonaltie, and had chosen
Commissioners, or Burgesses, to go to the Iunta, or, Assembly, then held in
Avila. The Cardinal derived the fault of all this mischief upon Monsieur de
Xeures, for giving the Emperor so ill counsel, as to demand that Subsidy, and
the worst of all was, that he never received it. The Cardinal was out of
heart, and perplexed with continual fears, not thinking himself secure in
Valladolid, by reason of these troubles and heart-burnings of the people, which
no fault of the King's but the covetousness of his insatiable Counselors, had
occasioned. I have already told you, that one Subsidy they desired was three
hundred millions, and another time six hundred millions, in all nine hundred
millions of Maravediz; therefore let no man marvel at the great difference of
these sums, for in effect no body could rightly understand what they would
have had; yet they say, the Emperor desired no more then the ordinary
Subsidy that his Predecessors, the Catholic Kings had, (which was two hundred
millions every year) and that the overplus they stole from him and the
Kingdom, contrary to his will or knowledge.

SECT. XI.
THe affairs of Spain were so imbroiled, and men so inconsiderately raving,
that it seemed as it were a scourge from Heaven, which threatened no less
destruction to that Country then that, during the reign of Don Rodrigo. They
trusted in Southsaier's Prognostical judgments of the succeeding mischiefs. Some
Devils invented, I know not what Prophecies, which they fathered upon Saint
Isidorus Archbishop of Sevilia, others upon Friar John de Roccacelsa, and one
Merlin, besides others, which they said, were of Saint John Damascenus, and
other Doctors; that of Saint Isidorus was his complaints or lamentations over
Spain. I have read all those ill pres^ges of calamity and destruction to
Spain, which so much affrighted and dismayed the people, and I find them only
idle things, which deserv not the setting down here, unless it were to make us
wonder at the facility and weakness of men in those times, to give credit to
any such like fopperies. The ignorant people were particularly besotted with
one which pourported, A ^roph^s^e.
That there should reign over Spain a Prince called Charles, who should
destroy the Kingdom, and make the Cities desolate, but he should be overcom
and driven out of the Kingdom by an Infant of Portingal, and that the said
Infant should reign over all Spain, and me think's we see the contrary.
Such follies does blind passion, work in thoughts of ignorant and indiscreet
people.

SECT. XII.
TOledo wrote to the other Cities the last year 1519, inviting them to
assemble, and consult of what was most meet and expedient for them to
supplicate the Emperor before his departure out of the Kingdom. And in regard
that Assembly went not forwards, and that now things were in such disorder,
that the breaking out was universal through the whole Kingdom, yet they did not
well understand, nor trust one another; so for the begetting a better
intelligence amongst them, and to the end they might the more firmly establish
the Commonaltie, Toledo invite's all the other Cities to send their
Commissioners t^ the Assembly at Avila.
which they called Holy, Toledo sent other Letters to all the Cities of
Castillia, pressing them with many powerful arguments, to send, without
delaie, their Commissioners to the Holy Assembly at Avila, and not to return
them any such excuse, as formerly, because such kind of Congregations and
Assemblies were condemned by strangers; for in that Holy Assembly nothing was
to be debated, but what concerned the Service of GOD. And that they might
study or invent Remedies against the Seven sins of Spain, treating first, Of
their fidelity to the King, their Lord. Secondly, the Peace of the Kingdom.
Thirdly, the Remedy or settling of the Roial Patrimony* Fourthly, the
grievances of the Natives. Fifthly, the Injustice done by Strangers. Sixthly,
the Tyrannies with some of their own Countrie-men had invented. Seventhly, the
intolerable Impositions and taxes which that Kingdom suffered. Urging moreover,
that they should not value what censure passed upon them amongst their enemies
for so doing, in regard wicked persons are always ready to blast with
opprobrious tongues, all good and religious actions, which presupposed,
although things should fall out contrary to their exspectations or desires,
and that they should be in danger of their persons, their houses should be
plucktdown, their goods taken away, and at last should lose their lives: In
such case they were to esteem disgrace a favor, danger security, poverty
riches, banishment a glory, loss profit, persecution a crown, death life; for
nothing is so glorious for a man, as to spend his life in the defense of the
Republic. After all these, and diverse other persuasive arguments, they desired
each City to give full credence to their Messenger, who had instructions to
treat further with them.

SECT. XIII.
THe fifth of Iulie 1520, the Lord Deputy of Murcia made a complaint to the
Cardinal and Council, how the City, being risen, had killed their Governor, a
Judge, and one of the Sheriffs, besides several other persons, and that the
people were all in Arms, and so disorderly, that because he went about to
pacify and allaie their fury gently, and in a peaceable manner representing
to them the foulness and enormitie of what they had don, they drove him out of
the City, and placed Guards and Rounds, which committed very great disorders.
Hereupon it was ordered by the Council, that Leguizama, Leguizama the Judge, by
order from the Council, goes to punish the disorders in Murcia.
a Judge of Oyer and Terminer, should go thither with large powers, taking
Officers along with him, and that the neighboring towns should furnish him with
men sufficient to bring them to reason. Leguizama the Judge, being arrived at
Murcia, entered peaceably into the City. He intimated his orders to the Chief
Justice, Gentlemen, Council and Assembly of the City, requiring their favor
and assistance. Which at first they did obey: and the Judge began to make his
privy search and examination, whereby he found some guilty, which he gave
order to apprehend. This pleased not the People, who began to think of turning
him out of the City. He sentenced a Shoemaker to be whipped, who being
brought through the streets, The people rescue the offender, and mu^inie
against Leguiz^ma.
the Beadles still whipping him, the people mutinied, and many being armed,
they rescued the prisoner with great nois and hubbub; which done, they went
into a house to consult what they were to do. The Judge perceiving that presently
betook him to his heels, and fled into the Marquess of Velez his house, who then
was in the City. The Marquess hearing that the Judge was gone to his house, he
would not stay with him, but presently took horse and rode out of the Town as
fast as he could to Mula, a City ten leagues from Murcia. The Judge made all
haste possible after the Marquess, and overtook him in the field a good way
from Murcia, where he showed him his Orders, charging him in the King's name,
under pain of Death and Confiscation of all his Estate, to go back again with
him into the City, and to aid and assist him to do Justice. The Marquess
answered him very angerly, (for he had desired him before to be very careful
how he proceeded, to consider the times, and not to be too rigorous, but he
would not follow his counsel) saying, The Marquess of Velez's answer to
Leguizama.
Judge! Go, make these Requests to such men as your self is, not to me, for in
respect I am very much a servant to his Majesty, I give you this answer and no
other. But to obey, and show the reverence I bear to the Roial Crown (in whose
name you require me to return with you) let your Notarie public com after
me, and I will give him an answer to what you demand of me; With that he
turned the reins of his Horse and rode on toward Mula. The Judge went back to
Murcia and set up his Horse in the same lodging he was at before. By this time
the Commonaltie was monstrousty distempered, and a multitude not only of the
Towns-people, but also of the neighboring Farms and Cottages, ran thither with
clamorous outcries, and a full resolution to burn him, and all that were in the
house, and they had executed their purpose but for Diego de Vera, who happily
was then at Murcia with his soldiers: and hearing they had such an intention,
he rode presently to the Judge's lodging, which he found encompassed with a
number of people, crying out, Let him die, let him die. Yet at the instance and
earnest request of Captain Diego de Vera they forbore, who desired them not to
commit any such violence, but leave it to him, and he would take such order,
that the Judge should go out of the City, and meddle no more in that business.
He obtained at length, with much trouble and importunity, a promise from them
to do whatsoever he commanded, upon condition, that the Processes made against
any of the Inhabitants of that City should be delivered to them, and that the
Judge should depart the City within one hour* Diego de Vera having promised
their desires should be performed, went into the Judge's lodging, who
presently delivered him the said Processes, which he gave to the people,
making them promise him, that they would not in any kind molest the Judge nor
any of his servants, but would let him go quietly and safely away, so he
departed without making any longer stay in those parts, Leguizam^ forced to
leav the City.
which was no small matter to obtein of such Mutiniers: the authority and
grey-hairs of Diego de Vera, besides the repute he had of being a gallant
Soldier, was very useful at that time. Having pacified the people, and
persuaded them to return to their own homes, he conducted the Judge, with his
servants, He flie's to Mula.
out of the City, and a league beyond, where they parted, and the Judge went in
a great chafe and fume to Mula. There he demanded men to return with him to
Murcia, The people rise there also, and raise the Country against him.
which coming to the people's ear, they rose also against him, and having
sounded an Alarm with much fury, they presently gave notice thereof to Lorca,
and so from Village to Village to Murcia, and in very short time they were
together in Arms about eight thousand men with those of Murcia, who marched a
Judgcatching directly to Mula. But he was too wise to wait for their coming,
and flying night and day he never stayed until he got to Valladolid. Where
he remained but two days, and on Sundaie night he went to Aldea Mayor, three
leagues thence, for he durst not stay in Valladolid, knowing they did not
greatly love him for some things past, and there was but a kind of
counterfeited ^eace in that City, he was afraid they would kill him.

SECT. XIV.
THe City of Sevilla, or Sevil, that all this while stood (as it were) looking
on the rest, had likewise its disturber, who endeavored to plunge it as deep
as the other Cities, in these unhappie Commotions. Don John de Figuero^
declar^th for the Commonalti^ in the City of Sevill^.
The beginning was thus. Don John de Figueroa (brother to Don Rodrigo Ponze de
Leon, Duke of Arcos) the Duke being at his Town of Marchena, set himself to
raise the people of the City in favor of the Commonaltie, with intent to be
Captain and Governor himself. To which effect, having already molded and
vvorked them to his mind, and being agreed with those that were his
complotters and confederates in this design, on Sundaie 17 of September, 1520,
after dinner time, he and some Gentlemen (kinsmen and followers of the Duke his
brother) went to the Duke's house in Sevilla, where they assembled and gathered
together above seven hundred men with Arms, which done, he and the rest of the
Gentlemen being on hors-back, and the people on foot, they took four pieces of
Ordnance out of the Duke's house with them, and so marched into the streets,
crying out, God bless the King and Commonaltie. Thus they went as far as St
Francis place, and no body else stirred nor offered to join with them, but only
looked on as they passed. By the way Don John caused the staves to be taken
away from the King's Officers of Justice, and gave them to others in behalf
half of the Commonaltie. In this time the Duke of Medina Sidonia, Don Alonzo
Perez de Guzman, being very young, was yet under the Guardianship and Tuterage
of Donia Leonor de Suniga his mother. Who being a Lady of an high Spirit and
courage, and seeing so dangerous a fire kindled in Sevilla, assembled all their
domestics, with all the friends and welwishers to her Son's Party (that she
could so suddenly get together) and sent them under the Conduct of Don Valencia
de Venavides a valiant Gentleman (who had married the Duke's sister) against
Don John de Figueroa. But being approached near each other, and ready to
fight, some Gentlemen of note, mediating betwixt them, composed their quarrel,
insomuch that the Duke of Medina's men returned home again, and Don John
advanced to the gate of the Fort Roial, which finding shut, he battered it
down with his Ordnance, and being entered with all his men, he took the
Commander of it Don Iorge de Portugal Earl of Gelves; which done, because it was
grown late, he quartered there all night, thinking that all the people of
Sevilla would presently flock to him, applauding this exploit, and back him in
his enterprise, but they were so far from countenancing his design, that the
greatest part of those that followed him that day, forsook him in the night,
and returned to their own houses. The next day, very early in the morning, the
Officers of Justice, and the Veynte y Quatros (by whom that City is governed)
being assembled, The V^ynte y Qu^tros ^te Four and twenty chiefmen chosen by
the City for the managing of affairs.
they ordered, that immediately the King's Standard should be brought forth,
and that by command of the City, the people should all go in Arms and assault
the Fort, which being re-taken, should forthwith be delivered unto the Charge
of him who before commanded it for the King. Don Fernando de Zuniga Earl of
Venalcazar and diverse other Gentlemen fitted themselves to assist the people in
this enterprise. But before they were in a posture to put this design in
execution, Don Valencia de Venavides, by order and command express from the
Dutchesses, Donia Leonor de Zuniga, and Donia Anna de Aragon, and the Duke of
Medina (who was sick in bed) having rallied and re-assembled the men that
followed him the day before with great courage and resolution marched to the
Fort, of which, after three hours hot dispute he became Master, Don John taken
prisoner, and the City quieted.
took Don John de Figueroa prisoner, (who was wounded in two places) and
re-delivered the Fort to Don Iorge de Portugal. So in less then 24 hours this
cloud was quite blown over, which threatened so furious a tempest.

SECT. XV.
THe City of Segovia sent to Salamanca, desiring Horse for their defens against
Ronquillo. The Common people and so^ Gentlemen gave their Votes to send them
succor, but the greatest part of the Gentry opposed it, saying, it was a great
diss^rvice to the King, and contrary to Justice. Many distasteful words
passed amongst them, but at last the Commons prevailed, Salaman^^ up in Arm^.
and turned all those Gentlemen out of Salamanca. One stately house, that
belonged to the Archbishop of Santjago's Steward, they burned down to the
ground. Neither did those Gentlemen hold themselves secure, until they were got
into Valladolid, where they gave a full account of all these passages. This was
the beginning of the rising publicly in Salamanca. After which they kept their
Rounds and Guards in the City, and sent Horse to the relief of Segovia, but
before they departed, Salamanca, with other Cities, sent two men to the
Cardinal and Council, beseeching them to forbear from chastising Segovia, for
if they did not, the City of Salamanca could not refrain from sending them
succor. Their chief Captain in this uproar was Don Pedro Maldonado, Don Pedro
Maldon^do Captain in Salamanc^*
Nephew to the Doctor Talavera, who drove the rest of the Gentlemen, that were
not of his faction, out of the City, and made the Corregidor go away also,
leaving the administration of Justice more out of fear then otherwise; which
done, the City ordered the Justice, and did what you shall see hereafter.

SECT. XVI.
THe Cardinal, Governor, seeing these troubles and disorders increas daily
without any hope of remedy, notwithstanding all the endeavors and gentle
means he, and those of the Council, had used to procure it: The President and
the rest agreed to give his Majesty an exact account of all the Commotions and
particular exigencies of the Kingdom of Castillia, and in what danger they
themselves were by reason of the people's fury, desiring his Majesty to take
some speedy order for the rectifying of so great disorders.

SECT. XVII.
THe Emperor had already received some intelligence of these troubles in Spain,
by means of Flemish Merchants, and other particular letters; But when those
from the Cardinal and Council came to his hands at Lovain, He was seized with
unexpressible sadness. The necessity of his going to be crowned in Germany
was very urgent, and his returning into Spain seemed yet of more importance.
The Letter's sad Contents br^d diverse discontents, and no less different
opinions (as the custom is) amongst the Courtiers of the nearest relation about
the Emperor. The Flemings condemned the Spaniards for raising these tumults and
commotions in their King's absence: The Spaniards retorted the blame upon the
Flemings, saying, That their ill Government had been the occasion of the ruin
and loss of Spain, and that they had robbed it; and indeed to say the truth,
They were both in fault; for the Flemings were as short of discretion and
prudence to Govern, as they abounded with a too insatiable Covetousness. And
the Spaniards, although they had some reason to complain, could not be excused
for rising up in Arms. Monsieur de Xeures grew much discontented and ashamed
upon the report of this breaking out of Spain, partly because he knew what
opinion went of him in the Court, but chiefly because he thought (as justly he
might) the Emperor would derive the fault upon him: who, whilst he was in
Spain, commanded with so absolute a power, that it was commonly said, The
Emperor Don Carlos is King by right, and Monsieur de Xeures in effect. The
Emperor being thus disquieted, called a Council, and desiring to have their
advices, he propounded, That they would consider what means was to be used,
that He might go into Germany, and receiv that Crown which He so much
desired, and provide some remedy to settle the disturbances of Spain, which was
of no less importance to him, for his Coronation could be no longer suspended,
and the remedying of Spain ought not to be differred. He had of his Council
in this occurrence, Germans, Flemings, Italians, Aragoneses and Castillans;
and their opinions were as different as their Nations. For the Germans urged,
that it was repuisite his Majesty should continue his journie into Germany.
The Italians said, it was necessary that he should make^ a progress into
Italy. The Flemings were very importunate for him to stay in their Country.
The Aragoneses pleaded, that Valencia was also risen up in Arms. And the
Castillans used all means possible to persuade him to re^urn into Castill^. The
case being so general and nearly concerning so many Kingdoms, the Emperor did
wisely to take the advice of many. But at last the resolution of the business
was given by few* as great Princes use to do in like occurrences. The result of
this Consultation was, That the Emperor should continue his journie into
Germany, and having received the Imperial Crown, there to remain until he had
fully settled the affairs of that Country, not being every day to return
thither. It was likewise resolved, That his Majesty should send amiable and
gracious Letters to all the Cities and Towns of Castilla, requiring some of them
to return unto themselves and his service, and expressing his thankfulness to
others for their good intentions toward him; That he should desire and
encharge the Nobles and Gentry to favor and assist those of his Roial Council;
promising to all upon the faith of his Roial word, that with all possible
expedition he would return into Castilla, (for the thought of the Emperor's
never returning into Spain, bred in the Common people the boldness to commit
such outrages and exorbitances). Moreover it was determined, That the Emperor
should write unto the President and Council, condoling their troubles and
persecution, commanding them withal, that in one place or other, six of them
should always be about the Cardinal and hold Council: To the end they might
serve as a Refuge for the good people to appeal unto, and be a terror to the
evil: for if the Council omitted the doing of Justice, the Roial Authority must
needs fall. And also, That the Emperor should appoint two other Governors to
be joined in Commission with the Cardinal, and those to be men of noble
extractions, well experienced, and advanced in years, of generous dispositions,
powerful in estates, but chiefly Natives of that Kingdom. This advice seemed
very sound and pertinent to the Emperor, whereupon he gave order it should be
put in execution accordingly, and those whom they Voted to be joined in
Commission with the Cardinal were, Don Fadrique Enriquez Lord High Admiral of
Castilla, and Don Inigo de Velasco Lord High Constable, who were both ancient
Gentlemen of great generositie and gallantrie. Which Election gave no small
satisfaction to the Castillan party, for they had shown themselves in their
commands not only wise but valiant, and were always fortunate in their
undertakings. These Noblemen governed with such valor and prudence, that the
Emperor in his Letters to the Lord High Constable, give's him thanks for his
services, acknowledging that by his means he was King of Castilla. And indeed
the Emperor said but what was true. Besides all this, his Majesty sent an
especial Command, That the subsidy which was granted him at the Groyn, should
not be exacted from those Cities which continued in their obedience to him,
nor from those which were willing to submit and be reduced, for it was his
will and pleasure graciously to forgive it them. This grace he did likewise to
the whole Kingdom, That the Roial Revenue should be allowed for the Taxes, as
during the Reigns of other Catholic Kings, his Ancestors. He resolved also to
abrogate the sale, farming and enhauncement of all Taxes and Impositions,
(which indeed were very great): and besides he sent to offer and certify,
That no Office in that Kingdom should be conferred upon any whomsoever,
unless he were a Native; which if he had granted when he was desired, these
Commotions had never happened. Of all this were engrossed his Majesty's
Patents and Commissions of sufficient power. Yet notwithstanding these three
things were the principal grievances and most important reasons that Toledo and
the other Cities alleged for excuse of their tumultuous risings: The granting
all these demands was not available enough to quiet their Commotions and reduce
them to obedience; Here the Author flatter's*
for the Contrivers and Ringleaders, who had seduced the people into those
mischievous practices, finding profit in fishing in that troubled water,
hindered all they could that these graces of his Majesty might not com unto
the people's knowledge, and when they were known, they gave out that they were
vain promises, and only fained or framed by the Council, because they were not
able to do any thing else until they had divided the people, and then that they
would fall upon them.

SECT. XVIII.
ABout this time Letters were brought to Toledo from all the Cities, concerning
their Iunta or Assembly, and they all agreed it should be as Toledo desired.
Don Pedro Lasso (whom Toledo honored so much, since his return from the Groyn,
where he showed such obstinacy in his resolution, that they received him with
great Solemnity, giving him the style of the Deliverer of that Country). Was
appointed for the chief Commissioner of that City; with him they sent Don
Pedro de Ayala, and two Iurates, besides other Deputies of the Common People.
Who resolved to take their Journey the same day John de Padilla went to the
succor of Segovia. The City of Avila was pitched upon for this Assembly, The
Junta began in Avilae. Iuli^ 29. 1610. Where they s^ayed not ^^ng before they
went to T^^d^sillas.
more particularly because it was situate in the middle of old Castilla, and the
Kingdom of Toledo. The Cities which made this Assembly were, Toledo, Madrid,
Guadalaxara, Soria, Murci^, Cuenca, Segovia, Avila, Salamanca, Toro, Zamora,
Leon, Valladolid, Burgos, Cuidad Rodrigo. The Commissioners of all these Places
being assembled, they chose their Secretaries and other Officers
correspondent. The Assembly was held in the Chapter of the Cathedral Church,
Don Pedro Lasso Commissione^ from Toledo, and the Dean of Avila (who was a
native of Segovia) were chosen Presidents. Upon a table in the Chapter lay a
Cross and the Evangelists, whereon they made oath, every one to live and die
in the King's Service, and in favor of the Commonaltie. And those that refused
to do this in Avila, were not only ill treated in words, but had their houses
pulled down. But this fortune only befell one Gentleman, named, Don Antonio
Ponze Knight of the order of Sant jago, and son to the Prince, Don John, his
nurs. The rest fearing the Peoples fury, condescended and collogued with them,
to save their lives, which were in no small danger. In the middle of the
Commissioners of this Assembly, was placed a little form, whereon did sit a
certain Cloath-worker, named Pinilles, with a wand in his hand, A wiser man
then the Author or else probably be never had rais^d himself from nothing to
so great prefe^ment.
and no Gentleman Commissioner or Ecclesiastic durst offer to speak one word
until this Cloath-worker had given him the sign, by pointing to him with his
wand. So that those who took upon them to remedy the Kingdom, were commanded
by a mean inferior fellow, a Cloath-worker. Such was the violence and blindness
of the Common People's passion. The first thing they Ordered, was, to take
away the staff from the Corregidor of Avila, next they sent Letters to the
Alcalde Ronquillo charging him not to set foot in the land of Segovia, and
condemning him to great penalties if he did the contrary.

SECT. XIX.
HAving already related the manner of the Commotions of the Cities and
principal Towns of the Kingdom, with their general Assembly at Avila, H^re
the A^thor would disgrace and undervalue if he could the bravest wi^t that
ever Spain bred, the ho^or of his Country whose in^entions were only for the
Commonwealth's good, and had he not been betrayed by some N^^le-men of his
Party, h^e ^ad made it (...) most gl^io^s Common-Weal^h in the World. He is
much lamented by many persons of quality in Spain yet (...) this d^ie.
I will now tell you the successes of those unadvised and indiscreetly raised
Tumults. And in regard one of the most notorious Actors in these tragical
disorders, was Don Antonio de Acunna, Bishop of Zamora, who is famous to this
very day, for the strangeness of his disposition, and manner of the death he
suffered, which was not suitable to the dignity of a Prelate, (but very
answerable to his Actions, since it was done with very great justification of
the Emperor, and by the Authority of Pope Clement the 7th, as appears upon
Record in the Arches of Simancas, which I have seen) you shall briefly hear who
this Bishop was, and what his conditions. During the time of Don John the
second his reign in Castilla, lived in that Kingdom Don Luis Osorio de Acunia,
a Gentleman of eminent note and account, father to Don Diego Osorio and this
Don Antonio de Acunia, to whom his father dying left the Arch-Deakonship of
Valpuesta, besides other means, In these times he being in service to their
Catholic Majesty's was sent by them Ambassador into France, after which the
Bishopric of Zamora was conferred upon him. The King was not very well pleased
with him, because he was of a turbulent Spirit, a lover of broils, impatient,
adventurously bold, and one that did take more upon him, then his profession
and degree required. He was naturally inclined to Arms, his ambition was to
make himself Lord and Master of Zamora, where the Earl of Alva de Lista then
lived, son in law to the Duke of Alva, a stout gallant Gentleman and a great
lover of honor. The Bishop and the Earl meeting about certain affairs betwixt
them they grew to such odds, that very good Mediators were not able to pacify
them. Zamora being in Rebellion, and paying no obedience but to the Junta or
Assembly, the Bishop on one side and the Earl on the other, used all means
possible to draw the people to their factions. The Earl was better beloved, and
bore the greater sway in the City, so that the Bishop was forced to leav it:
It made him half madd to lose his house, and so desperate seeing his Enemy
prevail so far against him, That he presently went to Tordesillas (where the
Commissioners of the Iunta were then assembled) with whom he joined in
confederacy, desiring them to assist him and furnish him with forces to beat
the Earl of Alva out of Zamora. They all received him with great respect and
contentment, thinking it an honor to their cause, to have so eminent a Prelate
amongst them, they gave him men and Artillery, wherewith he marched back
toward Zamora. The ^arl being informed of the manner of his enemie's advance,
thought not fit to stay for him, but quitting the Fort, went and associated
himself with the Cavaliers of the Loyal Party, as you shall hear. Thence
forwards the Bishop stuck close to the Iunta, and the Farl as eagerly followed
the King's counsel, each of them so much favoring their Party, that there were
not any two more remarkable then they. The Bishop was threescore years of age,
but as vigorous and lively as if he had been but five and and twenty. I was
acquainted with one that knew him and received orders from him, who told me
that he was excellent at handling his arms. That he had more then four
hundred Priests under his command all well armed and valiant men, and that he
still charged at the head of them himself, Saying, Here my Priests. The rest
hereafter.

SECT. XX.
I Have told you in what manner Segovia was fortified, the resolution of the
Inhabitants, the relief which they received from many places, notwithstanding
Ronquillo's endeavors to hinder it; how Toledo encouraged them with promises
both of men and money, Madrid, Guadalaxara, and Salamanca did the like, making
their case their own. Medina del Campo secured them their trading, offering to
bear what loss soever they should sustein either of persons or goods. At last
the City of Avila seeing what Ronquillo did against Segovia; and the adjacent
Towns, that he entered into the Villages belonging to Avila, taking, killing
and executing Justice in a severe manner, and that by order of the Cardinal and
the Council, he had taken from Segovia all the Places and Towns under its
jurisdiction, commanding them not to obey or be any way subject to that
City, neither to furnish them with provisions any more then if they were
their enemies, under pain of death and confiscation of goods, giving them power
and Authority to keep Justice amongst themselves, as being a distinct
jurisdiction, and other privileges to the destruction of that City: They
assembled in Council, and agreed to send a Petition in the name and with the
subscriptions of the Officers of Justice, the Regidores, Gentry, Religious
Persons, and of all the Commonaltie, humbly beseeching the Cardinal that he
would be pleased to set a remedy to those disorders, and not proceed with so
much rigor against Segovia, for that City would be reduced sooner by fair
means then by such severitie. That he would command Ronquillo to raise his
Siege, and that he should not molest, nor use such cruelty against Segovia.
The Cardinal and those of the Council did not weigh much this Petition of
Avila, which so incensed that City, that thereupon they sent them word
peremptorily, that since they would not rectify those disorders, they were
resolved to seek their own remedy. Mean time Ronquillo was at Santa Maria de
Nieva making what preparations he could against Segovia, making incursions
into their territories, and laying Ambuscado's for those that came out of the
City. It happened that two young men coming out of Segovia, fell into the
hands of Ronquillo's Guards, who asking them whence they were, and whither they
went? They answered, That they were of Salamanca, that they came from Segovia,
and were returning to their own homes. At first the Guards were in the mind to
let them go, because they seemed to be but poor fellows, yet afterward they
laid hands on them and brought them before Ronquillo; who asking them who they
were, whither they went, and whence they came? They said, they were Carders,
who seeing Segovia straightened, and trading dead, they were upon their return
to their own houses. He examined them severally concerning the manner of
Tordesillas his death, and they agreed not in their relation. Ronquillo
thereupon began to press them further, demanding more and more and more
questions, till at last one of them confessed he fetched the rope vvherevvith
they dragged Tordesillas along the streets, and the other that he plucked him
by the hair. Upon this confession he condemned them both to death, one to be
drawn and quartered, the other, who said, he plucked him by the hair, had
first his hand cut off, and then was hanged. It seemed a dir^ct Judgment of
heaven to put those men into the hands of the Justice, and that they should
confess without torture.

SECT. XXI.
AFter this Ronquillo met with one Francisco Peralta, a sufficient man, and
well beloved in Segovia, but not thinking fit to execute Justice upon him
presently, sent him prisoner upon on an Ass, to a Castle belonging to the
Bishop of Palencia. But meeting by the way a man, that was very z^alous for
the cause of the Commonaltie, and satisfying his curiosity by telling him the
occasion of his imprisonment, through his means he was rescued by the Common
People of Duenias, Alguazil is an officer of justice in Spain.
and taken away from the Alguazil, that had charge of him, (who had so much a
do to escape with his life) and Peralta after courteous entertainment in the
Town, had a horse given him, vvhe^evvith he went to Burgos, which then was
declared for the Commonaltie. John de Padilla, you have heard, marched out of
Toledo at the head of two thousand men well armed, and having passed the Port
de la Tablada, he came within sight of Segovia, where in a Plain, not far
distant, he pitched his camp: the next day he sent a Trumpetter to Ronquillo
with a peremptory message to bid him get him gone, if not, that he would forth
with put in execution what the City of Toledo had Commanded him. Hereupon
Ronquillo retreated to Antonio de Fonseca at Arevalo, and so they fled both
together* not being able to withstand John de Padilla's Forces.

SECT. XXII.
THe Cardinal, President, and those of the Council labored, all they could, to
persuade the Queen Mother to sign certain orders (which they would send
throughout the Kingdom) against the disturbers of it; because the greatest
Authority, which those of the Junta pretended to have, was to say, that
whatsoever they did, was for the Queen's service (whose that Kingdom was) and
other things to that purpose. The President therefore and some of the Council,
went to Tordesillas, and spoke publicly with the Queen, who was very merry
with them, but complained, saying, that for fifteen years past she could never
know the truth of any thing, then turning toward the Marquis of Denia, she
said, this Marquis told me the first lie. At which words he fell upon his
knees, and with tears in his eyes, he said, it is true Madam, I did tell you a
lie, but it was to moderate the violence of your passions, and now I give you
to understand that the King, your father, is dead, and I did bury him. She
answered, Bishop, believ me, All that I see or hear, me thinks is but a
dream. The President answered, Madam! in your hands, under God, lies the
remedy of this Kingdom, and your Highness will do a greater miracle in Signing
what we demand, then ever did San Francisco. She bid them go to bed, and come
again next day. The day following, being Sunday, they returned in the
morning, much time was spent in controversy, whether they should kneel or sit
before her, but the President telling her, that those of the Council ought not
to be treated in that manner, she commanded they should sit, but chairs
being brought in, she cried out, no chaires, but bring a form, that was the
custom in my mother's days, only give the Bishop a chair. Six hours they were
with her in private, and the result of all was, that they should return to
Valladolid, and consult with the rest of the Council, what orders they should
issue out, which done, she would sign them. They came to Valladolid, and in
the interim John de Padilla arrived at Tordesillas (as you shall find
hereafter) those of the Council were presently afraid to be taken, and some
report, that he sent a Captain in persuite of those that came from Tordesillas.

SECT* XXIII.
THe same day that Valladolid rose up publicly in Arms (which was Wednesday the
29th of August) John de Padilla, having beaten Ronquillo from Segovia, John
Bravo, and John Zapata, with the men which they brought from Toledo, Segovia,
and Madrid, arrived at Medina del Campo. Which the Townsmen taking as a great
favor, went out to receiv them with their flags and mourning colors, besides
many tears, which moved these Captains to great compassion, especially when
they saw the Town reduced to ashes; they comforted the People the best they
could, and John de Padilla took thereupon occasion to tell them, Gentlemen, If
you had reflected well upon the Letter, which I sent you giving you notice that
Fo^seca was raising forces, with intent to fetch the Artillery thence,
peradventure you had not been suff^rers in so high a nature. Those of Medina
wondered that they never had heard of any such Letter, and after diverse
circumstances, it was found out that the Regidor Gil Nieto had received and
concealed it from the people: whereupon they grew to an excessive passion, and
whilst this was yet in agitation, Gil Nieto unfortunatly came amongst them.
Some of whom discoursing of the Town-affairs, said to him. If there were no
Traitors in Medina, the miseries we suffer never had befallen us. Who are
those Traitors? replied Gil Nieto. At which words started up Bobadilla, the
Cloth worker, and with a great Oath answered, you are one of the Traitors, then
drawing his sword he violently flew upon him, and with one blow separated his
head from his shoulders, which done, and having found in his bosom John de
Padilla's Letter, they flung him out at the windows of the Regimiento,
Regimi^nto, or Casa del Regimiento, is ^he house where the inhib^tants ^n everi^
City d^ ^ssemble about things concerning their Poli^ical Government*
upon the Soldiers pikes which stood below. He was afterward taken up and
interred by his friends and kindrid. John de Padilla remained five days in
Medina, and the Town having given him two great pieces of Ordnance, he
departed thence with his men for Tordesillas. He pretended that he went
thither to kiss the Queen's hands, and give her an account of what passed in
Castilla. Others said, that he went audaciously to seiz on her, and take her
into his power. Being arrived, he drew up his Army in Batalia, charged his
Ordnance, and remained in that Order, until he had given notice of his coming
to her Highness and the Town. The Queen presently gave order they should go
forth to receiv him, which the Town did in the best manner and with the
greatest company they could, and as they were even ready to meet, he
commanded his two Guns to be shot off with great showting and nois of
Trumpets. The Salve being past, they took John de Padilla in the midst of them,
and so entered the Town with the greatest applaus that might be imagined, after
he had rested himself a while, he went to the Palace, where the Queen
received him very graciously, gave him Audience, and asked him who he was. To
which he answered, John de Padilla's speech to the Queen at Tordesellas.
That his name was Iuan de Padilla, son to Pedro Lopez de Padilla, who had
been Captain General in Castilla, and served the renowned Queen Donia Isabella
her mother, and that also he came to tender his service to her Majesty, with
the people of Toledo; That he did give her to understand, that since the
deceas of the Catholic King, her father, there had been, and were in that
Kingdom great disorders, mischiefs and dissentions for want of a Governor.
Although the Mighty and Illustrious Don Carlos, her son, had governed Spain,
yet by reason of his sudden departure, the Kingdom was risen in such Commotions
and Disordrous manner, that all Spain was ready to be destroyed, and that now
he was com with a certain Army of Toledians to serve her Highness, whom he
desired to see, and know what Commands she had to lay upon him, for he was
ready to spend his life in her service. The Queen was much astonished to hear
such things, and said, she never knew any thing of it before: For she had
been sixteen years shut up within a chamber, under the Guard of the Marquess of
Denia, and wondered to hear any such stories, but if she had known of her
Father's death, she would have gone abroad and set some remedy to those
mischiefs. So forgetful and void of Judgment was the Queen. Then she said to
John de Padilla, Go you now, I command you, take the charge, and execute the
office of Captain General in the Kingdom, and give you order for all things as
need shall require, until I provide otherwise. This said, she retired into her
chamber; and John de Padilla returned to his Quarters, well attended and very
jocund for the favor the Queen had done him, in giving him that Commission.
Many times after this, John de Padilla had conference with the Queen, and she
seemed to give Audience to him and others of the Iunta, very willingly. They
told her once, that the King her son, had done great damage to the Kingdom,
whereunto she answered, That her son was not greatly in fault, for he was but
a youth, but the Kingdom rather ought to be condemned for suffering it. Then
she commanded, that the Assembly of the Kingdom should be kept there, that
she would autorize it. Hereupon an Order was forthwith issued out, That
Proclamation should be made in Medina and other places, for all the
Commissioners that had assisted in Parliament at the Groyn to make their
appearance and render an account at Tor^esillas under pain of death.

SECT. XXIV.
THe Iunta was yet held at Avila, whither was sent an Order from the Queen,
commanding them to remove to Tordesillas, which they presently obeyed, for it was
their only way so to do; The Queen understanding nothing what belonged to
businesses. The Antagonists of the Junta gave out, That those Dispatches which
were produced and publshed in the Queen's name were falls, and the testimonies
likewise made by counterfeiting hands. The Junta took a resolution to turn the
Marquess of Denia out of the Queen's service, for the ill opinion he (being a
loial subject) conceived of the Commoners, alleging, that she was not well
pleased with him. And because they would be informed how the Marquess did serve
the Queen, they sent to Maestro Fray Pablo a Dominican Friar, a grand Commoner,
Commissioner of Leon, and to the Commendador Almaraz, Commissioner of
Salamanca, and El Bachiller de Guadalaxara: Here the Author jeer's his own Coat.
And from these men's relation (which was never the holier for the Frier's
having any part in it) resulted a determination to turn the Marquess and his
Lady from the Queen. Whereupon they were not only cast out of their house, but
driven out of Tordesillas, with such strictness and precipitation, that they
had not one hour's time to take away their goods and housholdstuff, and
although they made their Requests to the contrary, they were no whit the more
regarded. In their places were presently put Donia Catalina de Figueroa, wife
to Quintanilla, and some other women of the Town. And the Marquess, with his
Lady, was enforced to repair to a small Village, and suffer with patience this
tribulation for their Prince's service. The Iunta or General Assembly s^ttled
at Tordesillas.
The Iunta being set at Tordesillas, they began to treat of the peaceable
government and quiet of the Kingdom. Soon after, Salamanca, Avila, Madrid,
besides other places, sent many Companies of Foot and Horse, paid at the charge
of the said Cities, with their respective Captains, who had Orders to be at
the King and Queen, his Mother's service, and in favor of the Junta. There was
already so great a confluence of Gentlemen and Captai^s, that Tordesillas was
not able to contein them, although the Common Soldiers were quartered in the
adjacent Villages. The City of Vallad^lid sent a thousand chois men well
Armed, under the Command of Don Diego de Quiniones, a valiant and well-born
Gentleman. The Commissioners, Gentlemen, Captains with many grave and learned
Friars, being assembled in the Junta, there was a motion made, that they
should send to Valladolid, to seiz upon the President and the rest of the
King's Council, and to have them brought to Tordesillas, or at least, to take
such order, that the City of Valladolid should not back them or conceal them,
but should give way that the Junta might apprehend and bring them away. To
this (the report is) there wanted no Votes, neither were the Friars backwards
in giving theirs, alleging, that the securing of those men was very necessary
for the good of the Kingdom. To this effect was dispatched a Dominican Friar
(who was a man of honor and great leaning) with Letters of Credence to the
Commonaltie of Valladolid, and to the Infant of Granada, their chief Captain
The Friar having delived his Letter and Message to the Infant^, he thus
answered, Father, as far as it concern's me (as being Captain of Valladolid)
I do obeie the Orders here sent from the Junta, but it is convenient the whole
Commonaltie should be assembled, that you may deliver your Message to them all
together, and receiv their answer. Hereupon the Deputies of the Wards, Jurates,
Common Council-men and other Officers, were all ordered to warn the Inhabitants
of their respe^tive quarters and parishes, to make their appearance the next
morning by nine of the clock at the Church of Santa Maria la Mayor, which was
done accordingly. The Infant of Granada, Don Pedro Giron and other Gentlemen,
being there assembled, with the rest of the Commonaltie, at the hour and place
appointed, the Friar went up into the Pulpit, and with smooth fair language,
he told them the substance of his Message, saying, That he came thither from
the Lords of the Junta at Tordesillas (who were the greater part of the
Kingdom, and were there assembled for the remedying of the distractions and
mischiefs which abounded in that Kingdom, as appeared by the Power and Letters
of Credence) which he had already showed to that very noble Commonaltie of
Valladolid, and the Infant their Captain. Yet because it was thought fit that a
business of such weight (as that wherewith he was entrusted to impart to them)
should rather be manifested to them all in that place, then communicated to
any members in particular, and in regard they were then all assembled, he
again notified those Letters unto them, giving them to understand that the
Lords of the Junta, moved with a very holy zeal, and desire of procuring the
Kindom's good and his Majesty's service, had found it convenient (to the end
the Intent of the Junta might the better take effect) that there should be no
Council Roial at all, but that the President and the rest should be sent
prisoners to Tordesillas, and to show that their Intentions were holy, and
tending only to the service of God, and the King, in the name of the Lords
Commissioners of the Junta, he did assure the lives of the Council, but not
their goods and estates. For they must know, that whosoever of that Council had
offended, his estate was liable to confiscation, according to the quality of
his delict, and that the money which should accrue, should repair in part the
damages which they had occasioned. Hereupon the Friar extended himself into
many Rhetorical expressions, to cog the people into a Consent, urging, that if
they did otherwise, it might be the occasion of bringing the whole Kingdom to
destruction: for if there was both a Junta and Council, the Junta governing
contrary to the sens of the Council, The I^nta send'^ to Valladol^d to d^ssol^
the K^^g'^ Counc^^.
and the Council abrogating what should be enacted by the Junta, what could
be exspected but confusion and utter ruin? Hereunto he desired their speedy
answer, because he was to return to Tordesillas. They forthwith replied, That
it was a business of no small moment, and required great consultation, yet if
he would stay till night, he should have their answer. They divided themselves
into several Assemblies to consult hereupon, and they were generally of
opinion, that it was a difficult and strange attempt for them to dissolv a
Council of so great Authority, being constituted by their King, especially
that City having received, in particular, so many Immunities and other favors
from them, and they ^eeing so good friends, that the Council had, Vall^dolid's
Answer.
in a manner, entrusted them with their persons, it were an act of high
inhumanitie and baseness to lay violent hands upon them. On the other side
they thought, that they were bound in conscience not to leav undone the
Commands of the Junta, in regard their Commissioners were there, they had
acknowledged their power, and had sworn to obey whatsoever should there be
ordered or enacted. In the end, they agreed to give the Friar this answer, That
if the Junta did desire to apprehend those of the Council, they should send
their own Captains and soldiers to do it, for Valladolid would have no hand in
either helping or hindering them in that design, neither would they favor the
one side, or oppose the other. The Friar, and those Captains, and other
Officers which came with him from Tordesillas, being satisfied with this
Answer, The Friar reckoned up those of the Council whom the Iunta demanded,
which done, it was agreed, that every Deputy of a Ward should take four or
five of the said names in writing, and go with a Notarie public to their
respectiv^ houses, or lodgings, requiring them to meet the next day in the
cardinal^s house, where he should tell them what further they were to do. Which
being done accordingly, those of the Council that could not escape ^as diverse
did) failed not to com to the Cardinal's Palace, where the F^ier, with his
Captains about him, A name^ Junta, summo^'s those of the King'^ Coun^il to
app^a^ before them at Tordesillas.
notified and commanded them in the name of the Iunta, to go with them to
Tordesillas, and to execute no more the offi^e of Counselors, that being
there they should know further what they were to do, and that there was no fear
of their lives, but their goods and estates he could not promise to secure.
Whereunto they made answer, Their answer.
That they held their Offices and Charge from his M^jestie's own hands, whom
they had served and did serve, and that although they were taken, they would not
go with them, unless they were carried away by force. This was the best answer
the Friar could get at that time, so he returned to Tordesillas, but was not
long before he came back again to Valladolid, with other Letters and Orders as
shall be seen hereafter.

SECT. XXV.
IN this coniuncture arrived an express from Flanders, The Emperor sen^^'s
Commissions to the Lord high Constable and Lord Admiral of Castilla making them
Joint-Governors of Spai^ with the Cardinal.
vvit^ dispatches from the Emperor, Letters for the Cities of the Kingdom, and
his Majesty's Commissions and Orders to Don Inigo de Velasco Lord high
Constable of Castilla and Leon, and Don Fadrique Enriquez Lord Admiral of
Castilla, auto^ising and Commanding them, jointly with the Cardinal Adriano,
to undertake the charge and care of governing and managing the affairs of that
Kingdom until his return. In his Letters, the Emperor declared his exceeding
sorrovv and discontent for the troubles and insurrections in that Kingdom,
notvvithstanding the great affection he alvvaies expressed toward them. That
his good will was so ill requited, and his favors no better accepted. That
they had failed in that fidelity vvherevvith (like good and Loyal Subjects)
they had alvvaies served the Kings, his Predecessors. Yet he could not be
persuaded but some particular persons, for their private ^nterests, had been
the occasion of all those disorders. And That in regard one of the principal
things, at which the Kingdom was aggreived, had been his conferring of the
government upon a stranger (although the prudence and uprightness of the most
reverend Cardinal of Tortosa could not in all reason but give them
satisfaction) to stop the current of those disorders, which increased daily in
that Kingdom, and to provide for the good government thereof, and the Peace of
his Subjects; with great deliberation and advice (during his absence, which
should not be long) he had ordered and appointed to rule jointly with the
Cardinal, as Vice-Kings and Governors of that Kingdom, the Lord Admiral and
Lord high Constable of Castilla, being both persons endued with wisdom, and
other parts requisite for so high a charge, and that they should take upon them
all the care, trouble, etc. And that he had given them particular charge if the
Kingdom was any way aggrieved, to send for the Commissioners or Burgesses of
the Cities, that they might demand redress before the Governors; And withal
he Commanded the Cities to be obedient unto them. The Emperor wrote also to
the Lord high Constable, endeering him by the acknowledgment of his former
services, to undertake and execute with like fidelity, resolution and
cheerfulness, the joint charge, with the Cardinal and the Lord Admiral, of
pacifying the present tumults and insurrections, reducing his Subjects to their
former obedience, and the governing and managing the affairs of that Kingdom
until his return. Dated in Bruxels the 9th of September 1520.

SECT. XXVI.
IF these Noblemen had been made governors before the Emperor's departure out
of Spain, questionless the Commotions had never come to that height. But they
were now too far gone beyond their recoverie, for although some were very well
pleased with this Election, others were not. The Lord high Constable (as we
shall see) was not very well beloved in Burgos. The Cardinal with the President
and Council were not only not beloved, but extremely hated and abhorred in
many Cities. Only in Valladolid the Cardinal was much respected and honored,
neither would they consent to his departure out of the City, although he
often desired it, but they offered themselves all to be at his service,
esteeming him (as it were) a Saint; and they kept guards at the Gates of the
City, lest the Cardinal, or any of the Council, or Judges should go away.
Yet for all their guards El Licenciado Zapata made his escape in a Benedictan
Munk's habit, Some of the Council escape out of Vallad^^lid in disguise*
having shaved his crown and his beard, and diverse others of the Council
likewise, who durst not attend the determination of the Junta: perhaps their
own ill consciences did accuse them, and filled their hearts with the
apprehension of danger, which only make the sinners fly, though no body does
pursue them. And indeed in offices and charges of that nature, some men are
monstruously insufferable.

SECT. XXVII.
FEw days after the Dominican Friar was returned to the Junta, and had given
an account of his endeavors at Valladolid, concerning the suspending of the
Council Roial, and the apprehending of the Counselors. They sent another
Friar, Alonso de Medina, Professor of Divinity, of the Order of St Francis,
with second Orders from the Junta to Valladolid. Where being arrived, he
caused the Commonaltie and Officers of the City to assemble at the Monastrie
of St Francis, which being done accordingly, the Friar went up into the
Pulpit, and showed the Letters of Credence which he brought from the Iunta, in
whose name he told them, they were again required to send those of the
Council-Royall Prisoners to Tordesillas, and that those of the Council of
War, who were fled and absented themselves, should thenceforwards be paid no
Salarie, nor enjoy any of their Revenues; But that they should all be punished
according to their several deserts; And that her Highness, the Queen's
pleasure and absolute Command was, it should be ^o, in regard it was found
expedient for the good of the Kingdom. Otherwise the offenders and wicked
Counselors, the Perpetrators of so many evils in the Kingdom, should escape
unpunished, and the poor oppressed People remain without Justice. Many other
reasons he aleadged, which were not unpleasing to the People, who were filled
with a desire of seeing the punishment (he mentioned) inflicted. And having
ended his discourse, he produced and read aloud to them a copy signed by three
public Notaries, of what passed between the Queen and the Commissioners of all
the Cities and Towns in the Kingdom, that had Votes in Parliament. Who being
altogether in her presence, gave her to understand by the mouth of the Doctor
Zuniga of Salamanca, the grievances of the Kingdom having been pilled and
polled by strangers since her ^ather's death, and out of the sens of their
opression, The Iunta's request to the Queen.
they desired that her Highness would be pleased to take upon her the Command
and government of the Kingdom, making high protestations, that they would obey
and serve her till death as their Queen and natural Sovereign, and that she
should Command as absolutely as the most powerful Queen in the World.
Whereunto she answered to this effect, That she loved that Country and her
Subjects with so much tenderness, that it grieved her exceedingly to hear of
any of their sufferings, But she had been so long mued up there, and always
such bad People about her, who fed her with falsities and lies, insomuch that
she knew not of her Father's death, nor of their opression, And that when she
was informed of those strangers coming into Castilla, it troubled her very
much, yet she thought it might be for her Children's good, though, it seemed,
it proved otherwise. But she wondered much at them that they did not revenge
themselves, if any thing was don contrary to Justice. And forasmuch (said she)
as you intend to remedy the ill-government of the affairs of the Kingdom, it
does rejoice me, and if you do it not let it lie upon your own Consciences,
besides I Command you so to do, and as far as lies in my power, I shall be
ready to do any thing for the good of the Kingdom, here or wheresoever I am.
You need not come all to me hereafter, it will be more convenient, that you
appoint four of the discreetest, and most knowing amongst you, who shall at any
time have access to me, and inform me what course is meetest to be taken, I
will hear them and do all that possibly I can. Then Don Pedro Lasso desired,
that her Highness would be pleased to nominate the four Members, whom she
would have to confer with her concerning the government of the Kingdom, she
answered that her will was, that the Iunta should send whom they thought good,
and she would hear them whenever they came.

SECT. XXVIII.
THis writing signed by three Notaries in the presence of the Infanta Donia
Catalina, all the Commissioners of the Kingdom, diverse eminent Priests and
Friars, and many other persons of quality, satisfied exceedingly the Common
people, who cried it up for a kind of miracle, that the Queen, after so many
years of retirement, in so strict a manner, that no body could scarce have a
sight of her, and so long discontiuance from any knowledge of State Affairs,
should now com forth, and show her self in a time of so great necessity, with
so much knowledge and clear judgment in things concerning the government of the
Kingdom: They praised God for showing his mercy in so high a measure unto
Spain: Yet some there were, who did not stick to say, that all those
circumstances were falls, and forged by those of the Iunta. That the Queen had
no judgment to meddle with any such affairs, neither was she in a condition
to be treated with. (This was commonly noised not only in Valladolid, but
diverse other places also: Pero Mexia treating of this business, seems in his
book to favor this opinion, I write what I had from one that was an eye witness
of all these passages, and who neither was a Commoner nor friend of that
faction.) After all this the Friar told them, that there were Soldiers without
the City, who, if they would give leav, should com in and carry away those of
the Council prisoners. They all agreed, that two hundred should com in the next
day, who would be sufficient to apprehend them, and carry them away to
Tordesillas. Whereupon the day following John de Padilla, Captain General of
the Iunta's forces, entered Valladolid with three hundred Lances of Avila and
Salamanca, and eight hundred Pikemen and musketeers, where he had noble
entertainment, and his Soldiers had good quarters given them, with a large
portion of all nec^ssaries. John de Padilla forthwith seized upon all those of
the Council that could be found in Valladolid, John de Padilla apprehends
some of the Co^ncil and ca^^i^th them prisone^s ^o Tordesillas.
who were Doctor Veltran, Doctor Tello, Doctor Cornejo, and El Licenciado
Herrera, all Alcaldes, whom he confined to their houses that day, under great
penalties, having taken good security for them besides, and set Guards upon
every one; he took away likewise the staves from the Alguaziles and other
Officers, whom he commanded and ordered, under great penalties, to make their
personal appearance at Tordesillas. The next day he carried them away
prisoners, with the respect and honor that every one deserved. He took with
him the books of the Treasury, and the Broad Seal wherewith the Council sealed
all their Acts and Orders; for the better autorising of the matter, the Junta
desired the Queen to confirm by her sign whatsoever should be agreed on by
them, as persons of her Council. Which she refusing to do, the Commissioners
there present, sent to their respective Cities, to give them power to see to
the government of the Kingdom (for fault of a Governor) and to constitute a
Council. Some did ^end their powers to this effect, others disliked that
proposition, holding it a thing needless, and of a dangerous consequence.
Diverse Gentlemen of Toledo were much distasted hereat, and sorry that John de
Padilla had been so forward, for which they sent him and their Commissioners a
notable check, refusing to give them any power concerning the Govenment of the
Kingdom.

SECT. XXIX.
THe Iunta, for the better autorising and securing their persons and
proceedings, used all means possible to seduce all the Cities of the Kingdom,
and engage them in their quarrel. From Palencia they had intelligence, that a
small matter would make them rise. Whereupon they presently dispatched thither
an Augustine Friar, giving him Orders first to sound the Bishop, and afterward
to address himself to the City, telling them how they stood obliged to favor
and assist the Junta, in regard the chief end of their assembling, and their
only study, since they were established, was for the general good of the
Kingdom. The Friar went (but it had been better for him to have stayed in his
Cell) and with much liberty and lavishness of words he began to treat of his
message, and having assembled the people, to preach sedition publicly in the
Pulpit. This continued some days, until the Cardinal, who then was at Rioseco,
with the Council, sent to apprehend him, which was the easier done because there
were diverse loial and well-affected persons in the City, who were scandalized
at the ill example of this Friar. He was carried prisoner to Medina, where
after few days, the fact being proved against him, he was strangled. He had
his desert, and may all Friars or Priests meet with the like punishment, How
uncharitable the Author is to his brethren Friars?
that imbark themselves so far in secular affairs, not observing that retirement
and modesty which their quality and profession does require, which is to
renounce the world with all its troubles and vanities. Yet the ^eed which this
factious Friar sowed in Palencia, took not so little root in the people's
hearts, but that soon after almost the whole Commonaltie of the City, infected
with his pernicious doctrine, rose in so tumultuous a manner, that the
C^rregidor was forced to fly away, they took away the stav^s from the King's
Officers, and gave them to some of the Commonaltie. They turned out of the City
the Provisores d^l Obispo or Officers of the Bishop's Count, they turned out
the Regidores, whom the Bishop had constituted, and the Commonaltie put others
in their places. At the ringing of a bell the people all assembled, and most of
them being Armed, they ran furiously to Villamuriel, (which was a Fort and the
Bishop's house) and pulled down a part of one of the Towers thereof. The 15th
Sept. 15^0, they cut down the greatest part of a Wood called Santillana, which
belonged to the Bishop; diverse other strange disorders and mischiefs they did
in and about the City, as if they had been in an Enemie's Country: things
indeed befitting the blind and furious rage of the common people.

SECT* XXX.
THe Cardinal, governor of the Kingdom, seeing the disturbed estate of things,
and that in Valladolid he was not obeyed, as the dignity of his person and
place required, but rather in danger daiely to be affronted, took a resolution
to retire himself to a Gentleman's house out of the City, where he might be
secure. This was no sooner known in Valladolid, but some of the Citie-Officers
came to ^peake with him, desiring to know wherefore he would go away from
them. The Holy man with much meekness, answered, that he would willingly
retire himself with the Lord Admiral at Medina de Rioseco. But those of
Valladolid, holding it their best way to keep him there, would not let him go.
They presently set guards at the Gates of the City, that none of the Common
people should go out, for they began already to fear, lest they should go join
with the Lord high Constable, who was levying forces to resist and suppress
those Tumults, which were grown so excessive in the Kingdom, to whom were
repaired those of Council, that escaped from Valladolid, to the end that
Castilla, The Cardinal endeavoring to go out of Valladolid is stopped by the
people.
might not remain without Justice. The next morning early the Cardinal, being
fully resolved to be gone, departed from his house with an hundred and fifty
men on horsback and on foot, besides diverse of the principal persons of the
City, who guarded him on both sides. But coming to the bridge they would not
let him pass, there he stayed a good while, still commanding his people to be
quiet and offer no violence, for they would have broke down the Gates and
forced their way through. This being known in the City, there was presently a
great hubbub, and a crying out, The Governor's goeing away, The Governor's
goeing away. Hereupon one Alonso de Vera, a Deputy of a ward, without any
Command or Order from the Captain General of the Commonaltie, ran in great
have to ring the Council Bell, which being heard the City presently took the
Alarm, and in a trice there was such a hurly-burly and confusion of people in
the stree^s, that it was wonderful, they all locked up their houses and shops
and posted with their Arms toward the bridge, (as if the City had been stormed
by an enemy) where in a moment's time (in a manner) was assembled a very
numerous Army of complete men, with new shining arms, but without order and
without Captain. The Cardinal seeing this tumult, turned back again toward
the City, and being half way over the bridge some of his servants said to him,
My Lord! your Eminence should do well to stand still there, until you see what
is the meaning of this boldness of the People. So he did remain a while,
having a strong guard before him. But the people came swarming to that place
like emmets. Whilst the Cardinal was at this stand, came Don Pedro Giron, to
whom all the people bore as much respect, as if he had been their Lord. He
was mounted upon a stately Ginnet, his body was covered with Armor as bright as
silver, his head with a richly gilded helmet, his horse proudly praunsing along
the streets, made way through the disorderly throng, until he came where the
Governor stood, to whom after salutation, Don Pedro Giron's speech to the
Cardinal, persuading him to return to his Palace*
he thus spoke. My Lord! I am sorry that your Eminence would offer to go away
thus without the consent of the City and Kingdom, if my Counsel might prevail,
you should return to your lodging, for if you stay longer here, it will not be
in the power of man to remedy or hinder the mischief, which your departure may
produce. The Cardinal's men not thoroughly understanding Don Pedro's speech,
began to draw their swords; which some of the people, that had crowded near,
seeing, cried out, Arm, Arm Commoners, help, help. Hereupon grew such a noise
and so great a tumult, that had not the President of the Chancerie, Don Pedro
Giron, and other Gentlemen been there to appease the fury of the people, they
scarce had left one man alive of all those that were with the Cardinal. But all
being pacified, he returned with his guards to his lodging, accompanied with
other Prelates and diverse Gentlemen of quality, and after all, followed his
train of bagage in the same order as they marched outward. The Common People
went before him all armed, with sound of drums and trumpets conducting him to
his lodging, with all due honor and reverence. By this time it was full twelve
of the clock, so that they spent six hours at least in this contention. The
Infant of Granada, Captain of Valladolid, was so much displeased that St
Michael's Bell had been rung, and that the people had all taken Arms in that
manner without his order or knowledge, that he threatened to leave his charge.
Thereupon strict order was given, that no man thenceforwards should dare, under
a great penalty, to ring the Bell or to rise in Arms, without their Captains
order. Vera who rung the Bell, to avoid the punishment which was intended, and
his offense deserved, fled to Tordesillas. After this, Valladolid ordered that
every five and twenty men should have a particular Captain, that should
command them upon occasion, having first received orders from the Captain
General. The news being carried to Tordesillas, how those of Valladolid had
opposed and detained the Cardinal, besides the good order they kept for the
guard and defens of their City, The Iunta sent an express with Letters to give
the People thanks in their names, extolling their valor to the skies, which
puffed up the people's hearts with a kind of vanity, and encouraged them to
commit greater exorbitancies another time.

SECT. XXXI.
THe Cardinal seeing it was not possible for him to go publicly out of
Valladolid, and considering how much it behoved him to depart thence, where he
had no more then an honorable prison, resolved to steal away privately: which
he did one night all alone, being disguised, and he had been gone ten days
before it was known in the City, or his own Guard of Horse missed him. His Foot
Guards went away the day before by two and two. After which time he sent to
entreat the City, to suffer his goods to be brought unto him, assuring them
that his going away should be no way prejudicial to them, that he was in a
manner enforced so to absent himself from them, both for respect of his
Majesty's service, and that he had not left him wherewithal to defraie his
charges in the City, but wheresoever he was, they might be confident he
would do all that might be for their^ and the whole Kingdom's good. Valladolid,
with much complement and civil expressions, sent him all his Linnens and other
household stuff to the Town of Rioseco, whither he was gone in exspectation of
the Lord Admiral. About this time there were great differences betwixt those of
the Commonaltie, and their Captain the Infant of Granada. They would have
killed him, many of them coming violently against him with their Arms, and
giving him very reproachful and abusive language. As he advanced into the
market place with above six hundred Lances to apprehend Alonso de Vera, (they
say) it was a Bridle-maker and some such like audacious fellows, that were the
occasion of stirring the people to this insolent attempt. The Iunta being much
displeased ^ ereat ordered that the Infant of Granada should leav the Office
of Captain, because it was too great a charge to allow him every month 30000
Maradiz, alleging moreover, that none but a native of the City, ought to
execute that Command. But the Infant giving notice of his discontent, by
command of the Iunta this matter was put to Votes, and he having the major
part on his side, it was ordered, that he should be confirmed in his Office,
but withal, that he should pardon Alonso de Vera, with the rest that had
offended him, and strict command was given, that the people should make no more
meetings, nor demand any thing from thenceforward with Arms in their hands, but
by way of Justice and Reason. That presently under pain of one hundred lashes,
all those Vagabands and fellows that had no professions, should avoid the
City. This was proclaimed in Valladolid on St Luke's day.

SECT. XXXII.
Whilst the Commonaltie of Valladolid was in consultation, whether the Infant
should continue in his Charge or not, arrived a Commissioner from the Junta,
desiring that City in their names to agree, and be all as one, and not to
give way to their particular passions, which might breed division among them,
to the great weakening and disenabling of that City, for they were now to
consider that they had many enemies, who had already begun one of the highest
and greatest attempts in the world. That if their hearts were not united and
stirred up therewith, they, with their wives and children, should be reduced
to most wretched slaverie. That with courageous minds and upright desires,
they ought to prosecute this matter, and be assistant to those Gentlemen who
were already engaged therein, and bouy them up out of that gulf of misery
whereinto they were plunged. For the Lords of the Iunta considering that
Valladolid was the most noble and principal City of all Spain, and that it had
been the principal author of their good (as in former times) exposing and
hazarding their lives and fortunes to many eminent dangers. They thought it
great reason to give them an account of what they had done in the Iunta. To
which effect they had sent to let them know, how that neither night nor day
they ceased laboring in the advancement of the service of God and the King and
the public good of the Nation, neither eating nor drinking in quiet, but still
watching with much care and study, how God and the King might have their due
respect and honor, and the Kingdom be preserved in liberty. Renouncing all
private affairs, leaving houses, goods, wives and children at random, to attend
and apply themselves with more fervencie to procure the people's good without
Interest. That before the Iunta sat at Tordesillas, they all took a solemn
oath, that no man should procure for himself, wife, children, friends or
kindred, any Lands, Offices or benefits whatsoever, to the end that they might
loi^lly, and without Interests, serve the public. That every one of the Iunta
was a Gentleman, and as free, as the King himself from all the tributes and
taxes that were imposed upon the meaner subjects, and that neither for respect
of what they might hope to gain, or to free themselves of that which others did
pay, they had exposed themselves to so great hazard, being no more then
fifty, that did help or any way advance this business, which so nearly
concerned all. That without them the Iunta could do little, the case b^eing
weighty and dangerous. That they trusted in God within eight days, the Iunta
would have taken such a course, that Castilla should enjoie as much peace,
quietness, and plenty as formerly; for they wanted nothing but the Articles of
the several Cities of the Kingdom, to extract the best out of them; which
should be printed and and sent through the whole Kingdom, that every one might
see the good which proceeded from the Iunta. The Articles which were purged in
the Iunta, whereby they thought (as they say here) to remedy and restore
Castilla to its former condition, shall be punctually set down in the following
Book. In Valladolid they much rejoiced at this discourse, and were highly taken
with the promises made them by the Iunta, which filled them with a thousand
good hopes, but within seven months they found them all fruitless. They offered
willingly their estates and goods, and to expose their lives in the defens of
the Holy Iunta as they called it.

SECT. XXXIII.
THe Cardinal and those of the Council, prudently desired first to proceed with
mildness, and endeavor by fair persuasions to quench, or (at least) mitigate
the fury of that unnatural ^ire; Note that this mes^age Was sent at the first
assembling of the Iunta in Avila.
to that effect they sent to entreat the Iunta to assemble rather in
Valladolid, where the Council then was, that there things should be remedied
to their liking and content. Those of the Iunta, having intelligence of this
message, sent one to meet him that brought it, before he could reach to Avila,
with command to charge him in their names, under pain of death not to com into
the City. The Council, seeing that they could prevail nothing by fair means,
sent to command and require the Junta not to assemble at all, in regard it was
a thing forbidden by the King and the Laws of the Kingdom, without their
Sovereign's leav. That if they had any thing to desire, they should repair to
the Council at Valladolid, and they would join with them in Petition to the
Emperor for the obteining and fulfilling their demands. This also they refused
to hear; and sent the like message back to the Council by the Commendador
Hinestrosa, to whom they denied both audience and entrance into the City. From
that time forwards the Junta called them of Council Tyrants, and those of the
Council termed them Traitors. Which being known in Valladolid, a rumor was
noised about, that the Lords of the Council had given order to apprehend those
of the Junta, for which cause El Licenciado Francisco de Vargas, Treasurer
General, and El Licenciado Zapata, made their escapes in the night from the
Council: For they having born a great swaie, one in the Treasury, the other in
matters of Justice, were both grown odious in the eyes of the Commonwealth.

SECT. XXXIV.
THe several Parties reviled, and fell into malicious expressions one against
the other, not considering, that that was one of the poorest and vilest
revenges upon earth, and which suit's with none but rascal-like and unworthie
dispositions. Those that were enemies to the Commonaltie, reported, that no
Gentlemen or persons of quality would have taken that side, but for private
respects and ambition. That Don Antonio de Acunia Bishop of Zamora (whose
story we are not yet com to) would make himself Archbishop of Toledo. That
Don Pedro Giron was on fire for the Estate of Medina Sidonia. The Earl of
Salvatierra ambitioned certain territories of great value, called Merindades.
Hernando de Avalos for revenge of some injuries don ^im. John de Padilla to be
Master of Santjago. Don Pedro Lasso to be Lord of Toledo. Quintanilla to have
the Command of Medina del Campo. Hernando de Ulloa to drive his brother out of
Toro. Don Pedro Pimentel to advance himself with Salamanca. The Abbat of
Compludo to be made Bishop of Zamora. El Licenciado Bernardino to be Judge in
Valladolid. Ramiro Nuniez that he might possess himself of Leon, and Carlos de
Arellano be Lord of Soria. Thus their tongues went nimbler then their hands
(except when they were asleep) breeding and brewing a world of mischiefs. And
diverse Gentlemen found themselves so far engaged already in this disorder, that
they could not with honor withdraw themselves, neither could they tell whom to
trust.

SECT. XXXV.
BEfore I proceed any further with the History, of what was done by the
Commonalties in Castilla, I will here describe the particulars of the
insurrection of the City and Kingdom of Valencia, in regard it was the
blindest and most pernicious of all Spain, and although some have written very
doleful and lamentable memorials thereof, they do not mention half what there
befell. Several prodigious signs presaged this miserable dissension in
Valencia. In the year 1517. The river which runs by the City of Valencia,
so shallow that sometimes there is scarce any water, on a sudden swelled, and
overflowed the banks in such manner, that it put those of Valencia to the
greatest shift and straight, Prodigious signs in V^lencia.
that ever they had been reduced to in former ages. Many days and nights, was
seen running along the streets a furious great Lion, which made so hideous a
roaring that the people ran trembling away from it, and if any had the courage
to stay, and see what it would do, they could see nothing. Other strange sights
were likewise reported to have been observed there in the years 1517, and
1518. You have heard how the Emperor, before his departure from the Groyn,
appointed for Viceroy of Valencia Don Diego de Mendosa, son to the Cardinal
Don Pedro Gonsalez de Mendosa, and brother to Don Rodrigo Marquis of Cenete.
Who executing his command and charge in Valencia, The Confed^rates of Vale^cia.
whenas the people, already linked in a Confederaoie, began to stand in a
competition with the Nobles, to molest and prosecute the Gentry, abusing their
servants and vassals with great audacitie and disrespect: It happened that two
Morisco's who belonged to Don Ramon de Cardona, Lord of Castalla, passing
along the street of Nuestra Seniora de Gracia, which was in that part of the
City, where most of the meaner sort of people lived; Some Tradesmen, that
were working at their doors, flouted and laughed at them as they used to do,
but the Morisco's answering them they presently rose in Arms, and cut one of
them so grievously that he died; And being about to kill the other also, who
defended himself, a man by chance passing by (whose name was Diego Pisador, by
trade a salt-maker) took compassion of the poor fellow, and did what he could
to defend him. Whereat those Townsmen were so incensed that leaving the other
they ran after this Diego Pisador, following him quite through the City to his
own house (whither he fled to save his life) and fell a storming it in a
furious manner about mid day, the officers of Justice not daring to gain-saie
them. The Priests of St Nicholas Church (which was close by that house) came
forth all with the Holy Sacrament, at the nois of this Combustion, to pacify
the fury of the People, which their presence and entreaties did somewhat
mitigate. But Diego Pisador, not holding himself secure in his house, thought it
a safer way to take sanctuary in the Church; so being come down, the Priest
that carried the Sacrament, took him next unto him, and ^o advanced toward the
Church; which the people seeing, they violently ran again upon him, and killed
him with their daggers. Upon this, came amongst them one Avendanio a
Cloath-worker, who was the Author and chief of this confedracie (it was
thought) to hinder and keep them from doing mischief, but seeing that man so
barbarosly killed, he went presently into a house, where he burst and died
miserably (some say) for anger and grief, to see such excessive disorder. These
and many other such like outrages were done by the People of Valencia, before
the ^mperor departed, whereof his Majesty was advertised by the Nobles and
Gentlemen of that City; and he referred it to Xeures, but he being more
sollicitous for the transporting of his treasure, then the remedying of the
troubles in Spain, neglected it. All that was ordered herein, was to remit the
quelling and reducing that People to reason, to the care of the Infant Dou
Enrique, Duke of Sego^be, but the People being launched into the depth of
mischief, slighted his Authority; which manifestly declared the rebellion and
pernicious intentions of that Confederacy. Soon after, a man condemned for
heinous crimes being led along to execution, the People came out with Arms,
and rescued him from the officers of Justice, abusing and ill treating them in
a horrid manner. No Noblemen or Gentlemen could pass through the streets, but
those of the Confederacy would deride and flout them with base reviling
language. Insomuch that a Hat-maker's wife, dressing a Hat at the door, with
her children about her, as some Gentlemen were going by, she bid the children
look at those men that passed there, and the boys asking her why she bid them
look at them, she answered, Because when you are grown up to be men, you may
say, that you have seen Gentlemen. This the woman said, because the Common
People were then in the mind to destroy all the Gentry of the whole Kingdom
root and branch. Avendanio the Cloth-worker being dead, the Confederates chose
another Captain, one of the same trade as the former, his name was Sorolla, a
pestilent audacious villain, who amongst other wicked facts, went to the City
Hall, when they were consulting about the Election of Iurates, and with a
confident impudence told those of the Regimiento, in the name of his
Confederacy, that if they did not admit them to be of the Regimiento, those
stones should flow with blood. And his threats were accomplished; for they made
their Election according to the rights and custom of the City. Whereat the
people were so enraged, that they committed those outrages which shall be set
down hereafter. In this distemper and extravagant hare-brainedness, Don Diego
de Mendosa found the minds of the people in Valencia, when he came to be
their Governor. Sorolla, Vicente Periz, one John Caro, and other leading men of
the Confederacy, understanding that the Viceroy had been fully informed of
their demeanors, and of the state of things, but yet dissembled the knowledge
thereof out of fear, considering what power and credit their Confederacy had
with the people: they complotted that Sorolla should hide himself in his own
house, and that the rest should go up and down the City and acquaint all his
friends and allies that the Viceroy had sent for Sorolla, and that (as they
were informed) he either had already hanged him, or was then about it, and
that for many respects, they ought not to let such a man suffer, who was the
defendor and mainteiner of the public good. This report being thus cunningly
spread through the whole City, so incensed the people's minds, that in an
instant all was up in Arms, Drums beating, and Colors flying, and in this
manner they marched to the Viceroy's house, crying out, Let the Viceroy die,
if he deliver us not Sorolla. The Viceroy, and some Gentlemen that were in the
house at that time with him, besides his servants, defended the windows and
doors, where the assault was hottest all day long, and night being com (as
God would have it) a good woman one of Sorolla's neighbors, who having seen him
in his house, and hearing that the people were storming the Viceroy's ^alace
for hanging Sorolla, she went to the Bishop of Segorbe, who lived close by,
and told him that she had seen Sorolla safe and sound in his own house but a
little before. Hereupon the Bishop went presently to Sorolla's house, which he
caused to be broken open, and finding where he had hidden himself, he chid
him thoroughly for his mischievous villainy, but he excusing himself, said, he
durst not go out of his doors. The Bishop immediately gave order to saddle his
mules, and riding upon one himself, and Sorolla on the other, with many
Halbards attending him, he carried him quite through the City to the
Viceroy's house, to the end the people might see- Sorolla was neither dead nor
a prisoner in the Viceroy's house. The Confederates seeing him alive, with much
joie they raised their siege, which had continued all day and almost all
night. After this they rescued a man likewise, condemned to death for heinous
crimes, whom, in regard he had many friends and kindred in the Cite, the
Viceroy had commanded to be hanged as soon as he had confessed, lest his
friends should petition for him before he was dead. The thirteen Sindicos and
Sorolla gave out, Sindico's were officers which they had m^de amongst
them^selvs.
that this man was condemned, and to be executed wrongfully, which the people
hearing, went pre^ently (all armed) to the prison and released him. T^en being
possessed that the Vice Roy was about raising men to subdue them, they
environed his house, and put him to his shifts, that he was forced to send his
Lady out of the City, and he not daring to stay long after her, with much
ado escaped, riding behind another Gentleman upon a mule. He having left the
City in this manner, all the Nobles and Gentry followed him with their wives
and Children, retiring every one to their own houses. The Viceroy being of
kin to the Earl of Cozentayna, carried the Vice-Queen to his house. The other
Gentlemen having left their wives and children in secure places, with what
arms, horses, and men they could get toget^er, repaired some to the Viceroy,
others to the Infant Don Enrique, and to the Duke of Segorbe Don Alonso,
agreeing all unanimously to adhere to the Emperor's service against the Rebels.
All these Gentlemen's houses within the City, the people plucked down or
burned, and plundered their goods; a thousand more abominable mischiefs they
did, which I am ashamed to relate (so cruel and unruly is that Beast, the
Common People when it has broke the bridle.) They armed all the slaves, and
received many Moriscos for soldiers. From Cozentayna the Viceroy went to
Xativa; the Inhabitants of that City desired him to give them leav to muster
upon St Bartholomew's day, which he denying, they marched out of the City in
despite and contempt of him, and mustered before his face. The Viceroy
hereupon, fearing a second trick of Valencia, retired into the Fort, which
those of Xativa perceiving, they proclaimed, that no body, under pain of
death, should furnish him with victuals, or any provision whatsoever. Hereupon
he went from thence to Denia, because if he was pursued by land, he might
escape thence by sea. Those of Valencia, hearing that the Viceroy was fled to
Denia, after that Xativa had rebelled against him, resolved to seiz upon all
the King's Revenues and Customs: which to effect, they went to the Custom
houses and broke the Records, took away the Books, and spoke words which were
wors then their deeds. Those of Valencia, seeing themselves masters of the
City, the Viceroy and all the Gentry being gone, they ordered the
Government thereof. They appointed thirteen persons to govern and defend it,
whom they called the Thirteen of the Confederacy. These Thirteen chose for the
General of their Army John Caro, (who was a Sugar-baker) and held intelligence
with the whole Kingdom: Insomuch that as soon as the news was heard of the
Rebellion of Valencia and Xativa, and that the Viceroy was fled, presently the
City of Oribuela and the Marquisat of Helche did the like, and at length there
was no City or Town but rebelled also, in imitation of Valencia, treating the
Gentry and nobler Citizens with the like dis-respect and tyranny. And the
Gentry, with their servants, arms, goods, and all they could get, joined
together in their King's service. So that (which is a thing worthy of note and
esteem) there was not one Gentleman, nor person of any birth or quality
through that whole Kingdom that sided with that vile Commonaltie, but valiantly
and unanimously ventured their lives and fortunes in their Prince's service,
although he was out of the Kingdom; they suffered patiently their houses to
be pulled down, their goods to be burned, their towns destroyed, and all to
show their fidelity to their King. The City of Oribuela chose for their
Captain one Palomares, who made himself so absolute Lord of those people
(being but a poor Serving-man) that oftentimes he drew out five thousand men
into the field to fight, though he paid dearly for it afterward. The
Confederates, having lost their respect to the Viceroy, agreed to lose
likewise the fear of God. They made a Conspiracy amongst them, the result
whereof was to rob and take away all the riches of the Monasteries and
Churches. Which being discovered, the loial Party desired Don Rodrigo de
Mendosa Marquess of Cenete, to take upon him the Authority of the Justice for
the King, which he did, and like a good resolute Gentleman, he hung up three
or four of the chief Conspirators, and so the robbery which they intended was
prevented, and the City quieted for certain days. But soon after the
Confederates marched into the field toward Denia, to drive the Viceroy out of
the Kingdom. Ten thousand men in Arms Valencia furnished to that effect. The
Clergy with their Hoods upon their heads, and Crosses in their hands, stood
all at the gate of San Vicente, and as the Confederates passed by them, the
Priests and Friars said to them, Sirs! Misericordia, Misericordia; and they
answered, swearing, Cuerpo de Dios, Iusticia, Iusticia. And indeed God's
Justice did abundantly fall upon their heads; for the greatest part of those
that answered so, were either killed in battle, or executed by Justice
afterward. John Caro and Sorolla were Captains of this Army. The Confederates
having the sole power and command of Valencia, John Caro was sent with a
sufficient force to besiege the Castle of Corbera, six leagues from Valencia,
which while he was battering with some pieces of Artillery, Don Geronimo
Vique (who at that time was at a Monastery of Friars of the order of San
Geronimo, half a league from the Castle) desired to speak with him, who,
overcom with his persuasions and powerful reasons, raised his siege. Which the
Thirteen of the Confederacy hearing, took the Office of Captain General from
John Caro, and conferred it upon Sorolla. By this time the Viceroy, with some
forces, which he had raised, was came to Gandia, to succor the Castle of
Corbera; And Sorolla with his Army went seeking the Viceroy: as he passed
he ruined and spoiled all the places, that belonged to Don Geronimo Vique,
because he had persuaded John Caro to leave the Castle. At last coming to
Gandia, he met with the Viceroy's Army and gave them battle, wherein many
were killed on both sides, but at length the Confederates won the day, and the
Viceroy, with the Earl of Oliva, and diverse other Lords and Gentlemen that
remained alive, were enforced to retreat to Denia, whither Sorolla with his men
still pu^sued them. And being arrived at a town called Vergel (one league
short of Denia) Mossen Baltazar Vives, Lord of that place, refreshed them, and
afterward conveied them safe to Denia, where he embarked for Peniscola,
whence they w^nt to the town of Morella, where they raised more men. Sorolla
returned to Valencia, where he entered with his Army very joiful and content
with his conquest. By this time the Duke of Segorbe Don Alonso de Aragon was
com into the field with above four thousand Foot, and diverse gentlemen with
their servants and others on hors-back, to the number of one hundred and
sixty, whereof was Captain Don Jayme Ferrer, son to Don Luis Ferrer, who was
Lord Steward to the Queen Donia Iuana, at Tordesillas. And being quartered at
Almenara, a league and half from Monviedro with intent to besiege it, which was
the strongest and most considerable Fort the Confederates had, but four leagues
from Valencia; notice was given him that the enemy appeared with no less then
eight thousand Foot and some Horse, fleshed with their Victory over the
Viceroy, and recruited with many fresh men from Valencia. Whereupon the Duke
sent Don Iayme with the Horse to discover, and according to his advice, he
would follow as speedily as might be with the Foot. This was carried with so
much discretion and valor, that the Duke gave them an absolute rout, leaving
above five thousand men dead upon the place, for which it is called to this
day, The field of slaughter. This Victory restored the Kingdom, which if it
had otherwise succeeded, the Common People had become absolute Masters without
any contradiction. Things being in this condition, the Viceroy returned with
a fresh supply, and encamped his Army about Alcira and Xativa; The People
were somewhat amazed, and startled at the rout the Duke had given them. Yet
those of Alcira and Xativa marched out very strong to meet with the Viceroy,
and finding him a league from the City, they gave him battle, the conflict was
so hot, and so well maintained on both sides, that it was hard to say which
had the advantage, the combat continued all day, and at night both Armies
being very weary, and great store of men hurt, they were both glad to
retreat, seeking refreshment and medicaments to dress their wounded men. About
this time the Cities of Oribuela and Alicante, with all the Towns and Places
under their jurisdiction, associated themselves with the People of Valencia. But
all the Gentry and persons of quality followed their Governor Don Pedro Masa,
who was enforced to quit those two Cities, and the Castle of Oribuela, whereof
he was Governor. But Don Iayme de Puyg, a valorous Gentleman (who was
Lieutenant of the Castle under the Governor) with fifteen or sixteen men
defended himself gallantly against the fury of the Common people, when in
their violentest heat they killed, burned and sacked the Gentlemen's houses.
The Marquis de los Velez, Don Pedro Faxardo, Adelantado Mayor (that is Lord
Deputy or Lord Lieutenant) of the Kingdom of Murcia, having notice of the
rising of Oribuela, levied what force he could, and marched to reliev the
distressed Gentry, having order from the Emperor, to assist the Governor of
Oribuela upon all occasions. Don Pedro Maca with his horse, being joined with
the Marquis de los Velez, the Common People of Oribuela, and the jurisdiction
thereof, (who were above eight thousand) marched in pursuit of them to the top
of a mountain, called Rajolar, with intent to give them battle, their
intilligence assuring them that they were far the greater number. The Governor
advised with the Marquis about relieving the Castle of Oribuela, which was in
great necessity, every one of his Troopers carrying in, a sack of provision
behind him, whilst the Marquess amused the enemy with skirmishes, for he
doubted not to be back with him time enough to discomfit them. This was don
accordingly, and being drawn up in Batalia, the Marquis secured the way to
the Castle, that the Governor might go thither with his Horse, and having put in
his provisions, return to the battle, which was dexterously and successively
effected, with the slaughter of above four thousand of the Rebels: So the
Marquis cleared all the Country about Oribu^la. But seeing how infected the
whole Kingdom was, and what multitudes of people were com in to the Commoners,
encouraged by their Victory (for it is the nature of the Common people to
follow the strongest party) he advanced higher into the Country with his
Army, which daily increased, insomuch that before he could reach Valencia,
he had above eleven thousand men and thirteen pieces of Ordnance, wherewith
he encamped at a place called Paterna, within sight of Valencia, and sent the
City a Summons, which being surrendered upon Articles, and the Viceroy
repossessed of his Command, the Marquis returned with his Army to Murcia.
After his departure, the Articles being not well performed, the Confederates
retired themselves to Xativa, where they chose for their Captain one Vicente
Perez a fellow whose trade was to gather Acorns. They assaulted and entered the
Fort, it being ill provided. Besides the aforementioned, there were diverse
strange presages in Valencia of these prodigious disorders; amongst others,
upon a Tuesda^e the 27 of May in the evening, a Thunderbolt fell upon a
Church called El Asseu de Valencia, Other Prodi^ious signs in V^lencia.
which threw down one of the Pinnacles, and burst the Clock in pieces. Upon a
Fridaie morning in the same month, fell a sudden storm of hail, with most
terrible Thunderclaps, after which, in a ground betwixt the County of Oliva
and Duchy of Gandia, were found three stones (which fell from the sky) in
color and make like flints. Fray Antonio de Guevara Chronicler to his Imperial
Majesty, and Bishop of Mondoniedo, reports, that he saw one of them hung in
a chain in Santa Maria Church, a league from Oliva, which weighed no less then
five and twenty pounds. The passage which I am now about to relate is so
remarkable, that men cannot but admire the blindness which possessed the
miserable people that affected these novelties and Insurrections. There was
nothing more certainly known in Spain, then that the Prince Don John (only
issue male of his father and mother, the Catholic Kings, and immediate Heir to
these Kingdoms) died at Salamanca, to the exceeding grief and resentment of his
parents and all Spain, and in those days there was no further scruple or
question thereof. But since in the time of these unhappie Commotions, the
Confederates of Valencia were so besotted, that a strange mean fellow of no
account (who came in a fugitive manner out of Africa, and associated himself
with them) that they received him, and beleiving, or seeming to believ him, to
be the Prince Don John, they swore allegiance to him, as King, and he
Commanded and ruled over them for two years, until he met with the end he
deserved, as shall be seen hereafter. In the year of our Lord 1512, a certain
Merchant of Biscaya, named Iuan de Vilvao, or John of Bilbo, went to trade at
the City of Oran. In the ship which carried him and his commodities, he light
upon a passenger, who addressing himself to him, told him that he could write
and read in several languages, and that if he pleased to give him any
competent subsistence, he would be glad to serve him as his factor, and teach
his children; the Merchant entertained him, and took him on board with him at
Cartagena, thinking himself the happiest man living, that he had so luckily
met with a man of such abilities to instruct his children and follow his
business besides. This fellow was of a low stature, thin-faced, of a sallow
complexion, he had a terrible look, his eyes being of a black and green
color, little hair, and thin upon his head, his beard wors furnished; he was a
man of very few words, in his Conversation somewhat too strict and austere,
seemingly intemperate in his diet, a great eater, but drank little, he spoke
Spanish, Arabic, and Hebrew. It never was known directly who his father was,
only he confessed, while he was under the lash, that he was a Jew's son,
and that he was Circumcised, but never Baptized, for his father carried him
into Barberie, in the same year the Jews were driven out of Castilla. He
remained in this Merchant's house until the year 1516, which was four years:
and to ingratiate himself the more with his Master, he told him,
thenceforvvards he would call himself by his name Iuan de Vilvao. But the
Merchant having occasion to absent himself often from his house, leaving his
wife, children, and goods, all in charge with this servant, one time at his
return from Castilla, he was told by his neighbors that Iuan de Vilvao, his
man, was a slepperie companion, and that in his absence he was too familiar
with his wife; others said, he had abused his daughter. Hereupon without any
further examination, he turned him presently out of his house, not declaring
any occasion, or reason he had for so doing, because he could not have his
servant punished otherwise, without bringing his own honor in question. At that
time there was a young man Corregidor of Oran, who not knowing wherefore the
Merchant had discarded his servant Iuan de Vilvao, entertained him to be his
Steward. The Corregidor having a handsome young wench, which he kept privately
in his house, Iuan de Vilvao used all means possible to gain her acquaintance
and affection, and withal to persuade her to learn witchcraft; for amongst
other good qualities, this wicked fellow was a great Practitioner in
Negromancie. The young maid being little pleased with his solicitations,
resolved at last to acquaint the Corregidor, how he importuned her, and that
he would persuade her to learn witchcraft, but chiefly that he had made her
promise to give him poison, that so they two might with more freedom enjoie
each other's affection. The Corregidor was much startled and amazed hereat, for
he thought his house and Paramour as secure with Iuan de Vilvao, as if he had
committed her to the custody of an Eunuch, and therefore he did not
absolutely credit her accusation of him; but afterward observing with a more
strict eye the carriage and demeanure of his ^teward, he was confirmed and
satisfied of the truth, especially when he found the spells and poison which he
was to use. He committed him to the public Gaol, whence upon a market day
he was fetched out, set upon an Ass, with his sorceries about his neck, and
whipped through all the principal streets of the City. The people were all
astonished that he should be so close a villain, for every body had a very
good opinion of him; After this, being banished Oran, he returned into Spain,
and dis-embarked upon the Coast of Valencia, just in the time of these
disastrous troubles. He, by his juggling inventions, begat himself a great
esteem and credit first amongst the Confederates of Algecira. Afterward he
came to Xativa, under the name of Don Henrique Manrique de Ribera, and being a
subtle Impostor, and the Confederates simple, and besotted with passion, he
wrought so much upon their blind credulity, that they made him their General,
and by little and little he so inveagled them that they held him for their
God, and their King. Vicente Periz (who was Captain General of the Confederate
Rebels of Valencia) made great submissions to him, saying, that God had sent
him to give them liberty, and that he would procure them much money and arms.
Those of Xativa adored him as their Redeemer, and called him El Encubierto, or
the man disguised, El Encubiert^.
saying, God had sent him for the redressing of the oppressed People. He made
them believ that he was the Prince Don John, Son to the Catholic King and
Queen deceased, and that for certain ^ecret causes and Revelations of God's
Judgments, The notable imposture of Iuan de Vilvao.
it was convenient for him not to be publicly known in the world for long
time past, but now since the Kingdom's were in so distressed a condition, and
in so great necessity of their natural King, to own and defend them, and
settle them in the same peaceable Government, as they enjoyed during his
Father's Reign, he desired to reveal himself unto them, and that it was God's
will also. This those wretched Confederates beleiving, followed and honored
him, as if he had been their God. Thus having gained the affection and esteem
of these Rebels, he conferred with diverse of the City of Valencia, of la
Huerta, and other places thereabouts, enticing them to put in execution what
that Tyrant, Vicente Periz, had already moved. He dealt likewise with some
places of Aragon, and Catalunia (which were already tottering and half, at
least, inclining to Commotion, engaging them, that at the same instant (if
possible) as he should make his Attempts upon Valencia, they should all rise
in arms, and secure those parts for him. Within Valencia he had his
intelligencers, and instruments, whom he employed to murder the Marquis of
Cenete, then Governor of the City; These were so faithful to him in this
treacherous design, that he wanted not assistants to convey him over the walls
into the City, whereby he might the better contrive his plot, seeing the
disposition of the place, and (having a more free communication with the
inhabitants) allure and draw to his byas more accomplices, to strengthen his
party, and execute his wicked intention. This was so cunningly carried, that
if God had not otherwise disposed it, the whole Kingdom at that time ran a
notable hazard of being absolutely destroyed. The City of Valencia (as I have
told you) being in so miserable a condition, the Religious men, with other
good and loial people, went to petition the Marquis of Cenete (who then was in
the Camp) to take upon him the Government of that distressed City. Which he
did (like a noble man as he was). The people expressed so much contentment and
comfort in his presence, that in all the Monasteries and Churches, they sung
with great solemnity, the Te Deum laudamus, and all the b^lls rung out in
testimony of an universal joie. The Marquis was a man of such courage and
resolution, that when, throughout the whole City of Valencia, no body durst
so much as name God, King or Justice, he took diverse of the rebellious
disturbers and hanged them. So that they began to be afraid, and sculked in
corners. Soon after having notice of a band of these Confederates, which were
fled from Valencia, he marched out against them, and meeting them about
Monviedro, he brought away their Colors, having routed and put them all to
flight. Amongst diverse great hazards which the Marquis ran of losing his life,
by the insolence or treachery of these Confederates, one I shall give in
particular; A monstrous disorderly multitude of these wretches being gathered
together in Valencia, fell like a furious storm upon the Marquis his house, with
huge clamorous outcries and ^lashing of weapons, not understanding each
other's mind, nor knowing what they would have. The Marquis hearing the nois,
went down to quiet the tumult, being well provided and attended, but his Lady
seeing him engaged amongst a throng of such vile respectless people, and
fearing lest he should be murdered by them, took such a fright, that her
weak Constitution being not able to resist the violence of that sudden
apprehension, she presently expired. Vicente Periz Captain of the Rebels,
with a numerous Army entrenched himself and planted his Cannon within sight of
Valencia, where he remained some time: In his Camp he had a bell, at the sound
whereof a numberless gang of thievs, such as his Army was composed of, ran out
of the City to him: And had not the Marquis been very circumspect, without
question they had suprised the City; but finding little probability of
effecting their design upon Valencia, they marched toward Monviedro, thinking
to make the Viceroy raise his siege thence, but within two days after
Monviedro was surrendered to him (which was of no small importance) for thereby
he had an open and free passage to receiv succor out of Castilla. The Marquis
hearing that the Confederates were marched toward Monviedro with their Cannon,
and having intelligence of their intentions, followed them (but with no
considerable force) and meeting some of his own foot companies, which having
been much galled by their Cannon and small shot, were retreating toward
Valencia quite disheartened, he strove to encourage them as well as he could,
representing to them the service of God and their King; but prevailing not with
them, however he^ advanced and set upon the enemy, crying aloud, Let the King
live, and the Traitors die, and without fear of their muskets or Cannon, which
played fiercely upon him, he charged into the midst of them, God (whose cause
he fought) preserving him, and striking their baser hearts with fear, insomuch
that he had them all at his mercy. Yet his nobleness and generositie was such
(though they deserved it not) that he commanded his men (who were very busy
in killing) to forbear further execution, crying out, Let them not die, let
them not die: having thus quite routed these Mutiniers, he returned to
Valencia with the spoil, and all their Artillery, where he was received with
joy and tears. The Viceroy afterward, being before Xativa, with intent to
reduce it to the Emperor's subjection, the Rebels dealt so cunningly with some
of his Soldiers (who sowed the same dissension in his Camp, as was within the
Town) that by certain signs they understood each others intentions, and they
agreed at one and the same time to fall upon the Loyal Party, and murder
them; and having taken their Artillery, to storm Valencia, sack it, and kill
all that were for the Emperor in it. This conspiracy was discovered, but there
was no remedy to hinder it, neither in the Viceroy's Camp, nor in Valencia;
for the Confederates were very numerous and the Loyal P^^sons but a small
Party; The Marquis, at the entreaty of the honest people of Valencia, went to
the Viceroy's Camp before Xativa, where he found more disorder then was
reported, and the infection less curable then he imagined. The sign that these
Conspirators had agreed upon, was, that in the night at a certain hour those of
the Camp should cry out, Pay, Pay, Mutiny, Mutiny, and those within the
City should answer, Pay, Pay, Mutiny, Mutiny. The Viceroy and the
Gentlemen with him in the Camp, desired the Marquis to venture himself, and
endeavor by going into the City, and reasoning with the people, to defer the
execution of this horrid treason: Although it seemed an act of great timeritie
(as indeed it was) for him to expose himself to the fury of a people so
mutinous, and bent upon mischief, yet the Marquis valorously did as he was
required: And it was miraculous, how his presence and fair deportment pacified
the inhabitants minds, and brought them to submit to reason. The Adversaries
being mad at the good success the Marquis had wrought within Xativa, conspired
how Vicente Periz, their Captain might secretly convey himself into the City,
and gathering as many of the people, as he could, together, apprehend the
Marquis. This was effected, and Vicente Periz with a multitude of well armed
men went to assault the Marquis, who being but slenderly provided, and weakly
attended, and seeing a squadron of these thievs advance toward him,
dissembled, and made as if he knew them not, asking them thus, Are you our
friends? do you com to serve the King? To which they answered neither yea, nor
no, but seemed to be daunted at the very sight of the Marquis. Hereupon with
much seeming affection he spoke aloud, Nay then my boys, Viva el Rey; viva el
Rey; which said, he fell upon them, and took away their Arms. Presently upon
this the rest of the enemies discovered themselves, and began to fight,
discharging their Cross-bows and Musket-shots as thick as hail against the
Marquis and his men, which the Marquis seeing, he cried with a loud voice, O
you Traitors! now force is requisite; and flinging down his staff, he took a
pike, and saying, God preserv the King, and let the Traitors die; he fell in
amongst them, fighting so desperately, that before his men could com to second
him, he had made them turn their backs, but at last being overpowered and
wounded in the left arm, he was taken prisoner, and carried by the people into
the Castle, where at that time the Duke of Calabria was also prisoner, who
received the Marquis with much honor. The Marquis was afterward put into a
Dungeon under St George's tower, where they kept him close prisoner some time,
thinking thereby to make the Viceroy, his brother, condescend to what they
listed: But at last he was released, and perceiving the Country to be
infected beyond hope of remedy, he retired to his own house. Those of Valencia
found a great miss of him, and seeing most of the people of the City become of
the Confederacy, Vicente Periz having possessed himself of la Huerta, and
other places thereabouts, the Iurates, and Chapter of the Church called el
Asseu, sent to beseech him, that he would be pleased to condole the misery
of that City, and be tender of the King's service. The Marquis was at Ayora,
a town of his, and upon receipt of this message, he took his way toward
Valencia. Thursdaie 27 February, 1522, the Tyrant Vicente Perez, trusting to
the multitude of his party within the City, took the boldness to enter into
Valencia, with intention to plunder it, and kill all that should resist him,
and having entrenched and fortified himself within the walls to that effect, it
struck great terror into the loial party. But the Marquis, well Armed, came
to a large place, called la Placa del Asseu, and caused to be rung that bell,
which they used to ring in Uproars, to the end all those of the loial party
might repair thither to him; where he stayed until noon, having used all fair
means possible to pacify without bloodshed the advers party; but seeing
nothing could avail, he took a view of his men, and what Arms they had; and
finding his no competent force to encounter Vicente Periz, who had made himself
very strong; he betook himself to his invention and policy, which succeeded
so advantagiously, that Vicente Periz came short of his design, all his men
being dis-banded, and returned to their own dwellings. This was a happy day
for Valencia, for if Periz his plot had taken, he had been absolute master of
the whole City; and ever after, that day was called the Thursdaie of Vicente
Periz: Yet staying within the City he rallied again, and what with those of
Valencia, what with the fresh supplies which were sent him from Xativa, and
Algezira, by the disguised Prince Don Iuan, or Iuan de Vilvao, who went thither
to that purpose: He was so strongly recruited, that he gave the Marquis
Battle in the streets of Valencia, and had won the day undoubtedly, if the
Marquis had not showed as much policy as resolution. In the Combat the
Marquis pursuing Vicente Periz (who was glad to take his heels) was knocked
down by a great pot full of earth, which a woman flung from the top of a house
upon his head, which though it killed him not outright, did stun and bruis him
very sore: He was presently taken up again by his servants, but his party
supposing him to be dead, lost courage, and withal the advantage they had
gained of the enem^e: which he perceiving, as soon as he was com again to
himself, ran amongst them, saying, If the Marquis be dead, the King is alive.
These words put new vigor into the hearts of his despairing men, who following
the Marquis, gave a fresh charge to the Confederates, so hot, that they were
glad to house themselves, which proved no Sanctuary, for there they were killed
and taken, not being able to make resistance. Vicente Periz had his head
presently struck off. This Victory quieted the City of Valencia, which was
so infected with the poison of Rebellion, that in the very Cloisters and
Monasteries, there was as much division and passion as elsewhere; insomuch that
one part prayed God to favor the Confederates, the other to give the Cavaliers
the Victory. The disguised Prince exspected a quite contrary success, hoping
by the death of the Marquis, and the routing of his party, to reign
victoriously in Valencia; but God, Iuan de Vilvao, or the disguised Prince
executed by the Ma^quis of C^nete in V^l^ncia.
who had otherwise decreed the Event, made him likewise fall into the hands of
the Marquis the 19th of May, 1522, who commanded him to be hanged, drawn and
quartered, and his head to be set upon the point of Lance. And thus that
villainous head was crowned, who of an infamous Jew, and abominable Sorcerer,
would have made himself King of Spain. After this grew several other Commotions
in that Kingdom, but nothing near so dangerous; which I shall omit now to
particularize, in regard I am called away by those of Castilla.

SECT. XXXVI.
THe Earl of Salvatierra, and other Mountaniers, infected the people of the
Mountains of Burgos, as far as Alava and Vitoria, with other places of la
Rioxa; and Burgos was very near revolting also. All which was opposed by the
Lord High Constable, not because the Emperor commanded him so to do (for he
received no orders from his Majesty to that effect till afterward) but moved
with the magnanimity of his own generous spirit, and the sens of Loialtie,
which was Hereditarie to that noble family. I do not find that any of the
Grandees of Castilla were very forward to break the ice in this undertaking,
though afterward, like honest men, they all set their helping hands. The Lord
High Constable at first prudently feared the Event, and was loath to engage
himself in so perilous an enterprise, hazarding no less then his life and
whole estate, in endeavoring to oppose so many, especially without arms,
money, or order from the Emperor. For the enemies were very many and powerful,
no less then thirteen of the most considerable Cities of Castilla, with diverse
other Towns and Villages, being declared for the Commonaltie; besides that
many Gentlemen of quality and great estates (much animated against the Emperor
and his Ministers) had involved themselves in the same Interest. It was an
attempt of so much consideration and danger, that the other Grandees thought it
the best way (seeing they were not able to do otherwise) to sit still and
look on, and many of them advised the Lord High Constable to do the like. But
his Lady Donia Maria de Tovar, only daughter and heir to Don Luis de Tovar,
Marquis of Berlanga, being one of the discreetest and most magnanimous Ladies
in all Spain of her time, was not of the opinion of those that gave her husband
that Counsel; but she never ceased, representing to him the advancement of his
Majesty's service, and that for the good of the Kingdom, he ought to resist
and suppress the exorbitances of the insulting Commoners, although he put
himself to the hazard of losing both life and fortune, in regard he bare the
Office of Lord High Constable, Captain General, and the second person of the
Kingdom next his Majesty. The Duchess being at her own house at Haro, wrote
to the Lord High Constable, her husband, this ensuing Letter, which is worthy
to be Chronicled.

The Dutchesse's letter to the Lord high Constable.
YOur Letter I received by Pedro de Velasco. And my opinion is, since his
Majesty from the place where he is does what he can, to give you his power
and Revenue here, That you determine to preserv it. For if he lose his right,
no wonder if you, and all those, that have done what they were obliged to do,
be dispossessed of yours; But if you maintain his interest, you and his other
Servants will be all secured. That which (in my judgment) your Lordship and
the Lord Admiral are now to do, is to raise men and money with all possible
expedition and try your fortunes. I write to Pedro de Melgosa to use all means
and shifts, that may be, to procure you money. The greater the danger, more
glorious is the attempt. Trust in our Lord God, for since herein you do both
him and the King service, be confident he will be favorable, and give a
blessing to your endeavors. So, because I intend to write more at large to you
by the Treasurer, I rest, praying God to preserv your Lordship's most
Illustrious person, with more tenderness then I wish to my self. From Haro this
19th of June, 1520.


Finis Libri Tertii.
THE CIVIL WARS OF SPAIN. THE FOURTH BOOK.
SECT. I.
THere is no Republic, or Change of Government whatsoever so barbarous, as to
be ignorant how important and necessary a Cement Concord is to make it long
subsist. Wherefore those of the Iunta dreading (and not without cause) the
dange^ wherein they stood, desired the City of Valladolid to agree and be all
of one heart: for the high consequence of the matter wherein they were engaged,
did require it, promising them that within fevv days they should see the
Ordinances, which with incessant labor and watching, the Holy Iunta had agreed
to publish and dispers through the whole Kingdom, whereby they hoped to make
that Republic flourish, as one of the most happy and best governed in the
whole world. The people were big with glorious hopes of enjoying a second
golden Age; and those of the Iunta were so well pleased with the thanks and
applaus of the People, that their Ordinances being finished; they resolved to
send them to the Emperor, by two Gentlemen and a Friar, not doubting but
therefore his Majesty would confer some honorable dignities upon them. But what
these were, I will not mention, only I may say, that he was so incensed at
their message, that they held it a great mercy they escaped with their lives.
They wrote moreover a kind of requisitorie letter for the Cities and Towns
where their Ambassadors were to pass, and therein they enclosed their Letters
to the Emperor, with the Articles and Ordinances, which in the name of the
Kingdom, they desired his Majesty to confirm; and though already I have
declared the substance thereof, I will set them down in the same form they sent
them; that the curious and patient may read and see the pretensions of the
Commonalties, and what the Kingdom demanded. Let every one judge what reason
they had, for my own part, I will neither excuse nor condemn them, but only
relate faithfully the truth, which is as much as can be required of me,
considering my office. In their Letters to the Emperor, they give his Maj^stie
an account of all the troubles and insurrections of the Kingdom, which they
told him, proceeded from the evil Counsel which his Majesty entertained about
his Roial Person, who, for their disordinate Covetousness, private passions and
interests, besides other sinister ends (they said) might more properly be
styled the Deceivers, Cheaters, and Enemies of his Majesty's Kingdoms, and the
public good thereof, then Counselors, such as they ought to be. For they
were the occasion that the Kingdom of Castilla, which abounded in riches, and
all other things that could be required of the most opulent and flourishing
Kingdoms of the World, was now beecom the poorest and most miserable of all the
neighboring Kingdoms: Which did not only concern the public, but was also
particularly prejudicial to his Majesty's Roial Patrimony, and which was
insufferable, That the desolation of his Majesty's Kingdoms, and the
exhausting of his treasure, to his own exceeding inconvenience, and the ruin
of his subjects, was to no other purpose, then to enrich his evil Counselors,
and diverse other persons strangers, who bare no affection to his Majesty, nor
had any zeal to advance his service, or the public good, but to build their
own fortunes. Next they complained that the Commissioners of several Cities
(who desired his Majesty in the name of the Kingdom, at Santjago and the
Groyn, not to demand any Subsidies) were by his Counsel sentenced rather
worthy of punishment then audience, and order given, that they should not be
admitted to sit in Parliament, but be confined and banished, some of them to the
remotest parts of the Kingdom. That since his Majesty's departure out of the
Kingdom, the Cardinal, with the President, and rest of the Council, had given
Commissions to Antonio de Fonseca, and the Alcalde Ronquillo, to sack and make
desolate the City of Segovia, notwithstanding they sent to excuse and submit
themselves to the Council, and that because of their so rigorous proceeding, they
sent to Toledo, and other Cities, for assistance, who before they raised any
forces to succor them, desired the Cardinal and Council by way of Petition to
deal more favorably with those of Segovia, but receiving no satisfactorie
answer, they sent an Army into the field. They aggravated the cruelty of
Antonio de Fonseca in burning Medina, whereby the Town was endammaged above two
millions of Ducates, and which occasioned the rising of diverse other places.
They declared how the Queen had commanded the Iunta to remove from Avila to
Tordesillas. That they had undertaken the care of the Queen's person, and put
the Marquis of Denia and his Lady from her, holding them destructive to the
advancement of the public good. They alleged reasons for dissolving the
Council, which his Majesty had settled before his departure. And why they
paid their Army out of his Majestie^s Revenues. At last they desired his
Majesty would be pleased to grant and confirm all those Articles, which their
Ambassadors should present him from the Kingdom, the intent and scope of them
being merely for his good, and the peaceable Government, by regulating and
repairing the miseries and great damages that had been occasioned through the
evil Counsel of those, which thitherto had abused and misled his Majest^e;
urging moreover, that for the benefit of the Public, and the improving of his
Roial Patrimony, it was necessary and expedient, that until such time as his
Majesty should appoint other persons of better temper, and uprighter
intentions to reside in his High Council then the former were, his Majesty
should give power to those Cities and Towns, which had Vote in Parliament, to
provide and see to the Administration of Justice, and other things wherein
those of his Council ought to have been more circumspect and moderate. And
also, that he would revoke the Commissions and Authority which he had sent to
the, then ruling, Governors, because they were men whom the Kingdom could not
endure. Besides this letter to the Emperor, they sent another to those of the
City where he then was, desiring them to join with them in supplication to
his Majesty, and procure his consent and approbation of all the Kingdom's
desires, in regard they tended to his Majesty's service, the public good of
the Kingdom, the increasing of his Roial Patrimony, and were exceedingly
conducing to a peaceable and quiet government. Dated from Tordesillas the 20th
of October, 1520. Under the the Letter was written, I, Lope de Pallares,
Secretary of the Parliament and Iunta of the Kingdom, caused this to be
written by their Command.

SECT* II.
ARTICLES Of The KINGDOM.
DON CARLOS and DONIA IUANA, etc. To our Infantes, well-beloved Children,
Brothers and Dukes, Greeting. Know ye, that for the remedying and repairing
the great damages and exorbitancies, which have been and are in our Kingdoms
of Castilla and Leon, by reason of the former evil Counsel and Government of
our said Kingdoms, The Commissioners or Procuradores of those Cities and Towns
that have Vote in Parliament, are assembled as becomes our Loial Subjects and
Servants, with zeal to our servic^ and the public good of our Kingdoms,
fulfilling that which the Laws of our Kingdoms oblige them to do; And by
special Command from us, the Queen, are com to Tordesillas, to take care and
provide for the reparation and remedy of the said damages and exorbitancies;
To which effect they have made and ordained certain Articles, which are
conducing and expedient for our service, the good Government of the Kingdom,
and the increasing of the Revenue and Partrimonie Roial. The Tenor whereof is
as follows:

MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY CATHOLIC PRINCES, QUEEN AND KING OUR SOVEREIGNS, That
which the Cities, Towns, Villages, Commonalties, and Natives of your Kingdom of
Castilla and Leon, do desires your Majesty's will be pleased to grant for a
perpetual Law, is here ensuing: That which concern's his MAJESTY'S ROIAL PERSON.
FIrst, These Kingdoms humbly supplicate your Majesty will be pleased
speedily to return into these Kingdoms, and being com, to remain ruling and
governing them. For staying here your Majesty may give Laws and Command over
the whole World, as your Predecessors have done: And nothing of all that which
they desire of your Majesty will be so pleasing to these Kingdoms (although
you should grant them much more, for they hope your Majesty will condescend to
all these things) then your speedy coming to them. For it is not the custom of
Castilla, to be without their King, neither can they b^e governed by others in
peace and quiet, which is very necessary for your Royal service.

Item, These Kingdoms humbly beseech your Majesty at your return, to be
pleased to marry, it being necessary for the universal good of these
Kingdoms, that there should be some issue to succeed your Royal Person, as
they desire, your Majesty's age now requiring it. And that you would be
pleased to take a wife according to the Vote and good l^king of these your
Kingdoms, for so she shall be of some Country in amity with them, as is
most convenient for your service and the contentment of your Royal Person.

That which concern's the Royal Family.
THat our Lady and Sovereign the Queen's Royal house be put in such order and
estate, as is becoming her Royal Person, and the honor of these Kingdoms. That
the Officers about her be persons of quality. That her house be sufficiently
provided of all thing befitting her dignity, for so her Highn^ss will be well
pleased with these Kingdoms, and they obliged.

Item, That his Majesty would be pleased at his return into these Kingdoms,
to bring neither Flemings, French, nor other strangers whatsoever, to bear any
Office in his Royal Family. But that he would confer all such Offices upon
Natives of these Kingdoms, there being multitudes of able and sufficient
persons, who will serve his Majesty with much affection and loyalty, and that
his heirs and successors for ever should continue the like order.

Item, That neither his Majesty, nor his successors, bring in, or entertain
any foreign soldiers for the guard of their Persons or defens of their
Kingdoms, in regard there are warlike and courageous men enough amongst the
Natives, not only to defend their own Country, but to conquer others, as they
had done heretofore.

Item, That his Majesty being in these Kingdoms, and having none but Natives
about him, would be pleased to order his Family in all respects as Don
Fernando, his grandfather, and Donia Isabel his Queen, and the rest of the
Catholic King's, his Progenitors of glorious memory, had done before him. For
in so doing he would save a number of unnecessarie expenses which were made in
his table and household; and this would palpably appear, for his Majesty will
find that in the dishes for his own table, and those that are made for the
f^vorites and great persons of his family, is daiely spent one hundred and
fifty thousand Maravediz, and that the table-expences of Don Fernando the King
and Donia Isabel (who were excellent and powerful Princes) besides the Prince
Don John (whom God receiv in his glory) and the Infantes, with a multitude of
attendants, amounted to no more then twelv or fifteen thousand Maravediz, per
diem. And hence proceed's his Majesty's wants, and the impoverishing of the
People and Commonalties, by ^ubsidies and other taxes imposed upon them.

Item, In regard it has been, and is a very excessive charge, to allow wages
to such as are not domestick's, That hence-fo^wards there be no Salaries given
to any Courtier's wives, or children, or any other persons whatsoever, no^ in
immediate service, or shortly to be entertained and admitted. But if any man
should die in his Majesty's service, in satisfaction or equivalence thereof,
he might allow a pension or stipend to the wife or children of the deceased,
although they be not of age to serve.

Item, In regard after the most ^llustrious Queen, our Lady Donia Isabel his
Majesty's Grandmother, was taken with the sickness, whereof she died, diverse
superfluous offices were crept into the Royal Family, which never were before,
That whosoever enjoyed any such office or offices, might forthwith be
discarded, and be allowed no Salarie: And all such superfluous expenses be
employed for necessary uses, more conducing to his Majesty's service.

Item, That in his Majesty's household no Grandee might have any office
concerning the Revenue or Royal Patrimony, and if any enjoy any such office at
present, that it may be taken from them. For this is very inconvenient, and
may greatly impair the said Patrimony and Royal Revenue.

Item, That during his Majesty's absence from these Kingdoms his household
officers, and other persons, who have relation or attendance upon his Majesty,
be paid out of the Royal Revenue.

Concerning GOVERNORS.
THat, In regard in his Majesty's absence it is requisite to have one or more
Governors in the Kingdom, such Governor or Governors might be Natives of the
Kingdoms of Castilla and Leon, appointed and chosen with consent of the
Kingdoms, and that with their being Natives may concur the other qualities,
which by the Law established by the King Don Alonso, called, Ley de La Partida,
is required. That the said Law may be observed and fulfilled to perpetuity;
As also the Order of Election and Provision, with the Conditions which dispose
in what case a Governor or Governors are to be chosen, as in respect of
minority, absence, or whatsoever other occasion.

Item, that the Provisions, Orders or Commissions which his Majesty had given
in those Kingdoms, contrary to the above specified form, might be declared
void, and that he would command those and every of those Governors, whom he
had autorized, to forbear the execution of that office.

Item, that the Governor or Governors, being constituted in the abovesaid
manner and form, may be invested with power to confer dignities, offices,
administration of Justice, and to redress grievances: And this not only in the
Kingdoms of Castilla, but also in the Isles and firm land already discovered,
or to be discovered, and that they provide them within ten days. That they
may present Dignities and places Vacant, and do as much therein, as the King
himself in person, but not give any g^ft or gratuitie out of the Royal
Patrimony, nor any t^ing thereunto belonging.

Concerning BILLETS.
THe lodging by Billets (which is practiced no where neither amongst Infidels
nor Christians, but in this Kingdom) being a thing most exorbitant, and whence
have proceeded and do proceed inconveniences and damages so excessive, that a
small volume cannot contain them, and his Majesty's subjects suffer thereby
not a little, as well in their honors and lives, as in their estates, That for
ever henceforth they may be freed from so abominable and prejudicial a
servitude. And that in these Kingdoms no such Billets be given in any kind,
neither by the King's themselves, nor any Lords, Noblemen or Prelates
whatsoever, and in case any should be given, That the People may not be
obliged to accept of them, unless with their own con^ents, they paying for
their lodgings, as shall be agreed upon with the owners or inhabitants of the
houses, whither such Billets shall be brought or directed. But in his
Majesty's progresses, That lodging and linen should be allowed Gratis for
those of his household and Court, so that he exceed not the term of six days
in one place, which expired, they should pay for their lodging according to
the ordinary rate and custom. Likewise, That the Soldiers of the Guard should
have free quarter after the usual manner.

Item, That their Majesty's the King's, Princes, and Infantes, his
predecessors, had given and allotted convenient lodgings for their Royal
Persons and Family, and to the number of seventie, but no more, for the
officers which were of necessity to be near the Palace were appointed in the
same City, or Town where the Court was, and in such houses as the Council,
Justice and Regidores of the said place should find convenient and suitable to
the conditions and quality of the persons to be lodged, and the said seventie
lodgings to be paid according as the said Council, Justice and Regidores
should rate or tax them. And that for payment hereof, all the Cities, Towns,
Villages, or Burrougsh should contribute without ex^mption, according to the
cessment made by the said Council, Justice and Regidores, without troubling or
asking leav of his Majesty, insomuch that under color thereof, there should
be no more cessed or gathered, then what the rent of the said lodgings would
amount to, under penalty of the Law.

Item, That these lodgings which are allowed for his Majesty's family, are
not intended for those of the Council, for the Alcaldes of his house and Court,
nor the Alguaziles, or other Judges or Officers whatsoever, nor the High
Treasurers, or any such like, for these are to pay for their lodgings, by the
order and form before mentioned.

Item, That his Majesty, or the Kings or Princes his Successors, might not
give any Billets in general or particular, or other Command whatsoever, that
the Inhabitants of such Cities, Towns, or Villages should furnish lodgings,
contrary to their own wills and consents: And that in case any such Billet
general, or particular, by way of entreaty or command, should be given, it
might be received with respect, but not fulfilled, neither the Owners or
Inhabitants of the said houses be obliged to accommodate the bearers thereof.

Concerning Customs, Taxes, the Revenues Roial, Pole-monie, and Fee farms.
THat the Customs and Thirds which belong to the Crown, may be reduced to the
same number and quantity as they were instituted by the Catholic King Don
Fernando and Donia Isabel, Anno 1494. That at the same rates and value all the
Cities, Towns, Villages, with their several Lordships and Leases of
Abbie-lands, may remain taxed for ever, and no higher: for they may not be
raised nor abated at any time, since such was the pleasure of the most
Illustrious Queen Donia Isabel, our Lady and Sovereign, as appears by her
last Will and Testament. And it is better for the augment of the Roial Revenue,
as well as the good of the kingdom; for there was more gold and silver brought
to his Majesty's Exchequer by the simple Penie-rents, then by these racking
enhancements, considering the breaches and failings which have been, and are
amongst those that farm the Subsidies, neither is that burthensom to the
kingdom.

Item, That the people may take in the said perpetual Tax, the said Customs and
Thirds, and be obliged to rent the Situados that there was upon the said
Customs and Thirds, restoring to their Majesty's the overplus, having paid the
Situados and rights at the accustomed places and summons* By this means their
Majesty's servants and retainers would be duly paid, Librancas, are
assignments of money.
and all those bribes and selling of Librancas would be saved, neither would
there be any need of so many Officers; and their Majesty's might spare great
sums of money, much wages, and a multitude of discharges, or bills of receipt,
which were given to Officers more then needed.

Item, That the Queen and King, our Sovereigns, and their Successors in these
kingdoms, be contented for ever to have and raise their Customs, by and
according to the forementioned imposition, and no otherwise, in regard so they
are certain, and not variable, neither will there be any thing diminished of
the Revenue, there still accruing to the Crown other profitable rights, as
Fines, Confiscations of goods, the Salt-pit-rents, P^ertos seco^, are Customs
paid at the going* in or cut of every several Kingdom in Spain by Land.
the Mountain-Tributes, Subsidies, Customerships, and Puertos secos, besides
current money, taxes, and ordinary paiments of the kingdom, with the rents of
Maestrazgos. And that which com's from the Indies, Isles and Firm-land amount's
to so great a sum, Maestrazgos, are the places of the Masters of the orders of
Knighthood in Spain.
that thereby his Majesty may sufficiently maintein his state, without
pressing the Kingdom in Parliament, and out of Parliament, to grant any other
extraordinary Subsidies, whereby the people is much aggrieved, and t^eir Roial
Consciences can be no less burdened with the oppression and great damages of
these kingdoms.

Item, That all the Inhabitants of the Cities, Towns, Villages, Buroughs and
Lordships, may enjoie the said perpetual taxes in general, that none amongst
them may rent or farm any particular part thereof at a higher rate then the
said taxes, nor that any more sesments be made amongst the Inhabitants of the
said places, then what shall be necessary for the recovering and gathering of
the said taxes.

Item, that every City or Town that is chief of the County, do cause a Chest
to be set in some secure place, wherein they may put or gather the Roial
Revenue, and that they see to and provide, that which shall be necessary for
the estate of the Kingdom; And chiefly to have a care that the Queen, our
Sove^eign ^adie's family, be maintained and furnished with all things
suitable to the Dignity of her Royal Person, and the honor of the Kingdoms,
next, to pay the Searchers, Counsels and Chanceries, with other ordinary
offices of the Kingdom, and being paid, that it remain stated in the offices
of the Puertos Secos, mountain-Tributes, and Customerships, and (in case any
be wanting) in the house of the Contratacion of Sevilla; And the remainder of
the Revenue and Royal Patrimony to be kept in the treasure, and delivered to
his Majesty, when it shall pleas God that he return into this Kingdom, or to
supply his necessities, and those of the Kingdom, if any real and urgent
occasion does require it.

Item, That the residue, or any thing that is unpaied of the Revenue, after ten
years, may not be farmed or recovered. For by recovering debts of so long
standing, may arise great extorsions and grievances on the Natives of the
Kingdom, or their sureties, children and heirs, who after so many years can
not, perchance, produce the discharges and acquittances that had been given.

Concerning Commissioners or Burgesses of Parliament, Subsidies.
THat the Subsidy granted to his Majesty by some Commissioners at the
Parliament in the City of the Groyn, be neither demanded nor received, nor any
other imposed hereafter; Nor that any other impositions, or tributes,
extraordinary be laid upon the Kingdom by their Majesty's, or any of their
Successors.

Item, That when any Burgesses or Commissioners are to be sent to Parliament,
the Custom of each City is to be observed in the state of the Regimiento;
moreover, one is to be sent from the Chapter or Clergy, another from the
state of the Gentry, a third from the State of the Commonaltie, and every
State to elect and nominate their Commissioner severally in a distinct
assembly; Which Commissioners are to be paid by their own City or Town,
except the Commissioner of the Clergy, who is to be maintained by the Chapter.

Item, When any Parliament is called, and the Cities and Towns, which have Vote,
be summoned to send their Commissioners, That their Majesty's, or any their
Successors, in these Kingdoms, send not to the said Commissioners any Power,
Instruction, or Command, in what manner and form their Powers are to be
granted, nor appoint or nominate any particular persons to be Commissioners:
But that such City or Towns may have free liberty to grant Powers according
to their own sense, and to such persons, as they shall think most convenient
for the good of their Republic.

Item, Wheresoever the Parliament be assembled, That the Commissioners may have
the freedom to meet, confer and discourse with one another, as often as they
shall think good, and that no President be ordered to com amongst them* for
that would hinder them from attending to those things, which particularly
concern the Cities, and the good of the Republic, which they represent.

Item, that during the time of the Commissioners being at Parliament, nor
before or after their return to their hou^es, as having been, or being
Commissioners in the said Parliament, they may not receiv directly or
indirectly, under what color or pretense soever, any present or gratuitie from
their Majesty's, or their Successors, in these kingdoms, of what value or
quality soever, neither for themselves, their wives, children or kindred, under
pain of death, and confiscation of goods: which goods may be employed for the
public reparations of the City or Town, whereof any such Delinquent was
Commissioner. For they being free from Covetousness, and without hopes of
receiving any bribes in that nature, will be more attentive and zealous for
the service of God, the King, and the public, and more careful to perform what
was encharged them by their Towns and Cities.

Item, that the Commissioners may only have the bare stipend, which shall be
allowed them by their Cities or Towns, and that the said stipend or Salarie be
competent, according to the condition and quality of the person, and the place
from whence he is employed as Commissioner; And that this Salarie be paid
out of the proper Inhabitants Revenue of each Town, or City, that does send
the said Commissioner, according as they shall be taxed by the Council,
Justice, and Regidores of the said place.

Item, that the said Commissioners may choos and entertain one or more Lawyers
being at Parliament, as they see occasion, to whom the Cities or Towns are to
pay a competent Salarie, but may change them as often as they pleas. And that
the said Lawyer may not demand or receiv any gratuitie from their Majesty's, or
other person, in their names (as is above instructed and ordered for the
Commissioners) neither may any Lawyer at all be entertained by the
Commissioners, but with the good liking and consent of the Kingdom.

Item, that their Majesty's would revoke and declare to be void all gratuities
of what quality so^ver, which were given to the Commissioners of the last
Parliament, held in the Kingdom of Galicia, and that neither they, nor their
wives, children, heirs or Successors, may injoie any part or parcel thereof,
under penalty of losing their goods, for the public reparations of the City,
or Town, whereof they were Commissioners.

Item, that thenceforwards to perpetuity, the Cities and Towns, that have Vote
in Parliament, may meet and assemble every three years by their Commissioners,
who are to be chosen out of the three States (as is aforesaid). And that it
may be done in the absence, and without license from their Majesty's, or the
succeeding Kings; to the end, that being so assembled, they may procure and
see, that the Contents of these Articles be punctually observed; and that they
may discourse of, and provide other things which may be expedient for the
service of the Roial Crown, and the public good of the Kingdoms.

Item, that the said Parliament being ended, the said Commissioners may be
obliged within forty days, to return to their Cities, or Towns, and give an
account of what they had done in the said Parliament, under pain of losing their
Salarie, and being deprived of their Office, which their Majesty's might
dispose as vacant.

Concerning Coin.
THat no money be transported out of these Kingdoms, either Gold or ^ilver,
coined or to be coined: Since it is forbidden by the Laws of the Kingdom,
under pain of death, confiscation of goods, and other Penalties. For the
contrary having been done, especially since his Majesty's coming into these
Kingdoms, the Country is impoverished and destroyed.

Item, That forthwith money be coined in these Kingdoms, of a different rate
and value, then that of the neighboring Countries, and that it be of a base
alloy two Caratts under the rate of the finest Gold, which may countervail in
weight and value the Crowns of Gold that are made in France; By which means it
will not be carried out of the Kingdom. Always provided, that whosoever
should be indebted any quantity of Maravediz, before the time of publication
of the new coined money, might be obliged to make payment in the coin, which
was then current, or to make up the value thereof in money of the later stamp.

Silver Coined.
THat a mark of Silver out of the Mint may be of the just value of two
thousand two hundred and fifty Maravediz, and no more.

Copper Money.
THat new copper money may be coined, and in regard too much Silver mixed with
it is but lost, into every Mark should be cast only the quantity of one of
the new Ryals.

Item, That the money of Silver mixed and Copper, which is made in other
Countries, is much less worth then it passes for in this Kingdom, and the
profit and gain thereof remains in foreign Nations, who carry away our Gold
for their base money. That six months being expired after the coining of the
said new money, public proclamation might be made to prohibit the taking or
receiving any of the said foreign mixed S^lver and Copper money.

Item, That the old money which is now current, in no wise may be made away,
given, or sold out of the Mint-hous, directly or indirectly, at any higher rate
then now it goe's, under penalty that whosoever shall be defective herein,
may lose his money and third part of his estate, to the end that it may be all
coined, to make new money.

Item, In regard before the new money be all coined, and especially in the
beginning, those who make a trade of transporting money out of the Kingdom, may
endeavor, and be apt to convey much away, That new searchers may be placed in
all Ports, by Sea and Land, and such as may apply their whole care and
diligence to the well executing of this particular, and nothing else, provided,
they be persons of trust. And that whosoever shall be found guilty of this
fact, may be punished and condemned to death (if convinced) without any
further process, That there may be no reclaiming or remission of this penalty
and punishment, but if those who are incharged therewith, be slack or
negligent in the execution of their office, that they may suffer the same
punishment. And to the end this may be the better effected, that whoso^ver
shall declare, or discover it, may have the one half or moitie of the money so
seized.

Transportation of Corn, Leather, Sheep, and Woolls.
THat no Corn, or the Leather of Sevilla, may be transported out of the
Kingdom. That the Mercedes, or gratuities and taxes (which were given and
imposed in some parts of these Kingdoms) of levying certain duties, for giving
license to transport Corn out of the said Kingdoms, and Leather from the City
of Sevilla, may be revoked, and declared to be void. For besides, that the
said taxes be unlawful, they are very hurtful and prejudicial to these
Kingdoms, and the City of Sevilla. And that their Majesty's may never
hereafter give the said license for money, or for any imposition.

Item, That henceforwards no sheep or hogs alive or dead, or any other cattle
may be transported out of the Kingdoms. For this has been the cause that
flesh, leather and tallow are raised to above double the price of what they
were wont to yield, and if the said cattle be not carried a way, these
commodities will return to the same rate they were at formerly, which will be
a great benefit to the Kingdoms. And if any be found a delinquent herein, That
the one half of his goods and estate may be confiscate to their Majesty's, one
fourth part given to the accuser, and the other fourth part employed for
reparations and public uses of the City, or Town, whereof he was Inhabitant.

Item, That the Merchants, Clothiers, and other trades of the Kingdoms, may
take to work and spend therein one half of all woolls, bought by Natives, or
Strangers, to send out of the Kingdoms, paying the same price, as they had
done, for them; if they had given ready money: And if they had taken them upon
trust, giving security to pay at a certain day, that the Merchants, and
others, might have them upon the same conditions, giving the like security.
And that the Officers of Justice may take the said Woolls from the Shepherds,
or buiers, and deliver them to such persons (as is beforementioned) not
suffering any fraud or contention to arise hereupon, but the truth being
known, speedily to deliver them to the said Merchants, and others, to be
wrought in these Kingdoms, paying in ready money, or giving the said security;
And in case any Officer neglect his duty herein, that he may lose one whole
years Salarie, and be obliged to make good the damage and interest of the
Party.

Concerning the Council, Courts, and Justices.
THat his Majesty would be pleased to dismiss those of the Council, whom
hitherto he has kept, in regard they have advised him to the great prejudice
of his Majesty's Roial Crown, and the excessive damage of the Kingdoms. That
they never be admitted to be of his Privy Council, the Queen's Council, or
Council of Justice. That their Majesty's would select some of the Natives of
those Kingdoms to be of their Roial Councils, who were known to be loial and
zealous for their service, and which would set aside their particular interests
for the people's good.

Item, that the President, Council, Judges, Alcaldes, and Officers of the
Courts and Chanceries may be visited every four years, according to the usual
manner. That those who are found faulty, may be punished, as the Laws of the
Kingdom have ordered, according to the hainousness of their crime: and those
who are found otherwise, may be acknowledged to be good men, and rewarded by
his Majesty.

Item, that the said Offices, as well of the Council, as of his Majesty's
family, Chanceries, and other Courts, be not given by favor, or procured by
the Petitions, or importunate solicitations, of any Grandees, or other
persons, near about his Majesty, but that they may be bestowed upon able and
deserving men: and that the provision may be to Offices, not to the Persons,
that enjoie them. And if any shall have, or procure them, contrary to the
tenor hereof, the kingdom may not acknowledge such as Officers, but that they
may be disabled to keep or execute any the aforesaid, or other public Offices.

Item, that the said Offices of the Council Roial, Alcaldes de Corte,
Chanceries, or other Courts, may not be provided or possessed by such as com
but newly from their Studies, but by persons ^ndued with qualities, and parts
necessary and fit for his Majesty's service, having been experienced and
practiced in the exercise of the Office of Counselors at Law and Judges, for
the contrary having been don hitherto, has been the occasion of great
inconve^iences and damages to these Kingdoms.

Item, that the Judges of the Council Roial, Chanceries, and other Courts,
which Voted in the first sentences, may not Vote nor sentence any processes
upon review: but pass the View and Votes of such Suits by order to the Judges
of another Court, as is usual in Suits, which by reason of disco^d, are
remitted from one Court to another, for of the sentences pronounced by those of
the Council, and Judges of the said Courts, being reviewed by them, have
proceeded and do proceed great inconveniences. For they show themselves very
passionate and desirous to confirm their sentences, defending them as if they
were Advocates for the party in whose favor they formerly had given sentence.
Writs of error.
And that all Suits may be determined by two Courts, without any
inconvenience, that that those Writs may be useless, which, they that are in
Suit, procure in like cases to make their Suits pass through all Courts.

Item, That his Majesty provide and appoint a Superintendent to be constant
and resident in every one of the Courts and Chanceries, as was accustomed in
the time of the Catholic Queen Donia Isabel our Lady, and that they be
persons of Authority and good intention, who may provide that the ordinances
be observed, and see that the suites be conformable thereunto; That Clients
applying themselves to them, may find redress and help for their grievances,
and that his Majesty may be informed by them of the State of his Courts, and
of the justice administered in them.

Item, That the said offices of the Council, Chancerie and Alcaldias, be not
perpetual, in regard it is so expedient for his Majesty's service, and the
good of the Kingdoms. That the Judges and Alcaldes, may not hold themselves
Lords of those offices, nor think it to be an injury to them to be
displaced, and others appointed to officiate.

Concerning the Council and Courts.
THat the offices of the privy Council, in what concerns the Kingdoms of
Castilla and Leon, and judges, his Majesty's Alcaldes de la casa e Corte,
Chanceries, and all other offices of justice, may not be given to any
strangers, but to the inhabitants and natives of the said Kingdoms; And that
for this respect no act or letters pattents of naturalization may be given,
and if any should be given, that they may be respectively received, but not
fulfilled. That the number of the judges of the Council of justice may be
twelve, neither more nor less, and those to be of such qualities and parts as
the Laws of the Kingdom do require.

Item, That Suits be determined in the Council and Chancerie in their order,
and as they stand registered, and by the Courts where they are depending without
joining of any others to them. That concerning this particular, his Majesty
may give no writs in derogation of ordinances. Also that those which were to
be pleaded, and determined in Chancerie, be not kept still nor removed by
wr^ts to the Council. And that those judges that can take recognisance of
Suits, and causes, may not be put by from hearing and determining the said
Suits by writ or order from his Majesty. And in case the judges be suspected,
the Parties may have the remedy of appeal. Or if his Majesty have given any
such writs, that he revoke and annul them. That henceforwards it may remain as
a perpetual and inviolable Law, that the Judges of the Council and Chancerie,
present or to com, may not obey the said writs, under pain of being deprived
of their offices, and paying one hundred thousand Maravediz each, for his
Majesty's exchequer. And that the same may be observed in the writs which
shall be given by his Secretary, the Suites depending.

Item, That those of the Council, Judges of Courts and Chancerie, and Alcaldes
de Corte, may not possess or hold more then one office. And in case they should
have two, or more, that they may be taken from them, and that they may receiv
Salarie for no more then one office.

Item, that matters of Justice which may be prejudicial to the parties
henceforwards, may be determined and dispatched by those of the Council, and
not by the privy Chamber, for by this means, things will be carried according
to Justice, and without grievances.

Item, that the Secretaries appointed for the Chamber, may not have Vote in the
Council of Justice, concerning those matters which depend on private Writs or
Mandamus from their Majesty's; to the end they may not defend in the Council
any Writs which they had so signed, whereby the parties might be aggrieved.

Item, that the said Secretaries appointed for the Chamber, may not receiv any
thing besides the Salarie, which his Majesty is pleased to allow them, it
being competent. For by experience it has been seen they have demanded and
adjudged diverse unjust things concerning the taxes and impositions of the
Kingdom. And they keep intelligencers through the whole Kingdom, to give them
notice of what is vacant, and how they may charge new taxes and impositions.
And this Office being in their own hands, they may ask what they list, and it
is granted them. But in case the said Secretaries, or any of them, should
demand any thing for themselves, their children or friends, that for so doing,
they may lose their Offices, and not only be disabled to execute the said
Offices, but all others whatsoever.

Item, that the diffinitive sentences pronounced by the Alcaldes de casa e
Corte, and Chanceries, in case of death, or mutilation of members, may have the
liberty of appeal to those of the Council and Judges of the Courts Roial. And
that the said Alcaldes may be obliged to grant the said appeals and
supplications according to Law.

Item, that the said Alcaldes de casa e Corte, and Chancerie, or their
Notaries, may not exact or receiv either more or less duties or fees then the
ordinary Alcaldes of the Corregidores of Cities and Towns in this Kingdom,
where there is Counsel and Chancerie.

Item, that the Alcaldes and other Officers of the Court called the Hermandad
(which is properly for High-way-men) may have a constant place of Residence,
when they leav their Office, which those that succeed them may enjoie; and that
these may have power to question and execute their sentence against the said
Judges and Officers, their Predecessors.

Item, that the Corregidores, Alcaldes, Officers of Cities, Towns, Villages,
Buroughs, and other places of Justice in these Kingdoms, may not be continued
in the said Offices above the space of one year after their donomination,
although the Cities, Towns, and Commonalties should desire it; for the said
Offices having been continued for longer time, has occasioned many
inconveniences and defects of Justice to such Cities and Towns.

Item, that henceforwards no Corregidores may be provided or appointed for any
Cities or Towns of these Kingdoms, but when the said Cities or Towns shall
require it, in regard it is so ordained by the Laws of the Land. And that the
said Cities and Towns may place and provide their ordinary. Alcaldes, being
men of abilities, that so the Salaries of Corregidores, their Lievtenants and
other Officers may be saved. That the Cities and Towns may appoint and allow
moderate and reasonable Salaries to the said ordinary Alcaldes out of the
public stock. And that the said stipendarie Judges may be tied to serve only
that Town or City which gives them the Salarie.

Item, that in cases wherein a Judge Inquisitor is required, those that are
appointed for Judges Inquisitors may go with the limited Salarie at the charge
of the King's Exchequer, and not at the charge of the Delinquents, for to
recover their Salaries, they make Innocent men Delinquents; and after that the
said Salaries and charges be recovered of those who were condemned and
declared guilty by those of the Council, or other Judges, the said
Examinations may be reviewed by way of Appeal, Commission, or otherwise.

Item, that henceforwards no Corregidor, or other Judge of what quality soever,
may be allowed to receiv his Salarie, or any part thereof, or by way of Ayuda
de costa (which is to help bear his charge) out of any fines or forfeitures
adjudged by them, but may return them to the Exchequer, to the end he may not
be thought to have pronounced an unjust sentence, out of covetousness thereof.
And that whosoever shall receiv any money in that kind, may be condemned to
pay four times as much into his Majesty's Exchequer, and be made incapable
of any Office ever after.

Concerning Encomiendas, or promotions to Dignities, and Council of the Orders.
THat those of the Council of the Orders, as Presidents, Judges, and other
Officers be visited in the same manner as is ordered for the Council Roial.

Item, that the Treasurers and Officers of the Orders, and Maestrazgos, or
Masterships, make their Visitations from three to three years, that it may
appear how they behave themselves in their Offices, and those that shall be
found guilty may suffer punishment.

Item, that the Encomiendas of the Military Orders of Santjago, Calatrava,
Alcantara, may not be given or conferred upon any Strangers, although they be
naturalized. But that herein may be observed the same rule as in
Ecclesiastical Offices, Dignities, and Benefices, whereby they may be provided
according as is constituted and ordained in the Statutes of the Order.

Concerning Bulls, Cruzadas, and Compositiones.
THat no Bulls, Cruzadas, or Compositions, of what quality soever be suffered
to be preached in these Kingdoms, unless upon some real and urgent occasion,
debated and approved in Parliament. That the money which shall be rai^ed
t^ereby, may be deposited in the Collegial or Cathedral Church of the
Bishopric, and not to be taken out thence, spent or employed otherwise, then
in the same urgent occasion, for which the Bull was granted.

Item, That in case there be such necessity of preaching the Bulls, Cruzadas,
and Compositiones, as above said, this manner and order may be observed. That
there be care had to choos honest men, of good consciences, and learned, that
they may know and understand what they preach. That they exceed not in their
preaching the cases and things contained in the Bulls. That they preach in none
but the Collegial, or Cathedral Churches. That in places where there are no
Collegial or Cathedral Churches, the Bulls may be sent to the Curates or their
Vicars, to the end they may divulge and publish them to their Parishioners;
That they advise and ^dmonish the people, but impose no Penalty, if they take
them not, and that they might receiv them if they would. That there may be no
such exorbitance, as was usual heretofore, injoyning the people to com, and
detaining them perforce in their Sermons, not suffering them to follow their
callings and occupations, unless they took their Bulls, and other such ill
demeanors.

Item, That whatsoever was to be recovered and gathered by virtue of the Bulls
thus received, may not be recovered by way of excommunication or interdict,
but by demanding it before the secular Justice of the City, Town, or Village,
where the Bull had been received. That the Alcaldes of the Villages may have
power herein, for the contrary, having been done, has much endangered the
Souls of laboring-men, Priests, and other persons, and the people suffer very
many and great oppressions in this manner of recovering it.

Item, That henceforwards for ever the Commissaries of the Cruzadas and
Compositiones may not levy or recover any thing of that which some Cities,
Towns, Villages, and Corporations have expended in their own houses in
feasting, Bull-baitings, or acts of Charity, although they do it from an
ancient custom, by vow, or what other way soever they can pretend.

Item, That the moneys levied by the Cruzadas and Compositiones, which were
granted for the war against the Moors; costs and charges of the Armies which
had been or are to be raised against the enemies of our Catholic faith, and
to releiv the Kingdoms and Cities of Africa, may be exp^nded and employed to
the same end, for which they were granted, and that they may not be granted
hereafter upon any other pretense whatsoever, nor the said money, or any part
thereof, may be given or bestowed as a Merced or gratuitie upon any body,
because, besides the public damage, men's Souls are endangered by the not
employing it to the use, for which it was granted; Which if it were applied to
the proper and right intent, the Royal Revenues would remain free for the
service and augmentation of the Royal estate.

Item, That the Mercedes and Librancas of any money of those said Bulls,
Cruzadas and Compositiones, which have been given to any particular persons, as
well natives as strangers, may be revoked and made void.

Concerning the Indies, Isles, and Continent.
THat henceforwards for ever, no Mercedes may be made of Indians, whereby the
Gold, or any other Commodities may be taken thence, to any person or persons,
of what quality soever. That these which hitherto have been, may be revoked;
for by that means their Majesty's Roial Patrimony has been, and will be,
much damnified, in stead of being advantaged, by reason of the great quantity
of Gold exhausted thence: Besides that, they are used more like Infidels and
slaves, then Christians, as they are.

Item, that the house of Contratacion at Sevilla, for the Isles and Continent of
the Indies, may remain for ever in the said City, and not be removed to any
other City or place within this Kingdom or without. In regard the said City
of Sevilla is so famous and fit a place for it, and it would be a great
hinderance to these Kingdoms, and a disservice to their Majesty's, if it should
be altered.

Concerning Mercedes.
THat their Majesty's, or the succeeding Kings, may not make any Merced of
goods confiscated, or to be confiscated, or of any part or parcel thereof, to
any Judge, or Judges, who have given, or are to give Sentence in the said
Causes. That the said Judges, or any of them, may not receiv any such
Mercedes, either in payment or lieu of their Salaries, or for Ayuda de Costa,
or in any other kind whatsoever, directly or indirectly, either for
themselves, or their wives, children, friends or kindred; for by this means
they, being free from all covetousness and interests, may, with more equity
and Justice, proceed and give their Sentence. That whosoever shall do the
contrary, may be obliged to restore four times as much into his Majesty's
Exchequer, and that they may for ever remain incapable of enjoying the same, or
any other public Offices.

Item, that their Majesty's or their Successors, may not give or make any
Mercedes or Librancas of goods and money, which has not been brought into
their Exchequer, or in their own hands; for by this means they will know what
they give, and how they endammage themselves; which not knowing, they easily
grant the said Librancas and Mercedes, as their Majesty's had given away in
that nature great quantities of pearls and money, which (if preserved) had been
sufficient to have maintained their Roial Household, without making such shifts
as they were driven to, by taking up money at Interest, or demanding Subsidies
of the Subjects and Natives of their Kingdoms.

Item, that their Majesty's, or their Successors, may not give or grant any
Merced of goods, demanded in their Majesty's names, or of the Roial Crown of
these Kingdoms, concerning which there is any Suit depending, unless sentence
be first pronounced against the possessors thereof, and that they be
absolutely condemned. That whatsoever has been done to the contrary
heretofore, may be revoked. Otherwise it would hinder the free Administration
of Justice according to right and equity. And that whosoever should receiv or
procure any such Mercedes, may for ever be held incapable and unworthie of
receiving for themselves, or others, any Merced from their Majesty's, or their
Successors, in these Kingdoms.

Item, that their Majesty's may pleas to revoke all Mercedes whatsoever, which
had been made or granted since the death of the Catholic Queen Donia Isabel,
as well by the Kings Don Fernando, and Don Felipe, as by Don Carlos our present
Sovereign. And whatsoever Confirmations have been made of any Towns, Villages,
Vassals, Jurisdictions, Salt Pits, Mines of Gold and Silver, Copper, Lead, Tin,
or Alum. In regard besides, that they are contrary to the Laws of the Land,
the most illustrious and Catholic Queen Donia Isabel, our Lady, did
absolutely prohibit and forbid them, when, by her last Will and Testament, she
left the government and rule of these Kingdoms to the charge and care of the
Catholic King Don Fernando; And that all this may be applied to the proper
use and benefit of the Roial Crown of these Kingdoms, and that those persons
who have obtained any such Mercedes, may make no further use of them hereafter.

Item, forasmuch as since the deceas of the Queen Donia Isabel have been made
diverse Mercedes, and many Patents and Privileges of Gentilitie given for money
to several persons, without any just cause or consideration of services done to
their Majesty's, that might deserv the said favor; whereby the Towns,
Commonalties, and those which pay the taxes, have been much damnified and
injured. That their Majesty's may revoke all such Patents, Mercedes, and
Privileges whatsoever, and those to whom they were given, may not any ways
enjoie them. And that henceforward no such Mercedes, Patents, or Privileges may
ev^r be granted, or be in force, to benefit those to whom they were given.
And that this may never be derogated or abrogated with any claus general or
particular, or by any ordinary or absolute Power.

Item, forasmuch as contrary to equity, and the tenor and fo^m of the Laws
of these Kingdoms, have been granted and made, diverse Mercedes of the Reversion
of Offices, Benefices, Dignities, and other things, in the hands of men yet
living: That their Majesty's may revoke all of them, without exception, that
hitherto have been made or granted, either by their Majesty's, or their
Predecessors. That nothing in this nature be ever granted hereafter, and if
any should be granted, that they may not be fulfilled, nor take effect,
notwithst^^ding any derogatorie clauses with penalties and confirmations
whatsoever; but to the end they may be resisted and be of no value, that they
may bear no penal^ies at all; And that whosoever shall procure any such
Merced, may be made incapable of any place in Court, or any other public
Office.

Item, that his Majesty discard and put away the Officers of his Roial Family
and Kingdom, as Treasurers, and their substitutes, and all others whosoever
have behaved themselves amiss in their offices, to his Majesty's great
disservice, and the universal damage of these Kingdoms; who having (as when
they first entered into their Offices) little or nothing of their own
patrimonies, and their profits much exceeding their expenses, have raised
themselves vaste Estates, to the prejudice as well of the public good of the
Kingdoms, and the Natives thereof, as the impairing and diminishing of the
Roial Patrimony.

Item, That the offices of his Majesty's Royal family and the Kingdom, those
of the Royal Courts, and the Alcaldes and Fiscales, or Attournies thereof,
Corregimientos, Assistencias, Alguazilagos, Regimientos, Veyntiquatrias,
Escrivanias of the Audiencias, and Council, and whatsoever other offices of the
Cities, Towns, and Places of the Kingdoms, which are at their Majesty's, and
their successors, disposal, now and from this time forwards, may never be fold
or given for money, or bestowed, as Mercedes, upon any, who being unfit to
execute the said offices, may make sale of them, in regard the sale of them is
very detestable, and forbidden by the Common Laws and rights of the Kingdoms,
for the great damages and prejudices which have accrewed thereby to the good
of the Public. And that the said offi^es may be freely given and bestowed
upon persons of sufficient parts and abilities to perform and execute them.

Item, That if the said offices or any of them, be provided otherwise, or
bestowed contrary to the tenor and form mentioned in the precedent Article,
That they may be held as vacant, and whosoever is so placed in them, may be
discarded. And their Majest^e's and successors provide and bestow them as above
said.

Item, That the officers which are to serve in the Court, or in any the Cities,
or Towns, of these Kingdoms, as well of the Iuzgados as of the Veintequarto
Escrivanias, and other such like offices, may not possess more then one office.
And if they be such as may be supplied by Substitutes, or ^ievtenants, that
these may be paid by the principal officers. And that their Majesty's or
successors grant no stipend or Salarie to the said Substitutes, nor the
Principals consent thereunto, under pain of losing their offices, and others to
be put into their places.

Item, as touching the Confirmations of the privileges of the Right or Custom
called, Maravediz de Iuro; That no confirmation of the said Privileges may be
required, and that their Majesty's give Command to the officers, who have
raised great sums thereby, to restore the said money to the persons of whom
they received it, and that speedily and freely without any trouble or suit.

Item, that those of the Offices Roial, as well High Treasurers, as those of
the Cruzadas, Compositions, or the Islands and Continent of the Indie^, may be
obliged to certify and declare unto their Majesty's, and their Successors,
whatsoever debts remain conce^led and forgotten, and all other things in the
said Offices, appertaining to the Roial Patrimony, but that they give no
intelligence thereof to any particular or private persons, lest they should
beg them, under pain of paying twice as much into the Exchequer or Roial
Patrimony, and of being deprived of the said Offices, and made incapable not
only of them, but all others.

Item, that those who have had, or have any Office Roial, or charge of the
Registers of the Roial Revenues, may not have the said Remainders of the
farming thereof, and in case any have made use of them, that he or they be
obliged to pay the double of what he has received thereof, into their
Majesty's ^xchequer, and lose their Offices, with the Salaries and benefits
thereunto belonging.

Item, that all those who have bought any Offices since the deceas of the
Catholic King Don Fernando, which could not be sold according to the Laws of
the Land, and the Contents of the preceding Articles, may not execute the said
Offices, under pain of death and loss of good, and their Majesty's may provide
and dispose them to other able and sufficient persons.

Concerning Residencia's.
THat all those Officers who had charge of his Majesty's Estate, in the time of
the Catholic King Don Fernando, his Grandfather, may be brought to an account
for what they did in their Offices and Charges, concerning his Majesty's Estate
and the Roial patrimony, which passed through their hands, and that they
produce these accounts before such persons as shall be nominated and appointed
by his Majesty, and the Kingdom. That his Majesty appoint and nominate these
said persons within thirty days after these Articles and Laws be granted by
their Majesty's, and in case his Majesty does not nominate any within the
said term of thirty days, that then those Accounts may be produced before
such persons as the Kingdoms shall appoint, who may receiv them for their
Majesty's Exchequer, and condemn and lay penalties upon those whom they find
guilty, according to equity and the Laws of the Kingdoms.

Item, that the like Account be also given by the Treasurers, and other
Officers, whosoever have been encharged heretofore with the Cruzadas, Bulls,
and Compositions, or with the Gold and Pearls brought from the ^slands and
Continent of the Indies; and the same order to be observed therein, as is
above-specified.

Item, that those of the Council, and the Officers of his Majesty's Family and
Court, who have been, or are to be dismissed, may make their Residencia, or
render their accounts before the Persons mentioned in the preceding Arcicles.

Item, that the said Officers be thus called to account, because they have
given advise and notice of many things which have been begged and given as
Mercedes, to the great Prejudice of the Roial Patrimony; which advices and
informations they gave, either to enjoie a share thereof themselves, or to
purchase them wholly, or to procure others to buie or farm them, by which
means, for very small matters, they have gained vaste sums of money. Therefore
in regard this has been a great damage and prejudice to the Roial Patrimony,
their Majesty's may ratify and allow the above mentioned persons to take the
said Accounts and Residencia's. And whatsoever shall be thus discovered by
them, that it may all accrue to their Majesty's Exchequer; for if they had
rightly and truly performed their Offices, they ought to have given their
Majesty's those Informations, and not to private persons.

Concerning Prelates and other Particulars.
THat the Bishoprics, Archbishopricks, Dignities, Canonicates, and other
Ecclesiastical preferments whatsoever, or the pensions thereof, may not be
conferred upon any ^trangers, but upon the Natives and Inhabitants of these
Kingdoms. That if any were disposed of contrary to the tenor hereof, his
Majesty may be pleased by Apostolical Authority, to order that they may be
resigned and conferred upon Natives of these Kingdoms, satisfaction being
given to those that are dispossessed of them, to their full value in other
rents in their own Countries.

Item, in regard his Majesty had given away the Archbishopric of Toledo,
before he was received and sworn King in the Parliament at Valladolid. That his
Majesty may make a new presentation of the said Archbishopric, and confer it
upon a Native and Inhabitant of the Kingdom of Castilla, who may deserv it,
being a person of learning and conscience answerable, a Divine or Civil
Lawyer; for the bestowing it on the Nephew of Monsieur de Xeures, contrary to
the Laws of the Kingdom, has been, and is, very prejudicial to the Kingdom,
and the said Dignity, he being under age, and absent, (and although he were
a Native of the Kingdom, it was not fit nor just to give it him). That the
Revenue of the said Dignity was transported out of the kingdom, wherewith if
he were a Native, and resident in the said dignity, he might entertain many
Nobles and Gentlemen in his house, as has been the custom formerly. And if his
Ma^estie would be pleased to gra^ifie the said Nephew of Monsieur de Xeures
with some other lands in his own Country. It might very well be done.

Item, that all Letters of Naturalization whatsoever, that have formerly been
given, may be revoked, and never any granted hereafter. And if any should
be granted, although with derogatorie clauses, and by an absolute power, that
they may be respectively received, but not fulfilled. That there may be no
penalty for the nonperformance of any such supplication, and whosoever
should be strict therein, may be apprehended and severely punished by the
Justices of the kingdom where he was taken.

Item, that the Judges, Notaries, and other Officers of the Ecclesiastical
Courts, may not have or demand more fees then those of the Secular Courts,
according to the ^tatutes of the kingdoms. And if, in any case, the
Apostolical Authority be requisite, their Majesty's may be pleased to send to
their Emb^ssador to procure it from his Holiness, and send it.

Item, that the Archbishops, Bishops, and Prelates of the kingdoms, may reside
in their own Diocese the greatest part of the year, whereo^, if they fail, that
they may lose proportionably a part of their fruits, to be employed for the
building or repairing of their Churches; for, by reason of their being absent,
the Divine Service is not performed as it ought to be. That his Ma^estie send
for a Bull to this effect from his Holiness, within the space of one year. And
if his Majesty did not send for it within the said term, that the kingdom
might have power to demand it, and take, by his Authority, out of the fruits of
the said dignities, as much as would diffraie the charges of the Journie, and
solicitation to procure it.

Item, forasmuch as his Holiness at his Majesty's r^quest had sent a License to
the Archbishop of Granada, purposing that whosoever should have his said power
(although secular persons) might judge and give sentence in some cases against
Priests, in criminal matters. That his Majesty would be pleased to cause the
said License to be enrolled within six months, and send a Copy thereof into
these kingdom, to excuse and avoid the scandals which arise thereby.

Concerning Regidores.
THat henceforwards, their Majesty's, or their Successors, never give or grant
any License to the Regidores, Veyntiquatros, Iurados, and other Officers of
the Council of Cities, Towns or Villages of these kingdoms, to live with, or
have any dependence upon Noblemen. That all Licenses to this effect
whatsoever, granted in former times, may be revoked; That the Laws of the
Kingdoms may be herein observed and executed. That whosoever shall procure, or
make use of any such License, may be deprived of his office. And that their
Majesty's dispose thereof, as being vacant, but that he or his children may
never re-injoy it.

Item, That the Regidores of the Cities and Towns of these Kingdoms, who are
Lawyers, may not execute the office of Advocates, nor plead in the said Cities
or Towns, but for them and their Commonalties.

Alienation of Goods or Lands from the Royal Crown.
THat his Majesty command effectually to restore the Towns, Villages, Forts,
Jurisdictions, Revenues, and all other Rights whatsoever, to the Cities and
Towns of his Royal Crown, which they had formerly in their possession, and
which the most illustrious Queen Donia ^sabel, our Lady, commanded in her will
to be restored. And to the end this may be effected, and the wills of the
Catholic King Don Fernando and his Queen Donia Isabel, may be fulfilled, That
executors may be appointed with sufficient power to perform the same within
six months without further delaie.

Item, to the end this may remedied henceforwards, That their Majesty's or
Successors, for no reason or cause, neither in payment or satisfaction of
services, or any other ways whatsoever, may alienate any thing from the
Royal Crown or Patrimony, and in case any alienation be made, that it may
be restored.

Concerning Forts and Alcaydias, or Governments.
THat the Forts and Alcaydias of the strong holds of these Kingdoms, may not
be given to any forreiners, but entrusted to the Natives and Inhabitants of
these Kingdoms, although they may produce letters of naturalization, And that
the same order be observed herein, as in the Dignities and Ecclesiastical
preferments.

Item, That his Majesty take away all command or governments whatsoever of
Castles and Forts, possessed by strangers, or transferred by them for money to
any natives of these Kingdoms.

Item, that Antonio de Fonseca may be dispossessed of the offices and command
he has in these Kingdoms, in regard of the great mischiefs and scandals which
they suffer by his occasion.

Item, that the Forts and Alcaydias may not be given to any Noblemen or
persons of high birth and quality. And that the Alcaydes or Commanders thereof
may take the oath of fealty to his Majesty, and give security to the Cities
and Towns where they are, that, by or from the said Forts, they shall receiv no
damage or prejudice.

Item, that his Majesty give order forthwith, and every two years from this
time forwards, to visit and repair, as occasion does require, the Forts and
places of strength upon the frontiers of these Kingdoms.

Concerning Cloth.
THat the Cloth that is imported from other Countries may be of the same size
and goodness, as those which are wrought in these Kingdoms, according as it is
ordered by the Statutes and Act of Parliament. That the said Act may be
executed as well upon foreign Clothes, as those which are made in these
Kingdoms. That what deferring of the time of the Act, or Licenses soever have
been granted to sell and disperse them in these Kingdoms, may be revoked and
declared void. That hereafter no such Licenses be granted, but in case there
be, that they may not be fulfilled. And that, without stopping or arresting
them, the Justices may proceed according to the Act, under pain of losing their
offices, and paying one hundred thousand Maravediz toward the reparations and
charitable uses of the City, Town, or Village, where their Residence is.

Contribution.
IN regard it is ordained by the Laws of the Land, that certain Towns and
Villages (which now are under the possession of some Noblemen) should
proportionably (as the rest of their neighboring Cities and Towns) bear a share
in the Tributes and Contributions, and Taxes for Hedges, Bridges, Fountains,
Watchmen, Suits in Law, Defenses, and enlargement of Territories; yet by the
favor of Noblemen and persons of great quality, (to whom they belong) they do
not observe or fulfill his Majesty's Commands herein. That henceforwards they may
be obliged to perform them, and in case of default to lose their Offices, and
all the Salarie thereof; and that the Lords of the said places may not oppose
or do any thing to the contrary under pain of losing the Lordship and
propriety of the said places, or Towns, which afterward shall be as
Crown Lands never to be alienated from the Royal Patrimony.

GENERALS.
FOrasmuch as his Majesty, in the Parlaments which he called at Valladolid
and the Groyn, did grant some things, which, for the profit and public good of
the Kingdoms, ought to be effected: That his Majesty command all provisions
and power necessary for the performance thereof, to be given to the Cities,
Towns, and other places of the Kingdoms.

Item, that his Majesty give order to proceed rigorously against Antonio de
Fonseca, Alcalde Ronquillo, Gutiere Quixada, El Licenciado Iuanes, and the
rest, that had any hand in the bur^ing and destroying of the Town of Medina del
Campo* And that his Majesty approve and allow of what the Kingdom shall do
concerning the confiscation of their, or any of th^^^ estates and goods.

Item, that their Majesty's approve the Assembly which the Cities and Towns of
the Kingdoms have made, and do make to the end they may repair and remedy the
exorbitancies and grievances of the Public; to make and ordain these Articles,
and all which they have done in order to the suspending of those of the
Council, and Officers of their Majesty's Family and Court, placing and
displacing Officers of Justice, taking and demolishing of Forts, pulling down
of houses, killing of men, tumults and uproars, and judging and sentencing
other matters of the Kingdoms; their endeavors in taking away all that might
stop or hinder their proceedings herein, and any other excess whatsoever, as in
the order and form of the premises is contained* The assembling the people,
raising of Arms, and the punishment which certain Cities and Commonalties have
inflicted upon the persons, houses, and goods of ^om men, whom they esteemed
enemies to the public good of the Kingdoms. And that their Majesty's
acknowledge to be well employed, all and every the sums of money which they
have taken out of the Roial Revenue, and other things, and disbursed in payment
of the said men, and Armies, or otherways in prosecution of the abovesaid
premises: And whatsoever taxes they had imposed and recovered to that effect,
or expended in any kind. That their Majesty's would command all to be
remitted and absolutely pardoned, as also not only their Assemblies and
Councils of the Cities and Towns of the Kingdoms, but likewise that every
particular person or persons that had been active therein, might be free from
any trouble or question therefore in any Courts, civil or criminal. That
their Majesty's would revoke and declare void, all and every information or
informations, commands, sentences, and provisions which those of the Council,
or the Alcalde Ronquillo, or any other Judge whatsoever, had made or given
against any of the Cities or Towns of the Kingdoms, or against any particular
persons, and that for this cause they, nor any of them, might be deprived of
their privileges or offices, but might remain free and indemnified. In regard
they were moved thereunto out of their respects to their Majesty's service, and
the public good of the Kingdoms, and for the increasing and preserving of the
revenues and Patrimony Roial, in order to the obligations and duties which they
owed to their natural Sovereigns, according as the Laws of the Kingdoms have
ordained. And that his Majesty would grant, autorize, and confirm the said
Articles as a perpetual and inviolable Law for ever, and that he would promise
and swear, by God and his holy Evangelists, never to revoke, or consent to the
revoking or altering of them, or do, or suffer to be done, any thing contrary
to their true intent and meaning in Parliament, or out of Parliament: And that
he would not demand of the Pope or other Prelate whatsoever any dispensation
or absolution for the said oath and promise.

SECT* III.
THese Articles were sent to Flanders by those of the Iunta, to be delivered
to the Emperor. Antonio Vazquez de Avila carried one Copy of them, and Maestro
Fray Pablo (a man of an exemplarie life and holy intentions, Who was an
exempted person and reserved by the Emperor to be punished.
only blinded with a zeal for his Country, seeing the Kingdom ruined)
another. They went several ways, but neither of them durst appear before the
Emperor, and some say, they never came into Flanders. Antonio Vazquez de Avila
arrived at length at Worms in Germany, which the Emperor hearing, commanded
him to be apprehended and imprisoned in a Fort; but after some time, being
better informed, he gave order to releas him. Fray Pablo, and Sancho Zimbron,
who went together, hearing, before they came to the Emperor, how Antonio
Vazquez had been welcomed, went no further then Bruxels. These Articles were
applauded and held for holy things amongst the Commonaltie; they said, The
Emperor must be very cruel if he did not confirm them. That those of the
Iunta deserved an immortal Crown, and a never-dying fame for their pains and
care in making such excellent and holy Ordinances, whereby their Kingdoms
should be made the happiest, and most opulent in the world.

SECT. IV.
THe Lord Admiral, being desirous to compose these differences and disorders
of the Kingdoms, before they broke out any further, resolved to go and convers
with those of the Iunta at Tordesillas, and being at Torrelobaton, he sent to
them, desiring, that they would give him the liberty and safe conduct to go to
them. Those of the Iunta answered, That they knew very well, that his Lordship
came to speak with them concerning the Commonalties of the Kingdoms, but they
desired him not to put himself to the trouble of coming thither, until he had
dismissed those Gentlemen, with their sou^diers, out of Medina, and his own
lands, and those of the Council likewise, in regard they disserved his
Majesty, and hindered the good of the Kingdom, which don, they should be very
glad to serve him, and show him all the respects due to his person. The Admiral
replied, that he was well contented to discharge all those soldiers, and send
away all those of the Council, except the Cardinal and the Lord High Constable
of Castilla, who were the Governors and principal men of the Kingdoms: Those of
the Iunta would not be satisfied, unless they were all sent away. Whereupon
they sent two Heralds with a Notarie public, to require him with great
protestations, that he should not permit the mischiefs and damages which
might be occasioned by the Iunta, and the Armies of the Advers Party. They
sent others also with trumpets, to require the Lord High Constable, and the
Earl of Alva, not to levy any Soldiers, because that would be prejudicial to
the Roial Crown, and hurtful to the Kingdoms. The Lord High Constable received
those that brought him this message very courteously, and commanded a dinner to
be prepared for them; After which, he sent them to the Earl of Alva, with
twelv of his own men on hors-back. The Earl apprehended the chief man of them,
commanding him to be clapped in prison, and afterward, they say, he caused
him to be strangled, and gave no other Answer to the Iunta: whereat they were
very much displeased; others said, The Earl did like a worthy Gentleman, for
no Law or Word is to be observed or kept with Traitors. The unfortunate man,
whom the Earl thus put to death, had been, not long before, preferred by those
of the Commonaltie, to the Office of Chamberlain to the Queen Donia Iuana. In
revenge of which cruelty (as they termed it) those of the Iunta commanded the
Lord Constable, and the Earl of Alva, to be proclaimed, in many Cities and
places of Castilla, Traitors, and capital enemies of the Kingdom; alleging,
That they raised forces against the Roial Crown, and to the prejudice of the
Kingdom. That they had made a new Broad-Seal, contrary to the Laws of the
Kingdom, wherewith they did seal Orders against his Majesty's Subjects, and
contrary to all right and Justice. That they did favor and uphold those of the
evil Counsel; and that they had apprehended her Majesty's Chamberlain, all
which was in dis-respect or contempt of her Majesty, and to the prejudice of
the public good. And therefore those of the Iunta, in order to the service of
God, and the Kingdom, did find themselves obliged to declare them Capital
Enemies, and accordingly, that their Estates and Land should be seized and
forfeited to the Roial Crown.

SECT. V.
THose of the Iunta being possessed of Tordesillas, and having the Queen, with
her family, and the whole Kingdom in their own hands, many people believed
that she was recovered, and that she was well-pleased with the proceedings of
those of the Iunta. The increasing of this opinion, and their credit with the
people, raised their thoughts to things of higher consequence, and the
novelties which every day did produce, were already swollen to so great a
number, and spread into so many parts that it is impossible to relate them so
clearly, fully, and distinctly as I would. The pretense of the Iunta was so
plausible, bearing the sugared name (which they gave it) of Liberty, and
exemption from unjust taxes and evil government, that diverse other places, were
likewise in Arms for them; And it was a miracle that any place stood out: For
they favored and countenanced them that followed their faction, and those of
the contrary Party were perpetually under the lash of their persecution.
Commotions (...) Palencia.
In Palencia the people mutinied, and would have killed the brother to their
Bishop Mota, with diverse Canons, and other Priests of the City, because they
had given possession of the Bishopric to the said Mota, Alcala de Henares.
whom they extremely hated. In Alcala de Henares they turned the Governor, and
the Vicar General to the ArchBishop, out of the City, because they hated the
Archbishop for being a kinsman to Xeures, and a stranger. Medina prepared to
make open War against Coca and Alaejos, in revenge of the mischiefs and losses
which they had sustained by Antonio de Fonseca. It would be an endless task to
undertake to give a particular relation of their outrages, what persecutions,
robberies, and murders, were committed in each place. Those of Segovia did not
lie still either, but were perpetually making new attempts against the Earl of
Chinchon, and the Town of Espinar, which they assaulted and sacked, as if they
had been Infidels, carrying away their wives and daughters, some of whose
husbands following after the Segovians, said, That if their wives went with
them beyond a certain limit, they should keep them for ever.

SECT. VI.
I Mentioned in the rising of Burgos, the prudence and courage which the Lord
high Counstable, to detain and suppress the fury of that disorderly people,
had showed, in taking upon himself the Authority and care of administering
Justice, to the great contentment and rejoicing of the Citizens. But the
inconstant Vulgar, upon no occasion, lost the respect which was due to so
honorable a person, never considering how advantageous it would have been for
them to have suff^red themselves to be governed by him in such troublesome
times. That which they pretended to be the cause of their respectless audacitie
was, That when Medina del Campo did besiege Alaejos, Segovia, Salamanca, Avila,
and other Cities, having assisted them with men to destroy that Town, out of
the exceeding hatred which they bore Antonio de Fonseca: Burgos would do the
like out of revenge of the Merchandise which they lost in Medina, by Antonio de
Fonseca's burning it: But the Lord High Constable satisfied them otherwise; And
because his son offered himself to be their Captain, which the people imagined
he did only out of subtlety and cunning to amuse them or for some other
by-respect, they began to be jealous of him; this suspicion engendered a mortal
hatred, insomuch that their fury grew beyond the bounds of moderation and
obedience. The Lord high Counstable had privately conveyed into his house four
hundred Lances: Which being known in the City, the Regidores and Gentlemen
assembled, and sent two of their company to summon him. He excused himself,
saying, he was very ill, and could not go to them: But they told him, that
they could not be satisfied with that answer, he must rise, and go with them.
At last he went, and was civilly received; being com amongst them, two of the
Assembly in the names of all the rest, rose up and thus bespake him; We are
very sorry and grieved that the honor and affection wherewith this City has
always served your Lordship and your Ancestors (being Persons of so great
quality, natives, and in a manner, Lords of all this City, which is the chief
of Castilla) should be so ill requited, as that you should keep secretly in
your house four hundred Lances, to destroy the people: we require you
forthwith to dismiss them, and reserv only twenty servants about you, if not,
the City will take their remedy. This was not very pleasing to the Lord
Constable, but it behoved him to satisfy their desires. Yet notwithstanding
he condescended to their wills, Burgos rises up in Arms against the Lord High
Constable.
the suspicions ceased not, neither were the people pacified. Upon our Lady's
day of September their fury broke out, and all the Commonaltie rose up in
Arms against him, in such a raging manner that they had killed him, if he had
not retired to his house, where almost two whole days they kept him besieged,
and Don Diego Sarmiento the Earl of Salinas with the Duchess and the Countess
their wives. After this, seeing himself the object of the people's malice, and
every hour in danger to lose his life; he conditioned with the people to let
him go freely with all his family out of the City; Which being granted, he
went to a Town of his called Briviesca. This example of the People of Burgos,
made other places commit the like audacities against their Lords; as Haro
against the Earl of Haro, Son to the Lord high Constable; Duenias against the
Earl of Buendia; and also Naxara against the Duke; although that City does
allege and prove that they rose not for the Commonaltie, but for the King,
whose subjects and tenants (they say) they are. The Lord high Constable being
at Briviesca, very full of care and sorrow to see the Kingdom in so great
distempers, and so little probability of any remedy; about the middle of
September arrived Lope Hurtado de Mendoca with dispatches and orders from the
Emperor, importing that he should be Governor of Castilla and Navarra jointly
with the Cardinal and the Admiral of Castilla; Which having read, he presently
accepted the Government of the Kingdoms: But because the Commission was for them
all three, he could not so suddenly execute the Command. For the Cardinal was
as yet at Valladolid, and the Admiral in Catalunia, in the County of Cabra,
whither the dispatches were sent to him, who was of opinion to defer the
acceptance of that Charge, until his return into Castilla, and to use some means
in the interim to agree and accommodate the differences of the Commonalties, as
you have already heard. Which difficulty being related to the Emperor, being
on the way to Aquisgran, where he was Crowned; he sent other Letters dated
the 17 October following, with special command to the Lord High Constable, that
having assembled some of the Council, he should, alone with them, execute the
charge of Governor of the Kingdoms, and provide for the remedying of the
present disorders, until such time as the Cardinal, and the Admiral could com
to join with him; which he did, as shall appear hereafter.

SECT. VII.
THe Lord High Constable seeing the remedy of the Kingdoms to lie upon his
account (although he was much offended with those of Burgos) without seeking
any reparation of honor, prudently endeavored by fair means and treatments full
of courtesy, to appeas that people, and reduce them into the Roial way of
doing their Prince service; for it was of no small importance for him, at the
beginning of his Government, to gain that City, and settle himself in it,
being the chief of Castilla, and a place of such greatness and esteem. He
kept intelligence with some principal Gentlemen of Burgos, by whose industry
the City was so well disposed and ordered, that within a short time after, he
became master of it; This was the first symptom of the Countrie's health, and
an Antidote against the desperate poison which had so infected the whole
Kingdom. The Lord High Constable, together with the City, committed to the
Charge of Don Diego Lopez de Castro, the government of the Castle of Lara, with
the territories thereof, he having first taken the Oath of Fealty, as he was
a Gentleman, according to the order and manner of Castilla, to keep it for the
Emperor. From this time forwards Burgos began to have an ill conceit of the
Iunta, disliking more and more their proceedings, especially their ill treating
of the Cardinal and those of the Council, and sent to their Commissioners to
com away from Tordesillas. After which they wrote to Valladolid, in testimony
of their Loialtie, encouraging and persuading those of that City to do the
like, in order to their due obedience to his Majesty, and the pacification of
the Kingdoms.

SECT. VIII.
THose of Valladolid, being ill satisfied with the letters which they received
from Burgos, returned them no answer, esteeming them people of small resolution
or constancy, and not fit to be trusted. Those of Burgos sent letters
likewise to those of the Junta, telling them many things by way of exhortation
and advice, amongst the rest, That they should leav the Queen in her free
liberty, to do what she pleased, and to let things remain in the same
condition the Emperor had left them, with other circumstances, which were
contradicto^ie to what formerly they seemed to desire. Whereby it appeared,
that they declined the Interest of the Junta, and favored the Lord High
Constable's Party. Some other places of the Kingdom also began to be more
moderate, by the Letters and promises which they received from the Cardinal,
and other Gentlemen of note.

SECT. IX.
IN the City of Valladolid the people were still divided by several factions,
some transported with a blind zeal, pres^ed for obedience to those of the
Iunta, thinking whatsoever they ordained was good and holy; others desired
with no less earnestness that the Lord high Constable, with those of the
Council, might be readmitted into the City, deeming whatsoever was enacted
without them, to be wicked and unjust: And hereupon they spoiled and murdered
one another, like people without sense or reason. Whereupon they wrote to the
Lord Admiral (who was their Countrie-man and near neighbor) giving him account
of the troubles of the Kingdom, and especially of the mischiefs which they
feared would befall that City in particular. Whereunto he sent an answer with
an extraordinary sens of sorrow, to see the danger whereunto the whole Kingdom
was brought, counselling and admonishing them to have a care left they lost
themselves: Moreover, in regard that City had been noted particularly for their
Loyalty to their King, and for the relation he had to it by his birth, it
grieved him to the soul to see it in such extreme distraction, which he feared
would not be so easily remedied; with several other expressions of affection
and tenderness for their welfare. But Valladolid did not set much by his
admonitions at that time: But afterward (though late) they were better
advised, and they found in the Admiral the mercy which they did expect, as
shall be set down hereafter.

SECT. X.
THe Letters from Burgos, with the sedulous and prudent endeavors of the Lord
high Constable, made those of Valladolid to bethink themselves a little, and
with a kind of remors for what was past, to begin to understand reason,
although the greatest part (but not the best) stickled hard to keep the City
in obedience to the Iunta, to the end they might compass their own ill
designs. After this the Lord high Constable sent to notify his Commission to
be Viceroy and Governor, together with the Cardinal and Lord Admiral, to all
the Cities of the Kingdom, where it might conveniently be done, which being
proclaimed, in most places was obeyed. Whereupon he sent to all his kindred
and friends, ordering them to raise what forces they could possibly, and
dispatched messengers to all the Grandees, and Gentlemen of note in the
Kingdom, encouraging and enjoining them to assemble, and be assistant to him.
And he^ring that the President, with others of the Council, were fled from
Valladolid in the manner before mentioned, he sent for them to com to him,
which the President, and some of them, did. Afterward the Letter coming to his
hands, wherein the Emperor Commanded (until the Lord Admiral could join with
them) That he and the Cardinal should govern; He presently began to put his
Majesty's orders in execution, using means to raise money for the levying and
paying of Soldiers: For without the force of Arms it seemed impossible to do
any good; and therefore he sent to borrow fifty thousand Ducats of the King
of Portugal, which he lent him freely. With which money, and what he had of
his own, or could procure any other way, he raised some Infantrie. Which done
he wrote to the Duke of Naxara Don Antonio Manrique Viceroy of Navarra for
more men, who sent him five hundred foot Soldiers and some Artillery, which
he also desired very earnestly. He sent likewise for those of the Guards, who
came from that expedition, which was called De les Gelues; Some of which were
ready to put themselves in the King's service, others took up Arms for the
Junta, by the persuasion and means of Don Pedro Giron (who was upon terms of
being their Captain General) and of the Bishop Don Antonio de Acunia, a great
stickler for the Commonaltie. Also he carried the business with those of
Burgos in such manner, that they all should be engaged in the Emperor's
service, promising them very fair conditions, and delivering into their hands
Don Iuan de Tovar Marquis of Berlanga, his second Son, and Don Bernardino de
Velasco, his youngest Son, as hostages, until such time as his Majesty should
allow and confirm his agreement with them.

SECT. XI.
Whilst the Lord High Constable was making all these diligences, the Cardinal
stole secretly out of Valladolid (as you heard already, upon the 20 of October
1520, with one single Page, and thence he went to Rioseco; whence he gave
notice to the Lord High Constable, and other Grandees of the Kingdom, desiring
them to send him men, and to repair thither in his favor; which they did. The
first that came to him, were, the Marquis of Astorga, who brought with him the
26 October, eight hundred Cross-bow-men, two hundred musketeers, four hundred
men Armed with Targets and head-pieces, two hundred Lances, and one hundred
Light-horsmen. The Earl of Venaivente came, the next day following, into
Medina, with two thousand five hundred Foot, and two hundred and fifty Lances.
The Earl of Lemos brought fifteen hundred men. The Earl of Valencia a thousand.
All which Noblemen, with some of the Council, stayed in Rioseco with the
Cardinal, exspecting more forces. Don Hernando de Vega, Lord of Grajal, brought
three hundred and fifty men; and the Admiral, Lord of that Town, wrote, he
would speedily be there also. The Lord High Constable was very glad to hear of
the Cardinal's escape. And according to his Agreement with those of Burgos, he
entered into the City the first day of November, and notwithstanding some
opposition, he possessed himself of it. Whence communicating by Letters with
the Cardinal, and other Nobles at Rioseco, they concluded, since there was no
other remedy, that they should carry on their business by force of Arms; That
the Rande-vous should be there at Rioseco, that being the most convenient
place, because nearest to Tordesillas, where the Iunta was likewise making their
Army. He resolved (it being generally so agreed upon) to stay at Burgos,
with such force as he thought convenient, to oppose and suppress the
Merindades, which were risen, (of whom the Earl of Salvatierra, with small
discretion, had made himself Captain) and sent his son Don Pedro de Velasco,
Earl of Haro, as Captain General of the Soldiers and Artillery that were sent
him out of Navarra, and those Horse and Foot that were at Medina de Rioseco. The
Earl of Haro departed from Burgos about the middle of November, and went to
Melgar, eight leagues from thence; Where he stayed to gather more Forces: Don
Pedro Veloz de Guevaro, Earl of Oniate, Don Garcia Manrique, Earl of Osorno,
the Martial of Fromesta, Don Alonso de Peralta, and other Gentlemen, met him
there, every one bringing as many men as they could raise, thence they
continued their march to Rioseco, whither every day came Gentlemen with other
Forces. Of all which, the Lord High Constable gave a particular relation to the
Emperor.

SECT. XII.
FRom the very day that those of the Iunta were informed of the naming of the
two Governors, they thought it was time for them to provide more forces then
what they yet had raised. To which effect they presently dispatched Letters to
all the Cities of their League, advertising them of the great preparations the
Governors were making, and that they must furnish both men and money. They
wrote also to Don Manuel, King of Portugal, thinking to gain him to their
Party; but what Answer he returned I could never learn.

SECT. XIII.
THose of the Iunta, seeing so great a confluence of Soldiers com daily to
Rioseco, they dispatched messengers presently to their several Cities, desiring
they would speedily send thither what forces they could make. Salamanca, with
the territories t^erof, furnished two hundred Lances, and six thousand Foot,
which, with those from Toledo, Madrid, and Segovia, made a reasonable good Army.
Thus both sides prepared what forces they could to destroy one another. Those
of Valladolid, seeing themselves in the middle of these two Parties, and both
very near them, being not determined which side to take, resolved to send to
them both. Their Messengers, Don Pedro Vacan Lord of Van^eca, Doctor Francisco
de Espinosa, Pulgar and Diego de Zamora, Batchellors at Law, in the name of
their City said to those of the Iunta, That if they did continue in doing that
which was just and good for the Commonalties, as they had begun, the City of
Valladolid, with all their Army and power, would assist them, but if
otherwise, they would decline their Interest, and resist them. Thence they went
to Rioseco, and said as much to the Cardinal, and those of the Council; adding
moreover, that they should not intermeddle, or hinder any thing which the
Iunta had done in favor of the Commonaltie of the Kingdom, upon which condition
they would obey them in all things, and (if they pleased) receiv them into
their City with honor and respect: And they did require them in the names and
behalf of the Infant, Gentlemen and Commonaltie of Valladolid, That they would
not raise any Soldiers, nor make any scandals or offense to the Country, by
gathering together Armies, otherwise, that they did protest against them. A
brave resolution of those of Valladolid to stand out against them both.

SECT. XIV.
NOtwithstanding the different factions which divided Valladolid, they were all
generally well affected to the Lord Admiral, and desired he should com amongst
them, hoping his presence would conduce much to the remedying of those
mischiefs, he being a very noble Gentleman, and no way addicted to passion,
or partiality. The Lord Admiral, having intelligence of all that passed in
Valladolid, wrote them a Letter, saying, That although he did not desire to
be pestered with those troubles and confusions, yet his coming thither should
not be deferred much longer. That his intention was to do good to them all
generally, being very much grieved for what had passed amongst them. That he
could not choos but admire at the tumultuous risings of the Kingdom. That if
they had but written twice or thrice to his Majesty, he would have remedied
all those disorders, by granting what they desired. That their keeping Guards,
and going their Rounds about the City, tended to nothing but the consuming of
their Estates, destroying of their Trade, the undoing of the Husbandmen and
Common People, for which he was very sorry. That the whole world took notice
heretofore of the nobleness and loialtie of these Kingdoms: And now their
inconstancy, divisions, and factious insurrections, afforded matter of
discourse to all other Nations. That they should take notice that the great Turk
was com with a mighty Army against Rodes, ravaging and spoiling Christendom
both by Sea and Land, and that by reason of these dissentions, animosities, and
confusion amongst the people, it were no hard matter for him to gain footing in
these Kingdoms. Therefore he affectionately desired them all to be pacified,
and to believ, that his Majesty was very much troubled and aggrieved at these
sad occurrences: And that at his return he would procure the good of the
Kingdoms. This Letter being read in the public Assembly of Valladolid, did
sufficiently startle some of them, but they hoped for a ^emedie from heaven.
After this the Lord Admiral being at Zerbera, wrote another Letter to them in
a manner to the same effect. Which being heard and seen by those of
Valladolid, they were astonished at the words and counsel which he gave them
therein, not knowing how to answer his reasons, nor to what they should
attribute his counsels. Some that were of opinion that the Iunta was wicked and
unlawful, would have it be dissolved; others extolling it to the skie^, urged,
that every body ought to conform themselves thereunto. The Nobles and Gentry
at Rioseco were very desirous to reunite and pacify Valladolid, it being so
considerable a place, thinking besides, that if they were but Masters thereof,
they should with more facility compass their design upon the other Cities: To
this effect they used all the policy and subtle inventions possible, sending
messengers, and holding private intelligence with those of the City, who were
well affected and desired the King's service. The City was in this season more
strictly watched then before, they making secret Rounds, and placing strong
Guards at all the Gates; for the contrary parti^ (which was the most powerful)
was jealous, and afraid of some double dealing.

SECT. XV.
AT the same time that Valladolid received the Lord Admiral's Letters, others
were brought to them from Burgos, which were likewise read in the public
Assembly of the City. The Reader may imagine what various humors, what
speeches, what factions, what passions were engendered, by the Contents of those
Letters; finally, what confusion they might breed in so noble and spacious a
City, (the seat of the Kings of Spain) and what judgments and censures might
there-hence take their rise, and fill the malicious heads of the Common people;
not knowing well which hand they had best to use, they resolved to play with
both, and sent again to the Cardinal, Governor, and those of the Junta also,
their Ambassadors Don Pedro Vacan, and the others before mentioned, with
certain Articles which they thought were convenient for the pacification of the
Kingdoms, The Cardinal with those of the Council, gave them a fair reception,
and a satisfactorie answer: Those of the Junta did no less, desiring to make
them of their pack, and moreover, they wrote a Letter to those of the
Commonaltie in Valladolid, with some expressions of zeal and affection mingled
with reprehensions for their luke-warmness and indifferency.

SECT. XVI.
ON Sundaie the eleventh of October, one Al^nso de Vera got up into the Pulpit
of the Cathedral Church of Valladolid, and read to the people two Letters, one
from those of the Iunta, wherein they desired, that Valladolid would assist and
stand to them, as they had promissed, and fulfill what they had commanded them.
The other was from Don Pedro Giron, in which he offered them his service,
desiring that as he had always showed a particular affection to that City,
and been tender of their welfare, they would receiv him, in regard he was
Captain General of the Junta's forces, and desired nothing but the good of the
Kingdom, and his Majesty's service, neither would he act any thing but with
the good liking and consent of Valladolid. The people were exceedingly taken
with these Letters, and said, they would do whatsoever therein was required,
and that Don Pedro should be welcome into the City; And the next day he made
his entry, all the people of Valladolid going forth to receiv him with great
applause. This War being betwixt kindred, friends, and Country men, there was
as much diligence used to gain places, and good wills, by Letters, as by force
of Arms. The Earl of Venavente, and the Lord Admiral of Castilla were in a
manner Natives and Citizens of Valladolid, their families from many
generations, having had their principal mansions there, and the City bare them
great respect, as they had reason. These Noblemen showing their affection to
Valladolid, as their Native soil, and seeing it so far plunged in these
distractions, either out of hope to reduce it by fair means, or merely out of
their love and desire of its good and preservation, they both endeavored by
Letters to make them sensible of their errors. The Lord Admiral chiefly
desired, that they would let him com into their City, promising, that he
would be as vigilant and careful of their general good, as of any particular
persons* That he would employ in their defens his own life, and fortune: If
that could not be granted, that they would send any three, whom they thought
fittest, to meet and confer with him, two or three leagues thence, where they
pleased. But Valladolid would accept of none of these conditions, alleging
that such enter-views would be ill taken, and that people would be apt
thereupon to say, Burgos having Articled and agreed with the Lord high
Constable, that Valladolid would do the lik^. So they returned the Lord Admiral
no other Answer, then that for the present they could not condescend to any of
those things which his Lordship desired. To the Earl of Venavente's Letter they
briefly thus replied, That since his Lordship was so Noble, as to offer them
his own person, and men, they desired that he would keep his promise, in
letting them have the said men to send to Tordesillas, in the Iunta's service,
and upon that condition, they should carry the Colors and Arms of Valladolid.
These Letters were dispatched in the name of the City by the Prior of the
great Church, who was a grand Commoner. These answers being sent to the two
Noblemen, the City gave order for the raising of more men to send to the
Iunta, because there were many wanting of the thousand which they had sent.
Moreover, Command was given for the gathering of one hundred Ducats out of
every Ward, which amounted to one thousand four hundred Ducats. Which was
forthwith done, and the thousand men completed. After this they caused a
Proclamation to be made throughout the City, commanding all and every of the
Commonaltie to appear under pain of being accused for Malignants, or
Ill-affected to the Iunta. Who being all assembled, they made them swear by
the Holy Evangelists, and upon the Cross in forma, that under pain of being
infamous perjurers and faith-breakers, they should be ready to serve, favor,
and assist in whatsoever those of the Iunta should do, in order to the service
of God, The Engagement of those of Valladolid.
the King, Queen, and Commonaltie of the City of Valladolid; and that they
should not do, or say, directly or indirectly, any thing to the contrary, or
suffer any thing to be said or done by their children, servants, or
households. And if they should know or hear any thing said or done to the
contrary, that they should forthwith inform the Assembly of the City of
Valladolid thereof, to the end the offenders might receiv condign punishment;
The Oath being thus pronounced, they all cried with one voice, This we swear.

SECT. XVII.
I Have already declared, how the City of Segovia was divided by several
factions, insomuch that they seemed to be in Civil War amongst themselves. The
Earl of Chinchon defended the Forts. Within the City there were several houses
of strength, wherein some of the Roial party fortified themselves, others did
the like in the Cathedral Church. The Fort being but slenderly manned, the
Earl of Chinchon went to Burgos, to desire succor from the Lord High
Constable, who sent ten Musketeers, valiant and resolute men, with order to get
into the Fort, ^s they could. They arrived at Pedraca on Fridaie morning, 23 of
November, where they took about one hundred weight of powder, and kept
themselves private until the Evening; Night being com, they marched with a
guide (who led them by-waies) to Parral, where he left them, and the Moon
being down, they went into the Fort, without any one's taking notice of them;
which was the better effected, because that very day those of Segovia had
assaulted the Church, and were weary, having found strong resistance. The next
day, it being noised in the City, that the Fort had received succor in the
night, they were much scandalized, and troubled at it, The Infant^ of Granada,
having been put out of his Office, with fourteen other Officers of the City,
by the people of Valladolid, who accused them of keeping correspondencie with
the Enemy.
thinking it more considerable then it was, and feared that they were sold by
some within the City. Things being in the condition beforementioned, disposed
for an absolute breach, the Cities of the League prepared arms and men with all
expedition; and those of the Iunta sent certain instructions (which their
Captains and Soldiers were to observe) to Valladolid, where Don Pedro Giron
(whom they all looked upon as Captain General) remained to make and order the
Army, as shall be more at large declared in the following Book.

Finis Libri Quarti.
THE CIVIL WARS OF SPAIN. THE FIFTH BOOK.
SECT. I.
THe Passions of the people in Castilla grew to such mortal animosities, that
pens and tongues being wearied, they fell to preparing arms and munition of
war: as when an Impostume fester's, no cure can be exspected, but by the
applying of hot burning Iron. Those Gentlemen who were the chief sticklers for
the Commonalties, being lanch'd forth into the deepest of the sea of passion,
knowing how ill a name they had acquired (which exceedingly offended their
presumption,) were already grown so desperate, that they cared not to lose
their Countries, Estates, Wives, Children, or their own Lives, desiring to
hazard all in the Lotterie of Arms, and make or destroy their fortunes in one
Battle; wherein, if their designs had been crowned with success, doubtless,
they would have changed their styles, and being victorious, remained with the
glorious attribute of Redeemers and Defenders of their Country: for humane
judgments determine by the Event, not by the middle or beginning of any
Enterprise. Though it has been the ordinary defect of other Commonalties to
have but slender forces, this was so powerful, Their Cap^a^ns were good enou^h,
if ^hey had not h^d some ^^eache^rous great ones amongst them.
that had there been the least good Conduct amongst them, and some experienced
Captains, Don Carlos hardly ever would have recovered the Crown of Spain. The
Common people were to blame, and the Gentry not to be excused, for opposing
and rising against their Sovereign's Ministers; yet we must of necessity
confess, that they were valiant. That there were diverse exorbitancies,
outrages, and insolences committed, What wonder is it amongst the respectless
and libertine People? and that the Gentlemen depended more upon them, then they
upon the Nobles, who assisted them. If we see an Army well disciplined, the
Soldiers subject and obedient to their Captains, shall we say absolutely all
those in that Army are Traitors? for my part I would not; neither is it any
such great marvel that children rise up against their own fathers; Here the
Author con^^^leth in a manner the justnes, of the Cause, and s^emeth himself to
justify it.
for if we look back to some passages of our Country of Spain, what shall we
see, but the like unnatural actions; the factions of Princes, the sidings of
Grandees, and private Gentlemen, who were so audacious, as to rise in arms,
against their lawful Kings? and yet they are not so spotted and foul as some
would make those of the latter times appear to be. I do not say this in
justification of these Commonalties, but only to excuse, in what I may, my own
Nation, and the Gentry thereof. But to return to the purpose: Nothing was left
unattempted on either side, that might conduce to the increasing or security
of their Party. You have seen in the precedent Book, that the Iunta sent their
Instructions to Valladolid, where Don Pedro Giron, and other Captains of the
Commonaltie, were assembled. The time being com (although the season was very
sharp and unfit for an Army to keep the field, being almost in the depth of
Winter) they all put themselves in a readiness, and in the name of the Iunta,
they wrote fresh Letters to the Cities and Towns of their Combination, to send
immediately all the forces they could possibly raise; which they did. Those of
the Iunta, according to agreement, Voted Don Pedro Giron Captain General of
their Forces, and sent him a Commission from the Queen, and the Kingdom,
Thinking that he being a person of so noble extraction, and allied to so many
Grandees of Castilla, would gain a great reputation to their Party; And most
men were of opinion, that Don Pedro Giron accepted thereof, and wedded the
Interest of the Commonaltie merely for his own ends, and that by means of these
troubles and commotions, he might get possession of the Dukedom of M^dina
Sidonia, which (as has been already said) he pretended was his right. This
Election did not digest well in John de Padilla's stomach, who, till then, had
executed the office of Captain General, and presumed it should be confirmed
upon him, and for his sake, neither the Commissioners of Toledo, nor of Madrid,
would give their Votes for Don Pedro. John de Padilla being informed of all
these passages, before that Don Pedro Giron came to take his staff, pretending
I know not what occasion, rode post to Toledo; and his men, seeing their
Captain gone, would stay no longer in the Army, but the next day took the
same way after him. Notwithstanding all this, Don Pedro Giron accepted the
Charge, and came to Tordesillas with fourscore Lances of his own, appointed a
Randevous for his Army, wherein he was much assisted by the industry and
diligence of the Bishop of Zamora, who brought to the service of the Iunta near
five hundred men with arms, of the ancient Guards of the Kingdom, (for the rest
were gone to the Lord High Constable) he brought moreover, seventie Lances of
his own, and almost a thousand Foot, four hundred whereof were Priests of his
own Bishopric, besides the people of Zamora, whom he had at his devotion; for
by favor of the Junta, he had driven the Earl of Alva out of Zamora, and made
himself Master thereof. Every day came fresh supplies from the other Cities,
both of Horse and Foot, all well armed, and with them some Gentlemen and
Commanders. From Salamanca came Don Pedro Maldonado, with about a thousand
Foot: Other Cities appointed those who were their Commissioners in the Junta to
be their Captains; As Leon chose Gonsalo de Guzman, son to Ramiro Nun^ez; and
the City of Toro, Don Hernando de Ulloa, who were their Commissioners; and so
likewise did other places. Thus those of the Junta grew from day to day more
powerful, being resolved to end the business by force of Arms. Their mouths
were all filled with reproachful and threatening language, especially the
Common-people's, who called the Grandees and Gentry of the Country, Traitors
and enemies of the Kingdom, saying, they had destroyed and taken away their
estates; (which availed them nothing) but who can restrein a multitude? Amongst
other impertinencies, they said, That the Queen should do well to marry the
Duke of Calabria, Don Hernando de Aragon, son to Frederick last K. of Naples,
who, since the time of the Catholic King, had been kept prisoner in Xativa, in
the Kingdom of Valencia; I believ this was only put upon those of the Junta,
and that they neither did, nor thought any such thing. But the truth is, their
passion was grown to such an height, that they never so much as named the
Emperor in their Proclamations, though they had sworn Allegiance to him, as
their King, but all passed in the names of the Queen and Kingdom: Insomuch that
the hatred and enmity betwixt the two parties became implacable, and both made
all preparations possible for a war. In short time those of the Junta had put
their forces in a readiness, and equipage to march unto the field, as was
determined.

SECT. II.
Amongst these occurrences arrived the Lord Admiral at Medina de Rioseco, where
he was met and received by all the Noblemen and Gentlemen, (who were com
thither to the Cardinal) with their Soldiers all armed, and drawn up in
Battle-Array. He expressed much gladness to see so many gallant men, and
persons of such eminent quality: Yet he had no intention, to wade through
blood to the accomplishment of his desires, but rather by fair means, if
possible, to settle the disturbed State of the Kingdoms; which to effect, he
left no stone unturned, and at last he obtained, that three or four of the
Commissioners of the Iunta should give him a meeting at Torrelobaton, where
they consumed five or six days in treating, but all his reasons, persuasions,
and fair promises could bring them to no reason: Before they would harken to
any proposition of his, they demanded that the Lord high Constable should
renounce, and leav off the exercise of Viceroy and Governor, which he had
begun to execute; And whilst the Lord Admiral was thus treating with them, the
Iunta commanded a Proclamation to be made against the Lord high Constable, and
the Earl of Alva de Lista, as is before mentioned, and other Noblemen: And Don
Pedro Giron, with the Bishop of Zamora, had orders to draw their Army into the
field, which was seaventeen thousand Foot, besides good store of horse, and much
Artillery, which had been brought from Medina del Campo. Whereupon the Lord
Admiral despairing of any Peace, protested against them, and returned to
Rioseco, being resolved to accept the Government jointly with the Cardinal and
the Lord high Constable, in regard those fair conditions of agreement, which
he offered, were slighted and rejected. Don Pedro Giron, Captain General for
the Iunta, and the Bishop of Zamora^ with his Soldiers and band of Priests,
marched out the 2^th day of November 1520, and quartered their Army that
night in Villabraxima, Tordehumos, Villagarzia, and other places about Rioseco,
with intent to starve or drive the Cavaliers thence. And indeed, if the
Commoners had been men at that time, they might have done it. From their
headquarters at Villabraxima, they wrote to the City of Valladolid, giving
them an account of their advance, and that, before they fell upon Rioseco, they
would send a King at Arms to require the Lord Admiral, and those of the Town of
Rioseco, to cast out those thievs, and destroyers of the Kingdom, (as they
called the Cavaliers); if not that they would use means to take them, and
hinder the Cardinal's Government, it being a thing contrary to the Laws, and
Rights of the Kingdom.

SECT. III.
AFter this, the Army of the Iunta, by way of justification, sent their
Heralds, or King's at Arms, to the Lord Admiral, with the other Noblemen, and
Gentlemen, then being in Rioseco, requiring them not only to leav that place,
but to go out of the Country, and desiring those of the said Town, to confirm
themselves to those of the Commonaltie in favor of his Majesty, but this
message was so ill resented, that the Heralds found but sorry entertainment,
being apprehended and disarmed by order from the Earls of Venavente, and of
Alva de Lista; which being known by the Iunta's forces, they presently
advanced toward Rioseco, The Bishop of Zamora marched in the Van with five
thousand men, fully resolved to do all the mischief he could to the Cavaliers.
He was no sooner com to Villabraxima, but the two hundred lances, which the
Marquis of Astorga had placed there, took their heels, flying with such
disorder and haste, that some of them lost their Arms before they could reach
Rioseco, and left the Place clear for the Bishop, who entering, said, Let the
King and Commonaltie live, and evil Counsel perish. The two hundred Lanciers
disorderly flight to Medina, alarmed the Cavaliers, who having put their Army
in good order, marched into the field, with intent to rout the Bishop with his
five thousand men, but he valued them not, though they were numerous, and men
of eminent qualities, for he knew Don Pedro Giron was so near with the
Rere-guard, and so Vigilant, that he would be ready to back and assist him,
if occasion should require it. Thus the two Armies faced one another, each
watching an opportunity to get the advantage of their enemies, and so they
remained both drawn up in Batalia one whole day, after which, the Cavaliers
retreated to Tordehumos, and the Iunta's Army to Villabraxima, both near
Rioseco. The four hundred Priests, which had left their Altars, in Imitation of
the Bishop of Zamora, to sacrifice their bloods in this Holy enterprise,
remained at Tordesillas, for the guard of the Town and of the Iunta, who out of
respect to their Sacerdotal Dignities, would not permit them to march amongst
the rabble of the Common Soldiers. Besides these Priests, remained two other
Companies of Foot at Tordesillas, and some horse commanded by Hernando de
Porras, Commissioner of Zamora, Gomez de Avila, and others. Three whole days
Don Pedro Giron kept his Army in order, offering to give the Cavaliers Battle,
but they would not; and indeed it had been madness for them to engage, being
far inferior in number ber, Here Don Pedro, and other Gentlemen, begin to play
the Traitors.
and not so well armed, although they were better men, and of higher courages
then the Common People, yet they thought it their securest way to exspect the
Earl of Haro's coming, (their Captain General) who was reported to be upon his
march thither; and besides they were in hopes t^ obtain the Victory by some
other means, without any loss of blood, the Lord Admiral having some overtures
thereof by private intelligence, and dealing with Don Pedro Giron, and some
other Gentlemen, who sided with the Co^moners, whom if he could handsomely have
taken off, it would have been no hard matter to have routed the Vulgar Pack of
Tailors, Shoomakers, Skinners, Curriers, and such like; whereof the rest of
their Armi^ was composed. But the Co^moners perceiving themselves much the
stronger Party, infested the Cavaliers with such skirmishes and hot alarms
both night and day, that they could take no rest all the while they stayed at
Tordehumos; And hearing that the Earl of Haro was exspected with more forces,
they determined to force them to fight before his arrival, or at least, to gain
the reputation of proffering them Battle. To this effect, having m^de a general
muster, they marched with all their Artillery in very good order toward
Rioseco. Sanabria, Commissioner of Valladolid, rid before with 30 Light Horse,
to discover the field. Don Pedro Lasso de la Vega led the Vantguard of
Cuirassiers, Don Pe^ro Maldonado and Francisco Maldonado commanded the Light
Horsemen. The Bishop of Zamora was Captain of the Vantguard of Foot; with him
marched Don John de Mendoca, Captain of Valladolid, son to the Cardinal Don
Pedro Goncalez de Mendoca, Don Gonzalo de Guzman, Captain of Leon, Don Hernando
de Ulloa, Captain of Toro, and others. In the body marched Don Pedro Giron,
called, Duke of Medina Sidonia, with him diverse other Captains, and Don John de
Figueroa, brother to the Duke of Arcos, who came that same day to the Army
from Sevilla, besides other Commanders. The Rear-guard and the Artillery was
committed to the charge of other officers. Being arrived within Culverine-shot
of the Town, they made an Halt, commanding their Heralds, in mean time, to
approach so near unto the walls, that they might be heard, and declare unto
the Admiral and Earl of Venavente, with the other Grandees and Gentlemen in
Medina, that the Army of their Sovereign Lady, the Queen, was com thither, to
execute upon them, by her command, those penalties which they had incurred by
governing the Kingdom without her orde^ or consent, and for raising and arming
men in contempt, and to the disservice of her Majesty; and therefore they did
offer them Battle, and did exspect their coming into the field. Having sent
this message to the Town, they remained in the same order almost until Sunset.
But the Cavaliers, although they were in Arms, made no show at all of Battle or
skirmish, but persevering in their former resolution, let them stand cooling
their heels there. At last, Don Pedro Giron, having commanded some of his Cannon
to be discharged against the Town, (but the bullets never reached the Walls)
returned with his Army into his Quarters, losing and neglecting that occasion,
which proved very prejudicial to his Party. He was no sooner gone, but the
Earl of Haro arrived with his men, who had marched as fast as possibly they
could, thinking to have com time enough to meet Don Pedro, for the Earl had
intelligence of his defying the Cavaliers in Medina, though he had no great
stomach to fight with them. All the Nobles and Gentlemen, with their Soldiers,
marched forth to receiv their Captain General with great solemnity, and
Military order. He brought with him three hundred Hors-men in complete Armor,
four hundred Light-hors-men, and two thousand five hundred Foot, all choice
men, and twelv or thirteen fieldpieces. The same night came likewise to
Rioseco, Don Francisco de Zun^iga y Avellaneda, Earl of Miranda, Don Veltran de
la Cueva, eldest son to the Duke of Alburquerque, Don Luys de la Cueva his
brother, Don Bernardo de Sandoval y Royas, Marquis of Denia, with his son Don
Luys de Sandoval, and Don Francisco de Quin^ones, Earl of Luna, with all the
servants, tenants and soldiers they could get. This supply increased the
Cavaliers to above one and twenty hundred horse, and six thousand foot
soldiers, besides a good company of servants. Insomuch that hereby they held
themselves stronger then their enemies; not that they exceeded them in number,
but in virtue and courage, besides the Cause which they maintained was more
just, and warrantable, which add's much confidence and boldness to the hearts
of men, and make's their souls insusceptible of any Panick fears.

SECT. IV.
THose of the Iunta seeing fresh forces com daily in to the Cavaliers,
endeavored to prepossess themselves of all the Towns and places of strength, and
sent besides, to all those of their league, to raise, and have in a readiness,
what men possibly they could, notwithstanding they were already much stronger
then the other party. Hereupon in Valladolid, by order from the Iunta, was
publicly proclaimed, that all the Townsmen, from eighteen to threescore years
of age, should be trained, and be ready with their Arms, to march into the
field, upon notice from the Captain General of the Army. The President, and
other Judges of the Chancerie in Valladolid, who were Persons of great respect
and esteem in the City, having never before meddled with either side, seeing
the great disorder amongst the people, and fearing further confusion, moved
with a good zeal and affection to their Countries good, came with all
expedition to Rioseco, to treat with the Lord Admiral, and other Noblemen,
about some fair accommodation, whereby the Kingdom might avoid the imminent
perdition, which through that unnatural war, in all probability, it was like
to suffer. They found amongst the Nobles very courteous entertainment, and
expression of a desire to condescend to any reasonable propositions, all the
difficulty and obstacle lay in those of the Iunta's Party, and especially in
the Bishop of Zamora. From Rioseco, the President, with the other Judges, went
to Villabraxima, where the Bishop, with his five thousand men, was quartered.
The President being admitted, entreated him with great earnestness and
humility, the tears standing in his eyes, to consider, and leav off in time
the evil and wrong course they had taken, The President of Valladolid's Speech
to the Bishop of Z^mora.
and no^ to give way to, much less to be the occasion of so great mischiefs,
murders, and scandals, which inevitably must fall upon the Kingdom, if they
continued inexorable, alleging, That it would be much more advantageous for
their Countrie's good (which they so much pretended) to accept of an honorable
peace, and accommodation, whereby (with the help of God) the Kingdoms might be
preserved from the present ruin, and restored to their former flourishing
condition: for admit the Commoner meet with the success which they desire,
vanquish the Cavaliers, reduce his Majesty to such streights, that he will
be glad to grant them more immunities then formerly they did desire, yet they
must live under him, and when he find's an occasion, he will put the yoke
again about their necks, and load them with taxes at his pleasure. That these
violent uproars and mutinies of the Commonalties, in disrespect or disobedience
to their Princes, were fickle and very unsecure. That those Gentlemen and
Commanders, which then engaged with them, if fortune gave them victory over
their enemies, would Lord it over them no less insupportably, then the others:
neither did those Gentlemen (Defendors of the Commonalties) show any great
discretion, setting themselves in opposition to all the Grandees and Nobles of
the Kingdom, especially in a matter of so much prejudice and disservice to his
Majesty. That it would be an act of greater wisdom, to accept of any fair
propositions of agreement, to remain in peace, with a due respect and obedience
to their Princes, whereby to gain their loves, and not to expose themselves to
the various and uncertain Chance of War. A gallant and resolute answer of the
Bishop of Zamor^ to the Lord President.
The Bishop answered, Lord President! Since in the condition and estate our
business now stand's, we have moved and advanced hitherto, I know what is
convenientest for us to do, and therefore I will not flinch nor recede one
step, but rather persevere in my enterprise, and pursue to destruction those
wicked disturbers of the Kingdoms. The President seeing the Bishop would not
hearken to what he desired of him, he required him in their Majesty's names,
by virtue of the Roial Seal, which he brought with him, not to stir from
thence, until he had been to confer about the same business with the Lord
Admiral, and other Noblemen, at Rioseco; but the Bishop gave him no answer
thereunto, neither did he make any more account of him, then if he had been
his servant (this was the perfection of this great Prelate, successor of the
Apostles). So the President and the Judges, leaving him, went to Medina, where,
by reason of the pervers Cross-grainedness of those of the Iunta, An heroic
and generous Spirit in the Bishop of Zam^ra being a man indefatigable.
they could effect nothing to any purpose; and the Bishop's Conscience was
pricked with such remors at the President's discourse, and his tender heart so
moved with his tears, that he scarce had turned his back, but his Reverend
Lordship called for his Armor (for the headpiece and pouldrons were the
Pontificial robes wherein he most delighted): And having commanded his
Artillery to be secured in the Rear-guard, he marched forth with his men to
encounter a great party of Foot, and th^ee hundred horse, which he had notice,
was advancing toward his quarters. But they, having intelligence that the
Bishop was com forth in quest of them, with a stronger Party, retreated to
Rioseco. By this time were com into the Army of the Iunta three thousand
soldiers more from the City of Leon, besides great numbers from Valladolid,
and other places; but chiefly John de Padilla was exspected with a supply from
Toledo and Madrid.

SECT. V.
THose of the Council proceeded against those of the Iunta, and all the Cities
of their League, according to Law, and having erected a Scaffold, they caused
them publicly to be proclaimed Traitors and Rebels to the Roial Crown;
Whereat they were so incensed, that thenceforwards they fought not so much for
the ^nterest of the Kingdom, as for reputation, and to revenge particular
quarrels (the offspring of those troubles and dissentions) or for ancient
grudges betwixt particular persons or places. The Bishop swore that he would
keep the field with his men only, until he were either dead, or crowned with
Victory. The Cavaliers were as resolute on the other side; insomuch that
although the President of the Chancerie insisted for peace, he prevailed
nothing. The Cavaliers had many skirmishes with the Bishop's men. At last he,
and Don Pedro Giron, seeing that the Cavaliers would not com out to give them
battle, they sent a Trumpeter to them with this message, Don Pedro and the
Bishop of Zamora's mess^ge to the Cavaliers.
That they should meet them in the field, to the end they might in one battle
set a period to all their Contentions, which caused so great disturbances in
the Kingdom. That Winter was coming on apace, and it was to no purpose to stand
dallying in that manner, and ruin one another by delays. That if they refused
to fight, they would go to their Towns and Lordships, and having plundered
them, burn their houses to the ground: But the Lord Admiral could not resolv to
put all to so great a venture. In Valladolid, besides the men which they sent
to the Army, (as is said) having mustered again, they found seven thousand
more Cross-bow-men, Pike-men, and Musketeers, which they could well spare,
leaving moreover, enough to guard the City; whereupon they sent to the Iunta,
that shortly they should receiv another supply from them, and that if occasion
served, they would go every man in person with their general Standard to serve
them, for they esteemed the Cause which they defended to be Just and Holy.

SECT. VI.
THe Countess of Modica, wife to the Lord Admiral, being a very virtuous and
devout Lady, was grieved at the Soul to see these disorders, and miserable
condition of the Kingdoms, wherein so many innocent persons suffered, and
desiring to compose the sad differences, she spoke to the Lord Admiral, her
husband, and the Earl of Venavente, earnestly desiring them to stop the current
of those miseries, which would proceed from that unnatural War. The good Lady
prevailed so much, that the Lord Admiral, the Earl of Venavente, Don Pedro
Giron, (who called himself Duke of Medina) the Bishop of Zamora, and she, had
a meeting at Villabraxima, one evening; And having ordered and agreed upon
certain Articles in favor of the Iunta, the Earl of Venavente said to the
Admiral; My Lord, though you desire to keep four or five Licenciado's in your
Town, I hope you will not bring our estates in question, The Earl spoke with
much cunning and dissimulation, purposely to pl^as and blind the Bishop, that
h^e might not suspect what they had in private concluded with Don Pedro Giron,
by which conference it appears plainly that they were betrayed, and sol^, as
Ant^nio de Gue^ara declares at large in his Epistles. No h^ng but the private
treachery of Don Pedro Giron could have deluded the Bishop and destroyed their
A^mie.
and give way to so many mur^hers, and robberies, as must needs follow, if so,
God forbid that I should have any thing to do with it, but to favor and assist
the Iunta, and the Commonalties, since all that they desire is good and just,
and I so acknowledge and approve it, and from this time forwards will justify
it: Which said, he set his hand to the said Articles, the Countess said as he
did; And the Admiral taking the paper in his hands, said to the Earl, Since you
have signed this first, I Will do the like: And he having subscribed, they went
all together to supper, very well contented. After supper they returned to
Medina, and presently gave a Command, that the whole Town should declare for
the Queen, the King her Son, and the Commonaltie. All this was done with a
politic art and cunning, to make the Army of the Commoners leav Medina; For
if it had continued longer there, it would have very much straightened and
incommodated the Cavaliers, the Commoners being already many more in number,
and receiving every day fresh supplies, and the Cavaliers having little hopes
of increasing their force, by reason that all the Nobles and persons of honor
in the Kingdoms of Toledo, Andaluzia, and Estremadura sat still, exspecting
which way the scale would turn, without declaring for King or Commonaltie.

SECT. VII.
UPon the agreement between the Lord Admiral, the Earl of Venavente, and Don
Pedro Giron, the Army without knowing any reason wherefore, marched from
Tordehumos and Villabraxima to Villalpando, where, after some small resistance,
they were received and quartered peaceably. Don Pedro Giron took up his
lodging, in his uncle, the Lord high Constable's house. All were of opinion that
Don Pedro juggled, and played legerdemain in this business, and so it appeared
by his dislodging his Army, and leaving the enemy free, besides having
nothing at all to do at Villalpando. And indeed Don Pedro Giron might well be
suspected herein, for the Grandees, who were his near kindred, wrought much
upon him, as shall be seen hereafter. The Cavaliers seeing themselves free from
the encumbrance of that powerful Army, which blocked them up in a manner, and
finding the way clear and secure from thence to Tordesillas, marched all out
of Rioseco, seizing on all Posts and Travelers, that might give notice of
their approach, making as if they had a design upon Valladolid, but with as
much speed as an Army could advance, they went directly to Tordesillas; Those
of the Iunta, hearing of their coming, dispatched presently a Post to
Valladolid, telling them, that the Cavaliers were marching thither with all
expedition, therefore they desired them to send them speedy succor. But
Valladolid having sent near four thousand of their choicest men already to the
Army, and hearing that the enemy was like to fall upon them, desired to be
excused, thinking they might better have relief from the Army, where were men
enough. But they being in good quarters at Villalpando, were not overhastie to
go to Tordesillas, for the plot was so well laid, that no man knew the
certainty of the design, but that which Don Pedro did a little after,
confirmed the suspicion the world had conceived of him. One night the Cavaliers
stormed the Town, having clapped a Petar to the Gates, but finding strong
resistance, the Earl of Haro sent a Trumpet, to tell them they came only to
kiss the Queen's hands, and to set her at liberty, and required them to yield;
Whereunto they giving no satisfactorie answer, the Earl resolved to force them,
and encouraged his Soldiers, promising them the pillage of the Town. But what
by the natural strength of the place, what through the courageous resistance of
the besieged, the Earl lost above 250 men, before he could make any breach.
The Priests, which the Bishop of Zamora left there, behaved themselves very
valorously in this Holy cause: One amongst the rest was particularly observed
to have given eleven men their Viaticum with his musket, from behind the
Battlements of the Wall, where he thought he stood secure, and as he saw
occasion sent his Benediction amongst them, which seldom mist his man. But at
last, some of the besiegers, with an unsanctified arrow, shot him quite through
the head, with which he presently fell down, and died, not having the time to
say so much as one Miserere. At length an Alferez, with some other Cavaliers,
T^r^^sillas taken by the Earl of Haro, Captain General of the Cavalier forces.
having forced their entry at a small breach in the wall, and given the sign to
their Camarades, the whole Army gave a shout, and with sound of Drums and
Trumpets, cried all out, Victoria, Victoria, which so animated the Besiegers,
that in the same, and in other parts of the Town, they made fresh assaults,
insomuch that the Besieged were no longer able to resist. The
Cavalier-Souldiers, being thus entered the Town, used no violence to either
man, woman, or child, for that they were forbidden; but neither Houses,
Churches, nor Monasteries escaped from plundering: So that no man had so much
as a bed left to sleep upon, unless the Soldiers, out of charity, would let
him have any; which punishment they did deserv, for fighting and defending
their goods no better, after they were engaged, and put themselves into a
posture of resistance. The Grandees and Gentlemen, being entered into
Tordesillas, went directly to the Palace to kiss the Queen's hands, and show
her their due respects, they found her with the Infanta, her daughter, Don^a
Catalina, in her own chamber, whence Don Pedro de Ayala, Commissioner of
Toledo, had persuaded her to withdraw during the fight: Some say, to the end,
that from the wall, she might have commanded the besiegers not to storm the
Town; others think, it was with intent to conveie her thence, and carry her by
the Bridg-waie to Medina del Campo; Some of the Commissioners of the Iunta make
their escapes.
But this escape that was intended for the Queen, being attempted just upon
the entry of the enemy into the Town, Don Pedro de Ayala left her, and fled
himself to Medina del Campo. She showed the Gentlemen that came to kiss her
hands very gracious countenance, though, by reason of her infirmity and want
of judgment, she cared little how things went; only it is reported, that
while they were battering the Town, some of the Commissioners being there,
desired that she would send a Command to the Besiegers to desist; and she
answered, Open you the gates, and let them in. The Earl of Haro stayed at the
gates, to see his Artillery and Horse let in until midnight; which done, he
went likewise to kiss her Majesty's hands, where he found the rest of the
Nobles, who soon after, taking their leaves, went to take their rest; but the
Earl of Haro spent all the night in placing his Guards, and taking order for
securing of the place. Nine or ten of the Commissioners of the Cities were
taken and imprisoned; the rest fled, some to Medina, others to Valladolid, where
they arrived so mangled and stripped, that 'twas a pity to see them. The Doctor
Zun^iga of Salamanca, Some are taken, and again released
Suero del Aguila, and Gomez de Avila, Commissioners of Avila, were released,
at the request of some Grandees, who engaged for them. In this manner was taken
the Town of Tordesillas; but not the Iunta, nor the good will of the revolted
Cities, whose fury was hereby more enflamed. Amongst the dead in the field
were found diverse dangerously wounded, and some Gentlemen, as Don Diego Osorio,
son to the Marquis of Astorga, who was shot through the arm, Don Francisco de
la Cueva hurt in the face with a stone, the Earl of Venavente wounded in the
Arm with an arrow, the Earl of Alva had his horse killed under him, and diverse
Commanders, and other persons of account. The King's Standard was shot and
tattered with two musket bullets, the Earl of Cisuentes holding it in his hand.
However, that daie's work was of exceeding great importance, and was the means
of giving a glorious end to these miserable distempers, although not so
suddenly; For hereby the Common people were disabused, the allegations and
excuses, of those of the Iunta, appearing to be no less falls then malicious:
for to give a more specious luster to their forgeries, and gain credit with the
People, they cunningly gave out, that the Queen was perfectly well, and in her
right senses, and that all they did, was by her order (which was nothing so),
whereby the blind ignorant Commonaltie ran themselves headlong into the
precipice of those disasters, which I have, and hereafter shall relate. The
glory of this memorable exploit was properly to be attributed to the Earl of
Haro's valor, who, contrary to the Votes of diverse others, would assault
Tordesillas, in stead of following their Army, to seek satisfaction for having
been out-dared by them to fight, and blocked up in Rioseco, according to the
others opinions and propositions.

SECT. VIII.
THose of Valladolid were in great fear, when they heard that Tordesillas was
taken, lest the enemy should fall next upon them, in regard they had
disobliged the Cardinal, the Council, the Lord Admiral, the Earl of Venavente,
and other Nobles, in not admitting them, and favoring so much those of the
Iunta, that it was generally reported, that Valladolid alone did maintain them.
Few men able to bear Arms were left in the City, for they had sent all to the
Army in a manner, but those that were left, stood upon their guard. Don Pedro
de Giron's and the Bishop of Zamora's Letter to Valladolid.
Whilst Valladolid was in this fright, came a Post from Don Pedro Giron, and
the Bishop of Zamora, with letters, wherein they said, That they knew not,
neither did they think that the Cavaliers in Rioseco would have attempted to
take Tordesillas, nor have offered that affront or disrespect to the Queen,
being there; That they could have no intelligence of their design, because they
had stopped, and taken all the Messengers and Travelers, that might give notice
of their march thither, and that when they did know it, and were prepared to go
succor the Town, news was brought them, that the Cavaliers were carrying the
Queen away to Burgos, which made them turn toward Valladolid, thinking that
way to intercept them: And that now being at Villagarzia, they thought good
to acquaint them with their motion, to the end they might receiv provision and
orders thence, to prosecute their design; Promising, since that the Cavaliers
had taken Tordesillas, and begun the War with fire and sword, that they would
do the like, if Valladolid was so contented. These Letters confirmed the
Peoples jealousies of Don Pedro Giron, insomuch that they cursed him in private
and in public, saying, he was a Traitor, Valladolid's answer to Don Pedro.
and had sold them. Moreover, they wrote to this effect to Don Pedro, That in
regard he had clouded his reputation by not succoring Tordesillas, to
vindicate his honor, he should forth with go and lay siege to it, and show
himself what he was; That his Army on one side, and those of Valladolid on
the other, besides the rest of their Associates, might jointly take their full
revenge for so insupportable an affront. They wrote in like manner to the
Bishop, and other Captains, but Don Pedro took no great notice thereof, neither
did he make any other show, then that he would go to Valladolid himself.
Diverse disorderly Captains, like sheep without a shepherd, with their
Companies, came and took up their Quarters at Villanubla, two leagues from
Valladolid: Others went to Valladolid with their plunder, amongst others, two
horsemen brought in a thousand Sheep, others fifty, others two hundred Mules,
Mares, and Carts laden with linen, and all manner of housholdstuff, taken
from the poor Countrie-men, to the value of above three Millions of Maravediz,
which they sold in the City, for little or nothing; a Wether was sold for two
Ryalls, an Ewe for one, and a Cow for two Ducats; But the mischief was the
greater, in that the poor shepherds and husbandmen, having ransomed their
cattle and goods, before they had gone half a league, the Soldiers would
plunder them again, spoiling and robbing friend and foe, as much as they could.
By which exorbitancies they began to see, how much better it would have been to
have satisfied their King's demands, although the tax was somewhat heavy; But
so great acts of disobedience never passed long without such just punishments:
Their outrageous impudence grew to such a height, that without any reverence or
respect, they robbed and spoiled the very Churches, as if they had been
Infidels; Women were not secure in their houses, nor men by the high ways.
Valladolid, to prevent further disorder in this kind, Commanded that those
straggling Soldiers, which were to the number of six hundred, should return to
their Colors at Villanubla, where their Captains were, and there they gave
them ten days pay more to endear them to go before Tordesillas; whither also
marched, with all expedition, men from Salamanca, Toro, and Zamora, in great
numbers, thinking to catch the Cavaliers in the Climm. But they lost no time in
fortifying themselves, repairing the Walls, (as was but need) scouring and
clearing their ditches, and laying in provisions of Victuals and Ammunition.

SECT. IX.
FAme soon carried the taking of Tordesillas through the whole Kingdom, which
was diversely resented according to the disposition and inclination of the
hearers, as is usual amongst a divided people. As Soon as notice thereof was
brought to Quintanilla, who commanded before Alaejos, he raised his siege, and
returned in all haste, with his men, to Medina del Campo, fearing lest that
might also be surprised. The Nobles in Tordesillas sent for the Cardinal, who
remained in Rioseco, with those of the Garrison. Don Rodrigo de Mendoca, Earl
of Castro, who came to Medina de Rioseco with his men, too late for the
expedition of Tordesillas, attended upon the Cardinal thither; where, his
Eminence being arrived, the Lord Admiral solemnly accepted the
Joint-government of the Kingdoms, with the Cardinal, and the Lord High
Constable, having first tried all means possible to reduce the people fairly to
the obedience of his Majesty; for after the taking of Tordesillas, he sent
Gomez de Avila, (who was there made prisoner) making him first swear to return,
to treat with Don Pedro Giron, and the rest of the Iunta, offering them very
honorable Conditions, if they would lay down their Arms and com in. But Gomez
being returned without concluding any thing, there was no apparent hope of any
accommodation: besides, seeing that the Iunta, and the forces of the Commoners,
were retired to Valladolid, (which was but five leagues from Tordesillas) and
that it was no time of year to keep the field, or besiege any other City,
leaving the enemies to themselves; the Governors, with consent of the rest of
the Nobles, put all their Soldiers in Garrison in the adjacent Towns; For
diverse of their men were gone away, having enriched themselves with the plunder
which they took at Tordesillas. The Earl of Haro, with some chois companies,
remained in Tordesillas, for the Guard of her Majesty's person, and defense of
the Town. Don Pedro Velez, Earl of On^ate, with some Horse and Foot Companies,
was placed in Simancas, though the Government thereof belonged to Don Hernando
de Vega, but he being of the Emperor's; Council of State, it was thought more
convenient he should reside at Tordesillas, yet he went thither sometimes
himself, as occasion served. In Portillo (a place of strength, belonging to the
Earl of Venavente) was put another Garrison, under the Command of Don In^igo de
Padilla, cosen-german to the Earl of Venavente. To Torrelobaton (a Town of the
Lord Admiral's) betwixt Tordesillas and Rioseco (by which all their provisions
were to pass) were sent other companies of soldiers, besides those which Don
Hernando Enriquez, the Lord Admiral's brother, had there; in regard that was
the way to Burgos, where the Lord High Constable was with the Council, with
whom they were to keep continual correspondence. Betwixt the Towns which were
for the Commoners, and those wherein were Garrisons for his Majesty, was such
killing, robbing, and spoiling, as if they had been the most mortal enemies in
the world, as shall be declared hereafter. Artificers could get no emploiment;
Husbandmen could not till their grounds, Merchants had no traffic, Cities lost
their correspondence with each other, because the ways were unsecure; Justice
was quite out of date; Excise, Tributes, Levies, Impositions increased daily,
by reason of the excessive charges of the Army, the Revenue of the Roial Crown
(which they had usurped) not being sufficient to defraie them. These, and such
like, were the fruits and profit which Castilla reaped by their disobedience:
And yet for all their miserable condition, they did not humble nor submit
themselves, neither would they accept of the honorable and advantageous
Conditions which were offered them: But every day they were sending fresh men
to maintein and foment the War from Valladolid, where those, who cast the
Kingdom into this precipice, had taken up their seat. Although they were so
jealous and displeased at their Captain General DON PEDRO GIRON, (especially
the Common people) that they did neither obey nor respect him, neither did he
hold himself secure amongst them, and therefore he left them soon after, as
you shall see.

SECT. IX.
THe Bishop of Zamora, and Don Pedro Giron, thinking themselves not secure in
Zaratan, (which was but a small open Village) marched with their Army to
Valladolid (although their coming was not very acceptable to most of the
City). Being there, they quartered themselves in the houses of those that were
affected to the King's Party, making abominable havoc and spoil; their
soldiers pulled down the houses of Francisco de la Serna, and Don Alonso Nin^o
de Castro, they plundered the house of the Comendador Santistevan, robbed and
spoiled all they could lay hands on in the Earl of Miranda's house, and diverse
other mischiefs they did within the City; whereof the Bishop being informed,
he caused many things to be restored, and some soldiers to be punished,
whereby he gained much good opinion and affection. Two days after their
coming thither, they marched both Horse and Foot in goodly order out of the
City, with intent to go to break down the Bridge of Simancas, but hearing by
the way that the Earl On^ate, and those of the Town, had saved them that
labor, (for the Earl had intelligence, that they intended to surprise him
there, and pass thence to Tordesillas) they wheeled about to take the Fort of
Fuensaldan^a, which they entered without any contradiction, and having left some
soldiers with a Commander in it, they returned to Valladolid the same night,
giving orders to their men to be ready the next morning before day; which was
obeyed, and they gave out, they would gain the pass at Simancas, proclaiming
war with fire and sword against the Cavaliers at Tordesillas. But Simancas,
being situate upon the descent of an hill, the river on one side, and a
strong Fort on the other, which the Earl of On^ate had been very careful and
vigilant in poviding with all necessaries, they feared no attempts from those
of Valladolid. Most of those that marched out of Valladolid that time, were
from Salamanca, Toro, and Zamora; many of them silly ignorant fellows, and
their Captains not much more knowing in Martial affairs, they were so long
fitting themselves, that they made it three a clock in the Afternoon before they
were all out of Valladolid (which was ten hours after the time appointed); so
that they were forced to quarter that night at Laguna, one league from the
City, some in the Monastery of Abrojo, others in the field with the
Artillery. There fell such a difference betwixt Don Pedro Giron and the Bishop
of Zamora, that Don Pedro, with his Lanciers, marched to Tudela, but there he
was refused quarters; so he was enforced to go on to Villavan^ez. Next (...)
the Bishop gave orders to march to Simancas, but some told him, that 'twas
better to return to Valladolid, and there take further advice. The people of
Toro, Zamora, and Valladolid had likewise some bickerings amongst themselves,
insomuch that every one would carry their Artillery home to their own Cities;
but those of Valladolid, being the strongest party, carried it to their City
without any more ado, which bred much discontent and heart-burning: and all
exclaimed against Don Pedro Giron, saying all the ill their discontented minds
could imagine of him, for leaving them in that manner, which confirmed all the
jealousies and suspicions which they had formerly conceived of him. One day,
twelv Foot soldiers of Valladolid went out upon a party toward Simancas, and
about one league from Valladolid, they met with fourscore Horse of that
Garrison, which made them fly, to secure themselves, into a little Tower
amongst the Vineyards, where they defended themselves until the Alarm was given
in Valladolid, and the Bishop of Zamora came out with a party of Horse, and
rescued them; two of those of Simancas were killed, and the rest, seeing more
men com from Valladolid, fled all away; so the Bishop returned with some hurt
men, but lost not one: Being night, the City (much satisfied with his courage
in this exploit) sent out many torches to receiv him. The next day, because a
brother of Francisco de la Serna's had murmured something against the Bishop,
they commanded his house to be pulled down: and in regard the people thronged
thither, out of greediness to carry away the timber, they heedlessly cut down
the pillars and posts that supported it, whereby the four quarters of the house
fell amongst the people, killed fourteen or fifteen men, and hurt diverse others.

SECT. X.
THe Commissioners, who fled, at the taking of Tordesillas, to Medina del
Campo, came afterward to Valladolid, where they held their Iunta general,
concerning the affairs of the Kingdom. The Lord Admiral, seeing his Towns
destroyed, his tenants plundered of all their goods and cattle, since the
^^rdinal's departure from Rioseco, sent them a Letter to Valladolid,
pourporting* The Lord Admirals Letter to those of the Iunta at Valladolid.
That since it had been God's pleasure to lay his Judgments upon the Kingdom,
and afflict them with the spirit of dissension, he desired (to the end there
might be no more spoiling nor murdering one another,) That there might be a
Ce^sation of Arms, but upon this condition, That whatsoever damage and
prejudice, he and the Earl of Venavente had sustained in their Lands, by the
robbing and violence of those of Valladolid, should be repaired, otherwise,
That those Arms which they had taken to offend them, Their Vote concerning the
Letter.
they should take to defend themselves. This Letter being read in the Iunta, it
was Voted that no answer should be returned, nor any other Letter received
thenceforwards from any of the Grandees. Christmas being com, they made great
preparations to go against Tordesillas; John de Padilla being arrived with the
men of Toledo at Medina del Campo, it was moved that he should besiege it on
one side, and the Bishop on the other, hereupon were every day consultations
amongst the Commissioners, but they could not determine any thing. At last it
was resolved, that John de Padilla should be sent for to Valladolid, that they
might take his advice. The Commoners were far more in number then the
Cavaliers, but these were the better and more experienced men in matters of
Arms* Tordesillas they fortified daily, and furnished with all sorts of
provisions. Simancas likewise was in so good condition, that the horse of that
garrison plagued those of Valladolid in such manner, that no body could Travel
nor keep any Cattle in the fields, or any thing else, but they would be sure to
snap it. By order of the Iunta it was Proclaimed in Valladolid, with sound of
Trumpets and Minstrels, that no Soldiers, or others, should rob under pain of
death, albeit they should meet with people coming from the enemies quarters,
unless they bore Arms on the other side, (and in such case, they might do what
they could) to the end that People might pass to and fro securely, and trade
not absolutely be destroyed. The like was proclaimed in Tordesillas and
Simancas. By this means the ways began to be somewhat secure, but not
altogether, and the People desired there might be one good battle, for either
side falling, the dispute would be ended. Cou^agious expl^it of the Bi^hop o^
Z^mora.
The spirit and Courage of the Bishop was remarkable: One night he sallied out
of Valladolid, and went to Palencia, took the Corregidor, the Alcaldes, and
other officers of Justice, and placed others in their steads, he had an intent
to apprehend Don Diego de Castilla also, but he fled. With the favor and
assistance of the major part of the City, he called himself Bishop of
Palencia, for which Bishopric he was presently off^ed sixteen thousand
Ducats. Thence he went to Carrion, and Torquemad^, in each of which Towns (as
in Palencia) he left two thousand men to guard them, (which the Commonaltie
had given him) he gave them strict orders to be very watchful and Vigilant,
but to offer violence to none, except the the people of Burgos, and other
places belonging to the Cavaliers, and from such, he bid them take what they
could, and pay themselves with the plunder, and tell the people, that if they
came a second time, they might thank God if they took not their lives away, as
for their goods or Cattle, they must exspect to have none left. This done, he
returned to Vallad^lid, having made himself a King, and Pope.

SECT. XI.
John de Padilla marched out of Medina del Campo toward Valladolid, with ^
great number of Foot, paid for a long time, but only threescore horse. And
being arrived at the bridge of Duero, he commanded his Artillery to be
carried up the River to Simancas; At about half a league distance, he caused
four pieces of Ordnance to be shot at the Town, whereupon the Earl of On^ate
sallied forth with fourscore Lances, with which he lay in ambush, thinking to
cut off John de Padilla's train, but being discovered, John de Padilla let
fly four Falconets at them, which made them soon turn their b^cks, and he
pursued them to the very Gates of Simancas. Thence he went to Valladolid,
where he was solemnly received with the applaus and content of the whole
City, making as if he were the father of them all, in whom they reposed all
their trust and confidence. And there he was made Captain General, although
those of the Iunta would have given that Command to Don Pedro Lasso de la Vega,
but the great credit and esteem which John de Padilla had gotten amongst the
Souldierie, made them decline that resolution. The Earl of Haro, having
intelligence of John de Padilla's march to Valladolid, had an intent to stop
his way, to which effect, he sent for Don Geronimo de Padilla to Simancas,
with those men he had at Portillo, but being upon his departure informed for
certain, that some of Tordesillas had given John de Padilla notice of his
design, and that they had agreed, as soon as the Earl was gone with his men one
way, John de Padilla should com another, and fall upon Tordesillas, where most
of the Inhabitants were for the Commonaltie, and desired nothing more, then the
effecting of this plo^; He c^anged his former determination, and stayed to
secure Tordesillas. After this, they had intelligence that in a place called
Rodilana, betwixt Medina del Campo and Valladolid, were quartered five hundred
Soldiers of Salamanca, who being so near Medina, thought themselves secure,
and kept no guards, hereupon the Lord Admiral, and the ^arl, consulted how to
beat up their quarters, and destroy them. Don Pedro de la Cueva, brother to
the Duke of Alburquerque, a valiant Gentlemen, undertook the execution of this
design, and with few more, then what the enemy was spoken to be, he marched
one night to Rodilana, and falling in suddenly upon them, he killed and took
most of them, the rest fled. Five or six days after this, the Earl of Haro,
having received other intelligence, that in a small Town called l^ Zarca, six
leagues from Tordesillas, where arrived seven or eight hundred Soldiers from
Segovia; He incharged the same Don Pedro (who was his Cosen German) because he
had been so successful before, to go and surprise the said Soldiers, giving
him two hundred horse and five hundred Foot to that effect. Don Pedro, with
those men, marched all night, and going a great league about to avoid Medina
del Campo, he set upon them unawares, and though the said soldiers retired
fighting into a Church, Don Pedro followed them so close, that entering perforce
after them, he killed and wounded many of them, and brought almost all the
rest prisoners to Tordesillas; which was held an exploit of great valor,
conduct, and importance.

SECT. XII.
JOhn de Padilla, the Bishop of Zamora, and other Captains of the Commo^altie
neglected no opportunities of advancing their Interest, and infesting the
advers party. It was concluded amongst them, that John de Padilla, with the
two thousand five hundred men he brought from Toledo and Madrid, should pitch
his camp before Cigales, (a small Town belonging to the Earl of Venavente, two
leagues from Valladolid) and if they did not receiv them willingly, that they
should force their entrance, but those of Cigales received them without making
the least opposition, and lodged them in their houses, thinking no harm. At
midnight (which was a base unworthie action) the Soldiers gave the alarm
through all the Town, and being in arms, they took all their Hosts, (who had
so freely given them quarters) and all the rest of the Town, and having
manacled, and disarmed them, not leaving them so much as a sword or dagger,
they put them all into the Church, and set a strong Guard upon them, saying,
They did so to secure the place, because it belonged to an enemy. The third of
January the Bishop marched again out of Valladolid at midnight, with some
companies of soldiers, directly to Pal^n^ia, his new Bishopric, where he
stayed some time; after which he gave out, that he would return to Valladolid,
but he turned another way; Other exploit of the Bishop of Zamora'^.
and having sent his Scouts before to Mocon, the next morning, by break of
day, he assaulted the Fort of Valdepero, whereof was Commander Andres de
Ribera, son in law to Doctor Tello; who, after a long dispute, and several men
killed on both sides, the Bishop receiving fresh supplies from the Beherrias,
was enforced to surrender upon condition, only to secure the lives of those
that were within. The Bishop took the persons of the Governor, his wife, and
Doctor Tello, her father, into his protection, The Governor of Vald^per^ taken,
and the place plundered by the Bishop'^ m^n.
but could not, or would not, hinder his men from plundering all their goods.
They found much very rich booty within the Fort, whereof the Bishop demanded a
fifth part, as being their Captain, which they gave him, yet he that had
least amongst the Soldiers, carried away forty Ducats. The Bishop grown
glorious by this prize, dispatched a messenger to Valladolid, requiring them to
send him more men, that he mig^t take the other Forts about Fu^ntes and
Palencia, and put Ga^r^sons i^ them for the Commonaltie, which done, he sent
Doctor Tello, his son-in-law, and daughter, prisoners to Valladolid, with a
Guard of thirty Horse.

SECT. XIII.
THe Commanders of the Iunta's forces used all possible diligence to be
revenged of those of Simancas, from whom they received continual affronts and
mischief, and therefore they sent for more me^ to Toro, Zamora, Salamanca, and
Avila, which they exspected daily; for all those, and other Cities, were
possessed with so much disdain and wilfulness, that they asspired and studied
nothing more, then the mainteining of that War, as if they thought that their
only means to Salvation; whereof certainly there was weak probability,
considering, that for eleven months, which those Domestic or Civil Wars had
reigned in Spain, the Devil had transported the hearts of men with this
infernal fury. If any one (though but of an ordinary capacity) did se^iously
consider, what destiny would befall those Citi^s, sor denying their due
obedience to their King, (he granting more then they desired) and persevering
in such extravag^nt misdemeanors and cruelties to themselves, besides the of^ens
to God; what could he think, but that they were quite bereaved of natural
reason? And that a Bishop (CHRIST'S Vicar) should make himself Captain of such
ungratious miscreants, O ^empora! o Mores! Impudence and respectless audacitie
were only in esteem; the vile inconsiderate multitude fought against the noble
and virtuous. Those that were of good extraction, or possessed any considerable
fortune, durst not open their mouths, for if by chance they did let fall any
word which sounded not well in the other's ears, presently their persons were
committed to prisons, their goods and estates confiscate, and they proclaimed
Traitors. Such was the confusion, such the corruption and reprobate estate of
the Castillians, in our Grandfathers times, from the year 1519, until 1522; In
which year God brought his Majesty back into these Kingdoms: which returning
to their obedience, and being acknowledged by their King, God raised them to
the magnificence and glory wherewith they flourished in former ages, and
enjoie yet at this present. To the end the people may see what blessings he
bestow's upon subjects that are obedient to their Princes, and how he
punishes the contrary; for although the Taxes which they impose upon them be
heavy, they heap upon themselves grievances infinitely more insupportable, by
rising in Rebellion against them. Though this strange History of the
Commonalties seem opprobrious to this Nation, and an indelible blot to the
Castillian honor, having broken their faith to their Sovereign, for which they
were so renowned in other ages: yet it is exceeding profitable in this respect,
Here the Author g^ve^h Kings a l^sson, ^dmonishing t^em not to oppres their
Subjects.
that Kings may know how to govern their Subjects without oppression, and the
subjects learn to obey without reluctancie; for the contrary can but produce
such sad effects as we both have and shall see hereafter. But to return to our
former relation, I must tell you, That the Garrison of Simancas, holding
themselves secure, by reason of the natural, as well as the Artificial strength
of the place, went almost every day Pekeering to the gates of Valladolid, and
not only brought away all their goods and cattle they could meet withal, but
abused and reviled them with most shameful language, calling them Dogs, and
Infidels, bidding them turn Christians again. In revenge whereof, those of
Valladolid so reaked their malice upon the Lord Admiral, and other Noblemen, in
this manner; The 11 day of Januarie, in the same year, by order, or at least,
consent of the Iunta, they made a Proclamation, that no Citizen, or Inhabitant
of Valladolid, or Jurisdiction thereof, should dare, under great penalties, to
go to the Fairs, or Marts, of Villalon, Rioseco, or Astorga, (which Towns
belonged to the Lord Admiral, the Earl of Venavente, and Marquis of Astorga)
their envy and spite being so inveterate, that if they could but blemish any
one of these Noblemen's eyes, they would not stick to have pulled out their own.

SECT. XIV.
DOn Francisco de Veamonte, by order of the Lord high Constable, surprised and
possessed himself (finding no great resistance) of the Town of Ampudia, or
Fuent Empudia, belonging to the Earl of Salvatierra, who was then playing the
mad mutinier in the mountains of Alava, and could by no means be reduced to
the Lord high Constable. The Commoners to gain favor with the Earl of
Salvatierra, determined to retake Ampudia. To which effect one night in the
said month of January, John de Padilla, and the Bishop, made an alarm in the
City of Valladolid, causing proclamation to be made, that every house should
furnish a Soldier, to go with John de Padilla as far as Cabecon, for the
expedition of Ampudia, in regard they had intelligence that five Companies of
Foot and horse were marched out of Tordesillas and Simancas, to take it from the
Earl of Salvatierra, who was a great supporter of their cause. But the Cavaliers
for the better accomplishment of their design, sent ten Scouts before to
discover, and ride close to Valladolid, whom those of the City perceiving,
presently sallied out, and gave not over the pursuit of them, until they had
recovered Simancas* By which means the the rest went securely on to Ampudia,
without receiving the least hindrance from Valladolid, who were diverted by
those of Simancas. John de Padilla, with great store of men, one whole Cannon,
and three or four field-peeces, marched to Cabecon and Cigales, from whence he
sent back again all the men of Valladolid, only two Companies, with which, and
the rest of his men, he arrived in very good order at Ampudia, where he found
the Cavaliers, masters, both of the Town, and Fort. John de Padilla's men,
being mad of fighting, fell to storming the Town, and having made two great
breaches, in the old, and new Wall, the Cavaliers, retreated to the Fort,
whither they pursued them: But the Cavaliers seeing they were but few, and the
enemies many, and stout-fighting men, they quitted the Fort, leaving in it a
Governor, with 60 Horse, and some Foot, and getting out at a private Sallie-port,
they fled to the Tower of Mormojon, one league distant from Ampudia, whereof
when John de Padilla had notice, he followed them with his whole Army, and
being arrived at Mormojon, he found they had made themselves strong within the
Castle, which was situate upon the side of the Mountain called Torocos,
toward the Champain. John de Padilla's soldiers were all so animated,
Mormojon taken by John de Padilla.
and desirous to grapple with the Cavaliers, that making a furious onset, and
burning down the gates, they were just entering the Town, when all the people
came out in Procession, the Priests with their robes, and Crosses in their
hands, and the women, and children barefooted, fell upon their knees with
tears, and humble supplications to John de Padilla, that he would not suffer
them to be sacked or plundered: But his men cried out, No, no, let us sack the
Town. At which words John de Padilla turned himself toward his soldiers,
saying, Take notice, Gentlemen, our intention is not to ransack or destroy any
people, especially those who are not culpable: by which, and other such like
plaus^ble language, he pacified the furious greediness of his soldiers, and
persuaded them to do what he pleased: which done, he told the people upon his
word, no man of his should offer them any violence, but they must bring a
thousand Ducats to content his Army, and swear to be true to the
Commonaltie; whereunto the poor Townsmen, out of fear, suddenly condescended,
and John de Padilla quartered all his men there, but with express order, that
they should pay for every thing, except Provender for their Horses, which the
people were willing to give them. Soon after, John de Padilla commanding one
half of his Army to lay close siege to the Castle, and block up all the
Advenues, with the other half he returned to do the like to those within the
Fort of Empudia, who would willingly have surrendered it, and those of Mormojon
likewise, if John de Padilla would have secured them their lives only, but he
refused it, and swore, if they stood out, he would hang every man of them;
Empudia taken by John de Padill^* and the Bishop.
so he assaulted them several times very furiously; but seeing how
courageously they defended themselves, to the loss of no small number of his men,
he was glad they would deliver it upon better conditions; which were these,
That they should resign the Fort, with all things belonging thereunto, as
Munition, Victuals, household stuff, etc. And march freely out with all their
own Arms, horses, and baggage, which they did to the number of one hundred and
threesco^e horse and Foot. Fray Antonio de Guevara, in his Epistles, The Bis^.
speech to hi^ m^n in the Assault.
reports, that the Bishop of Zamora, encouraging his Soldiers in this
assault, said to them, So, my boys, get up nimbly, fight and die courageously,
and let my Soul go at a venture along with yours, since you die in so just and
Holy an enterprise. John de Padilla would not suffer any damage or havoc to
be made of any thing within the Fort, nor stand to batter it much without,
because the Earl of Salvatierra had written to him, to take it with the least
prejudice to him that might be. Those of the Commonaltie were very well
pleased at the taking of Empudia, and John de Padilla's Army increased daily,
by the confluence of people to him from the Beherri^s. The Bishop of Zamora
departed from Empudia, to Moncon, thence to Magaz, spoiling and doing all the
mischief he could to those of the Cavaliers party; He caused Macariegos, and
other Towns, to be sacked, insomuch that he was as much dreaded as fire, in
places that were not able to resist him. But in Valladolid they found great
miss of him, to defend them from the incursions of those in garrison at
Simancas.

SECT. XV.
THe Bishop of Zamora, by Letters, promises, and other private practices,
solicited, and egged on the people of Burgos, as much as in him lay, to make
another Commotion in the City. But the Lord High Constable was so vigilant and
zealous to advance his Majesty's service, that he did not only keep those of
Burgos in good order and subjection, but endeavored by the same means the
Bishop used, The Lord High Constabl^'^ plot discovered.
to gain the people of Valladolid; The plot being discovered, or at least
suspected, they cunningly returned an answer to the City of Burgos, enclosing
therein a Copy of the Letter (which they shrewdly imagined was of the Lord
High Constable's own forging, and not from the City) to the end they might
both be read publicly, which occasioned such a tumult and mutiny among the
people, that like hare-brained inconsiderate creatures, Mutiny in the City of
Burgos.
they presently rose in Arms, and would have turned the Lord High Constable out
of the City. But he, seeing fair words and gentleness prevailed nothing at
all with them, determined to carry it with an high hand, and make them to
submit per force, having taken the Command of the Fort from them. To bring this
resolution to effect, one day he drew up his soldiers and servants all in
Arms, in a broad place before his own house; thither repaired to him forthwith
Don John de la Cerda, Duke of Medina Cely, Don Luis de la Cerda, Marquis of
Cogolludo, his son, Don Alonso de Arellano Earl of Aguilar, Don Antonio de
Velasco Earl of Nieva, with his two sons, Don Hernando de Bobadilla Earl of
Chinchon, Don Bernardino de Cardenas, Marquis of Elche, eldest son to the Duke
of Maqueda, and son in Law to the Lord High Constable, besides diverse other
persons of honor, with their kindred, and servants, who were all resolved to
venture their lives with him in this design; which the people perceiving, they
all assembled likewise, intending to fight with these Noblemen, and they were
so near engaging, that some Arrows were interchanged from each party, and the
bullets began to fly also; but the chief of the City, The Common people
submit to the Lord High Constable.
seeing the advantage the Nobles had over the People, they speedily sent to
require and command the Commoners to be quiet, and peaceably laying down their
Arms, to obey the Commands of the Lord High Constable, as their ViceKing and
Governor, which they did without much contestation, and followed, very
submissively and quietly, the Lord High Constable, who went directly to the
Fort, requiring the Governor to deliver it him presently, otherwise, he
protested, he would enter it by force, The Fort is surrendered to him.
and execute Justice upon him, and all the rest with him; Some disputes and
controversy there was thereupon, but before night it was surrendered; and the
Lord High Constable put in another Governor for his Majesty, placed a
Corregidor in the City, and re-established the government in the same manner
it had been formerly. Thus Burgos, not being able to resist, was pacified, and
reduced to the obedience of his Majesty, wherein that City continued ever
after.

SECT. XVI.
THis done, the Lord High Constable sent Don Iuan Manrique, the Duke of
Naxara's eldest son, to suppress those of the Merindades; and by reason he was
very young, Martin Ruiz de Avendan^^, and Gomez de Butron, Gentlemen of great
account in those parts, and in Biscaya, were appointed to go along with him;
being arrived there, those Gentlemen carried the business so discreetly, that
there was a peace concluded betwixt the Lord High Constable, and those of the
Merindades; But it lasted not long, for Gonsalo de Barabona, the Abbat of
Rueda, Garcia de Arce, but chiefly Don Pedro de Ayala, Earl of Salvatierra,
infringed it, who was grown very powerful in those mountainous parts, and so
besotted with that inconsiderate passion, that by his obstinacy, he brought
himself to a miserable end, to the utter ruin and destruction of one of the
most honorable and most ancient families of Castilla, and the Mountains.

SECT. XVII.
AT the time that most of the Cities of Castilla declared for the Commonaltie,
in the province of Alava, and City of Vitoria, that opinion was not generally
received nor allowed, although some did take the liberty to speak over
lavishly, especially against those of the Council. In this season was brought
to the said province, and City of Vitoria, a Letter from Burgos, wherein that
City (as the chief of Castilla) desired those of that province to send two
persons (whom they pleased) to confer with them at Burgos. At the same time,
were brought other Letters from the province of Guipuzcoa, and the County of
Biscaya, desiring that they might all unite together. The City of Naxara and
Town of Haro desired, that they would assist them, against the Lord high
Constable, and the Duke of Naxara, who, they said, did tyrannize too much over
them; Vitoria returned civil answers to all, Burgos only excepted, to whom
they would not write, because they made themselves their Superiors, in styling
that the Metropolitan City of Castilla, for the City of Vitoria did presume
that they, and their province of Alava, were absolute of themselves, without any
dependencie, or relation to Burgos, as their Head. But they sent John de Alava
(who at that time was Merino Mayor, that is, Chief Judge of Vitoria) to let
their Ambassadors understand, by word of mouth, the pre-eminence of that
Country, and that they could not condescend to the Union which they desired,
for they understood that Burgos had shaken hands with their obedience to his
Majesty, and they would not be participant of their disloialtie. This answer
was no less unexpected then unwelcom to those of Burgos. About the same time,
Troubles in the Country of Biscaya.
some Towns of the Province of Guipu^coa, infected with the Common Contagion,
fell foul upon the City of San Sebastian, because they would not approve of
their extravagant opinions, cutting down and spoiling their Orchards, (for they
have no Vineyards) and doing them diverse other mischiefs. But prevailing not
there, they wrote, and held correspondence with diverse other places, by means
of Pedro Ochoa de Santa Maria de Mondragon, (a subtle fellow) who was their
Mercury. At length, Vitoria tainted with the same diseas, had joined in
confederacy with them, but that Diego Martinez de Alava, Deputie-General of
that province, with others, his allies and kinsmen, endeavored to restrain them
from a design so wicked and prejudicial to his Majesty.

SECT. XVIII.
THe Earl of Salvatierra, being at difference with Madama Margarita, his
Lady, insomuch that he would not live with her, she addressed her complaints
to his Majesty of her grievances, and of the indignities, which, through his
cross and unworthie disposition, First ground of Salva^^erra's di^^a^ie against
his Majesty.
she was enforced to suffer. Whereupon it was ordered by his Majesty, that
the said Countess, with her Children, should remain in Vitoria, and that the
Earl should allow them maintenance according to their qualities; and an expr^ss
Command from his Majesty was sent to Diego Martinez de Alava, Deputy general
of that Province, to see the said order punctually observed, who desiring to
execute this Command by the Authority and means of the Council, the Earl
thought to counterpois that power, by making the Commonaltie of his side, who
did him little good in this particular, although those of the Iunta sent to
that Province, and to the City of Vitoria, a Judge, called Antonio Gomez de
Ayala (who afterward was executed for a notorious Commoner at Valladolid) with
orders and power to give sentence in favor, or against any that should be
brought before him: his addresses were particularly to the Earl of Salvatierra,
to the end that he might assist and support him: The Ea^l gave him fifty men,
who attended on him at his coming into Vitoria; which the Deputy Diego
Martinez de Alava, and Pedro Martinez his brother, with others of their
kindred, seeing, and knowing that he brought particular orders against them
from the Iunta at Tordesillas (where the Deputy, and his kinsmen, had been
proclaimed Traitors) they thought it a thing much conducing to his Majesty's
service, and their own security, to apprehend this Judge, which to effect, the
sons of Don Fernando de Alava, Diego Martinez de Al^va, and his allies,
apprehend and imprison the Judge, whom the Iunta sent to Vitoria.
Governor of Bernedo, and John de Alava his cosen germane, with twenty men,
besides other friends and servants, went to the Judge's lodging, took him and
his servants out of their beds, clap't irons upon them, and carried them to the
Fort of Bernedo, and took away the Orders which he brought from the Iunta,
wherein they gave the charge of Governor and Captain General to Don Pedro de
Ayala, Earl of Salvatierra, from the City of Burgos to Fuente Ravia. The Judge
remained under safe custody in the Fort, in mean time the Gentlemen, who
carried him thither, returned to Vitoria, where they found the People much
distempered, and murmuring at those men's imprisonment.

SECT. XIX.
Amongst these Occurrences came an Express from the Lord High Constable, with
Letters, notifying to those of Vitoria, and the Province of Alava, the Orders
which his majesty had sent him, encharging him with the Government of the
Kingdoms, and commanding all his Subjects, to obey him as their Viceroy and
Governor. But those of Alava, being much inclined to the Earl of Salvatierra,
said, That they were upon a certain agreement with those of the Province of
Guipuzcoa, which being concluded, they would obey as far as they were obliged.
But the Deputy Diego Martinez, and all his friends, received the said
notification with due respect. The City of Vitoria returned an answer to the
Lord High Constable, but would not give him the title of Governor; whereupon
some words passed between John de Alava, and the rest, who bade him, in scurvie
terms, go out of the Assembly; but he boldly answered, Get you gone, like
Traitors and Rebels: for which words, they caused him to be apprehended. In
this interim, a Priest, from the Earl of Salvatierra, desired to have
conference with those of the Assembly: which the Deputy, Diego Martinez,
knowing, privately stole out from the rest, and laid hands upon this Priest,
clapped him in prison, and having opened his packet, he found several Letters to
Friars, and other particular men, desiring them to induce the people to deny
their obedience to the Governors. This bred a main disorder, and libels were
scattered about by the people: yet Martinez, and Pedro de Alava, with all those
of their kindred and alliance, resolutely determined to maintein his Majesty's
Interest, pressing and requiring all the rest to subscribe also to his
Commands; if not, they protested against them, styling them no otherwise, then
Rebellious and disloial Traitors. Of all which proceedings, they sent
information to the Lord High Constable, and he to the Council Roial, (who then
resided at Castroxeriz). Those of Vitoria, seeing their fidelity brought into
question, resolved to submit, and sent their Letters to that effect, promising
all obedience to the Lord High Constable, beseeching him to pardon their former
extravagancies and inconsidtrateness, and that he would give order to burn
those Informations, which Diego Martinez de Alava had sent to him against them;
which he did. So by the diligence and resolution of Diego Martinez de Alava,
and other Gentlemen of his name and family, the City of Vitoria was reduced,
and continued afterward their Loialtie and obedience to his Majesty. All
these passages were in the year 1520, and the beginning of 1521* The Lord High
Constable, seeing that no reason would sati^fie the Earl of Salvatierra,
endeavored to do him what mischief he could. He took from him the Town and
Castle of Empudia, and put a Garrison of his own therein, who (as you have
heard) were again forced to quit that, and other places, by John de Padilla; In
which time the Earl of Salvatierra, having picked up a number of people out of
the Merindades, besides his own servants and soldiers, he led them as far as
the Monastery of San ^an Salvador de On^a, wit^ intent to go recover Empudia;
but being informed there, that the Bishop of Zamora had already taken it, he
changed his resolution, The Earl of S^lvatierra faceth Vitoria with his Army.
and turned his Forces toward Vitoria, threatening to burn it to the ground, if
they did not renounce their obedience to the Lord High Constable, and deliver
the Deputy Diego Martinez, and his brother, into his hands. The City, being
not a little staggered and affrighted at these high menaces, sent messengers to
the Earl, with great submissions, which so much abated his fury, that all the
month of January, 1521, they remained unmolested.

SECT. XX.
HIs Majesty's Royal Council being at Briviesca, and hearing what notable
service Don Pedro Xuarez de Velasco, Lord of Cuscurrita, and Dean of Burgos,
had done his Majesty in that City, and how courageously he had behaved
himself, they sent for him. Don Pedro not knowing what danger might befall,
took about twenty Gentlemen and servants on horsback with him, all well armed,
with green Coats over their Armor, that no body could discern any thing,
besides the hounds and hawks they carried with them, made no creature suspect
any other, then that he went out to take his pleasure. Being arrived at
Briviesca, the Council gave him order to subdue the seven Merindades of old
Castilla, who were up in Arms. Whereof Don Pedro would have excused himself,
saying, That it was not suitable with his Coat to command Soldiers; (for he
went in the habit of a Priest, by reason of his Deanery.) But those of the
Council answered, that although he were effectively a Priest, (much more
having only the habit of one) he ought to change his surplice into a suit of
Armor, especially in cases wherein the service of God, and the King, was so
much concerned. Don Pedro, seeing it was in vain to expostulate any further,
resolved to put their Commands in execution, and considering he was the Lord
high Constable's Son, discreetly valiant, and beloved of every body, many
Gentlemen, and persons of quality, offered themselves to venture their fortunes
with him. Being arrived within a league of Medina de Pumar, (which was hard by
those Commoners, whom he went to suppress) they had intelligence of his
approach, and forthwith disposed themselves to give him battle; Don Pedro,
though he had nothing near so many men, resolved however to conquer them, or
die in the combat; So having passed over a wooden Bridge, he gave them so hot
and furious a charge, D^n Pedro Xuarez de Velasco routeth those of the
Merindades.
that they quickly showed their backsides, and scattering themselves in a
disorderly manner, they sought their security amongst the Craggie mountains,
he pursued them as far as he could, and staid some time, thinking they might
rallie, but he heard no more of them. So he returned Victorious, and lost not
one of his men.

SECT. XXI.
IN the month of March, of the same year, the Lord High Constable, seeing that
they exceedingly wanted Artillery, in regard the Commoners possessed all that
which was in Medina del Campo he gave order to fetch away that which the
Catholic Kings had in store at Fuente Ravia. Don Sancho de Velasco was
presently dispatched thither, with Commission to bring the Munition over land,
and the Artillery by sea to Bilbao, thence to Vitoria, and so to Burgos. The
Iunta (then at Tordesillas) having intelligence hereof, presently sent to
advertise the Earl of Salvatierra, that he might prepare forces and intercept
the Artillery; Who used such diligence, that in short time, he had raised,
amongst his friends and tenants, above ten thousand men. And a Gentleman named
Goncalo de Varahona, Captain of the said Earl's forces, went to the Merindades,
and of those men which Don Pedro Xuarez de Velasco had routed and dissipated,
he rallied so many as made up the number of almost fourteen thousand (the like
Army was never known to be raised in those parts, in so short a time) with
these men he took the Munition that came by land; and hearing that the
Artillery (which was seven great pieces of Ordnance) was coming from Bilbao to
Vitoria, The Earl of Salvatierra, by order from the Iunta, intercept's the
Artillery which wa^ going to the Lord High Constable, and causes it to be
broken in pieces.
convoied by seventeen hundred men, whereof many were Gentlemen of note of
Biscaya, besides the Alcalde Leguizama, and the Corregidor of Vitoria; the
third of March, he marched with his whole Army nine leagues that day, and
night, the next morning by break of day he came into the Vallie of Arretia,
where the Artillery was* Don Sancho de Velasco and his men, giving all for
lost, dis-mounted their Cannon, and taking away the Carriages, and their Mules,
shifted for themselves. The Earl seized on the Artillery, but not being able
to carry it away, he caused it to be broke in pieces. This done, the Earl
returned with his Army to the Vallie of Ayala, having some intelligence, and
encouragement from some of his friends within the City, to fall upon Vitoria,
which was very pleasing to his Captain Goncalo de Varahona, and other Officers.
The report flying about, that he intended to sack Vitoria, made a number of
rabbling people join, which swelled his Army to fifteen, or sixteen thousand,
but most of them were ill armed, and wors disciplined. He pitched his camp in
the plain of Arriaga, one quarter of a league from Vitoria.

SECT. XXII.
THe Abbat of Santa Pia, and Fray Diego de Arna, a Dominican Friar, being
persons, whom the Earl particularly esteemed and effected, went to him in his
Camp, desiring and conjuring him not to enter into the City. So falling upon a
Treaty of agreement, he demanded, that they should deny their obedience to
the Lord High Constable, and that they would deliver unto him the Deputy Diego
Martinez de Alava, with his brother, and certain others of his kindred. The
Cit^zens believing that if those Gentlemen were out of the City, the Earl's
fury might be the better appeased, earnestly desired them to absent
themselves, which they did, and carried their wives and families with them to
Trevin^o, a Town belonging to the Duke of Naxara, where they exspected Don
Manrique, his son, with some forces from Navarra. The City being in this
perplexity, some who had relation to Don Alvaro de Mendoca, Lord of Mendoca de
Arriva, (who was an intimate friend with the Earl of Salvatierra) beseeched him
for Don Alvaro's sake, not to use any violence to that City. But he briskly
answered, That they had not performed their promises to him. At last, to
satisfy him, they concluded, That he should enter, with his colors flying, at
the gate of Arriaga, and march out again at the gate of Santa Clara. Whilst
this was arguing, com's El Licenciado Aguirre, (who was one of the Council)
saying, That they ought not to open the gates to the Earl of Salvatierra, and
that whosoever should do it, were Traitors. Those that were present gave him a
very rude answer, and had laien violent hands on him, if Lope de Xuaco, and some
others, had not suddenly conveied him out of the City, from whence he went to
stay with Diego Martinez de Alava, The Earl of Salv^ti^rra's Army enter's
into Vitoria.
and the rest, at Trevin^o. The Earl came not into Vitoria himself, but sent
his Captain Goncalo de Varahona, mean time he went to a place called Ondagoya,
in the Vallie of Quartango. Those of the Iunta sent the Earl of Salvatierra
thanks for the favor he had done them, in taking that Artillery which the
Lord High Constable (they said) intended to carry against ^alencia, and
afterward join with the rest of the Cavaliers.

SECT. XXIII.
THis Earl of Salvatierra, Dis^osition of Don Pedro de Ayalae Earl of
Salva^ierr^.
(who was also Earl of the Valleys of Ayala, Quartango and San Milan) was a man
of a monstrous hautie and terrible disposition. It happened, when those of the
Iunta sent to him, desiring him to wage War with the Lord high Constable, and
intercept his Artillery, that he then was with his Army before Briviesca,
and without returning any answer to their Letters, he presently raised his
siege. The Messengers of the Iunta thought thereby, that he had no intent to
act according to the contents of the Letters, which they delivered him, and
were very angry, saying, That he did only make a show of favor and
friendship to them, for now the Common^ltie having need of him, he would do
nothing for them. These words were brought to his ears, whereupon he wrote to
the Iunta, His Letter to the Iunta, an ^he City o^ Valladolid.
and to Valladolid, expressing much distaste and anger, that they should harbor
any such thought of him, saying, that he came not of the race of any pedling
mercenarie fellows, nor of Traitors, but lineally was descended from the sto^k
of the Loyal Nobility of the Gottish King's of Spain. This murmuring against
him, by those of the Iunta, did so distemper him, that the blood gushed out at
his nose and mouth for mere anger, and cast him into a sickness, which had like
to have cost him his life. After this, he sent to the Iunta, and Valladolid,
desiring them to have a care that his Town and Castle of Empudia, should not
be destroyed, nor spoiled in the re-taking, although he knew the King would
not suffer him to enjoy it.

SECT. XXIV.
THe Gentlemen of Vitoria, who were retired at Trevin^o, sent to the Lord high
Constable and Duke of Naxara for succor; The Lord high Constable sent them four
hundred Foot Soldiers, and one hundred horse. The same night they arrived at la
Puebla de Argancon, the Deputy Diego Martinez went with them to suppress the
Earl of Salvatierra at Andagoya, but he having notice of their design, showed
them a pair of nimble heels. Being entered into the Town, they went presently
to his house, which having thoroughly ransacked, they burned to the ground; which
done, they returned to la Puebla. The next day arrived at Trevin^o, Don
Manrique de Lara, the Duke of Naxara's eldest son, with two thousand Foot, and
forty horse. He, and the Deputy, with the rest of the Gentlemen there,
resolved to go to Vitoria, and inflict condign punishment upon some of the
factious, and encourage those of the Loyal Party. The Inhabitants of Vitoria,
being unwilling to receiv so many soldiers into the City, sent messengers to
Trevin^o, desiring Don Manrique not to bring his soldiers thither, but they
could not prevail. So those men which Don Manrique brought, and the Lord high
Constable's, entered all into Vitoria, as also the Deputy with all his kindred.
The next day, being Fridaie, Don Manrique marched to the Town of Salvatierra,
which was the Earl's, and took it with the Castle also, both which, he gave
the Deputy Diego Martinez charge to keep for his Majesty, leaving him two
hundred soldiers; with the which Diego Martinez marched from Salvatierra, to a
place called Gauna, where the ^arl had another strong house, which having burnt,
he returned to Salvatierra, and Don Manrique the Sundaie following, went back
to Vitoria. The Earl seeing they had taken his Town of Salvatierra, and burnt
his other houses, went to the Valley of Quartango, and raised four thousand
eight hundred men with his servants. Hurtado Diez de Mendoca, hearing this,
came to Vitoria, and advertised Don Manrique of all particulars; Whereupon he
presently marched with his men to Quartango. The Earl stayed not to make him
welcome, but fled with all his men to the mountains; So Don Manrique's men
pillaged all the Valley, burned down the Towers of Andagoya, and Morillas.
Thence he marched toward the Merindades, where he did no great harm, the
people submitting themselves to him, only he burned some houses of Goncalo
Varahona's, thence he went to Burgos, where he joined his forces with the
Lord high Constable, who was then preparing for the battle of Villalar. Goncalo
Varahona, and one Captain Brizuela, after Don Manrique's departure out of the
Merindades, did a world of mischief in the houses of those, that had agreed and
made their peace with the Lord high Constable, at the Town of Valpuesta, he
killed one Salazar a Batchellor at Law, and burnt his house, from thence he
went to the Valley of Ayala, where the Earl of Salvatierra was: Where they
remained until April next following, raising men, as fast as they could, to go
against Vitoria and Salvatierra. Whereof the City being advertised, they put
themselves in a posture to resist him, got munition from the Seaside, made
ready their ordnance, mustred their ^en (which were but six hundred fit to
bear Arms, besides two hundred Soldiers.) The Lord high Constable sent them
from his Towns of Haro, la Puebla, and San Vicente, two hundred and fifty men
more, besides two troops of light hors-men. He sent moreover Commissions of
Captains General of the Mountains, and those parts, to Martyn Ruyz de Avendan^o
y de Gamboa, and to Gomez Goncalez de Butron y de Mugica. Upon receipt whereof
Martyn Ruyz de Avendan^o came to Vitoria, and with the men of the City, and
those that came from other places, resolved to give the Earl battle. Hereupon
the Deputy Diego Martinez de Alava, repaired speedily to Salvatierra, to
defend that, in case the Earl should make any attempt upon it. Being arrived
there, he would have sent his Son to the Castle of Bernedo, whereof he was
Governor, but the Townsmen would not suffer him, and offered to apprehend him,
whereupon there arose great disorder, and he was enforced to retire into the
Fort. Diverse of the Townsmen, having relation to the Earl, were very desirous
that he should repossess it, and therefore sent him intelligence privately,
that Diego Martinez, and his Sons, were in a manner prisoners, and that now was
the only time for him to fall upon the Town. Whereof he being very well
pleased, made all the haste he could from Quartango to Salvatierra, but was met
in the way by the horse of Vitoria, who took some of his men prisoners, however
he marched on, and Goncalo Varahona stayed behind; The next day about
midnight ^ee arrived at one of the Gates of Salvatierra, called San Iuan, and
his men cried Ayala, Ayala; Which the Deputie's men (who were upon the guard)
hearing, put themselves in a posture of defense, and discharged some of their
Ordnance, which killed and hurt some of his Soldiers. The Earl himself, being
very near the Gate, they flung down a great squared stone, which raked his
shoulders as it fell, and quite spoiled his horse, that made him retreat further
off till daie-break, by which time Goncalo Varahona had brought the rest of his
men, so they marched all in a body to a place called Vicun^a, where they
burned five houses belonging to Diego Martinez de Alava. And the Earl having
intelligence that the Town of Salvatierra, and the Deputy, were reconciled,
and stood upon the defensive, having no Artillery with him, nor finding any
refreshment for his men, the people being all fled to the Mountains, he
relinquished his design. But upon his retreat, a Party of horse with some Foot,
sallied out of Vitoria, and took diverse of his men at Alegria, with whom
returning to the City, and giving notice of the order, or rather disorder, of
the Earl's Army, they concluded to fight them; To which purpose all the horse
and Foot marched out, and Captain Ochoa de Asua was sent before to hinder him
from passing the bridge of Durana; But his horse being already passed, they made
it good till the Foot was all over, by which time the whole body of the
Vitorians was come up. The E^rl of Salva^ierr^ put to flight.
The Earl at first made as if he would fight, but they played so hot upon him
with their muskets, that seeing his men drop so fast, he rod away with only
one Page, which seeing his men began to follow him: Goncalo Varahona valiantly
stayed behind, crying to his men to stand. Captain Valenzuela encountered him,
and took him prisoner, who, with six hundred of his men, much pillage, and
diverse Colors, were all carried to Vitoria; Martin Ruyz de Avendan^^, His
Captain G^nsalo Va^ahona taken prisoner by those of Vito^ia, and be^^a^ed in
the ma^ket place of their City.
who was present at the sight, committed Goncalo Varahona to Pedro de Alava's
house for the present, and few days after, he was beheaded in the great market
place, whereof an express was sent to give the Lord high Constable notice, who
was then upon going to Villalar, where, a short time after, the battle was
given, which was the ruin and break-neck of the Commoners.

SECT. XXV.
TO relate all the troubles which the Lord High Constable had with those of
Burgos, and the Earl of Salvatierra, would fill whole Volumes. I shall now
only cursarily mention, what was done in order to the conclusion of the
Treaty and Articles, Here Don Pedro Lasso begin's to treat privately with the
Council, by means of Alonso Ortiz, who was a Iurate of Toledo, and his fellow
Commissioner in the Parliament at Santjago.
which the Bishop of Laodicea brought, concerning the reducing of Don Pedro
Lasso. Four days Ortiz remained in Tordesillas, exspecting until the Lord
Admiral had consulted of those Articles with the Cardinal, and given him the
result of their determination. But in day time he durst not go abroad, so
that his negotiation was only in the night, (for there is no War so dangerous
as that betwixt kindred, and people of the same Nation and Language). At last
he was dispatched, but he was fain to carry their Answer in his memory, not
daring to have any writing about him, ^o he went coasting and crossing the
Country in the night, until he came into the high-waie of Medina del Campo,
to the end that if he should meet any of the Commoners, they might think he
came from Medina, and was going to Valladolid; where, by break of day, he
arrived, and the Guards knowing him at the Gates, let him in without
difficulty* He would not go to his own lodging, but alighted at a friend's
house, whence he went directly to Don Pedro Lasso, and gave him an exact
account of what he had done with the Cardinal and the Lord Admiral at
Tordesillas. But in regard he had not full satisfaction of all his demands
(which were, that they should procure his Majesty's approbation and allowance
of the principal Articles sent him by the Iunta, for the good of the Kingdoms).
It was determined, that the Bishop of Laodicea should send a Friar to
Tordesillas, who should correspond with him in their ordinary cipher, and that
Ortiz should likewise return thither; which he did cunningly, without giving
any susspition, and being dispatched, he returned to Valladolid in like
manner as before.

SECT. XXVI.
IN this same year, the Kingdom of Toledo broke out into the like disorders and
exorbitancies, as were committed in other parts of Castilla. They report in
Toledo, of Donia Maria Pacheco, wife to John de Padilla, and daughter to the
Earl of Tendilla, that she was a woman of such a daring and resolute spirit,
that she was the greatest Instrument to support the Commonaltie of that City.
And (if we may believ Fray Antonio de Guevara) he relate's, that she being
com into the Vestrie of the great Church in Toledo, to take away the Plate for
payment of her husband's soldiers, she fell upon her knees, beat her breasts
with her hands, cried, sighed and sobbed, two torches standing lighted before
her, and fell into a kind of ecstasy, believing the deceit and conjuring of a
Morisca Witch, who told her, that her husband should com to be a King, or
somewhat near it. He says many other things of her, but let them pass, since
afterward she paid dear enough for her folly: And indeed what otherwise
could be exspected of a woman, that does so far deviate from the rode of her
natural emploiment, as to throw aside the Distaff, and the Needle, and busy
her self with matters of State, and War. The Towns of Orgaz and Ocan^a, with
the favor and support of those of Toledo, declared likewise for the
Commonaltie, and did a thousand mischiefs and affronts to the inhabitants of
Almaguer, and other places; for the remedying of which disorders, the Governors
of the Kingdoms constituted and ordained Don Antonio de Zun^iga to be Captain
General of the Kingdom of Toledo; who having rai^ed me^ at Consuegra, marched
into the field to put their commands in execution, what success he had, shall
be said hereafter. For the Iunta, and the Cavaliers call me away.

SECT. XXVII.
THe City of Valladolid was grown so passionate in the prosecution, and
supporting of the Commonaltie's Interests, slighting the Emperor's graces to
them, and being so maliciously bent against his Council, the Lord Admiral, and
the Earl of Venavente (who out of particular relations did desire, and used all
means possible to procure their good) that all their affection was turned into
hatred, and their favors into discourtesies. In this occurrence arrived at
Valladolid, a certain Priest, with Orders from the Emperor, and the Queen, to
the President and Judges of the Chancerie there residing, wherein they were
commanded, with the College and Universitie, forthwith to depart that City.
This coming to the people's knowledge, they were exceedingly incensed therewith,
seeing they should be deprived of three main benefits they had; which to
prevent, they gave out that those Orders were falls, and forged, or
counterfeited by the pretended Governors, who studied to do them all the
mischief they could. And they determined to apprehend the Priest that brought
them; but he sheltered himself by the President's advice in the Chancerie.
Whereupon the people, all in arms, came thither in a tumultuous manner to
demand the Priest. The President not seeing any other remedy, to satisfy the
multitude, delivered him to them; they presently clap't him into the Common
Gaol, where leaving him, they returned to the President, and in a furious
peremptory manner demanded, that he would deliver them those Orders which the
Priest brought him; he answered, That after he had conferred with the Judges
thereupon, they should have them; but they growing more insolent, told him,
That if he delivered them not without any further delaie, they would set fire
on his house. The President, seeing their mad resolution, thought it his best
way to let them have their wills. Those Orders being brought, they forcibly
entered into the Chancerie, and took away the great Seal also, which they
delivered to persons of their own choosing. In the Orders they found, how the
Emperor commanded the President, with the forenamed, within three days to
leav Valladolid, and repair to the Governors, under pain of being deprived of
their Offices, and that for the present they should go to the Town of Arevalo,
where they should attend his further pleasure, in regard Valladolid had
declined his service, and adhered to those that were Traitors to his Roial
Crown.

SECT. XXVIII.
THe Cavaliers sent to Valladolid, desiring a cessation for ten days. The
Major part Voted, that they should not consent thereunto, alleging that the
Cavaliers would break it, and besides that, they would never have demanded it,
but to recrute themselves with men and arms, which they wanted. At last they
returned this answer, that each party should deposite five thousand Marcos de
Plata, or marks of silver, in some faithful and sure person's hands, and
whosoever should break the peace in that time, should forfeit the money, upon
those terms they would hearken to them, but not otherwise. The Cavaliers
refused this proposition, and the next day following, they sent a Trumpeter
with a Letter of defiance to those who called themselves the Commissioners of
the Kingdom, declaring open War with fire and sword against the Commonalties,
and Valladolid, and required them to lay down their Arms, disband their
soldiers, to conform themselves to those whom his Majesty had appointed
Governors of the Kingdoms, and obey their Commands as they ought. Otherwise
they protested to hold them as Traitors, and would do them all the spoil and
mischief that in them lay. Those of Valladolid answered, That they feared them
not, bade them do their worst, and they would serve them with the like sauce:
And without any long delay they sent to those in Simancas, charging them, both
men, women, and children, presently to depart the Town, or they should all
suffer death without reserv. Thus those of Valladolid, A brave resolution of
Valladolid.
and of the Iunta, showed their insulting pride and cruelty, which spoke them
rather men given over to despair, then capable of reason and judgment.
Notwithstanding all this, the Lord Admiral, much grieved at the obstinacy of
Valladolid, The Lord Admiral's Letter to those of Valladolid.
and out of the tender affection which he bare to that City, wrote them
another Letter, in his own, and the Cardinal's name, inducing them by all fair
means possible, with promises of satisfaction for their grievances, to return
unto their due obedience to his Majesty, dis-banding their A^mies, disclaiming
the Interests, and refusing to harbor or assist with their men, artillery, or
otherways any of the disturbers of the peace and repose of the Kingdoms,
assuring, that if they would do so, they should find him always ready to do
them all the good offices that they could exspect or desire of him. And if not,
he protested, that according to his Majesty's Command, and in order to his
service, he would proceed against them as Delinquents, and disloial subjects;
and that he would make some of them suffer such exemplarie punishments, as
should deter succeeding Ages from committing any the like acts of
disobedience. Those of the Iunta, and of Valladolid, having read the Lord
Admiral's Letter, made no great account of the persuasive part of it, The
Iunta's and Valladolid's answer to the Lord Admiral.
neither were they any thing daunted at his threatenings; but returned him an
insolent mock-answer; wherein they charged him, and those of the Council, with
disturbing of the Kingdoms, and required them in the names of their Majesty's,
and of the Kingdoms, to return to their due obedience, leaving the Queen, with
the most illustrious Infanta, to their free liberties; to dis-band their
forces, both of Horse, and Foot, and diverse other things, which if they refused,
or delaied to perform accordingly, they protested, in the names of their
Majesty's, and Kingdom, to proclaim war against them, and declare them
delinquents, disloial and disobedient persons to their Majesty's, and that they
would inflict such punishments upon them, as should make them examples to
posterity, for ever committing any such enormities, etc.

SECT. XXIX.
AFter these Letters, the Cavaliers wrote another to Valladolid, which I could
not procure: But I have seen the answer, which those of Valladolid returned
them. It seemed that the Cavalier's Letter to them was not so Civil, and
respectful, as they did exspect. Therefore in their reply, they said, That
they believed that their Letter was ill addressed, for certainly it was not
intended for them. Then they fell upon the justification of their cause,
imputing the fault of all the troubles and disturbances of the Kingdom to the
Cavaliers, and making remonstrances of the Common People's Loyalty, in what
concerned his Majesty's service, being not wedded to their private Interests,
like the Cavaliers, who always regarded their own particular advancements and
profit, to the diminution, and almost, consuming of the Royal Patrimony.

SECT. XXX.
THe next day after this Letter was written, the Iunta commanded one of every
house in Valladolid to march out with John de Padilla, to receiv John Bravo, who
came Captain of those men, which were sent from Segovia, Salamanca, and Avila.
They were in all six thousand complete Foot and horse, besides thirty Carts
laden with Munition, carriages, and other warlike utensils. They passed the
bridge of Duero, to the great grief and dread of those in Garrison at Simancas
(which was not far distant) and so marched directly to Valladolid. Upon whose
arrival, the Iunta sent for the Bishop of Zamora, who was in the Beherrias,
burning and spoiling Cavalier's lands. The Bishop being returned, they sat in
consultation upon what enterprise they should go next. Those of Valladolid
spread a report, that they would fall upon Simancas, in revenge of the damages
which they daily received from that Garrison.

SECT. XXXI.
I Mentioned cursorily before, how Don Pedro Lasso began to wax weary of the
Commonaltie, and bethink himself of the disservice he had done his Majesty:
Now you shall hear fur^her with what difficulty his reconcilement was
accomplished. Ortiz being returned to Valladolid, related to Don Pedro Lasso
every particular passage (to his best remembrance, for he durst not bring any
papers) betwixt the Lord Admiral, the Cardinal, and him, concerning the
agreement. Wherewith Don Pedro was not well satisfied, seeing they demanded
more of him, then he was able to perform, so he remained unresolved. About
the time that he was in this Quandarie, arrived at Valladolid, Fray Francisco
de los Angeles of the order of St Francis, a man of a noble extraction and
great learning, who afterward was Bishop of Coria and a Cardinal. He went
first to Burgos with Letters from the Emperor to the Lord high Constable, and
the Articles which he desired his Majesty to sign for that City: thence he
came to Valladolid, where he had conference with Don Pedro Lasso; but lest
their too frequent conversation might breed suspicion, Don Pedro agreed, that
he should communicate freely with Alonso Ortiz, whose breast he found a
secure receptacle of any secret. Ortiz told Fray Francisco all the ways and
means he had used at Tordesillas, and what treaties had passed betwixt him and
the Lord Admiral; That for his part he came from Toledo to Valladolid* merely
to try if his endevors might contribute any thing to the remedying or
composing of those unhappie differences. Hereupon Fray Francisco took a
resolution to go himself to Tordesillas, to confer, with the Cardinal and Lord
Admiral; and being there, they sent for Ortiz, who went to them upon
Shrove-tuesdaie, Anno 1521, he alighted at the Monastery of Santa Clara,
where Fray Francisco lodged, and in regard it was past midnight, there was then
no possibility of speaking with the Lord Admiral; but the next morning, he
coming to hear Mass in the same Monastery, went up into Fray Francisco's
chamber, where Ortiz hid himself; all that morning until dinner time they spent
in treating about the Articles, in the Afternoon they did the like; and it was
God's will, that before they parted, all was fully concluded, to the
contentment and satisfaction of each party, whereof were transcribed two
Copies, one signed and sealed by the Cardinal and Lord Admiral, as Governors,
obliging themselves punctually to perform all and every the Articles therein
contained, and procure them to be confirmed by his Majesty, provided that Don
Pedro Lasso did make good what he had promised. Ortiz durst not carry this
writing to Valladolid, fearing lest the Guards should search him. So it was
agreed, that Fray Francisco de los Angeles should carry it to Abrojo, a
Monastery of Friars, a league short of Valladolid, (for he durst not venture
to go into the City with that about him) and that Ortiz should send some
trusty messenger thither for it. Ortiz returned the same night (half frozen)
to Valladolid, and the Guards let him in without touching him, he telling them
that he came from Medina del Campo. Being entered the City, he went
immediately to Don Pedro Lasso, whom he informed fully of all the passages,
and that Fray Francisco de los Angeles was to bring the Articles of agreement
in writing, signed and sealed that same night to Abrojo; which he did, the
Earl of On^ate giving him a Convoy of twenty Horse from Simancas, who put him
safe within the gates of the said Monastery, Don Pedro and Ortiz were in pain
long time, how they should send with safety for this writing, and at last they
resolved one Fray Pedro de san Hippolito (of the Monastery Del Prado (which
was without the City) who was Don Pedro's Confessor) should go for it. He
accepted the emploiment, and went to Abrojo, and having received the writing of
Fray Francisco de los Angeles, he returned; but being com near to Valladolid
about Sunsetting, he met with certain soldiers which had been roving abroad,
who seeing the Friar in that rode, imagined that he came from Simancas, and
thinking him to be a Spy (or rather for greediness of his mule) they laid
hands on him, saying, He was a Traitor, and that he came from Simancas to
give the Cavaliers intelligence of what passed in Valladolid. In this rude
manner they led him into the City, calling him Traitor, and saying, that they
would strip him, to see what Letters he brought to any particular persons; so
they brought him to an house close by the gate, where they made him alight to
be stripped. But it was God's great mercy to deliver Don Pedro, and the rest
that were engaged with him out of this danger: for just as Fray Pedro was
forced to alight from his mule, Note that seldom has there been any Trea^herie
committed, but a Friar, or some Clergy man, had a hand in it.
two Franciscan Friars came most happily thither, to whom Fray Pedro addressing
himself, with a neat slight of hand, and a notable resolution, drew the papers
out of his own sleev, and slipped them into one of theirs, beseeching him for
God's sake to fling them into the fire, and let no body see them: thus he
deceived the eyes of above five hundred people that were gathered together to
strip him: which they did, but finding no papers at all about him, they
carried him before Pedro de Touar, one of the Regidores, and Captain of
Valladolid, who knovving him, commanded them presently to releas him. By this
vvile he saved the lives of all those that were concerned in that Writing.

SECT. XXXII.
THe Franciscan Friars, having read these Articles, did burn them, as Fray
Pedro desired; but they could not refrain from speaking thereof to some others,
and they to others, so that at last it was the common Town-talk, and it was
carried to the Iunta. Don Pedro Lasso somewhat troubled, asked Ortiz what they
should do; who bad him be of a good courage, and if any question came of it,
to say, it was a trick of the Cavaliers, to sow discord amongst them, and
although they had begun with him, doubtless, ere long, they would do the like
to others. It fell out (as Don Pedro feared) that he was questioned in the
Iunta hereupon; but he was so well prepared to answer them, absolutely denying
the Charge, that with his smooth and resolute answers they were satisfied; in
regard there was no evidence, nor any ground of suspecting, but merely from the
bare words of the Friars. This sore being well salved, Ortiz wen again to Fray
Pedro, desiring him to venture once more to Tordesillas, and acquaint the Lord
Admiral of what had passed, and beseech him to send another Copy of the
Articles, like the former, which was lost; which he told him, he might safely
enough do in the night, there being a Monastery of his Order just in the way
to Tordesillas, whither he would send another messenger to bring it to
Valladolid. The Friar went, and being arrived at Tordesillas, he told the
Lord Admiral the story of his adventures, and how the former Copy had
miscarried, and therefore Don Pedro, and Ortiz, desired him to send another.
The Lord Admiral wondered at the Frier's strange relation, and thanked God with
him for his deliverie, and gave him forthwith another copy verbatim like the
first, wherewith he returned in the night to his Monastery, whither Ortiz
sent one of his own servants, who brought it safe into Valladolid. Hereupon Don
Pedro Lasso began to undermine, and cunningly to confer with some gentlemen and
Comissioners of the Junta, concerning the miseries of the times, persuading
them to condescend to a peace, and to be reduced to the good, and
tranquillity of the Kingdoms, in regard that was the end of their Assembling
and rising up in arms. Some thought this Proposition but just and reasonable,
others absolutely dis-approved it. All these passages were particularly related
to the General of the Dominican Order, then being at Tordesillas, who
persuaded the Grandees of the Kingdom to send Letters to those of the Iunta
General, and to the Particular Iunta of Valladolid, to this effect; That in
regard both Parties did fervently desire the good, and quiet of the Kingdom,
and that each in particular did pretend to advance it, yet they spoiled and
butchered one another without sens or reason, being all Natives of the same
Country, and their intentions (though in a different way) steering the same
Course. Therefore for the better understanding of each other, if the Gentlemen
of the Iunta would nominate any two of the Commissioners, and send them to the
Monastery of St Thomas, which is without Tordesillas, to treat with them, they
would at the same time appoint two of their party to go to the Monastery del
Prado, not far from Valladolid, to confer with those of the Iunta; by which
means they might com to some reasonable agreement, for the satisfaction and
general good of the Kingdoms, and that there might be no more war or
dissension amongst them, which had been the occasion of so much damage and
misery. Those of the Iunta (diverse of them being indifferently well inclined,
and seeing Don Pedro Lasso, who was one of the principal amongst them, lean
that way) were so far from dissenting, that without further delay, they
appointed him, and Alonso de Guadalaxara, Commissioner of Segovia, to go in
their names to Tordesillas, giving first notice to the Cavaliers thereof, and
wishing them to send their Agents to Prado, as was agreed, both giving
security and pledges that their Messengers should pass without danger or
molestation. This was concluded on Fridaie, March the 10th 1521. On Saturdaie
night following arrived at Valladolid, those whom the Governors sent for
pledges; but those who were against this Treaty, having consulted with John de
Padilla, who likewise did not relish it, gave order to those upon the Guard,
not to let any into the City that came from Tordesillas, but to take away
their Letters, and seiz upon their persons: Insomuch that a messenger with a
Pass for them, being com to Valladolid, the Guards would have apprehended him,
but he was so circumspect, that he got clear of them, and returned to
Tordesillas. This was not done by the general consent of the Iunta, but only
by those which were against the Treaty; and the rest of the Junta marvelled
that the Cavaliers did not keep their words, in sending their Pass, or safe
Conduct for the Commissioners, according to their own motion.

SECT. XXXIII.
THings being thus discomposed, the Captains of the several Cities, with the
Bishop of Zamora, and John de Padilla, agreed to draw all their forces into the
field, to stop all correspondence betwixt Valladolid and Tordesillas, that the
Treaty might not go forwards, and to destroy and spoil all the Towns or
houses they could, that belonged to any of the Gentry in Tordesillas. With
this resolution the Bishop of Zamora, John de Padilla with his Toledians, John
Zapata with those from Madrid, John Bravo, Captain of the Segovians, and
Francisco Maldonado, who commanded the men of Avila and Salamanca, went to the
Iunta, desiring that they would appoint a Captain General over them all, and it
is reported (out of craft, thereby to render him more odious to the Common
People) that they pressed to have that office conferred upon Don Pedro Lasso,
which plot was imputed to John de Padilla, who never was Don Pedro's friend.
The Iunta, to satisfy them, did name Don Pedro, but he desired some time to
think upon it, before he would accept it, and those that bare him no good
will, began to divulge his being made General, in a disparaging manner,
saying, It was more honor then he deserved, in regard he had given them so
much reason to suspect his fidilitie, for holding correspondence with the
Governors to sell them, and that John de Padilla was much more fit for that
Command. This was so much buzzed amongst the people, that they began to murmur
highly against Don Pedro. The mutiny growing to such an height, that Don
Pedro, and his friends, not thinking themselves secure, prepared to make
resistance, in case they should assault them in their houses, as some gave out
they would. And (they say) the very schoolboys, instructed by their masters
so to do, ran crying up and down the streets, Let John de Padilla be General,
and not Don Pedro Lasso. The Bishop of Zamora sent him word that his safest
way would be to absent himself from the City, or at least, to retire into
some secret place, for the people were very jealous of him, and in their fury
would be apt to do him some displeasure, but this was only a plot to entrap
him. Don Pedro very resolutely returned the Bishop this answer, That he had
done nothing that he was ashamed of, or ought to run away for, and that he
would not stir out of his house, if the people had any thing to say to him,
there they should find him. The people's design upon Don Pedro Lasso being
publicly known, some principal persons of the City came amongst them, and so
handled the matter, that they all retired to their houses, and there was no
harm done.

SECT. XXXIV.
THose of the Junta, being in consultation about the ordering of their Army
(for there was no more thought of peace) some said, that it was very requisite
that they should have a Captain General, and although John de Padilla had
executed the office ever since Don Pedro Giron had left it, yet he had not his
Commission from the Junta, neither had the present Army (which the several
Cities had raised) acknowledged him. Some stood for Don Pedro Lasso de la Vega;
but the major part of the Junta, and all the Common people Voted for John de
Padilla. He seeing that they would make him their Captain General, out of a
feigned modesty refused it, earnestly desiring them all to give their Votes
rather for Don Pedro Lasso, who was more worthy and capable of so high a
Charge then he, not that he declined their service however, but he would
content himself with the Command of the two thousand men which he brought from
Toledo, with whom, and with his own person, he would serve the Commonaltie to
the last breath. The people hearing that John de Padilla was like to be outed,
they came crying in a tumultuous mannertothe Junta, and pres^ing them to make
John de Padilla their General, for no man else should be. And thinking that Dom
Pedro Lasso was the only man that hindered the election of John de Padilla, the
multitude ran presently to apprehend him in his house, laying to his charge that
he had used means to reduce them to his Majesty's service, that he had been
cause that the Cavaliers had taken Tordesillas, having been in the conspiracy
with Don Pedro Giron. But the Bishop and John de Padilla followed, and stayed
them in the great market place. As Soon as ever the rabble saw the Bishop and
him, they flocked round about them crying out, Let John de Padilla live, let
the Bishop live, long may live John de Padilla, who take's away the taxes of
Castilla. In this manner did the multitude carry him up and down the market
place, hooting and shooting as if they had been all mad; insomuch that John de
Padilla could not speak to them, if he would have said any thing, they kept so
horrid a nois, saying, He should be their General, and no other. John de
Padilla, and the Bishop, seeing this fond madness of the people, withdrew
themselves into a house, out of a window, whereof John de Padilla spoke to them
in this manner; J^hn de P^dilla's speech to the Common people in Vallado^id.
Sirs! You know how I came hither Captain for the City of Toledo, in favor of
the Commonaltie^ of this Kingdom, to serve you; you must know likewise, that
Toledo is not inferior to Valladolid, but a f^iend to it, and all the other
Cities of the Kingdom, who all agreed to send me to assist you, and with the
same affection and willingness I have performed my part, and whilst I have
breath, I will omit nothing wherein I may serve you; and I thank you for your
good wills to me. But the Lords of the Iunta have determined to choos a
Captain General for their Expedition: Believ me (sirs!) it is most fit that
place should go by Election, and I assure you that I was the first man that
made that motion, for that is the best and safest way; moreover, those
Gentlemen know very well what they do. He scars had uttered these words, but
they all cried out, We will have none but John de Padilla, and the Bishop.
Thus they continued for the space of a long hour, and more, John de Padilla
entreating them to give their consents, that Don Pedro Lasso might execute that
office, for nevertheless he should be ready to spend his father's and his
own estate, besides the ventring of his life in that Holy Cause, for the
service of the Commonaltie. But no reason would stop their mouths, they still
continued crying, he and non else should be their Captain. Which obstinacy of
the people, being reported to those of the Iunta, they Voted John de Padilla
Captain General of ^ll their forces. From that day forwards, Don Pedro Lasso
began to relinquish the Commonaltie, and diverse of his friends did the like,
seeing how blind and void of reason the people were, and how much prejudice
they did themselves, in following a people so overswaied with passion, and the
greatest part of them too but men of mean and obscure extraction.

SECT. XXXV.
Four hundred Lanciers of the choicest men of those that come from the
conquest of the Gelves mutined and would have gone away because they did not
receiv the pay, which was promised them from Valladolid, and they demanded
moreover paiement of their arreares ever since the death of the King Don
Fernando, which amounting to forty Ducats a man at least made the sum of
eight thousand Ducats. The City not having money to satisfy their demands,
yet loath to let them go, because they were stout, well disciplined soldiers,
and well armed, caused all their Gates to be shut, whilst they went to procur^
them money. In the first place they searched the Cloister of the Benedictans,
where they found six thousand Ducats, which some particular persons had
deposited there, thinking it more secure then in their own hands. Here the
Au^or, though ^ Friar, expresses more^ spl^en and passion ^hen Christian
charity to his br^thre^.
After which, they went to other Religious houses and Colleges in like manner;
Insomuch that at last, with what they took up by way of lone, they got enough
to give them satisfaction. Thus was that City guilty of their own torment and
trouble, by maintaining a firebrand (for they deserved no other name) in their
own bowels. But that which seemed most grievous to them, was, That they were
daily so molested and affronted by that paultrie Garrison of Simancas:
Therefore they flatly told those of the Iunta, that either they should go
themselves, or give them their men, for Valladolid was resolved to unroost those
Harpyes. At length Valladolid seeing themselves reduced to so great want and
poverty, for they had no way to gain a penny, all Trading and Commerce lost,
the roads were so unsecure, that if they did but peep (as it were) out of their
houses, they were in danger of being killed, taken ^risoners, or at least
plundered; and that their War was not in earnest to the purpose, neither had
they any hopes of peace, they wrote a Letter to the Cavaliers in these terms:

Valladolid's Letter to the Cavaliers.
Illustrious Sirs!
We received a Letter from you, whereby any man of the least judgment or
understanding may plainly see, that your actions do absolu^ely contradict what
you express in words. And for a further manifestation, that the peace which you
publish is directly opposite to your actual proceedings; you have introduced an
abominable War in these Kingdoms, under the notion of obedience to their
Majesty's, battering and forcing the place where the Queen resid^d, seizing on,
and imprisoning ^er servants, and the Commissioners of the Kingdom, permitting
her Court to be ransack't, the Churches to be robbed, women violated, the
highways stopped, the Justice of the Kingdom (which was the Chancerie) to be
taken away, and other horrid things, which never were seen or heard of before;
whereby experience shows us, that the offers of Peace, which you have and do
make us, are only forms, and a policy to weary out, divide and procure the
utter destruction of the King^om. Being sore aggrieved at, and for the
disservices, damages, and troubles which our Sov^reign Lord the King, and his
Kingdoms have, and do daily suffer, and s^eing that with this dissembled Peace
which you cunningly publish, may be brought to ruin and perdition, we are in
the mind to persevere in that which we have begun, and maintein the name of
faithful and loial subjects, in discharging our duties to our Sovereigns, and
in executing what we are obliged to perform to our selves, and our Country;
not forgetting what is past, we suffer with cheerfulness all these troubles and
afflictions, which are worthy of acknowledgment before God, and his Majesty,
our Sovereign, since they pass as obligations which we owe them. We hope
hence ^orwards, that all the oppressions and ways which you have used to
divert and withdraw us from this holy purpose, shall not weaken or dis hearten
us, but rather strengthen and encourage us the more to resist and fight against
all those that have been the causers, and so detestable initiators of the
miseries of these Kingdoms. ^^d we trust in God that ^e will speedily show some
heavy judgment upon the ^^^^ntors of such pervers actions, that they may alone
suffer the punishment of their crimes, not we, nor those of the holy Junta;
for whosoever will seriously and judiciously consider it, shall see, that there
is no fear of blame* where is faithfulness and truth, neither does passion dare
to presume, where the public good is preferred before the particular; nor
ambition, where men without consideration of either honor, life or fort^nes,
expose thems^lvs to diverse hard censures and obloquies. But their actions
rather ^mbolden and strengthen them to continue so just an undertaking, the
obtei^ing whereof will procure us the perpetual Peace which we desire. Yo^
know, Sirs, that the producer of Peace is War; if our forefathers had not
fought and spilt their blood, we should never have enjoied that happ^^ Peace
which we had during the time of the reign of King Don Fernando, and Donia
Isabella of glorious memory. That war is laudabl^, which tend's to the
liberty of the King and Kingdom; And abominable i^ that Peace, whose end is
subjection, oppression, and sl^verie: Therefo^^ our purpose and intention is,
That our King may be free, enjoie his Kingdoms as our Sovereign Lord, not
subject nor over swaied by any evil favorites, nor falls or cheating Counsels.
That his Revenues and Roial Patrimony may not be usurped, or lavishly wasted,
but preserved, or usefully expended for the good of his Kingdoms, to the end
he may be beloved, obeyed, and faithfully served. And out of this love,
obedience, and respect, we wish, desire, and humbly beseech his Majesty to
seek a remedy for his Roial Crown, and his Kingdoms; that, under God, he
only may be ou^ Lord, our King, only mighty, only rich, his own and our
only helper an^ redressor, whom only we may fear, serve, ^onor, and obeie: to
whom only we may asscribe the glory, and render a due acknowledgment for our
public good, and to whom only we may address our complaints and grievan^^s:
which if you would but seriously weigh and consider, you would not so condemn
and oppose our holy proceedings, nor the sacred end at which we^ aim. And
since we cannot accomplish our desire in a peaceable manner, it is but reason
we should endeavor to obtein them by war, in regard it is just and holy, our
end being to find everlasting Peace. So it cannot be said that the Kingdom
is cause of this War, but those disturbers, who hinder us from enjoying and
procuring the universal good, which we seek after; for which they must render
a strict account to God and their Majesty's, besides all the damages,
slaughters, extortions, and other grand mischiefs, which will all lie upon
their score. The true peace is, that (...)* and the other Grandees ceas from
disturbing or hindering the universal (...), which we labor with all our force
and might to procure. For the effecting and settling of which Peace, the Truce
which your Lordships did desire was very requisite, if your Actions had been
answerable to your Verbal expressions; but that was not granted you, because it
was demanded only to amuse us, and to gain time to your selves; and if it were
not so, neither is it just nor reasonable, that the Kingdom should dis^band
t^eir forces, which have cost so much trouble and charge the raising; for the
experience of former passages has taught us, that your intent is to cosen and
overcom us with such formal pretenses. But we supplicate and require you, to
give the Kingdom leav to seek and find the good which they pretend, and not to
set your selves in opposition and contradiction of our intentions; for our drift
and purpose is no other, then to advance our holy enterprise, and repel all
those that shall withstand us. of whom our trust in God is, that ^re long we
shall obtein Victory. To whom we make our hearty prayers, that he will be
pleased to enlighten your illustrious understandings with the true knowledge of
our Cause.


SECT. XXXVI.
ALthough the Cavaliers did treat of an Accommodation, yet they ceased not to
get what arms, and assemble what forces they could. The general Letters signed
by the Cardinal, Lord Admiral, and Earl of Haro at Tordesillas, with the date
in blank, I have seen in the Lord High Constable's hands, with diverse other
originals. They demanded of Avila eighteen hundred Foot: of Cordova, one
thousand: of the City of Jaen, three hundred: of Trugillo, one hundred and
fifty Lances, and two hundred Foot: of Badajos, one hundred Foot: of Baeca,
two hundred Foot: of Ecija, three hundred Foot: of Ubeda, two hundred Foot. of
Xerez, one hundred and fifty lances. of Caceres, two hundred Foot. of Anduxar,
one thousand Foot. of Ciudad-Real, one hundred and twenty Foot. of Carmona,
one hundred and fifty Foot. of the Duke of Arcos, sixty lances. of the Earl
of Vruen^a, sixty cross-bow-men on hors-back. of Don Fernando Enriquez,
twenty lances. of the Earl of Palma, twenty lances. of Don Rodrigo Mexia,
twenty lances. of the Marquis of Tarifa, fourscore lances. of the Marquis of
Comares, thirty lances. of the Earl of Ayamonte, thirty lances. of the
Marquis of Villanueva, twenty lances. of the Earl of Cabra, fifty lances. of
the Duke of Medina Sidonia, one hundred lances. All these men they desired, and
all paid for three months, promising to repaie the Soldiers, and charges of
levying and arming them out of his Majesty's Revenue. At the same time, the
Lord high Constable used the like diligence to raise men in the Mountains,
saying, hi^ design was to resist the Bishop of Zamora, and the other Traitors
with him: also he used means to intercept the Arms which were coming from
Guipuzcoa to the Commoners.

SECT. XXXVII.
THe Commonalties, especially Valladolid, were much displeased that those of
the Iunta, and the Commanders of the Army did so prolong the War, for already
they were so exhausted, that they found themselves not able to sustain it. And
Valladolid, who had so vast a charge of soldiers to maintain, and suffered
exceedingly, by the continual assaults and incursions, which those of Simancas
made into their Territories, was more sensible of the smart then any of the
other Cities, and never left praying and threatening in public and in private,
until they had persuaded or forced the Captains to march out with their Army,
and to end the dispute with the Cavaliers in on battle. Upon Saturdaie night of
the first week in Lent the 17 of February 1521. John de Padilla, with the
greatest privacie that might be, le^t his design should be discovered,
marched with his men out of Valladolid to Zaratan (a Village within a league of
the City) where he quartered that night. From whence he went the same night
with forty horse directly to Simancas. Being arrived at the Watchtower,
which was upon a hill a little above the Town, John de Padilla asked the fellow
which kept it, if he had perceived any thing of the enemy; The man thinking
he had been some of their Garrison, said, Yes; I saw a great number of men
march from Valladolid to Zaratan, which make's my heartake, for we have but a
few left in Simancas. John de Padilla presently laid hands on him, and carried
him to his Quarters, where having secured him, he returned tow^rds Simancas,
by the way he lighted upon a party of their horse, that had been scouring the
Country, those he charged and chased into the very Town, after which he
returned to Zaratan, with a great prise of sheep, which he took from them.
Three days after this, came more men out of Valladolid with the Artilerie of
Medina. Next day after them, marched out those that came from los Gelves, who
were quartered in Zaratan, Arroyo, and other places about Simancas, with them
came the Bishop of Zamora, who although sick, would not stay behind the Army,
saying, That in defense of the liberties of the Kingdom, dead or alive, sick or
in health, however he would follow the Camp, such was the courage and
animositie of a Prelate threescore years old at least. Besides all these, came
to join with him likewise John Bravo and Francisco Maldonado, with all their
forces and diverse hors-men. Some days they remained in Zaratan, pillaging and
taking what they could from those of Simancas and Torrelobaton. Some days they
took from the Inhabitants of the enemie's Quarters 1500 sheep per diem, and
though it was Lent, their Bishop gave them leav to eat flesh, so they wanted
for no good cheer. Another time John de Padilla marched out of his Quarters
with a great party of horse, and met with some of Simancas and Torrelobaton's
Garrisons, and after an hot skirmish, wherein some on both sides were killed,
John de Padilla took fifty Cavaliers, horses and arms, for which he might
have had great sums of money, if he would have ransomed them, but he refused
it.

SECT. XXXVIII.
IT being a holy time (in Lent) and the War dangerous and prejudicial, diverse
good Religious men interceded for an Accommodation of these differences, and to
procure an absolute Peace, if possible. At Aniago (a Monastery of the
Carthusians, upon the River Duero, three leagues from Valladolid) was the
meeting place to Treat. Those of the Commonaltie had very fair and advantageous
conditions offered them, but their heads being possessed with prejudice, and
their hearts infected with the poisonous vice of War, having the liberty to
pillage and spoil as they listed, Here the Author ^xtend's himself as far in
flattery, as in other places in passionate railing.
they would not hearken to any reason. Indeed the Lord High Constable, and the
Lord Admiral, are both worthy of immortal prais; for out of a most Christian
zeal and affection to their Country, they desired this peace, offering the
Commonalties all favorable and reasonable terms possible, and indented with the
Emperor, in a manner, that he should grant and confirm whatsoever they agreed
upon with them, and that he should remit and pardon all the injuries they had
done to his Roial Crown; Protesting moreover, that it grieved them to the souls
that any man should die in that quarrel; yet nothing would do.

SECT. XXXIX.
ON Thursdaie, the 21 of February, John de Padilla marched out of Zaratan with
his whole Camp (which consisted of seven thousand Foot, and five hundred
Lances) at two of the clock after midnight, going very silently in good order,
and taking Guides along with them to show them the way to Torrelobaton, in the
very Suburbs whereof he took up his quarters, robbing and plundering all they
could lay hands on; but the people had carried all their best goods into the
Town, which was very strong. John de Pa^^lla besieges Torrel^bation.
The next day John de Padilla commanded his great Ordnance to be planted in
convenient places, to batter ^he Town, which he did very smartly; but all his
shots were to little purpose, for the rampires were extraordinary. After this
he gave them a brisk assault, with great clamors of men, and bouncing of Guns,
but he got nothing by that, for the besieged defended themselves with much
resolution. In this Conflict (which lasted all day) were diverse slain and
hurt, but the most part were of John de Padilla's men, who fought at
disadvantage, having no defense nor rampires to shelter them; so that seeing
the great loss he received, and the little good he did, mos^ of their ladders
being too short, and those that ventured to mount up, were either knocked down
dead, or shrewdly wounded, he thought it his best way to fall off, and sound
a Retreat; so the combat ceased for that time: All that night John de Padilla
labored to entrench himself, and raise a battery in another place, that he
might give them another fresh assault the next day. The Lord Admiral, and the
others at Tordesillas, being advertised of John de Padilla's being advanced
to Torrelabaton, sent presently to draw the Garrisons out of Simancas, and
Portillo, with intent to reliev Torrelobaton, if possible, although they were
but weak in Foot, and the enemy had great store, and very good. First they
sent out two Troops of Horse to discover the order and strength of the enemie's
Camp, with whom they had some slight skirmishes. This day John de Padilla
wasted in raising a new battery, and planting his Artillery, but he found
that p^rt of the Town no less strong then the former, so that he could do no
execution; but on the morrow (which was the third day of his being there) he
removed his Ordnance to another part of the wall, which was weaker, where he
made some breaches, which those of Valladolid and Toledo spying, ran presently
hurrying without order to enter; the dispute continued very hot a great while;
but the Besieged behaved themselves so gallantly, that they were forced to
retreat with no small loss. The same day the Earl of Haro, Captain General,
having left a sufficient Guard in Tordesillas, marched out to face the enemy,
with a matter of a thousand Lances, intending to give the Alarm on one side of
the Town, whilst the Governor Don Francisco Ossorio, Lord of Valdonquillo
carried in a fresh suppli^ of soldiers on the other. He desired of the Lord
Admiral that they might be Horsemen, but the Earl of Haro thought that not so
convenient, he having more need of the Cavalrie for the field-battle: Being
com within sight of the Town in the Evening, they stayed upon the top of a
hill, whence the Earl sent a party of his Horse to skirmish with some
Arcabusiers, (who being betwixt the besieged, and the mud-walls, stood much to
their advantage) but seeing his men cruelly galled, and able to do no good
there, he commanded they should retreat to the body, which was still upon the
hill expecting Don Francisco Ossorio to put in execution their intended design:
but whilst they were thus staying, arrived a Gentleman with a Letter from the
Lord Admiral, to the Earl of Haro, saying, That he might return again, for he
had notice since, that there was no such need of putting any succor into
Torrelobaton, for there was already strength sufficient to defend it;
notwithstanding this countermand, diverse Gentlemen offered to go into the Town;
but it could not be attempted, the Lord Admiral having forbidden the Ladders
to be brought, which were agreed upon. So it behoved the Earl to go back again
that night to Tordesillas, without bringing his purpose to effect, to satisfy
the Lord Admiral, who (as it afterward proved) was very much over-seen
therein: But some say, he was angry because the Earl of Haro did not follow his
advice in the prosecution of that design. John de Padilla being alarmed by
these thousand Horse, and finding that he had not force enough for the
offensive and defensive both, sent presently to Valladolid for more. Upon
receipt of his Letter, three thousand Foot, and four hundred Horse were ordered
to march to the Army at Torrelobaton, who went with as good a will to
fight, as if they had gone to gain the Iubilee. On Saturday 28 Febr. they
arrived in the suburbs, to the no less rejoicing and encouragement of the
Besiegers, then the dis-heartening and terror of the Besieged; who sent to the
Lord Admiral, complaining very much of Valladolid, saying, That only that
City ^id them all the mischief. Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday they battered
incessantly with all their Ordnance, and very many were killed on both sides: A
man could not peep above the wall, but he had presently a bullet, or an arrow
in his head: yet the Cavaliers stood out manfully; but being not above four
hundred Foot, and some few Horse, they were not able to defend themselves, and
w^thstand the continual assaults of the Enemy, having no intermission nor time
to take any rest, besides provisions began to fail them. John de Padilla having
raised several batteries against the Town, at last one of them made a breach,
where (whilst the besieged were defending themselves in another part of the
Town) those of Valladolid entered with their Colors; they sacked the Town with
the greatest cruelty in the world: they killed the poor laboring men, because
they could not give them what they demanded, spilled all their Wines, breaking
the tubs in pieces; they plundered the Churches, stripped the Altars, and broke
open the Tombs, thinking to find some hidden treasure therein. Finally they did
such things, that the most savage bruits, who have not the use of reason, could
not do wors, respecting neither humane things nor divine. Next day being
Wednesdaie, they fell to battering of the Tower, which defended it self
stoutly, but being full of women and children that had retired themselves
thither for security (who feeling it shake at every shot that hit it) cried
out, fearing it would fall upon their heads, and having nothing to eat, it was
surrendered upon condition to secure all their lives, John de Padilla take'^
Torreloba^o^ and the Tower.
and half their goods. Thus John d^ Padilla took Torrelobaton, which was no
inconsiderable piece of service* Hereby he gained himself much reputation
amongst the Common People, it being but three leagues from Tordesillas, where
the Governors, with all their forces, were. The Towns which stood for the
Commonaltie, made great shows of rejoicing for this Victory. The Lord Admiral,
and those that were with him, were cruelly netled hereat, and being vexed more
for their honor's sake, then for the importance of the place, they resolved to
be revenged. So they gave notice forthwith to the Lord High Constable of all
passages, who commanded immediately four thousand men (which he had ready)
with four pieces of Ordnance, to march by the way of Palencia to Tordesillas,
whereof Don John de Mendoca having intelligence, sallied out of Valladolid with
above four thousand Foo^, and stopped their passage. The Cavaliers seeing they
could get no succor that way, nor having men enough in Tordesillas to
encounter John de Padilla, who was very strong, besides all the Cities being
their enemies, they sent to demand a Truce for eight days of John de Padilla,
which although he, and some of the Commissioners that were with him, were not
unwilling to grant, yet they durst not, without consulting with Valladolid; for
in regard they stood in great need of that City, and were very much favored
and assisted by them, they bare them a singular respect, and would determine
nothing without their privitie. This was communicated to all the people of
Valladolid, and discussed; at length they all agreed to return this answer,
That they should by no means grant them any truce, no, not for one hour, but
proceed against them with all manner of rigor; for it was most certain, that
they demanded a Truce for nothing else, but merely to recruit themselves of men
and provisions, to the prejudice of the Commonaltie; and if they did grant them
eight or fifteen days liberty, by the ancient law of the Kingdom they might
renew their Cessation still to ninety and six days, and so from ninety six
to ninety six, until the year were out; by which procrastinations, the
Commonalties would be destroyed and ruined, and the people lose their courage
and good zeal, which at present did animate them to defend their Liberties: yet
notwithstanding Valladolid sent this answer, the Commissioners of the Kingdom,
and the Commanders of the Army did grant the Truce for eight days, from
Sunday to Sundaie.

SECT. XXXIX.
THis Cessation was demanded after the taking of Torrelobaton, although that
much displeased the Lord Admiral, and Fray Francisco de los Angeles went to
Valladolid, in his and the Cardinal's name, to treat thereof, whom Alonso de
Vera a bridler and one of the worshipful City officers, meeting at the Gate
del Campo, treated very uncivilly, and would not suffer to enter into the
City. After this, Alonso de Ortiz, with danger enough of his life, ventured to
return thither, with Letters of credence to treat about the same business. Who
being entered into the City, communicated his errand to Don Pedro de Ayala,
and Don Hernando de Ulloa, (whom he found died in grain for his purpose) and
forth with they gave order, that the Iunta should assemble to hear the message
that Alonso de Ortiz brought from Tordesillas. Which being heard, and the
Articles and conditions of the Truce being almost concluded, and the time for
the continuance thereof limited; it chanced that Fray Pablo and Sancho Zimbron
(who ^arried the Articles of the Kingdom into Flanders, to get them granted and
au^horized by his Majesty, as has been already mentioned) arrived at
Valladolid: And hearing that they were about a Treaty of Cessation of Arms,
Fray Pablo presently sent notice of his arrival to the Iunta, desiring them
that they would not conclude of either Peace, or War, or Truce; until he came
to give them an account of the employment, upon which they had sent him into
Flanders. Hereupon that business was suspended until the evening: And then the
Commissioners of the Kingdom being set again, Fray Pablo came and gave them
an account of his journie, and what he had done. Amongst other relations, he
told them, that when he came into Flanders, the Emperor was gone into Germany,
whither he and Sancho Zimbron intended to follow him; but by the way he was
informed that his Majesty had given order (if they came into Germany) to have
them hanged; Whereupon they went no further. Moreover, that he knew that his
Majesty was so displeased with those Articles, and so incensed against those
that had a^y hand in the making of them, or in raising those Commotions in the
Kingdom, that at his return into Spain, they should be all severely punished,
notwithstanding any engagement or promises the Governors had made to the
contrary in his name. This information the Friar gave the Commissioners of the
Kingdoms, besides diverse other particulars, which are too tedious to relate. In
conclusion, he told them that his advice was, that they should contract
neither Peace nor Truce with the Grandees, but stand firm and unanimously
persevere in their former resolution. So that if his Majesty would com again
into their Kingdom, (...) might be through their means, Wholesome counsel of the
Friar.
and not by the Grandees. For that being done by a permissive will of the
Kingdom, they might make their own conditions, and have what security they
pleased; besides, they might so make their bargain, that if his Majesty did
not perform his agreement with them, the Kingdom might remain united and
agreed, That all the people should assemble whenever occasion did require,
and stick close one to the other in what concerned them for their defense, and
have sufficent assurance that the agreement made with them should be
performed. Wherefore his opinion was, that they ought not only, not to grant
the Truce which was desired, but courageously to persist in the War, until they
had destroyed the Grandees, and made the Commissioners of the Kingdom with the
Iunta, Lords of the Country. Notwithstanding this discourse of Fray Pablo, the
Commissioners commanded Ortiz to continue the Treaty. After all this, it
happened that the Friar sitting next to Ortiz, and taking him to be a
Commissioner of some City, that was com to the Iunta since his departure, he
began to repeat some thing of his discourse to the other Commissioners, but
chiefly harped upon the Emperor's intent to punish the Commoners,
notwithstanding any pardon the Governors should promise them in his behalf.
Whereupon, not well brooking his speeches, Ortiz asked him how he knew the
Emperor had any such thought: He answered he was told so. Then Ortiz could
hold no longer, but with a voice that might be heard by all in the room, said,
That he wondered that a man of his coat and gravitie, being a Doctor of
Divinity, who ought to give good example, should positively say a thing of
such importance (as that which he had verified to those Gentlemen in these
words, ( That notwithstanding any pardon the Gavernors should grant, confirmed
by his Majesty, those who had raised the Commotions in the Kingdom, his
Majesty would punish at his return, as if they had been taken in the fact)
upon no other certainty, but only hear-saie; In regard those words were
enough to disturb and hinder the conclusion of the Truce, which might produce a
Peace, and those of his dignity and profession ought rather to endeavor to
make Peace, when other hopes failed, then to hinder and obstruct the means of
procuring it. The Friar hearing this, was very wrath, and asked who he was; It
being told him that Ortiz was the man that solicited for the Truce in behalf
of the Cavaliers, he stole out of the Iunta. Ortiz stayed still, treating with
the Commissioners about the conditions of the Truce. In mean time Fray Pablo
went to some of the City, telling them that they had suffered a Traitor to com
in amongst them, whom the Grandees had sent under the notion of treating a
Truce, to epsy what was done in the City, and to sound the People's
inclinations: That in his opinion they ought to turn him out of the City, or
apprehend him, and make him confess the principal cause of his coming thither.
Presently the Commoners, in whose heads he had buzzed these things, went along
with him to the Iunta, all armed, and boldly rushed into the Chamber where they
sat, asking them very peremptorily, why they suffered a Traitor to com into
the City, to spy and make advantage of their proceedings; requiring the
Commissioners forthwith to discharge him the Ci^ie, otherwise they would
apprehend him and make him give them an account of his business there; Other
high language and threatenings they used, which put Ortiz in a bodily fear. The
Commisioners with smooth and flattering words pacified them in such sort, that
they went quietly away. Which done, Ortiz thus spoke unto them, Gentlemen, If
because I came hither upon your words and assurance to treat of the Truce, this
stir and combustion has been rais^d, rather then the people shall turn me out
of the City, I will depart: But if you pleas to treat further of the business,
for which I have undertaken this journie, and will promiss as you are Gentlemen
to secure and defend me, notwithstanding their menaces, I will stay until all
be concluded. Those of the Junta answered, that they were contented, and gave
him their words, upon the faith of Gentlemen, to defend him. So the Treaty
went on, and they stirred not from the place until the conditions were all
concluded, Alonso Ortiz obtain's a Truce from those of the Junt^ with the
Cavaliers.
whereof a Copy was given to Ortiz, enclosed with the Conditions and Articles,
besides a particular dispatch from the Iunta general, and the particular Iunta
of Valladolid to their Captains, then being at Torrelobaton, giving them to
understand, that they had agreed unto that Truce, and commanding them to obeie
it, and cause it to be proclaimed in their Army, verbatim as it was there
written. With these dispatches departed Ortiz post from Valladolid, after
eleven of the Clock in the night, and arrived at Torrelobaton about one; where
he found neither in the Camp, nor in the Town, any Guard; so he entered into
the Suburbs with his servants, where two thousand men lay fast asleep about
their fires, so careless, that two hundred men, falling upon them at that time,
had been enough to have destroyed the whole Army. Ortiz lost no time, but
forthwith he notified to John de Padilla, and other Commanders, the Orders for
the Truce. That same night, and next morning, they all assembled, and although
there were some dissenting opinions amongst them, and difficulties of either
accepting or keeping it, especially being contradicted highly by Diego de
Guzman, Commissioner of Salamanca, who, by command of the Iunta, came into the
Army, under notion of being the General's overseer. At length the Truce was
accepted and proclaimed in the Army; By order from the Junta the Truce is
proclaimed in John de Padilla's Army.
whereof Ortiz taking certificate, departed presently for Tordesillas, where
he was joifully received by the Lord Admiral and the Cardinal, with the rest
of the Grandees, who all were very glad of that Truce, as thinking it the
precursor of the so generally desired Peace. The same night being assembled in
the Cardinal's Chamber, the Lord Admiral, the Earl of Venavente, the Marquis of
Astorga, the Earl of Miranda, the Earl of Alva de Lista, the Earl of
Villarrambla, the Earl of Cifuentes, and diverse other private Gentlemen,
besides Iuan Rodriquez Mausino, Ambassador from the King of Portugal, El
Licenciado Polanca of the Council, and Pedro de Camaceli Secretary; Before
them all Ortiz related the troubles which he had gone through, and produced the
Dispatches which he brought concerning the Truce, wherein those of the Junta
said, That they were contented to condescend to the Truce, which was desired in
the behalf of the Governors of the Kingdom, in order to the service of God, and
because the King of Portugal had so commanded it: The Nobles were much distasted
hereat, saying, They would not consent to the Truce upon such terms; The
C^andee's exceptions against the Truce.
that they were not so ill provided, as that the Commoners should think they
had any advantage of them: That they were ready to give them battle whenever
they would, and that the Truce should not be accepted nor proclaimed in their
Army, unless those words were altered. Hereupon were different opinions and
votes; at last it was resolved that Ortiz should go back to Valladolid, to
treat thereupon. Some days were spent whilst this was in agitation, during
which time neither the Truce was well observed, neither was there open War.
Those of Valladolid disconten^ed against the Com^anders of their Army, for
yielding to a Truce.
Whereupon the Commonalties, especially Valladolid, were highly discontented,
and went muttering out their complaints in these or the like words, That their
Captains having raised themselves to such high Offices, did but dally and grew
negligent of the Cause; That the Cav^liers did amuse them in trifling away the
time in Treaties, only to recruit and strengthen themselves, and fall upon them
when they saw their advantage; in which opinion they were not much mistaken.

SECT. XL.
DOn Pedro Lasso, and Alonso de Guadalaxara (...) ^^^sioner of Segovia, were
all this time at the Mo^^^^^ (...) Dominicans, without Tordesillas, treating of
Peace ^^th the ^^^dinal and Lord Admiral. But upon the taking and sacking of
Torrelobaton, the Lord Admiral being very much displeased, the Treaty was
broken off for a while; yet out of the great desire he had to see the Kingdom
settled, he fell to treat again of the Peace. And being agreed upon some
Articles, it was the general opinion of them, that the Cessation would conduce
much to the conclusion of the rest; for the better and more speedy effecting
whereof, diverse Prelates and good Religious men came from several parts to
ass^^t at the Treaty. The Governors and Noblemen condescended to the greatest
part, and most important of the Articles, which the Commonalties desired, and
the Peace was in a fair way of being concluded; but the Commoners were so
mistrustful, that they could not agree about the security: the Governors and
Grandees offered to oblige their persons and estates to procure the Emperor's
approbation and confirmation of their agreement with the people, besides other
very fair propositions which the King of Portugal's Ambassador did much incite
the Commoners to accept: But they would have the Grandees engage themselves to
demand it by force of arms, in case the Emperor should deny to ratify their
conditions and promises to the people, delivering them some principal persons as
hostages, and certain Forts (then in their hands) as pledges of their
performance thereof. Insomuch that t^eir standing upon such terms, destroyed
absolutely all hopes and probability of Peace. Yet hoping that time might
produce some better effect, it was resolved before the Truce was fully expired,
to procure a Prorogation or a renewing of it; to which effect the Ambassador
of Portugal, and Don Pedro Lasso, taking some grave Religious men with them,
the last day of the Truce went to Torrelobaton, and gave John de Padilla, and
the other Captains, an account of all passages; who, whether not willing, or
not having the power to grant their desires, agreed (although the Truce was
out) to go to Zaratan; where those of the Junta assembled to treat thereupon.
But they were so high, and fearing thereby to lose their great Offices,
especially the Commanders of the Army, that they could agree upon neither
Peace nor Truce, although some of the Iunta did give their Votes for it, whereof
Don Pedro Lasso de la Vega was the leading man, who from that time forwards
left them, withdrawing himself from that Assembly, and went to the Governors
at Tordesillas. The Truce brok^n off again.
Thus the Truce and Treaties came to nothing, only this benefit they produced,
that in those eight days time John de Padilla lost a good part of his Army;
for those soldiers, who had gotten money, or any good plunder at the sacking
of Torrelobaton, the passages being free and secure during the Truce, went
home to their own dwellings; the like did diverse of the Horse of the ancient
Guards of the Kingdom, because they were not paid. After this there was another
Assembly at Bamba, whither John de Padilla was sent for, who being com, they
all agreed to sit at Zaratan. Thither repaired diverse from Valladolid on
hors-back and on foot, to small purpose: The Grandees demanded Truce for eight
days more, or for three; but the Commoners would by no means give consent
thereunto, alleging that they would deceiv them: then they went to dinner, but
being ready to sit down, John de Padilla had notice, that they had a design to
murder him, whereupon, without staying to eat or drink, away went he to
Torrelobaton, and the rest to Tordesillas.

SECT. XLI.
BY this time Don Antonio de Zun^iga had on foot a complete Army in the
Kingdom of Toledo, in favor of his Majesty's loial servants, and to reduce
Ocan^a, which with other places of the Maestrazgo of Santjago was risen up in
Arms: and being at Almaguer, the Guardian of St Iuan de los Reyes of Toledo
came to him with certain admonitions and treaties from that City, and
Commonaltie thereof, insomuch that there was a kind of Truce betwixt them, and
probabilities of a peaceable accommodation: but it fell out otherwise, and
their difference grevv to an open War, the Bishop of Zamora being made Captain
for Ocan^a, and other revolted places, against Don Antoni.

SECT. XLII.
IN some papers which I have seen Originals of Fray Antonio de Guevaua,
Chronicler to his Imperial Majesty, concerning the Commonalties, He mention's
that the Town of Duen^as likewise rose up in Arms, and misdemeaned themselves
exceedingly toward the Earl and Countess of Buendia, who making resistance
against their fury, the people sent to desire succor from those of the Junta.
And he saie's that those of the Junta and the Commoners also did seem to be
sorry that those of Duen^as had desobliged the Earl, because neither he nor
his Lady had expressed any disaffection to the Commonalties, and that of
secret friends their miscarriage had now made them open enemies. Yet seeing
that it was of no small concernment to have the Town of Duen^as at their
Devotion, the succor which they demanded, was forthwith sent them from
Valladolid, to wit, seven hundred Foot, Pikemen, Musketeers, and
Cross-bow-men, and all paid for a certain time. For which they returned thanks
in a Letter to Valladolid, wherein they made large expressions and
protestations of their firm resolution to serve the Emperor, and the
Commonaltie, with diverse other things.

SECT. XLIII.
THe 27th of March 1521. Both the Armies were in ill condition enough, and
neither of them could boast of much advantage over the other, according to the
information which Don Pedro Luxan Commendador Mayor of Castilla being in
Simancas, did give the Emperor; saying, That in that Garrison they stood in
want of men; That John de Padilla with the other Captains for the Commonaltie
had taken Torrelobaton; That from Tordesillas and other places thereabout, his
Foot had received some prejudice. That diverse of his men had left the Camp, as
is usual when an Army lie's still without action. That the like was done by
the Foot in the Loyal Army also, but of horse they had a sufficient quantity.
That the Army remaining in Torrelobaton, was reported not to exceed two
thousand Foot, and three hundred hor^. That John de Padilla and those with him
were upon their departure thence, having a great desire to com to Simancas,
where they presumed at least a thousand more would com to them from Valladolid,
out of revenge and hatred to those of that Garrison, and to secure themselves
from any further damage. That money began to grow scarce amongst the
Commoners, and that their soldiers were ill paid. That the same diseas was
amongst the Cavaliers, yet they had somewhat salved that sore by the sale of
those Noblemen's and Gentlemen's plate that were in Tordesillas, wherewith they
had procured money to give one months pay to the Foot, and two to the horse
viz. March and April, (By which time the Emperor had written that he would be
back in Flanders and ready to take shipping for Spain.) And that those old
soldiers which came from los Gelves, came every day, by two and three at a
time, into the Cavaliers Army, and gave out that the rest would all go near to
follow them.

Finis Libri Quinti.
THE CIVIL WARS OF SPAIN. THE SIXTH BOOK.
SECT. I.
THe passions seated in the Souls of men are in effect not unlike to the
recoverie of a body out of some desperate sickness: For any the least excess
cast's the affected Party into a relapse, and by an untimely precipitation
hurrieth him into the Sepulcher. The Cavaliers and the Commoners did not treat
with that realtie as they ought: Some made a fair show, and seemed to desire a
Peace, though they were best contented with the War, for diverse particular
interests which they did receiv thereby. Others dissembled (though not
altogether) and the most part of those (which were called Commoners) were
prepossessed with a diffident and distrustful humor, holding for uncertain and
only pretenses, all the conditions that were offered them on the behalf of his
Majesty and the Cavaliers. Whilst they were in a treaty during the eight
days of Truce, two things happened which destroyed all the Impostume or poison
wherewith their hearts were swollen, bursting out into the disorders which in
this Book shall be related, and shall conclude this deplorable History.
Insomuch that the clouds, which hung over Castilla, Here the Friar m^keth a
digression, falling into his usual manner of flattery.
threatening a cruel storm, were all dissipated in one short and not bloody
battle betwixt the Cavaliers and the Commoners, in the plain of Villalar, the
success whereof struck such remors of Conscience into the people's hearts, and
the Cities acknowledging their errors, returned to their obedience unto him,
whom God had given them for their King, serving and loving him, as shall be
^een hereafter. During the forementioned occurrences, Francisco de Mercado,
Corregidor of Medina del Campo, with twenty horse (which in those days were
called Esquiers) and other persons, who by command of the Iunta were coming to
Valladolid, at the pass over the River Duero (which is two leagues from
Valladolid and one from Simancas) they were encountered by a party of one
hundred and fifty light-hors of the Earl of On^ate's, who were going to seek
adventures: Four of those of Medina were killed upon the place; Francisco de
Mercado, the Master of the Ordnance, and two more were taken prisoners, and
carried to Simancas. Notice hereof being given at Valladolid, they sent out a
strong party to rescue them but it was too late; and the Corregidor of Medina
(who was immediately released again) hindered them somewhat, for meeting with them
he told them, They might go back again, for the business was nothing; But
afterward knowing the truth of the story, they apprehended the Corregidor of
Medina for a suspicious person, laying to his charge the loss of those men, and
would have executed him presently, but upon more serious consideration they
held it best to dissemble and forbear a while, lest they should thereby
endanger the lives of those that were prisoners at Simancas. So they sent first
to demand them, making great complaints, that during the Truce they should
commit such acts of hostility, and break their words with them: But they found
no amends.

SECT. II.
THat which chiefly incensed the minds of all the Commonaltie was, that before
the time of the Truce was exspired, there was set up (they knew not by whom) in
the market place of Valladolid, a Proclamation made and signed by the Governors
of the Kingdom, wherein they named diverse Citizens of Valladolid, Toledo,
Salamanca, Madrid, Guadalaxara, Murcia, Segovia, Toro, Zamora, and all the rest
of the Commonalties, to the number of five hundred persons, and some Gentlemen,
declaring them Traitors, Violaters of their faith to God and their King, and
calling the Bishop, and John de Padilla, and other Officers of the Commonaltie,
treacherous enemies to his Majesty. This was dispatched in Burgos, and
proclaimed with great solemnity before Anton Gallo, Chancellor and Secretary
of his Majesty's Council then at Burgos, and diverse other persons of note. The
names of the parties mentioned being very many, and that importing little or
nothing to the substance of the History, I shall not trouble the Reader
therewith.

SECT. III.
VAlladolid, in revenge of this Proclamation, set up against them, and the rest
of the Commonalties, the next day after it was found in the market place, they
pasted upon the door of Santa Maria Church (which is now the Cathedral) a
Paper, with a direction to the City of Valladolid, animating them to persevere
in their holy purpose, and not to be intimidated for any practices of the
Enemies, or be troubled at their reviling them with such opprobrious terms,
and encouraging all those of the Commonaltie to make all forces possible, and
march speedily into the field with so numerous an Army, that the sight of them
only should serve to overcom their enemies without fighting, by which means
they should save the lives of many men, which would be lost, if their Armies
met with equal strength, besides the hazard to which they should expose their
Cause. And if they were successful, the War would be at an end, peace and
plenty would encreas, the liberty and public good of the Kingdom ensue, and
the name of Traitors remain upon the Conquerred, who never would dare to face
them again: This, with some other things to the same effect, was the substance
of that Paper, which the Common people read with great content and applaus,
crying it up exceedingly, and sending copies of it through the whole Kingdom.

SECT. IV.
JOhn de Padilla's staying so long at Torrelobaton was very prejudicial to the
Commonalties; for besides that he lost many men, he gave the Cavaliers time
to recruit and strengthen themselves notably, whereas questionless if he had
fallen upon Tordesillas as soon as he had taken in Torrelobaton, he had driven
them to extraordinary straits. But he remained there hugging himself with that
small victory, and the applaus of the people, which he had thereby procured:
He fell to repairing the walls which he had battered down, as if he intended
to make that the seat and residence of his Army, which lasted not long after.
The Cities of Toro and Zamora sent him some fresh supplies, whereof the
Cavaliers having notice, they sent out a Party of seven hundred Lances to cut
off their way, and their lives too, if they could; near Pedrosa they met, and
after a pretty hot skirmish, the Cavaliers forced them into the Town, where
they besieged them close; but John de Padilla having notice of his men's
distress, soon came to reliev them with three thousand Foot, and five hundred
Horse, leaving a sufficient Guard in Torrelobaton: whom when the Cavaliers saw
with so great force, they made their retreat good to Tordesillas; And John de
Padilla marched with his men to Castromonte (another Town of the Lord
Admiral's) and having taken it, left a Garrison in it, and thence returned to
Torrelobaton, intending to exspect the succor for which he had sent to the
Cities of his Combination; in the mean time he repaired and fortified the
Town, (as I said before) lest the Cavaliers of Tordesillas should fall upon him
before the forces he exspected were com to him. There he began to be sensible
of his own ill government, John de Padilla was not so incapable as the Friar
make^ him, th^ugh over-seen in this o^casion.
and of the damage which he received by his too great confidence, which soon
after he more plainly saw, to the loss of his liberty and life. For it is a
blindeness and imperfection of a man's intellect to thrust himself upon
imploiments beyond the reach of his capacity, and having undertaken them, to
be r^miss in the execution of them. To be the occasion of any troubles or
disturbance in a Commonwealth is not Justifiable, but being once engaged, it
is an act of prudence for a man to be vigilant and active in the atchievment
of his design.

SECT. V.
IT were unjust that the great zeal wherewith the Lord high Admiral of Castilla
was moved to reduce the people of that Kingdom (which were up in Arms) by fair
means and without bloodshed, to peace and due obedience to his Majesty, should
pass without mentioning, for the eternal memory of so noble a person, and the
honor of his generous family, who (as it is well known) was of the blood
Roial. Having advertisment that Don^a Maria Pacheco Mendoca, wife to John de
Padilla, had a great hand with her husband, and might contribute much to the
withdrawing him from that employment, nay, that he had done the more by her
instigation and spurring him on. And that Pedro Lopez de Padilla, his father,
was yet living in Toledo, but very old and decrepit; the Lord Admiral sent a
Gentleman, one of the Emperor's servants to them, with instructions full of
prudent and sage counsels and advice, and strong arguments to convince and
persuade them to induce John de Padilla to moderate his over-violent passion,
and admit of a Treaty with him, advising him not to be so extreme careful and
earnest in advancing the affairs of Valladolid, as to forget his own, assuring
him that if he would (as then it was in his power) but contribute his consent
to the concluding of a Peace, he would not only procure a pardon from his
Majesty of all past-offencers, but set him highly in his esteem, and obtein
diverse favors and Mercedes to be confirmed upon him and his children. These,
and diverse other good remonstrances he gave Alonso de Quin^ones to urge at
Toledo, to the abovenamed persons; but he might gave saved that labor.

SECT. VI.
THose of the Iunta, hearing of the great Power which the Earl of Salvatierra
had assembled in the Mountains, wherewith he had possessed himself of the
Artillery, which was coming from Navarra to the Cavaliers, and of the Forces
which the Bishop of Zamora had in the Kingdom of Toledo, besides those which
were with John de Padilla, had their hearts at eas, thinking their game
cock-sure. Moreover, diverse of the Kingdom, who had looked on till then, seeing
the Grandees so hard bestead, took up Arms to make good the Cause of the
Commonaltie. And had things been as those of the Commonaltie could have wished,
they would have had partakers and abettors enough. But there is no Law in this
life for the good, or the evil to overcom, or be overcom; for favorable, or an
advers fortune. Yet seeing themselves in so good a condition, and highly
resenting the Proclamation which was published by the Governors, against them
and the Cities, they resolved to pay them in the same coin. They fulminated a
Process as they pleased themselves, and having commanded a great Scaffold to be
erected in the chief marketplace of Valladolid, adorning it with hangings of
rich cloth of gold and silk, and steps and seats placed in good order, on
Sundaie the 17 of March, 1521, all the Commissioners of the Iunta, and
Deputies, with a great number of Attendants, and sound of trumpets, drums, and
other music, came and seated themselves upon it: Before them went the Kings at
Arms, with the Maces and Coats of the Kingdom, and being placed in their
throne, their Attornie general read with a loud voice. That they had made a
process against the Admiral and Constable of Castilla, the Earl of Venavente,
Earl of Haro, Earl of Alva de Lista, Earl of Salinas, Ma^quis of Astorga, the
Bishop of Astorga, against the Secretaries and other Officers of the evil
Council (for so they termed his Majesty's Council) and against the High
Treasurers, and under Treasurers; the Merchants, and other Inhabitants of
Burgos, Tordesillas, ^imancas, and other places, declaring them Traitors, and
breakers of the Truce, expressing diverse reasons, especially the burning of
Medina del Campo, with the cruel and inhumane sacking of Tordesillas, wherein
they alleged, the Cavaliers showed neither respect to God, nor his Saints, nor
the person of the Queen, who was present; and that two Soldiers, without fear
of God or their own consciences, broke into a Church, and stripped the image of
our Lady, and cut off one of her arms, for greediness of some gold which there
was upon it. That some others took away the Custodia, whereof one eat up the
consecrated Hostia. They ripped up a thousand more such like things, which I
shall now omit to rehears. Thus our Spaniards treat^d each other, being all of
the same Nation and language; and yet all this was for their King's service,
(as they pretended) and to free the Kingdom from Tyrants.

SECT. VII.
AFter this, the War grew very hot, and their passions on both sides
implacable, and no day passed without some sallying out of the Garrisons to
robb and spoil each other. Some Companies of musketeers having notice of
provisions and munition that was carrying to Tordesillas, marched out of
Torrelobaton to intercept them. Whereof the Earl of Haro being informed, took
a stout party of horse with him, and gave such a hot charge to John de
Padilla's men, that he left diverse of them dead upon the place, and took one
hundred and fifty prisoners, which so scared the rest, that they never durst
quatch afterward, nor make any incursions upon his Territories, as when they
came first thither they boasted they would do. Those of Medina del Campo,
roving in like manner on the other side, the Earl of Haro with all the Nobles
and Gentry in Tordesillas (except the Lord Admiral, whom in respect of his age
and charge of Governor, they desired to stay with the Queen) went one day
purposely to face it, and scour the whole Country about it, at whose
appearing, those of the Town sallied forth and skermished with them, in which
encounter some of them were sorely wounded, others taken prisoners, amongst
whom was Alonso Luys de Quintanilla their Captain, Son to Don Luys Quintanilla,
to whom (as is already said) those of the Iunta committed the charge of her
Majesty, when they took Tordesillas. John de Padilla having intelligence from
some Inhabitants of Tordesillas, of the Earl of Haro's grand sallie. Determined
with his Army to assault it in his absence, and put the Governors to a rout,
and some report, that he had a promiss from those inhabitants to make one of
the Gates for him: Which being told the Lord Admiral, and that John de Padilla
was already upon his march, he sent word immediately to the Earl of Haro, who
lost no time after this notice, but with all his gallant party came thundering
back to Tordesillas; which John de Padilla perceiving, he durst not prosecute
his design, but wheeled back to his Garrison of Torrelobaton. After this, they
remained some days pretty quiet, without any encounter or action
considerable. For, by reason of John de Padilla's obstinate resolution of
staying in Torrelobaton, his Army was so diminished, that he had not men
enough left to make a sallie of any consequence. Wherefore he sent to
Salamanca, Toro, Zamora, and other Cities, demanding fresh supplies. On the
other side, the Governors agreed to put in effect what they had discussed
amongst themselves, which was, That the Lord high Constable coming from Burgos
with his forces, they should all join in one body, and make up an Army
sufficient to encounter John de Padilla, in case he should take the field,
(the succors which he exspected being arrived) or to besiege him where he
was: for being divided, they could not attempt either of those enterprises,
without danger and a doubtfulness of the success, neither indeed had they
strength enough to perform either design, considering they must leav a
competent Garrison in Tordesillas. According to this resolution, the Lord High
Constable, and other Noblemen, with the forces they brought with them to Burgos,
prepared themselves for the journie. The Duke of Naxara, then Viceroy of
Navarra, sent him a thousand old soldiers, and some Artillery, which with his
own men, and those other Noblemen's with him, made three thousand choice Foot,
and five hundred gallant Horse, well Armed, besides some Gentlemen, and Light
Horsemen, and besides those which he sent before with Don Diego de Sarmiento
Earl of Salinas, and those which his Nephew Don Pedro Xuarez de Velasco carried
to subdue the Merindades. With these forces marched the Lord High Constable
from Burgos, leaving the City under the government and guard of Don Antonio de
Velasco Earl of Nieva, with a competent number of men to that purpose. John de
Padilla, and the other Captains of the Commonaltie, having notice hereof, sent
presently to the town of Vezerril (which is in Campos) where he was to pass,
advertising and requiring Don John de Figueroa, brother to the Duke of Arcos,
(who still followed the Commonaltie with some Cuirassiers, and Light Horsemen,
then being at Vezerril) to defend the pass, and do the Lord High Constable
what disturbance and mischief he could: but he being arrived, commanded his
men to storm the Town, which was done, and he entered without any great
difficulty, it being a place of no considerable strength. Don John de
Figueroa, and another Gentleman with him, called Don John de Luna, were sent
prisoners to the Castle of Burgos; which done, the Lord High Constable
continued on his march to Rioseco, where he arrived with four thousand Foot,
six hundred Horse, three or four great Pieces of Ordnance, about five hundred
Gascones, and six hundred Moors of the Kingdom of Aragon, Vassals to the Earl
of Almenara, wherewith he served the Cavaliers.

SECT. VIII.
THe Cavaliers had so played their Cards in the Kingdom of Aragon, that two
thousand soldiers were raised in the City of Saragosa, and paid at the
Kingdom's charge; who being mustered, and ready to depart, the Common people
of the City hearing that they were levied in favor of the Cavaliers against
the Commonalties of Castilla; There was such a hubbub and uproar of a sudden in
the City, that all the people fell unawars upon those soldiers, disarmed and
routed them quite, saying, that Aragon had nothing to do to meddle or
contradict any thing concerning the liberties of Castilla. Here Don Pedro Giron
discover's himself to be a Traitor on both sides.
Don Pedro Giron, who was retired to a Town of his named Pen^afiel, gave
intelligence of the raising of these men, to those of the Commonaltie, and that
a great part of them, after they were disarmed, marched to the Lord high
Constable at Burgos, whom upon this notice, they say, the Earl of Salvatierra
did cut off by the way, which was a thing of no great difficulty, considering
in what ill equipage and condition they then were. Don Pedro said moreover,
that he sent them this advertisement, merely out of a desire to express his
readiness to serve the Commonalties, and the City of Valladolid, telling them,
that it would not be amiss to send their acknowledgments and thanks to
Saragosa, for doing them so great a favor without being desired. He wrote
another letter to Valladolid immediately after he had deserted them, and
relinquished the office of Captain General, vindicating himself of the
suspicions and fault wherewith they charged him, offering to return unto his
Command, and desiring them to be favorable in their censure, until they knew
further: Whereupon some gave their Votes for his returning to his Charge,
alleging, that although he had committed an error, and in probability not
unwillingly, Another notorious Traitor to the Commons. Here the Friar
flattereth again the family of the Girons.
in marching to Villapando, and leaving the way clear for the Cavaliers to go
from Rioseco to Tordesillas, the fault was chiefly to be derived upon Don
Pedro Lasso. But John de Padilla had gained so much repute amongst them, and
the Common People, that most of the Iunta disliked that proposition: And it was
better for Don Pedro Giron they did so, for it was a stain to the greatness of
his birth to be Captain of such people.

SECT. IX.
BEfore I com to relate the end which befell John de Padilla and the Iunta's
Army, the several passages and exploits of the Bishop of Zamora present
themselves unto my pen. When he marched from Valladolid, by the Iunta's order,
he gave out that he went to take possession of the Archbishopric of of
Toledo, then vacant by the death of Guillermo de Crouij, nephew to Monsieur de
Xeures. He carried with him an hand^om Army of both Foot and Horse, with five
fieldpieces. In Toledo he was very well received, and the City furnished him
with more men and Artillery, from Alcala de Henares he took six Pieces more,
so that he had in all fifteen Pieces of Ordnance. Don Antonio de Zun^iga his
adversary was likewise very strong, having at least six thousand Foot, and
proportionable number of Horse, besides diverse Gentlemen that were com to assist
him. Amongst whom Don Pedro de Guzman, a valiant young Gentleman (whom his
Majesty made the first Earl of Olivares) was chiefly taken notice of for his
good service. I have already mentioned how the Duchess of Medina Sidonia,
Don^a Leonora de Zun^iga, by her masculine courage and resolution, appeased the
disorders and insurrection which Don John de Figueroa attempted to raise in
Sevilla: since which, hearing of the Commotions in the Kingdom of Toledo, and
that her brother Don Antonio de Zun^iga, Prior of San Iuan, was engaged in the
suppressing of them, she picked out a thousand of her choicest Foot, and an
hundred Horse, with six fieldpieces, all at the Duke, her eldest son's charges,
and sent Don Pedro de Guzman, her third son with them, to the end, in Don
Antonio de Zuniga, his unkle's company, he should give testimony of his
valor and fidelity to the Emperor, against those revolters. Don Diego de
Caravajal, Lord of Todar, and his brother Don Alonso, came likewise to assist
Don Antonio in this expedition with a reasonable number of men. With all which
forces the Prior marched out of Almaguer toward Ocan^a, thinking to reduce it
to his Majesty's subjection either by force or composition. The Bishop of
Zamora, who had no less forces with him, put his Army in a posture to
encounter him, and both came into the field with a full determination to fight,
which some devout religious men grieving for the loss that both parties were
like to sustein, endeavored by many pious remonstrances and persuasions to
divert, but all they could obtein was a Truce for three days. The event of
these Armies is diversely related by two several Autors, whom I chiefly follow
in this narration; the one says, That the Bshop having put the Prior to
flight, and routed his Army, remained master of the field, The Relation of the
first Author (who in probability was Gueuara) is ^he ^ather to be believed.
but was sorely wounded in two places. The other, Pero Mexia, reports, That
during the Treaty, some scattering soldiers of Don Antonio's Army being
engaged with some of the Bishop's, one of Don Antonio's Foot-Captains seeing his
men over-match't, without any order from the Prior, charged the Bishop's men
with his whole Company, and so both Parties seeking to favor and rescue their
own men, at last the whole Armies were both engaged, and had a furious battle,
wherein diverse were wounded and killed on both sides; at last the Bishop's men
being worsted, began to show their heels, and the execution had been much
greater if the night had not separated them, leaving the victory and glory of
the day to Don Antonio's men; The darkness of the night befriended the Bishop
very much in his escape, and diverse of his men, who fled to Ocania: But he
made no long stay there, being informed that he was pursued by Don Antonio,
and that the Town was upon terms of yielding to him; So the Bishop being gone
to Toledo, within three days Ocania was surrendered to Don Antonio for the
Emperor, upon conditions of pardon for their former disobedience, and they
received him with great solemnity and acts of submission. After which Don
Antonio's Army increased daily with fresh supplies, which he quartered in all
the frontiers and Towns adjacent to Toledo, continuing the War against the
Toledians. Don John de Ribera did the like on the other side of the River Tagus.

SECT. X.
AMongst other transactions in this War, the expedition of the Town of Mora was
the most remarkable, and the most desastrous that yet has been related: It was
thus, The Inhabitants of that Town being inclined to the interest of the
Commonaltie, rose up in Arms, and so continued a certain time; But seeing the
Power and Victorious proceedings of Don Antonio, they capitulated with him, and
promised obedience to his Majesty, (yet so little constancy there is amongst
the Vulgar) after their agreement, they revolted again, declaring for the
Commonaltie, as before: and not contented with this, seeing one of Don
Antonio's Captains pass by the Town, with some sheep and other cattle, which he
had taken in the confines of Toledo, they sallied out to the number of three
hundred men, and rescued the Prize, forcing him to fly: whereupon, the next
day Don Diego de Caravajal, who was quartered two leagues thence at Almonacid,
marching out with his Horse, joined with Don Hernando de Robledo, who had the
Command of some Foot companies, whom Don Antonio, at the instance and persuasion
of Diego Lopez de Avalos, Commendador of Mora, had sent to keep them in aw, and
make them stand to their conditions; who advancing together to the very walls
of the Town, (which the Inhabitants had made as strong as they could) summoned
them to deliver it for his Majesty, and give them a peaceable entrance: But
they sturdily refused, calling them Traitors, and reviling them in base
injurious terms, accompanied with many musket shots, and arrows. Don Hernando
de Robledo, and those with him, enraged at this uncivil treatment, entered the
Town by storm, and forced the Inhabitants to retreat to the great Church,
wherein they had put all their wives and children, having fortified it, as they
could, and dammed up all the doors but one, which, though open, was barrocadoed
lustily, and in it they had planted two Fawkenets, with some barrels of powder
for their defens. Don Hernando being com thither with his men, required those
that made good the Church to submit; whereunto they answered with a shot from
one of their Guns, which killed a Corporal of h^s: whereat his soldiers
growing desperate, without any order or command, presently fetched a great
quantity of sprey, or bavins, which they heaped against the other doors, and
set fire to them, thinking when the doors were burned down, to enter into the
Church. But the fire coming to the barrels and the tubs wherewith the doors
were barrocadoed on the inside, made such a blaze, that the timber of the
Church taking fire therewith, all was immediately of a flame; and the poor
people's having no way out but through the fire, nor any breathing place
within the Church, were well-nigh all consumed; At least three thousand persons
lost their lives in that miserable manner, which was very much lamented all the
Kingdom over.

SECT. XI.
THe Bishop of Zamora was not idle all this while, he had as great a fire, in
a manner, as this, within himself. He went to Toledo disguised, and alone,
having left his men two or three leagues off the City, but being arrived, he
made himself known; whereupon the people presently flocked to see him with
great eagerness, by reason of the high value and esteem which he had acquired
amongst the Commonalties. The City made exceeding demonstrations of joie for
his coming thither, and forthwith granted him the administration of the
Archbishopric, according to his desire, as if they had been Popes. In
accomplishment whereof, they carried him with great solemnity to the Cathedral
Church, and placed him in the Archbishop's seat: Which act and form of taking
possession being past, they gave him money, and a good quantity of
Church-plate, wherewith to pay his soldiers. This made him return merrily to
his Army, and soon after he went to reliev Avila, which was besieged by Don
John de Ribera, before mentioned: Which he did with the loss of many men on
both sides. That done, he used all means possible to mischief and endammage
Don Antonio's Army, but he could do him no great harm, he being grown very
powerful, by reason of fresh supplies that daily came in to his assistance,
especially by the recruit which his Nephew Don Pedro de Guzman, brother to the
Duke of Medina Sidonia, brought him.

SECT. XII.
AT the same time that the Bishop departed from Valladolid to the Kingdom of
Toledo, Don John de Mendoca, with seven hundred men, raised and paid by the
City of Valladolid, marched to succor Duen^as against the Lord high Constable,
whom they feared would lay siege to that Town. But seeing there was no great
need of him there, he went to Villacis (which is a walled Town and indifferent
strong, one league from Carrion) which he entered by storm and sacked. Thus the
confusion and ruin of the Kingdom grew daily greater and greater, which much
perplexed the Governors, and grieved all those that were truly zealous for the
public good. Yet there was no way left unattempted to procure a peace, but
nothing concluded. The more the Cities of the Kingdom suffered, the more their
hearts were hardened, peremptorily resolving to stand to the rigorous
arbitrament of War for the ending of their differences. And Valladolid being
the chief seat of the Commonalties, and as it were, the sinews of the War, all
the other places of the Kingdom made their addresses to that City, extolling
it to the skies, saying, That was the only firm Pillar which supported their
Holy pretensions, whence they expected the benefi^ of their liberty. Amongst
others, the City of Leon having levied some moneys, in order to the Iunta's
command sent a Letter to those of Valladolid, highly magnifying the Justice and
holiness of their cause, thanking and commending them exceedingly for their care
and vigilance in the mainteinance and prosecution thereof, and lastly excusing
themselves that they could procure no more money to send them at that present,
promising within short time to raise a more considerable sum for the
furtherance of that holy design, and their treasure being exhausted, to
engage their own persons, with all their friends and allies in whatsoever they
should pleas to command them.

SECT. XIII.
PAlacios de Meneses, a Town not far from Medina de Rioseco, would needs enter
into the same brawl with the Commoners, and rise up in Arms with them. Don
Alonso Enriquez Bishop of Osma, brother to the Lord Admiral, and the Earl Don
Hernando being at that time in Medina, drew out three thousand Foot and one
hundred and fifty horse, with which they marched directly to Palacios de
Meneses, intending to storm and sack it in revenge of that which the Commoners
had don at Torrelobaton. This design being discovered, John de Padilla sent
threescore horse into Palacios, which otherways was not very ill provided, for
having the enemy near them, their continual fear made them the more careful
and circumspect. There was within the Town near four hundred inhabitants able
to bear Arms, all well provided with Cross-bows and other weapons: insomuch
that when those of Rioceco came thither, and required them to let them in, they
answered, That their manner of coming was such, that they could not with
safe^ie permit them entrance. Thereupon the Cavaliers bid them send any two of
their Townsmen to treat with them; whi^^ (...) ^^d. But being com unto them,
they stripped them, (...) ^^em back in their shirts, with threatenings and
comm^^^^ ^^liver the town presently, otherwise they would ^ansack (...) ^^^^^oy
them utterly. The Town not valuing their mena^^^ ^^^od to their former
resolution, and would not admi^ them p^^^ing themselves in a defensive posture,
in case they should atte^^^ to storm them. The Assault was very furious, and
the resistance of the Assailed no less courageous, killing and wounding ^^ch
other without pity, four hours together: At last, those within being fewer in
number then the Assailers, were forced to quit the walls, which the enemy
presently scaled, and placed two Colors upon the top, and diverse others were
following them: but when those of Palacios saw themselves in that extremity,
three hundred Cross-bow-men, and many with slings, charged them so thick with
stones and arrows, that both the Ensigns being killed, one fell with his
Colors within, the other on the outside of the wall; so that those of Rioseco,
seeing so resolute a resistance, were glad to make a fair retreat; but they
first set fire to the gates, which the Towns people perceiving, the women
brought presently above two hundred great pitchers of Vinegar, and the bow-men
sent such clouds of arrows amongst them, that they killed ten of their men, and
wounded a great number. With this payment they returned to Rioseco, and those
of Palacios remained very well pleased and satisfied: hereof they presently
gave intelligence to John de Padilla, Don John de Mendoca, Captain of the
forces of Valladolid, and to Empudia, desiring ^uccor, les^ the Enemy, angry
at their ill success in that attempt, should surprise them another time.
Hereupon those of the Iunta commanded Don John de Mendoca to go to Palacios.
The same night after the assault, came fifty musketeers from Empudia to
Palacios, so secretly, that they were not discovered by the Enemy, who
returned the next day thither, thinking to carry it, not knowing any thing of
the succor which came to them of Palacios overnight, which, though it was not
much, proved of great importance. Those of Rioseco fell on de^perately, but the
Townsmen, with the help of those Musketeers, defended themselves very stoutly,
and killed their men so fast, that they were fain to retire with loss: And
those of Palacios were cried up for gallant men, having repulsed so many
enemies two several times, without the loss of one man, they being but an
handful in comparison, and their Town not strong.

SECT. XIV.
THus the confusion and war daily grew more violent in the miserable Kingdoms
of Castilla, Toledo, the Province of Alava, and in the Mountains of Burgos. In
the Kingdom of Valencia there was nothing but cutting of throats, and robbing
one another: And Valladolid, seeing the Kingdom in so distracted a condition,
began to murmr against those that sat at the helm, charging them with the
ill managing of the affairs, and that they did nothing but trifle and delaie
the time, without knowing when or how to set a period to their miseries: They
desired to bring their differences to an end, but chiefly by the conquest of
the Cavaliers, that they might be exempted and freed from such great
mischiefs. The fault of not concluding, either by a firm peace, or an open war,
they imputed to the Commissioners of the Kingdom; who to enrich themselves, and
because they would not be brought to an account of one hundred and fifty
thousand Ducats, which they had received, were glad to keep things from a
conclusion; of which Valladolid having suffered the most of any place, and
which had been at the greatest expenses, was most sensible, and did exceedingly
lament. To say the truth on both sides, as well of the Cavaliers, as of the
Commonalties, there was trouble and hard measure enough. In Montealegre the
Bishop of Osma, and the Earl Don Hernando, put a great number of the Toledian
soldiers to the rout, being there with their Captains, swaggering and
rioting, and never suspecting to be surprised by the Enemy. They killed some
of them that made resistance, and carried near two hundred prisoners to
Rioseco. Thus both parties studied to weaken and ruin each other, and betwixt
them consumed the whole Country. John de Padilla kept his Court in
Torrelobaton, like another Annibal in Capua. Upon a Mundaie, the 8 of April,
all the people of Valladolid rose up in a tumultuous manner, being wearied out
with those of the Iunta, and discontented at their secret and long
consultations, without concluding any thing. In this disorder they went seeking
them from place to place, being fully resolved to turn them out of the City,
or know of them the reason of their delays; for the damage which they daily
received from those of Simancas was insufferable. There was no trading at all,
every thing grew so excessive dear, that a bushel of wheat was worth eight
hundred Maravediz. The people flocked in multitudes to the great Church, where
the Deputies, with the Captains of the City, were assembled, with loud voices,
and lamentable cries, beseeching them to seek some remedy, for their misery
was insupportable, desiring them moreover, to let them know the reason, why the
war was so procrastinated, and urging, that fifty days were past without any
action of war, neither could their imaginations reach to what they intended.
The Officers answered them, That the occasion of those demurres was, the often
going to, and coming from Tordesillas about the Treaty of Peace with the
Cavaliers, bidding them return quietly to their houses, and before night they
should know particularly all the circumstances and passages of the business.
Whereupon the people prayed them to consider well what they did, and not to let
them suffer any further detriment, or be burdened with any more expenses,
for within less then seven months they had dis-bursed above one hundred
thousand and five hundred Ducats, besides other charges and losses, which they
had sustained beyond number, yet they did grudg none of all this, if they could
close up their miseries with peace, or revenge themselves by war, and that they
might be permitted to fall upon Simancas and Tordesillas; for nothing grieved
them so much, as that they could not have their wills on them. Toward the
Evening, the people of every Ward being called together, they were showed
certain Articles which two Commissioners of the Iunta had concluded with the
Governors, and brought from Tordesillas; the substance of them being according
to the contents of the General Articles of the Kingdom, specified at large
already, I shall spare to trouble the Reader with a second relation.

SECT. XV.
THe people having perused these Articles, would by no means approve of them,
nor consent to any agreement, alleging, that what the Cavalier promised therein
was not sufficient, neither was it certain to be performed, for they had no
warrant from his Majesty so especial, as a business of that consequence did
require; besides, they refused to give any pledges, or deliver any strong holds
into the Commonaltie's possession for their security. And since the conditions
they offered them were neither good nor sure, they would have no Peace, but War
with them: in regard they found no security of their persons or lives without
it. The Commissioners and Captains, seeing all the people fully determined and
bent to give the Cavaliers battle, and either live with liberty, or end their
miseries with death, (most of them being of the same opinion, deeming that to
be their only safe way) cherished them in that resolution, presently giving
order to all the people of Valladolid to be in a readiness, all the Artillery
to be prepared and fitted to carry into the field: the like was done through
all the Cities and Towns of the Commonaltie, every Commissioner repairing to
his own City and Town to that purpose: Thus they intended in one day to end
all their troubles, and that this last bout should pay for all their delays
and triflings, whereby they had ruined themselves, and given the Cavaliers time
to recruit and strengthen their Party.

SECT. XVI.
ONe night, whilst these things were thus in agitation, John de Padilla, by
order of those of the Iunta, came privately to Valladolid, and after they had
consulted with him concerning things necessary for the present expedition, he
returned immediately to Torrelobaton, to secure the Artillery which was there,
having intelligence that the Cavaliers in Tordesillas had a design to surprise
it. Order was given to raise him two thousand Foot well armed, with two hundred
Lances in Valladolid, and two pieces of Ordnance, for two purposes; the one, to
demol^sh Torrelobaton, which he did afterward; the other, to give the Lord
High Constable battle, before he could join his forces with the rest. For
those from Valladolid, with the two thousand which he had in Torrelobaton, and
those which he exspected hourly from Salamanca, Toro, and Zamora, (who were
six thousand Foot, and two hundred lances) besides two thousand five hundred
from Palencia, fifteen hundred from Duen^as, four hundred from Palacios, and
others from the Beherrias and Merindades, would make him an Army of fourteen
thousand. But those of Valladolid were so long before they could be in fit
equipage to march, and the other Towns and Cities not sending in their
supplies time enough, John de Padilla could not execute his design against the
Lord high Constable; who (as you have heard) took Vezerril, and marched into
Rioseco with four thousand Foot, six hundred lances, three or four pieces of
Artillery, etc. So that, through the weakness and want of care of the
Commoners Captains, he soon after set a period to that so miserably
contentious and destructive War. The Cavaliers on the one party, and the
Cities for the Commonaltie on the other, raised all the force they could
possibly for this expedition. The City of Palencia sent six hundred men and
two pieces of Ordnance. Duen^as four hundred men and two pieces of Ordnance.
Baltanas de Cerrato two hundred. Those of Segovia, Avila, and Leon came not;
Salamanca made good the number before mentioned. All these were without any
discipline or experience in Martial affairs, and amongst their Officers there
was such emulations, every one standing so upon their punctillio's of honor,
each Captain would be chief, scorning to receiv orders from any other: In a
word, they were ill bred people, possessed with no less ignorance then
unadvisedness* The Merchants, and other Citizens of Valladolid, seeing the
^^siness brought to the push, and the people resolved to decide ^^eir
difference with the sword, fearing or doubting the event, ca^^ied all their
goods and Merchandises into Monasteries, having shut up all their warehouses
and shops, and laid all other trading aside, only for matter of arms, every
one providing himself the best he could. The poorer sort of people being
ready to starv, made lamentable complaints in the streets, crying out to God
for mercy, and to releas them out of those calamities, though it were with the
loss of their lives. They feared the power of the Cavaliers, who had an Army
of two thousand Lances, and seven thousand Foot, of the choicest men in the
Kingdom, all well armed, and in good order, with stout and experienced
Officers, under the Command of the Earl of Haro, who with great Vigilancie,
answerable to his Courage, executed the place of Captain General.

SECT. XVII.
THe Lord High Constable marched out of Rioseco toward Tordesillas, the 19th
of April, 1521, to join with the rest of the Cavaliers, where he was
exceedingly desired. Being com to Pen^aflor near Torrelobaton, he there took
up quarters for his forces: wence he went to Tordesillas, where he was
received with extraordinary expressions of joie. John de Padilla was yet in
Torrelobaton, with eight thousand Foot, five hundred Lances, and the Artille^ie
of Medina del Campo, exspecting more supplies from the other Cities, which, by
their ill management and slackness, were not com to him; And the thousand men
from Palencia and Duen^as were also hindered from joining with him, by reason
of the Lord High Constable's being at Pen^aflor; Two months he staid there.
whereby he plainly perceived his own, and the other Captain's unadvisedness
and oversight, in spinning out so much time there. The Lord High Constable,
the Lord Admiral, and the other Grandees concluded to make their Rande-vous at
Pen^aflor, leaving with the Queen, and for guard of the Town, the Cardinal of
Tortosa, Don Bernardo de Sandoval, Marquis of Denia, with his troop of Horse,
Don Diego de Rojas, Lord of Santiago de la Puebla with his, and as many
companies of Foot, which was sufficient, the walls of the Town being in very
good repair. They presently dispatched orders to those in garrison at Portillo,
to com to the Rande-vous; and to the Earl of On^ate to stay with his Horse in
Simancas, to hinder Valladolid from sending any succor to John de Padilla. This
done, the Earl of Haro having given command overnight to have his men in a
readiness, the next morning they all marched to Pen^aflor, where they reposed
that night, being Sundaie. Mundaie by break of day, because they would lose no
time, the Governors, and the Captain General drew all their forces into the
field, which amounted to about seven thousand Foot, and two thousand four
hundred Horse, besides some Noblemen and Gentlemen of the greatest quality in
Castilla. That day they did nothing but muster their men, sending in mean time
some Light-horsmen to discover in what posture John de Padilla was in
Torrelobaton; for they were generally of opinion to besiege him so close, that
he might not go thence without giving them battle; and they made no question
of worsting him, their Army exceeding his, if not in number, in goodness and
valor of the men. With this resolution they returned to their quarters.

SECT. XVIII.
JOhn de Padilla, and the other Captains, understanding the advantage the
Cavaliers would have of them in the field, durst not encounter them, and
fearing to be besieged, they began, too late, to be sensible of their own
carelessness or imprudence, in staying so long at Torrelobaton; and thinking
their safest course would be to march secretly thence, as soon as possibly they
could, and make no stay until they arrived at Toro, where they might remain
securely until the succors came to them from Zamora, Leon, Salamanca, and the
other Cities, (whereof they were in daily exspectation) or go from thence to
Salamanca, as they saw occasion; they resolved so to do. Whereupon a certain
Priest sitting at the table with him, A Priest dissuade's John de Padilla from
encountering the Cavaliers.
thus said, Sir! I have seen a Prophecy in which is declared that the
Commonalties shall this day be vanquished, and the Cavaliers remain
victorious, therefore I beseech you Sir, depart not this day from
Torr^lobaton. Whereunto John de Padilla made this answer, His Answer.
Go, t^ust not in such foolish and vain predictions, but in God repose your
confidence, to whom I shall willingly sacrifice this life, and my person, for
the public good of these Kingdoms, and in regard it is now no time to flinch,
I do resolv to die, and let him dispose of me as shall be most for his
Glory* This was on Tuesdaie morning, whilst John de Padilla was at
breakfast. Which done, his Army marched out with all silence possible, and in
good order, the Artillery in the Van, his Foot divided into two squadrons, and
he bringing up the rear with the horse. The Governors and their Captain General
soon had intelligence of John de Padilla's march, and presently made after him
three several ways, whom without any great difficulty they took prisoner, and
routed all his Army. The manner of their fight is diversely reported by several
Authors, but one (who saie's he was a spectator thereof) relate's it thus:
That upon St George's day, the Cavaliers having notice of John de Padilla's
departure from Torrelobaton toward Toro, they sallied out upon him from three
several places, those of Tordesillas charged his Army in the Van, those of
Medina de Rioseco in the Rear, and those of Simancas falling desperately in
upon the Flanks, put all in disorder. The Commoners marched until they came
near Villalar, in very good order, and the Cavaliers were of several opinions
concerning the giving of them battle* Some said it was enough to make them
fly, and lose their credits; and that it was wisdom not to put a business of
such importance to the hazard of one battle. That their Foot was very numerous,
and in appearance good: that those which the Lord high Constable brought, were
but few and much harassed, besides if they miscarried in this enterprise, their
hopes were all destroyed with their forces. But the Marquis of Astorga, the
Earl of Alva, and Don Diego de Toledo insisted with much eagerness to charge
them, and their voices carrying it against the more timorous party, they did
make after them: Who having great store of excellent horse, and I. de Padilla's
men being ill disciplined, besides the ways being so deep that they could
hardly march, and seeing the enemy advance toward them in great bodies
several ways, their courage began to fail, yet their Captains animated them
all they could. The Cavaliers followed them still in this manner, their horse
skirmishing now and then with them, until they came near Villalar, where,
having got within shot of them, they let fly their Ordnance amongst their
ranks (who marched very close) which killed them by heaps. This made their hearts
fall to their heels, and for have to get into the town, they ran one over the
other, notwithstanding all their officer's endeavors to keep them in order, and
for their further misfortune there fell so fierce a shower of rain, that the
Foot stuck fast, engaged in the mire to the very knees, neither could they make
any use of their Artillery, partly by reason of the ill wether, and partly
through the baseness of their gunners, the chief whereof named Saldan^a, a
native of Toledo not well understanding his office, fled away, and left the
Artillery in a plowed field. A private plot of Don Pedro Maldonad^'s with the
Earl of Venavente, to betraie the Artillery.
Although some have reported that Don Pedro Maldonado dealt privately with the
gunners, so to engage the Ordnance, that they should do no execution against
the Cavaliers, having so promised his Uncle, the Earl of Venavente, who had
made him sensible of his error. However it was, the Cavaliers seized upon all
their Artillery, and diverse of John de Padilla's men both Horse and Foot, saved
themselves by coming to them, having first changed their red crosses into white
ones, which was the sign of the Loial Party. John de Padilla expressed a great
deal of courage and valor in his own person, and seeing his game quite lost,
he, with five Horsemen more, charged into the Earl of Venavente's troop, and
being known to be the General of the other Party by the richness of his
Armor, Notable courage of Io^n de Padilla.
was presently encountered by Don Pedro Bacan, Lord of Valduerna, native of
Valladolid. John de Padilla was in complete Armor, and bore in his hand a Lance
all plated with iron, wherewith meeting Don Pedro Bacan (who was a corpulent
heavy man, and but slightly armed) him he gave so rude a salutation, that he
was soon unhors't: John de Padilla still charged on, crying, Santjago,
Libertad, (which was the Commoner's word, and the Cavalier's word was, Santa
Maria y Carlos) at last he broke his Lan^e to the cost of some of his enemies,
after which Don Alonso de la Cueva singled him out, and having wounded him,
John de Padilla taken prisoner.
bade him deliver his Arms, which he did. Being thus a prisoner, Don John de
Ulloa, a Gentleman of Toro, came riding up, and asking who that was, some told
him that 'twas John de Padilla, whereupon he gave him a cut over the Bever,
and hurt his nose, but not much, for which he was mightily condemned by all
that saw or heard of that ungentleman-like action. So John de Padilla was
dismounted, and remained Prisoner. John Bravo, Captain of the Segovians (who
would also signalize himself) was likewise taken: and Francisco Maldonado,
Captain of the Salamanca forces, had the like destiny; but his men having all
forsaken him, he was caught running after them as hard as he could. The
Cavaliers spent all the rest of that day in wounding, killing, and taking,
having the pursuit of their enemies two long leagues and a half. Many dying men
desired to make their confessions, but there was no body would assist them,
nor take any compalsion of their condition, which was a lamentable spectacle,
being all Christians, friends, and kindred. The Cavaliers being masters of
the field, stripped all both living and dead, sharing the spoil equally amongst
themselves. John de Padilla would often bemoan his sad misfortune, saying, If,
after the taking of Torrelobaton, he had followed on his victory, he should
never have been reduced to so deplorable a condition, which was very true;
for by his staying two months there, the Cavaliers cunningly delaied the time
with Cessations, until they had so strengthened their Party, that they
over-povvered him. But the All-seeing Providence disposed it otherwise. At
first, the Commonalties hearing that their Army was routed, and John de
Padilla taken, gave out, that it was some plot or treachery of his to lose the
battle, laying many other things of this nature to his charge, but they were
better satisfied of his realitie to their Cause* when they savv he lost his
head for it.

SECT. XIX.
THe next morning betimes, the Governors commanded Don Pedro de la Cueva to
convoy the prisoners, John de Padilla, Don Pedro Maldonado, Francisco
Maldonado, and John Bravo to the Castle of Villalva. While they were preparing
to go, John de Padilla asked Don Pedro, whither he was commanded to carry
them; who answered him, That for the present they were to go to Villalva,
whither afterward he knew not. Soon after they were sent for thence to
Villalar, and put into a house, with a good guard upon them. The Governors
being infomed of their arrival there, gave order that John de Padilla, John
Bravo, and Don Pedro Maldonado should be beheaded, and Francisco Maldonado
carried to the Castle of Tordesillas: But as he was on the way thither, a
messenger overtook him from the Governors, who told Malbaseda, Lieutenant to
Don Diego Hurtado de Mendoca, (who had the charge of him) that he should bring
Francisco Maldonado back again to execution, Don Pedro M^ldonado was s^ved for
be^raying the Ar^^^^erie.
for the Earl of Venavente had desired them not to behead Don Pedro Maldonado
in his presence, being his Nephew. And because it had been divulged, that Don
Pedro Maldonado should be beheaded, which at the Earl's entreatie was
countermanded, the Lords had Voted that Francisco Maldonado should be executed
in his place. So he being returned, the Governors sent for the Alcalde of the
Chancerie of Valladolid, Commanding him to execute Justice upon the persons of
John de Padella, John Bravo, and Francisco Maldonado. The Alcalde presently
went to the house where they were prisoners, and bade them prepare themselves,
for the Governors had given order for their executions. John de Padilla desired
him to send him a learned Priest to confess him, and a Notarie to make his
Will, and some witnesses. The Alcalde replied, That in the place where they then
were, he could not exspect to find any men of extraordinary learning, yet
he would enquire, and if he could find one, he would satisfy his desire
therein: but as for a Notarie to make his Will, he need not trouble himself,
for all his goods and estate were Confiscate. In the condemnation of these
Gentlemen, there was no process, nor formal proceeding made, as used to be in
other criminal causes, by reason of the evidence of the fact, and the quality
of the offense. At last a Priest was sent to them, and John de Padilla being
at Confession, a Franciscan Friar came, who was thought an abler man, so John
de Padilla, and the rest, made use of him. Their Confessions being ended, they
were brought forth and carried upon Mules to the place of Execution. Before
them went a Crier, saying, This is the Justice which his Majesty, and the Lord
High Constable, with the other Governors, do command in his name to be
executed upon the persons of these Gentl^men, Their command is, that they shall
be beheaded as Traitors, disturbers of the Kingdom, and usurpers of the Roial
Crown, etc. The said Alcalde Zarate, and the Licenciado Cornejo Alcalde de
Corte went along with them to autorise the execution of the Justice. Resolute
Answer of J^hn Bra^o.
John Bravo hearing the Crier say that they were to suffer for being
Traitors, he replied, Hangman! thou lie, and those that bid thee say so, we
are no Traitors, but zealous for the public good, and defendors of the
Kingdom's liberties. Hereupon the Alcalde Cornejo bid John Bravo hold his
peace; whereunto John Bravo answered, I know not what, and the Alcalde gave him
a punch in the breast with his staff, wishing him to consider his present
condition, and not affect such vanities. And John de Padilla said moreover to
him, Christian admonishment of John de Padilla.
Sen^or John Bravo, yesterday was the time to fight, and show your self a
valiant Gentleman, this day to die like a Christian. So the Crier continued
his lesson until they came to the place of execution, where being arrived, they
all alighted from their Mules to receiv the fatal blow. John Bravo being first
called to execution, they bid him bend and settle himself in a fit posture; he
replied, That they might force him, if they would, and so they did, seizing on
him, and stretching him upon a carpet, which done, the Hangman cut his throat,
and would do no more, until the Alcalde Cornejo commanded him to cut his head
quite off, saying, Traitors were so to be used, and their heads to be set
upon the gallows, which was done accordingly. The next being Io^n de Padilla's
turn, he very willingly prepared himself, and having taken of certain
Relics, which he wore about his neck, he gave them to Don Enrique de
Sandoval y Rojas, (eldest son to the Marquis of Denia, who amongst other
Gentlemen men was standing with him) praying him to wear them whilst the war
lasted, which being ended, he desired him to send them to his wife Don^a
Maria Pacheco. Here these three noble Gentelmen died as gallantly as they had
lived, being Patriots of their Country, whose memories deserv an everlasting
same.
After which, as he went to place himself conveniently for the executioner's
hand, he saw John Bravo's body lying by, to which he said only thus, Are
you there good Gentleman? and presently his head was cut off like John Bravo's.
Soon after, Francisco Maldonado being brought forth, was executed in the same
manner, which done, their heads were set upon several nails over the place of
execution, so the Justice ceased for that time, and those Gentlemen's cares
were ended. A Gentleman of the Loyal Party, the day before the battle, wrote
a letter to one of the contrary opinion, telling him, that now the business
was brought to such a push, that there was nothing to be thought on else, but
every one to stand upon his guard, for whosoever fell, should be sure to bear
the ignominious brand of Traitor: As questionless it had been; for we see all
the actions and exploits of this life are more esteemed, and censured by their
successes and events, then any other ways. If Cortes had not been fortunate in
Mexico, when he took Motezuma, we should have said he had been a rash
fool-hardie fellow, but Fortune having crowned his valiant enterprise with
success, all men now applaud his gallantrie, giving him the attributes of
Courageous and Prudent.

SECT. XX.
TO say the truth, in all that I have read of John de Padilla, I find him a
gallant valerous Gentleman, though he was engaged in that unfortunate
business. It is reported, that one day going to his house, very melancholy and
dejected, he said to his wife, sitting on hors-back, and she at the window:
Sen^ora, what do you think now of the condition whereunto you have brough^ me?
at which words she made answer, Be of good courage, for of a poor Esquire I
have made you half-King of Castilla. But the Common People are apt to say
many things in such like occurrences, wherein there is not one word of truth.
In my judgment, if there had been any such passage betwixt him and his wife,
he would have expressed some discontent or anger in the letter, which he
wrote to her the same day he was beheaded: But there was no such thing
mentioned in it, quite contrary, he expressed therein very much affection and
tenderness to her, seeming to be more sensible of her grief and sorrow for his
sad fortune, then of his own suffering. Besides his letter to his wife, he
wrote another to the City of Toledo. The contents were as follovveth.

John de Padilla's letter to his wife.
SEn^ora! If your pain did not more trouble me, then the losing of my life, I
should esteem my self entirely happy. For death being a thing so certain to
all Mortals, the Almighty shows him a singular favor whom he honor's with
such an one as mine, which, though lamented by many, is doubtless acceptable
in his sight. It would require more time, then what I have, to write you some
things for your Consolation, but that cannot be allowed me, neither do I
desire to defer the reception of that Crown, which I hope to enjoy. You may,
like a discreet woman, bewail your own misfortune, but not my death, for being
so just, it ought not to be lamented by any: My soul, since nothing else is
left me, I bequeath to you, desiring you to entertain it, as the thing which
most affected you. I do not write to Pedro Lopez my father, because I dare not,
for though I was his Son in daring to lose my life, I was not heir to his good
fortune. I will not extend my self any further, because I will not trouble the
Executioner to wait, nor give way for any one to suspect, that to prolong my
life I enlarge my letter. My servant Sossa being an eie-witness of my end, and
to whom I have communicated the secret of my intentions, shall tell you what
cannot be expressed herein, and so I rest, exspecting the instrument of your
sorrow and my comfort.


John de Padilla's letter to the City of Toledo.
TO Thee, the Crown of Spain, and glory of the whole World, free since the
time of the mighty Goths; to Thee, who by the effusion of the blood of
strangers, as well as of thine own, have recovered liberty for thy self and thy
neighboring Cities: I John de Padilla, thy legitimate Son, now give thee an
account how by the blood of my body, thy former Victories are refreshed. If
fortune has not suffered my actions to be Chronicled amongst thy memorable
exploits, the fault was in my destiny, not in my good will: Which as a mother,
I desire Thee to accept, since God has given me nothing else to lose for Thee,
but what I have adventured. I am more aggrieved for Thy resentment, then my own
life. But Thou must consider these are but the turns of fortune's Wheel, which
never stands still. This is my contentment and consolation, that I, the
meanest of Thy children, do suffer death for Thee; and that Thou have nourished
at thy breasts such as may take satisfaction for my wrongs. Many tongues,
doubtless, will busy themselves in the relation of my death, which as yet I
know not my self, though it be very near: My end will give Thee a testimony
of my desire. My soul I recommend to Thee, as the Patroness of Christianity,
of my body I make no account, since it is no more mine, neither can I write
any more, for at this very instant, I feel the knife at my throat, with a
greater sens of Thy displeasure, then apprehension of my pain.


SECT. XXI.
THe Victory being obtained at Villalar, and the Commoners Army quite
routed, presently dispatches were sent post to the Emperor, giving him account
of this good fortune: And the Earl of Haro, as Captain General, wrote a
particular relation to the Emperor of all the passages, which he receiving at
Bruxels, the eighth of Julie, he ansvvered, saying, That although by other
Letters, of the 24 April, he had intelligence of the vanquishing and punishing
of those Traitors, (for so he called them) yet he was better satisfied to
receiv it from his hand, thanking him very much for all that he had done in
order to his service, and for the affection and zeal which he expressed
toward him in that emploiment; promising, at his return into that Kingdom, to
gratify him according to the merit of his extraordinary services; hoping,
that by his endeavors he should find means to settle the whole Kingdom, which
he particularly encharged him to use all his vigilance and industry to
procure: And chiefly he recommended to his care the War of Navarra, which was
of so great importance, and that he would assure the Grandees and Gentlemen
which had engaged in his service, that at his return he would gratify their
Loialties according to their qualities and deserts. The Commoners forces being
all discomfited as we have seen, and their three principal Captains executed,
those of the Iunta, who were in Valladolid, fled away, and all was of a sudden
blown up like smoke in the aer. Within three days after, the Cavalier's whole
Army marched to Simancas, and quartered in Towns all about Valladolid,
intending to fall upon that City, and treat them as such open enemies did
deserv. But first, being numerous enough, they possessed all the Towns and
Villages thereabouts, and stopped up all the Avenues, suffering no provisions to
be carried in to them. Whereupon the most valiant and violent of all the
people began to be crest-fallen: Others that had (as much as they durst)
opposed those past Commotions, seeing the Governors victorious and powerful,
declared themselves. There was no Captain nor Commander left in the City.
Whereupon to make short, and prevent a Summons, they thought their only way
was, to yield themselves upon good conditions, which they hoped the Lord Admiral
(though much offended) out of compassion and affection to that City, would
grant them. In which resolution they sent some religious men, and persons of
respect, with much submission and humble acknowledgment of their faults, to
desire mercy and pardon of the Lord Admiral: Who at first showed himself very
much displeased and unwilling to hearken to their desires, saying, He ought,
and would make an example as well of the principal offenders, as of the Common
people. The Soldiers, who exspected notable plunder, their fingers itching to
measure out the silks and velvets with their Pikes, (as they bragged they
would) were mad because the word of command, To fall on and enter the City, was
so long a giving out; which the Inhabitants knowing, every one secured their
commodities the best they could. But by God's help, and the indulgence of the
Governors, a Peace and pardon was concluded and proclaimed in the market places
and streets of Valladolid, with great acclamations of joie, and sound of
Trumpets, Drums, and other musical instruments: All the Inhabitans being
exempted from personal punishment, confiscation, or loss of offices, excepting
twelv, whom the Lord Admiral should nominate, and appoint to be left out of
the Articles, to be disposed of as the Governors should think fitting; that
they might all take notice, that they had a King and Lord, to whom they ovved
obedience and service; and such a King as did not seek after vengeance, or
desire the destruction of his Subjects, but to pardon them with clemency, and
chastise them with mercy.

SECT. XXII.
THe City of Valladolid, which had shown so much stubbornness and obstinacy
not long before, proclaimed the Pardon with great contentment; and thought they
had obtained no small favor, to preserv their Town from being sacked, the
Soldiers being so ready to make the onset. The ^arl of Venavente, and the
Bishop of Osma were great instruments of hindering the destruction of that
City: and the Lord High Constable, with all the rest of the Grandees, were
very glad of it, esteeming that the pacification of the whole Kingdom depended
upon the surrendering of Valladolid. The manner of the Cavaliers entering into
Valladolid.
The same day, April 27, all the Cavaliers entered in great state, with their
Squadrons in Martial order, the Horse all in Armor, covered with rich scarlet
coats: the first that marched in, were the Earl of Venavente, and Earl of Haro,
Captain General, the Earl of Castro, the Earl of On^ate with their Troops,
their Armor was covered with scarlet, embroidered with gold. After them
followed the Lord Admiral, with the Adelantado, his brother, and the Earl of
Osorno, all in green, with their troops in Armor covered with the same Liverie.
Next them, marched the Captains and Camp masters of the Army, with their
Colors flying, and the Gentlemen all clad in cloth of silver and gold. Then
came the Bishop of Osma, with those of the Council Roial, the Alcaldes and
Alguaziles; And last of all, the Lord High Constable, with the Earl of Alva de
Lista, the Earl of Salinas, the Earl of Aguilar, and the Marquis of Astorga,
with all their men splendidly accoutred, besides diverse Gentlemen, and Foot
soldiers, all in such stately manner, that Valladolid was worth the seeing
that day: yet it was observed, that the people were so stomackful, that
neither man nor woman did so much as look ou^, or open a window, as if they
disdained or abhorred to see them, who, four days before, were their mo^tal
enemies. (Such are the Comedies and Tragedies of this life). How often did the
Cavaliers desire Valladolid to make a ^eace? what advantageous conditions they
offered them? how often did they slight their favors? how many scornful answers
did they return them? and at last it came to this, that they were constreined,
though with heavy hearts, and hanging down their h^ads, to receiv and treat in
their houses thos^ whom they so ill affected. And those of Valladolid must
a^knowledg a particular obligation to the Nobility of Castilla, (whom they
always found ready to receiv them with open arms, and do them all the good
offices and favor possible) as well for this daie's favor, as others, which by
their mediation the Kings of Spain have granted them, notwithstanding so great
uproars and disorders as have been committed in that City. All the rigor that
was don at this time in Valladolid, was the executing of an Alcalde, and an
Alquazil of the Iunta, whom the Governors commanded to be hanged, the rest
fled, though no body prosecuted them.

SECT. XXIII.
THe rout of the Junta's Army at Villalor, and the Justice that was executed
upon the Gentlemen there, with the surrendering of Valladolid, and the favor
which the Governors showed them, being noised through the Kingdom, the other
Cities began to be more submissive, who before carried their heads so high.
Duen^as courted their Earl again, whom they had forced to leav the town, rising
up in Arms against him. Palencia opened their gates to the Lord High Constable.
Medina del Campo did the same. But Mota stood out a while upon the defensive,
yet at last they were glad to make their peace. But the Lord High Constable,
and the Lord Admiral were such worthy Noblemen, that they used no acts of
rigor in any place, and all those whom they reduced, found themselves so well
with their present condition, that they held themselves as redeemed out of
thraldom and oppression. Only those of Toledo continued in their willfullness.
The Common People murdered two brothers, Biscayners, named Aguirres, only
upon vain surmises and suspicions which they conceived of them, yet they had
both been Captains under John de Padilla. Notwithstanding that the Prior of St
Iuan, Don Antonio de Zun^iga was with his Army in the confines of that City;
the Commoners with a great body and some pieces of Ordnance, marched to a
Castle called Almonacid, and continued battring it for two days, the Governor
valorously defending it; which the Prior hearing, presently gave command to
draw all his forces into the field, intending to give them battle. But they
having intelligence thereof, soon railed their siege, and returned to Toledo,
for fear of being put to the worst. Some days after Don Alonso de Caravajal,
brother to Don Diego, being quartred with some light-hors-men at Maxcareque,
four leagues from Toledo, six hundred Foot, and fifty Horse sallied out of the
City, and taking by-waies that they might not be discovered by the Enemie's
Sentinels, by break of day they fell upon the Village, surprised Don Alonso and
his men, and carried them all prisoners to Toledo, before any of their party
could com to rescue them. They did several other such exploits, and on the
other side the Prior did them what mischief he could. The Governors were much
troubled hereat, but could not pass with their Army to Toledo, until they had
quieted all the old Castilla. But that which put them to the greatest plunge,
The French advance into Navarra.
was the news of the King of France his Army advancing into the Kingdom of
Navarra. It was told them that Don^a Maria Pach^co, John de Padilla's wife,
with all her kindred in Toledo, maintained and fomented chiefly this humor in
the Inhabitants, therefore they resolved to send thither, and use some means to
get her out of the City, believing, that if she were gone thence, the rest
might be more easily reduced: To this effect they sent a Captain, with a few
men disguised, who offered himself to go to Toledo, and carry her out of the
City by fair means, or by foul. Being arrived at Toledo, he went directly to
the Fort where Don^a Maria was, desiring to speak with her; But the people
having some intelligence of his design, presently made an Alarm, and came in
great multitudes to the Castle, where finding the Captain in discourse with
Don^a Maria, they straight laid hands on him, and flung him out at the window,
which being high, he broke himself all to pieces with the fall; after this
they cut the throats of all those that came with him, insomuch that the City
was in greater disorder by this means then before. The F^enc^ Army repulsed.
In the month of September 1521. the French being beaten out of Navarra, the
Governors were in the mind to march with all their forces into the Kingdom of
Toledo, and subdue that City, but they were again diverted by a second
intelligence which was brought them, that the King of France was come to Bayona
with a very powerful Army. The French enter into Biscaya by B^yona.
And Don Antonio de Zun^iga (who had begun that enterprise) being desirous to
bring his design to perfection, drevv all his forces out of their Garrisons,
and pitched his Camp before the City on the one side the River, and Don John de
Ribera had his men quartred near the City on the other. Don Antonio had with
him eight hundred lances, which scoured all the Country about, and had daily
smart skermishes with the Toledians, wherein diverse fell on both sides. In
this expedition was Don Pedro de Guzman, third Son (as you have heard) to the
Duke of Medina Sidonia, who being young and full of mettle, D^n P^d^o de
Guzman so^ely wounded and taken prisoner ^y the Tol^dians.
and ambitious to show his valor, engaged himself too far amongst the enemies,
by whom he was taken close by the Castle of San Sernan, so desperately
vvounded, that the Toledians were enfor^'t to carry him off the field upon a
board, he not being able to go any other ways. Don^a Maria Pacheco, being
at a vvindovv in the Fort, obs^rved with great attention all the passages of
the fight, and distinguishing Don ^ed^o from the rest, she was much taken
with him, seeing ^im b^have himself so gallantly; And being brought to the
Fort, she went out to receiv him, partly out of respect to Don Pedro's noble
birth, but chiefly out of a private inclination which proceeded from the
esteem she made of his valor and animositie. She treated him with much
civility and demonstrations of affection, comme^ding highly his provvess
whereof her eyes were vvitnesses, and told him, that his generositie was
vvorthie of an eternal m^morie, only this was wanting him, that his Valor was
not employed in the King's service, and in favor of the City of Toledo: (for
the Commonalties pretended in all the Cities, That whatsoever they did, was in
order to his Majesty's service). Don^a Maria would suffer none of Don Pedro's
retinue to stay with him, or any body else to visit him, neither would she
permit him to write to Don Antonio's Camp: But treating him with very great
care and complements, she spared nothing that was necessary for his
recoverie: his wounds being thoroughly cured, she endeavored to win him to
their side, promising, that if he would renounce the other party, they would
make him General of the forces of Toledo. But finding her time lost in
persuading him, she resolved to get him exchanged for other prisoners which
Don Antonio had taken of the Toledians, which was done; for the better
effecting whereof, those of Toledo gave Don Pedro his Parolle for eight days,
to go to his Uncle's Army, having made him swear first, that he would return
again, in case he procured not the liberty of those whom they demanded:
Amongst other exceptions which they made him renounce in the Oath they
administered to him, one was, That he should not allege that those of Toledo
were Traitors, and therefore he was not obliged to make good his Word or Oath
to them, which was fulfilled accordingly. The City was very well provided for
a long time, and they had broken down all the Mills for twelv leag^es compass,
that Don Antonio's men might have no means ^o grind their corn. They took all
the Plate of Silver and Gold out of the Cathedral Church, which being coined,
did much enrich them, and made them so stout, that they said, They would never
consent to Peace, unless there were first a pardon general granted for the
whole Kingdom of Spain, and that Don Pedro Lasso de la Vega were delivered into
their hands, for (they said) he was the principal cause of all those Troubles,
and the only man that put them upon that insurrection.

SECT. XXIV.
THe Marquis of Villena being entered into Toledo, by consent of the City,
began to bring them to a right understanding: whereupon he wrote to the
Governors, that they might follow their business in Navarra, as for the
Toledians he would undertake to reduce them to their due obedience. The
Governors glad to be eased of an affair of such care and trouble, employed all
their industry and force to resist the incursions of the French* as shall be
said hereafter. Hernando de Avalos, and some other of the Inhabitants, would
gladly have received a pardon from the Marquis of Villena's hands; therefore
being sent to by them, he came, accompanied with the Earl of Oropesa, and some
Horse and Foot, but nothing could be effected, for the contrary Party
mutinied in such a tumultuous manner, that the Marquis was forced to go out of
the City, after he had spent some days time to procure a Peace. The same
effect had the endeavors of Don Diego de Cardenas Adelantado of Granada, Duke
of Maqueda, who, with the same intention, came to Toledo, very well attended,
and was driven out by the Common people. Such was the confusion of that City
which Don^a Maria Pacheco did uphold with as much courage, as if she had been
a Captain long exercised in Martial affairs, and therefore she was generally
called, la Muger valerosa, the valiant Woman: The report goe's, that she made
use of the Crosses in stead of Colors, and to excite the people to compassion,
she made her son to be carried up and down the streets upon a Mule, with a
mourning Hood and Cloak on, and in a Streamer, the picture of her husband John
de Padilla beheaded. Diverse other things were said of her, it may be they were
but feigned. Amongst the rest, That she had a fancy that she should be a
Queen, which was put into her head by some Morisco witches at Granada. At length
her party began to weaken and diminish, Don Estevan Gabriel Merino prevailing
against her, who showed himself a person of great conduct and prudence. This
Prelate (who afterward was Cardinal of San Vidal) then governing the
Bishopric of Iaen, and being Dean of Toledo, assisted by the Marshal Payo de
Ribera, and other ^entlemen of that City, having routed Don^a Maria, and her
adherents, turned them out of Toledo; and she, having disguised herself in a
Countrie-woman's habit, D^nia Maria Pacheco's escape out of Toledo.
and riding upon an Ass, with some Gees in her hands, escaped: otherwise she
had lost her head as well as her Husband. So she spun out the rest of her days
in exsile. After this the City was reduced, and enjoied the benefit of the
general pardon, Some sai^ sh^e died in Portugal.
with other good conditions, which, by reason of the War of Navarra, were
granted them, and (as they desired) neither Don John de Ribera, nor any of his
kindred, were permitted to com into the City, until the King returned into
Spain; they received Don Estevan Gabriel Merino, and Doctor Zumel, They should
rather have erected a Statue, in memory that he died a Martyr for his Country.
for their chief officers of Justice. They pulled down John de Padilla's house
to the ground, which done, they ploughed it, and sowed it with Salt, because the
soil, where the Captain of so great troubles and mischiefs had his birth and
habitation, should not produce so much as grass or weeds, erecting there a
pillar, with an Inscription, declaring the manner of his life and deplorable
end.

SECT. XXV.
ALthough the whole Kingdom almost was reduced (the fear of punishment
exceeding the hopes they had of carrying on their design); Yet the Fort of
Fermosel (which was under the command, and properly belonging to the Bishop of
Zamora) stood peremptorily upon their defense. The Governors hereupon sent the
Earl of Alva de Lista, with a competent number of men, to take it; who
requiring the Governor to deliver it to the Emperor, he answered, that he
kept it in the Bishop of Zamora's name for his Majesty, that if his Majesty
did com thither and bring the Bishop with him (whom the Duke of Naxara had
taken prisoner) he would presently surrender it, otherwise not. The Earl laid
siege to it hereupon, but to small purpose, for it was very strong. The Duke of
Naxara not long after sent to the Governors, desiring them to command the siege
to be raised before ^ermosel, because it belonged to his son; the Bishop having
^xchanged it with him. The Governors gave order forthwith that the Earl of Alva
should give them Truce for twenty days, whilst they sent to the Emperor to
know his Majesty's pleasure. The manner of the Bishop of Zamora's being t^^ken
prisoner.
The taking of the Bishop of Zamora was in this manner. He seeing all his
party routed, and that it was no boot for him to stay in Spain, resolved to
make France his refuge. But being in the confines of Navarra at the same time
the French King made his attempt upon that Country, at a place called
Villamediana, a league from Logron^o (although he had disguised himself) he
was discovered and taken prisoner by an Alferez named Perote. Who carried him
thence to Navarrete a Town two leagues from Naxara, where he delivered him to
the Duke Don Antonio, who kept him there, until the Emperor commanded him to
be carried to the Castle of Simancas, where he ended his days, as you shall
hear.

SECT. XXVI.
THe City of Valladolid wrote to the Lord Admiral, desiring him to stand their
friend, as his Ancestors had done in former times. Whereunto he returned a
very kind answer, assuring them all the favor he could do them, or procure
them from his Majesty, so that they continned their contrition and
acknowledgment of their errors, and refrained from acting any thing misbecoming
the obedience of Loyal and faithful subjects* And to conclude this tedious
relation, I shall tell you only that the Emperor being retur^ed into Spain,
called a Counsel in Palencia, where he consulted of and concluded a general
pardon for the whole Kingdom. But some of the Commoners being brought to
execution (as shall be hereafter mentioned) the Castillians not knovving what
had past in his Majesty's Counsels, began to be possessed with fears; For the
absolute destruction and banishing whereof, the Emperor upon the 28th of
October 1522, caused a great scaffold to be erected in the chief market place
of Valladolid, and covered with rich cloth of gold and silk, whereon his
Majesty clothed with long robes, after the Ancient manner, all his Grandees
and Council about him, being seated; his Attornie General with a rich Herald's
Coat, and one of the Clarks of the Exchequer named Gallo, having made a long
narration of the troubles and insurrections of Castilla, read with a distinct
loud voice the general pardon which his Majesty granted to the whole Kingdom:
wherein were excepted only some threescore or fourscore persons; whom, in
regard the greatest part of them were but ordinary people, some of them Friars
and others already punished, I shall not trouble my self to particularize, They
died gallantly as Martyrs for their Country.
only the execution of Don Pedro Pimentel de Talavera, (who was taken at the
battle of Villalar) and his head was cut off in the public place of Palencia.
The Commissioners of Guadalaxara and Segovia, with some others, being
prisoners at la Mota de Medina del Campo, the Alcalde Leguizama was sent
thither to do Justice upon them: Being there arrived, he commanded seven of
them to be brought out of the Common Gaol (where they were put) with ropes
about their necks and set upon Asses until they came into the chief market
place of Medina, where all their heads were cut off. In the City of Vitoria, a
skinner of Salamanca, and two or three more of his accomplices, were executed on
Fridaie the 14th of August 1522. That which was chiefly laid to the charge of
the Commissioners and other Gentlemen, was their daring to take possession of
the Queen at Tordesillas, turning away the Marquis of Denia and his Lady,
who had commands from his Majesty to attend her person. And besides that some
of them held correspondence with the King of France.

SECT. XXVII.
THe Bishop of Zamora being taken (as is related) was brought afterward
prisoner to the Fort of Simancas, where he continued a good while. During
which time with a brick which he had cunningly put into a bag, wherein he
used to carry his Breviary, he knocked out the Governors brains, that had
charge of him, being in discourse with him by the fire side. So leaving the
father dead, he had made his escape, but that his Son discovered him, and
having brought him back, locked him into his Chamber, without doing any thing
else to him, for murdering his father which was held and commended for a piece
of great wisdom and patience in the young man. The Emperor upon notice hereof,
The Bishop of Zamor^'^ death. His Majesty had great reason to g^^^^ for the
lo^s of the g^^^test Prela^e that ever Spain b^^d, b^eing so aged, and so
resolu^e to the l^st, for the good of his Country.
commanded the Alcalde Ronquillo to go thither, who having too much Justice on
his side, and bearing no great affection to the Bishop, by virtue of a license
the Emperor had from Pope Adrian, to punish the said Bishop and other Priests
and Friars for their exorbitances, bearing date the 7th of March 1523. He
c^used him to be strangled within the said Fort; And some report that he hung
him upon one of the Pinacles of the Tower, to the end he might be a spectacle
to all that passed that way. This was done contrary to the Emperor's
knowledge, and it grieved him very much, although he had reason and power
enough to do it. This was done An^ 1526.

SECT. XXVIII.
THe end whereunto Don Pedro de Ayala, Earl of Salvatierra was brought, may
serve for an example of the various vicissitudes of Fortune in this life: Thus
died this brave Earl, whom if the other Nob^es had seconded, they had made
Spai^ the most glorious Re^ublic^ of the wo^ld.
After he was taken he was carried to Burgos, where he was kept prisoner in
the Earl of Salinas his house, where he was let blood to death, Anno 1524, the
Emperor then being at Burgos, after which he was carried to his grave, his
feet hanging bare over the Bier, with irons upon them, exposed to the public
view of all. This unfo^tunate Earl was reduced to so much poverty, being
forsaken of all his friends in his imprisonment, that he had nothing to eat
but a poor mess of pottage, which Leon Picardo, a domestic servant and Painter
to the Lord High Constable, sometimes brought him. His son Don Athanasio de
Ayala, Nota^^^ pie^ie of Do^ At^anasio d^ Ayala to his f^^ther, the Earl of
Salvatierra, being ready to starv in prison.
then Page to the Emperor, out of compassion and piety, which a child owes
to his father, sold a horse which he had to buie the Earl victuals: for which
the Master of the Pages would have him punished, and complained of him to the
Emperor; whereupon the Emperor calling Don Athanasio to him, and asking him for
his horse, he presently answered, That he had sold him to buie Victuals for
his father. The Emperor was so far from being displeased at so pio^^ an act,
that he forthwith commanded forty thousand Maravediz to be given him. Thus
this great Earl, who, as he said of himself, was lineally descended from the
mighty Goths, ended his days by an untimely death.

SECT. XXIX.
THe Emperor being desirous to express the Contentment which he received by
the Pacification of his Kingdoms, and that he might show himself a gracious
Prince to those that had offended his Majesty in so high a measure, he
commanded that two days after the general pardon was proclaimed, there should
be great Feasts celebrated in Valladolid, with great solemnity, with
Tiltings, fighting on hors-back with Bulls, and a Turnament or Just-Royal. And
the Emperor himself being in complete Armor, and so disguised, that no body
could know him, entered the List, and brake several Lances with those that had
gotten the greatest honor that day, behaving himself with such dexterity,
courage, and gallantrie, that he drew the eyes of all the Spectators upon him,
and kindled a curiosity in their breasts to know who he was, which being
discovered, their gusts increased with their admirations. Light-winged Fame
having filled the World with the Emperor's good success, many Princes and
Ambassadors, from all parts, thereupon came flocking to his Court. The King of
England sent his Ambassadors, and Don Luis de Silva, in the King of Portugal
his Master's name, came to congratulate his Majesty's return, his reception of
the Imperial Crown, and the pacification of the troubles in Spain, desiring
moreover, that he would give order that the Castillians might go no more into
the Moluccas, which his Majesty remitted to be determined by judicious and
experienced men.

SECT. XXX.
HIs Majesty's goodness and clemency to his Subjects, had it been in the
ancient Greek's or Latine's ages, should have been celebrated with a never
dying memory, since of so many offenders so few were excepted in the general
Pardon, and well near all those too obtained an exemption from all punishments,
as well of Persons, as Estate: And the Nobles were restored to the same height of
honor and esteem as they possessed formerly, the Emperor showing as much favor
and liberality toward them and their children, as if they never had committed
any offense against him. Whosoever take's the pains to peruse the history of
these fore-related Commotions will find, that Hernando de Avalos, a Gentleman
of Toledo, was one of the greatest sticklers for the Commonalties, one of the
chief Ringleaders of these disorders, and one that persevered in them with as
great obstinacy and perverseness as might be; for which he was excepted, yet
nothing was done to him. But whether out of fear, or otherwise, he privately
slunk away out of the Kingdom; for which the Emperor (as he had reason) was
the more displeased at him. And having continued in this voluntary exile some
time, at last having disguised himself, as he thought, sufficiently, he took
the boldness to return to the Court and endeavor to procure his pardon, which
coming to the knowledge of one that was near his Majesty's person, he thinking
to do an acceptable piece of service, went presently and told the Emperor, that
Hernando de Avalos was in the Court, and that, if his Majesty was so pleased,
he would apprehend him, for he knew where to find him. The Emperor took no
great notice hereof at the first time. Two or three days after, the Gentleman
thinking his Majesty had not well understood him, or else had forgotten what
he had told him, gave him a second advice of Hernando's being there.
Whereunto the Emperor with a countenance that expressed no great pleasure in
any such like actions, answered; Thou should have done better to have
advised Hernando de Avalos to leav the Court, then to press me to give command
to have him apprehended. So the pick-thank remained ashamed and confounded, (as
all those which delight in such base unworthie offices for the most part are,
when their malicious practices do not take effect). It is moreover reported,
the testimony of the goodness of this Emperor, that being told how fevv had
been executed of those offenders, he replied, It is enough, let there be no
more blood spilt. Which was a saying indeed becoming the Dignity of so great
a Prince.

SECT. XXXI.
THe general pardon being known through all Spain, the hearts of all the
people were filled with no less rejoicing then affection to their Prince,
having such notable experience of his clemency and valor, and thenceforwards
the Peace and quietness grew daily more and more in the Kingdom. Those of
Valencia hearing what his Majesty had done at Valladolid for the Kingdom of
Castilla, presently sent their Commissioners, humbly craving the same grace and
favor from the Emperor, and in particular they desired his Majesty would be
pleased to remove thence their Viceroy Don Diego de Mendoca, whom they
abhorred exceedingly, deriving upon him all the fault of their past Commotions,
by reason of the many Tyrannies and oppressions wherewith he had overburthened
the people. But those Commissioners not coming in the name and with a general
power from the whole Kingdom, their desires were not granted at that time.
Whereupon the 12 of November, Anno 1522, four other Commissioners were sent
with full power, from the Kingdom of Valencia, to tender, without reserv, into
his Majesty's hands all their honors, lives, and fortunes, that he might
dispose of them at his will and pleasure, absolutely resigning themselves to his
clemency, and desiring only that he would give them another Viceroy, for
they could not endure Don Diego de Mendoca, and that he would change some other
Officers; Which the Emperor, to satisfy them, did, placing in Don Diego's
stead, the Queen Germana, and making Don John, Marquis of Brandeburg, her
husband, Captain General of the whole Kingdom, who died in the same year. After
which, the Emperor considering the fidelity and Roial descent of Don Hernando
de Aragon, Duke of Calatria, (who being a prisoner in the Castle of Xativa) in
the time of Troubles the People would have set him at liberty, and made him
their Captain General, and married him to the Queen, but he discreetly refused
their offer, saying, That he would not go out of prison without the Emperor's
consent) sent for him to Valladolid, where he did him great honor and respect,
and having married him to the Queen Germana, (who was second wife to the
Catholic King Don Fernando) invested them in the Government of the Kingdom of
Valencia.

SECT. XXXII.
Whilst the Governors of Castilla, after this Victory at Villalar, were
reducing and settling Segovia, and the other Cities of that Kingdom, with
intent to pass with their Army to suppress and quiet the disorders of the
Toledians; The Duke of Naxara came to them at Segovia, The French make it
cursions into Nava^ra.
informing them that a powerful Army of French under the command of Monsieur
de Asparros, brother to Monsieur de Lautrech Viceroy of Milan, was entered into
Navarra, had taken Pamplona, Stilla, and diverse other places, and not content
to have run all that Country over (to which they seemed at first only to lay
claim, and that not in King Francis his name, but for Don Enrique de la Brit,
who pretended to be right owner of the Kingdom of Navarra. At last they
declared themselves (what reallie they were) open enemies, and marched with all
their forces to assault the City of Logron^o, their word was Vivat the King
and flower de Luce of France, and the Commonaltie of Castilla, which was a
great argument that some of them held correspondence with the King of France,
The French are forc^d to raise their siege before Log^onio.
and gave him encouragement to send his Army thither; But the valor and
policy of those of Logron^o was such, that the French were enforced to raise
their siege, and go away from thence with no inconsiderable loss, and the
Governors being com to succor Logron^o, pursued them, Their Army routed in
the Pyrenean mountains, and Navarra also reduced by the Governors of Castilla*
and after diverse skirmishes they joined battle in the Pyrenean mountain,
wherein the French being absolutely routed and their General taken prisoner,
the whole Kingdom of Navarra was presently reduced under the Emperors
subjection. Who perceiving the animositie of the French King, and the means he
used to endammage him in several parts, as well in Flanders as in Spain,
notwithstanding the conditions of peace made betwixt the two Crowns at Noyon;
resolved at last to pay him in the same coin, and take his full revenge of him
in Italy. To which effect, he first sent Ambassadors to Pope Leon, desiring
his friendship and assistance to drive the French out of Lombardy, dispossess
them of Milan, and restore it to Francisco Sforza, Son to Lewis brother to
Maximilian, from whom the King of France had taken that Country; and to retake
likewise Parma and Placentia, which belonged to the Church. Hereupon a yearly
pension of ten thousand Ducats out of the Archbishopric of Toledo, The
Emperor and the Pope combine against the French King.
and as much in lands in the Kingdom of Naples, was promised to the Cardinal
Iulo de Medicis for Alexander de Medicis base son to Laurencio Son to Pedro de
Medicis, who was Duke of Vibino. The Pope was so far from disliking the motion,
that he prepared money and men to assist the Emperor, making the Marquis of
Pescara Marquis of Mantua his General; who joining with Prospero Colona, Their
forces take the City of Pa^ma.
Captain General of the Imperial forces, they laid siege to the City of Parma,
which after some days resistance, they stormed and sacked. The City and Castle
of Milan they took also, Milan. Pavia.
after which the City of Pavia, and all the rest of the Cities and Towns
belonging to the State of Milan presently surrendered themselves: This done, the
Imperialists (notwithstanding their Army was much lessened, money growing
short, by reason of the Pope's sudden death) besieged and took the Cities of
Como and Alexandria upon the River Ada in Lombardie. About the same time the
King of France advanced into Flanders with a very powerful Army, The French
advance into Flanders, and are repulsed.
to succor the City of Tornay (which then was besieged by the Emperors forces)
but being repulsed by Henry Earl of Nassau and Don Hugo de Moncada, he
retreated, and the City for want of relief was surrendered to the ^mperialists.
In mean time Francis the first of France, nothing dismayed at the crosness of
his fortune, sent another numerous Army against Spain, (building much upon the
absence of the Emperor and the distractions in that Kingdom) which entering into
Navarra by Puerto de Ronces Valles, The French take Fuente Ravia.
took the Forts of Pen^ol and Maya, and encamped before Fuente Ravia, a strong
place in the Country of Guipuzcoa, four leagues from Bayona, which after ten
or twelv days siege, despairing of any succor, Diego de Vera the Governor
delivered, upon condition that the soldiers should all march freely out with
bag and baggage, the Inhabitants not to be plundered, and have liberty to
stay or go out of the Town, as they pleased: for which he was afterward
questioned in Castilla.

SECT. XXXIII.
Henry the eighth, King of England, (whom the Emperor, and King of France made
Arbitrator of their differences) having concluded that the French King was the
Peace-Breaker, Henry 8. of England assists the Emperor against the French.
sent the Duke of Suffolk (who had married Marie, sister to Henry the 8th, and
Widow to Lewis King of France, with a considerable force, to join with the
Imperialists, under the Command of Florencio Egmondio, Earl of Bura, at the
Siege of Hesdin, in the frontiers of Flanders, which after two months time
they were compelled to raise, by sickness, and the overflowing of the River,
besides the unseasonableness of the weather, enforced them to repair into their
Winter Quarters. But the Spring following, they took the field again, and
marched near forty thousand strong toward Paris, spoiling and burning without
mercy as they went, which put the Parisians to a terrible fright. At the same
time the Lord High Admiral of France entered into Lombardie with an Army of
above fifty thousand Combatants: The Venetians assist the Emperor in Lombardie.
But the Venetians, being joined with the Imperialists, recovered all the
places which they had gotten, and drove them quite out of Italy. Not long
after the King of France came himself into Lombardie at the head of another
mighty Army, thinking to carry all before him, Francis the first of France
taken prisoner at Pavia.
but before the City of Pavia (where he had pitched his Camp) his forces were
all routed by the Marquis of Pescara, General of the Imperialists, and he
taken prisoner, his Horse being killed under him: The Prince of Navarra was
likewise taken and committed prisoner to the Castle of Pavia, whence he made
his escape; the Prince of Scotland was killed barbarously by a Countrie-fellow,
to whom he had discovered himself, and promised a great reward to conduct him
safe to Vigeven, where his Train and Baggage was, which fellow coming to relate
to the Marquis his exploit, exspecting some recompense, he commanded to give
him a halter for his news, and he was hanged presently. Diverse other Noblemen
and persons of quality were taken, and many killed in that expedition. The
King, after some time, was carried into Spain by Don Carlos de Lanoy, Viceroy
of Naples, upon his earnest request, hoping to make his conditions the better
with the Emperor, if he could speak with him himself. He continued a Prisoner
a year and upwards, after which time, he was released upon Articles betwixt
him and the Emperor, whereof one principal was, That he should marry the
Emperor's sister, Don^a Leonor, widow to Don Manuel King of Portugal, and
restore the Dukedom of Burgundy to the House of Austria, for performance of
their agreement, his two eldest sons, Francis the F^rst exchanged for his two
sons.
viz Francis the Dolfin, and Henry Duke of Orleans were, at the same time as
he was set into France, delivered as Pledges to the Spaniards. But being in
his own Country, whether by persuasion of ill Counselors, or, thi^king the
conditions too unreasonable, and he not obliged to make good his promise,
having been forced thereunto in his imprisonment, he sent the Archbishop of
Bourdeaux to the Emperors Court, requiring him (in regard it was not in his
power to give away any part of his Country) that he would give his children
their enlargement upon any reasonable ransom. Which Embassage the Emperor, with
great indignation, answered thus briefly; That if the King of France could not
perform the conditions (as he pretended) yet desired to have his Sons at
liberty; he should com back and take their places, (which was in his power to
do, and he had promised by oath) otherwise, he must not exspect to have his
children so soon released. Hereupon the French King giving way to his
vindicative passion, left no means unattempted to incite the other Christian
Princes to wage War in his favor against the Emperor. And after some time having
drawn Henry the 8th of England to his Party (who had some other pretenses to
quarrel with the Emperor) they both sent their Kings a^ Arms with Letters of
defiance to him into Spain, and gave order to their Ambassadors to return, The
Kings of England and France, sent Letters of Defiance to the Emperor.
and leav his Court. Whereupon their private animosities broke out into a
public War, which for a time continued more fierce and bloody then the
former: but at last their differences were composed, and an happy peace
concluded between those two potent Princes, Pe^ce made between ^he Emperor and
King of France, by the Archdutchess of Austria, and the Duchess of Angul^m^.
His two sons ransomed for 2000^ of Crowns of Gold.
by the no less ingenious then industrious endeavors of the most excellent
Princesses, Don^a Margarita, Arch-Dutchess of Austria, Aunt to his Imperial
Majesty, and Madama Luysa Duchess of Angulema and Anjou, widow to the Duke of
Sav^y, and Mother to the King of France. Upon which agreement the young Princes
were released, after almost four years close imprisonment, their Father sending
for their ransom two millions of Crowns of Gold, which sum of money was put
into one boat, and they into another at Fuente Ravia, with the like diffidence
and ceremony as was used when the King, their father, was exchanged for them.
At the same time Don^a Leonor the Emperor's sister passed into France, The
Emperor's sister L^onora married to the French King.
according to the Articles, who was married by the Cardinal of Tournon to the
French King, with great solemnity and expressions of joie, Anno 1530. This
Peace continued not long, for Francis King of France (who in all other Princely
qualities and ornaments, was rather surpassing, then at all inferior to any of
his Cotemporaries) being transported with an insatiable ambition, and envying
the Emperor's greatness, gave several meetings at Boloigne, and Calis to Henry
King of England (who having shook hands with Conscience and Religion, and
repudiated Queen Katharine, Charles the Fifth's Aunt, thinking the Emperor would
some way express his discontent, and show himself sensible of so great^an
affront, resolved to give him further occasion of distaste); And there they
conspired to suscitate the Lutherans in Germany, A plot betw^xt Hen. 8 and
F^an. King of F^ance, against the Emperor.
and raise new factions in Italy against him, and under hand they encouraged
the Danes to rise up in Arms against their King Christian, whom (pretending a
Truce, and a desire to make an Accommodation with him) they surprised, he not
suspecting their treachery, and imprisoned him in the Castle of Sundiburgi in
Holsatia, where he miserably ended his days: The said Princes had no other
ground for this p^ece of malice, but only in relation to the Emperor, because
Christian was his friend and Allie, having married his sister Ysabella; and not
content herewith, at length finding fit opportunities, they again declared open
War against him, the transactions and events whereof shall be exactly
represented in the Succeeding Book.

FINIS.

