Two Treatises. The first is, A plain PLATFORM FOR PREACHING: Whereby The Word
of Truth may be rightly divided; And he that speaks, speak as the Oracles of
God. Digested into 20. Propositions. The second is, THE DESTRUCTION OF Inbred
Corruption. OR, An Antidote against fleshly Lust.

By A. Symson Minister of Gods word.

London, Printed for John Wright, at the Kings Head in the Old Bailey, 1658.

To the Honorable Trustees, for maintenance of Ministers, and other Pious
Uses, etc.
Sir John Thorrowgood of Kensington, Knight, George Cowper, Richard Young, John
Pocock, Ralph Hall, Richard Sydenham, Edward Hopkins, John Humfries, and Edward
Cresset, Esquires. Grace, Mercy, and Peace from God our Father, and Jesus
Christ our Lord.
It Is written of the Bereans, Acts 17.11.
That they were more noble then those in Thessalonica. What! more nobly
descended? more nobly educated? of greater antiquity, learning, valor, power,
renown, or any other external privilege, prerogative, or respect? Not so, for
if by the Bereans, we understand the Citizens of Berea (which was a city in
Macedonia, not far from Pella, where Alexander the Great was born) they came
far short of the Thessalonians in many, if not in all, the forementioned
respects. Or, if by them we understand the Jews which dwelt in Berea, See Beza
on the place.
and had a Synagogue there, whereinto Paul entered when he came thither, (as is
most consonant and agreeable to the Text) they were in outward respects in the
very same condition wherein the Thessalonian Jews were, not more enobled,
dignified, preferred. But herein they were more noble then those in
Thessalonica, in that they received the Word with all readiness of mind; and
searched the Scriptures daily whether those things were so. Erasmus Paraph.
That is (according to one) For they received the Doctrine of the Gospel very
readily, every day searching the Scriptures diligently, that they might see how
those things that they had learned by the Apostles instruction, agreed with the
Prophecies and Figures of the Law. Halls Paraph.
Or, (according to another) They cheerfully received the Word of our Gospel,
and took pains to search the Scriptures, and to compare our Doctrine with the
Text of the Prophets to see if we had alleged them aright. Having thus
received the Word, thus searched the Scriptures, which the other did not, they
were therefore more noble then they; more ingenuous, better affected.

To be well reported of, reputed of, both whilst they are alive, and when they
shall be dead, is that which all should, and many do affect. Pro 22.1.
For a good name is rather to be chosen then great riches. Eccles. 7.1
And a good name is better then precious ointment. Nor are the Deserving to be
deprived of their due commendation; for hereby not only of Deserving they
become more deserving, Virtus laudata crescit.
but others also endeavor to follow them: propound them as fit patterns for
their imitation.

Paul is not here deprived of his due, nor are the Bereans of theirs; but both
commended by the holy Ghost in this sacred History.

Paul, for that having been so often in danger, and suffered so much already of
the Jews, Acts 9.23.
(as at Damascus, when they took counsel to kill him; and to this intent
watched the gates day and night: Disciples let him down by the wall in a
banquet. Acts 13.45.
At Antioch, where they spoke against those things which were spoken by him,
contradicting and blaspheming; they stirred up the devout and honorable women,
and the chief men of the City, and raised persecution against him and Barnabas,
and expelled him out of their coasts. Act. 14.5
At Iconium, where there was an assault made both of the Gentiles, and also of
the Jews, with their rulers, to use them despitefully, and to stone them; they
fled unto Lystra and Derbe. Lystra, where they persuaded the people, and having
stoned Paul, drew him out of the City, supposing he had been dead. Acts. 16.23.
At Philippi, where both he and Silas had many stripes laid upon them; were
cast into prison, with a charge given unto the Jailer to keep them safely. At
Thessalonica, where the Jews which believed not, moved with envy, Acts 17.5.
took unto them certain lewd fellows, of the baser sort, and gathered a
company, and set all the City on an uproar; and assaulted the house of Jason,
and sought to bring them out to the people.) That having, I say, been already
in such dangers, and suffered so much, he would again adventure, going into the
Synagogue of the Jews which was in Berea, and there preaching the Word, and
testifying the Gospel of the grace of God; Oh the Faith, Patience, Zeal,
Magnanimity, Charity, Confidence, and Constancy of this faithful Servant of
Christ! Yea, Tu ne cedematis, sed contra audentior ito.
the more his enemies were, the greater his troubles; the more, the greater was
his resolution. What says he himself? The holy Ghost witnesses in every city,
saying, Acts 20.23, 24.
That bonds and afflictions abids me: But none of these things move me, neither
count I my life dear unto my self, so that I might finish my course with joy,
and the ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus; to testify the
Gospel of the grace of God. Act. 21.4
And again, The Diseiples having said to him through the Spirit, that he should
not go up to Jerusalem. And Agabus foretold, that the Jews at Jerusalem would
bind him, and deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles; whereupon, all they
that were present besought him not to go up to Jerusalem: What mean ye to weep,
and to break mine heart? for I am not ready to be bound only, but also to dye
at Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus.

The Bereans, That they admitted Paul into their Synagogue; permitted him to
preach there; did not disturb him whilst he was pre^ching: not only heard him,
but received the Word by him taught, with all readiness of mind, examining and
trying the same (as being unto them new, and whereof they had not formerly
heard, nor were therewith acquainted at all) by the Scriptures of the Old
Testament, which they daily and duly searched, for their further, both
satisfaction, and confirmation. Whereunto may be added, That they were not led
away with the Error of the wicked Jews; did not follow them, though a
multitude, in evil; but loved, what they loathed; embraced, what they despised;
received, what they rejected, the good Word of God taught by the Apostle Paul.

Were Ministers now such as Paul was, People now such as the Bereans were, how
happily might they enjoy each other? How much would Unity and Amity abound? How
much Love, Concord, Peace? What mutual endeavors for the good of each other?
How would God be glorified? the Church edified? the Gospel flourish? Truth
triumph? Error decrease? Satan lose of his power and interest?

But alas! what Factions and Fractions, what Jars and Wars, what Divisions,
Shismes, Rents, Breaches are among them? How do they persecute, prosecute one
another? As they differ in judgment, especially about their Meum and Tuum,
(the one seeking to get what they conceive to be their due, the other seeking
to retain what they conceive to be none of theirs) so between them there is no
small alienation of affections. For the Divisions of Reuben, Judge. 5.15
there were once among the people of God, great thoughts (Heb. Impressions) of
heart. Oh that for our present Divisions we were thus affected! then would we
employ the utmost of our endeavors (especially fervent and constant Prayer
unto God) to quench this Fire, make up this Breach, heal this Sore; till then
we are Physicians of no value.

In the mean time, as Timothy was a diligent follower of Paul's Doctrine, 2 Timothy
3.10. Marg.
manner of Life, Purpose, Faith, Longsuffering, Charity, Patience; so let all
such as are, or would be reputed Gods Ministers, herein follow Paul, follow
Timothy. 2 Timothy 2.15.
Let them study to show themselves approved unto God, workmen that need not to
be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth. Let them preach the word, 2 Timothy 4.2
be instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all
long-suffering and Doctrine. Great is their Dignity, Honos.
great also is their Duty. Onus.
Hereof the very Names whereby they are set forth in Scripture, may put them in
mind, as amongst many others, these few: Ambassadors for Christ, 2 Cor. 5.20.
Builders, 1 Cor. 3.10. Ensamples to the Flock, 1 Pet. 5.5. Fathers begetting
men and women through the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.15. Guides, Heb. 13.7, 17. Marg.
Interpreters, Job 33.23. Laborers together with God, 1 Cor. 3.9. Messengers,
Isa. 44.26. Overseers, Acts 20.28. Pastors, Jer. 3.15. The Salt of the Earth,
Mat. 5.13. Shepherds, Jer. 50.6. Stewards of the Mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1.
Teachers, Isa. 43.27. Watchmen, Isa. 52.8. and 62.6. Jer. 6.17. and 31.6. Ezekiel.
3.17. and 33.7. Every of which calls upon them to be diligent and faithful in
the execution of their ministerial Function. And for the People, would they
but seriously consider what the Apostle Paul required of them with relation
unto their Ministers. 1 Timothy 5.17.
Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor, especially
they who labor in the Word and Doctrine. And again, Heb. 13.17.
Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves: for they which
for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy,
and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you. Without peradventure,
they would be swift to hear, Jam. 1.19.
(to hear the Word of God; the excellency, necessity, and utility whereof, who
is able sufficiently to express? to receive with meekness the ingrafted Word,
Mar. 16.26. What is mainly to be aimed at in preaching and hearing the Word. 2 Timothy 1.13.
which is able to save their souls. This, even this, ( the souls salvation,
being of more value then the whole world) is that which is mainly to be aimed
at, both in preaching and hearing.

To further this, the Preacher is to hold fast the form of sound Words:
whereby, both the substance of sound Christian Doctrine, and the form of
expressing and delivering it, may be understood. He is to preach, 2 Timothy 2.15.
1 Pet. 4.11
but rightly dividing the word of truth. He is to speak, but as the Oracles of
God. He must preach the Gospel, 1 Cor 1.17. 1 Cor. 11.9.
but not with wisdom of words, or speech. He must utter by the tongue words
easy to be understood: how else shall it be known what is spoken? Shall he not
speak into the air? Shall he edify the ignorant and unlearned? Shall he not be
unto them a Barbarian? The Apostle Paul did excel in Learning, was a notable
Linguist, Logician, Rhetorician, what not? yet what says he of himself? I
thank my God, I speak with tongues more then you all; yet in the Church I had
rather speak five words with my understanding, that by my voice I might teach
others also, then ten thousand words in an unknown tongue. In Preaching regard
is to be had unto the Auditory, whether they be learned, or unlearned; knowing,
or ignorant: to use learning in a learned Auditory is suitable, but plainness
is most fit for a plain Auditory.

There are who run before they are sent, and take upon them to be Teachers of
others, they themselves standing in need of instruction, both about the Matter,
or what they are to teach; and about the Method, or how they are to teach.

To remedy both, and that that which is daily done (will be done howsoever)
here may be well done, to the glory of God, and edification of his people, I
have thought good to communicare (what was many years ago bestowed upon me by a
dear friend and faithful Minister of Gods word, now with God) A plain Platform
for Preaching; whereof if they (whose Learning is but small, and their
experience in preaching not very great) shall be pleased to make use, I doubt
not, but that through Gods blessing on their endeavors, both their Matter and
Method of Preaching will prove satisfactory, and give good content.

There are many who have writ on this Subjest; as Mr. Perkins in his Art of
Prophesying. Mr. Bernard in his Faithful Shepherd. Keckerman in his Rhetorica
Ecclesiastica, Sculterus in his Method of Preaching. Erasmus in his
Ecclesiastes. Jacohus Reneccius in his Clav. Sacrosanctae Theologiae. Solomon
Glassius in his Philologia Sacra. Weems in his Christian Synagogue. Hyperius,
Illyricus, with diverse others.

But this Platform being so short and substantial, so plain and easy to be
understood, and containing so much in such a small bulk, Magnum in parvo.
I conceive to be most fit, especially for the unskilful unexperienced, young
Beginner.

For This I humble crave your Honors Patronage, that under your Names it may
appear in public. And vouchsafe also your Protection unto a poor Orphan The
Destruction of inbred Corruption; or, An Antidote against fleshly Lusts; which
was some years ago exposed unto public view, and had Patrons who were then
able to defend it; but those being either dead or disabled, it now runs unto
your Honors for shelter.

Both these I present unto your Honors as tokens of my Thankfulness for your
continued Favors.

The Almighty God, who is the exceeding great reward of all them that walk
uprightly before him, (in whose hand is the length of days) bless and prolong
your days here, to the Advancement of his Glory, the Propagation of the
Gospel, and the Comfort, Supportation, and Encouragement of all the
Conscionable, Faithful, Painful, and Religious Laborers in the Lords Harvest;
and after this life, crown you with Glory for ever. So prays

Your Honors in all humble duty, Andrew Symson.

A plain PLATFORM FOR PREACHING: Whereby The Word of Truth may be rightly
divided; And he that speaks, speak as the Oracles of God.
I. What preaching is.
PReaching is an Ordinance of God, for the saving of men's souls, through the
public Interpretation of the Scriptures, by the voice of one assigned unto
that office in the Church of God.

II. Ministers are bound to preach the Word
Every Minister is bound constantly to perform this duty among the people where
God has set him; for he is to use not alone one or two, but all means of
saving them, seeing all are little enough: and this of Preaching is one of the
most special, and chiefest.

III. What the interpreting of the word is.
The interpreting of the word is the finding out the Order, Sum, and meaning
thereof. This is done by a Logical, Rhetorical, and Grammatical Analysis of the
portion of Scripture treated of; of which alone the Logical is commonly to be
brought in public, and that with terms not savouring of Art, when the people
are unlearned and without Art.

IIII. The rules to be observed herein.
In interpreting the Word, these three Rules are of special use.

1. The literal and largest Sense of Scripture is the true sense, so far as it
breeds not some disagrement and jarre between the several parts of Scriputre
compared together. 2. When any such disagreement will arise from the literal
and largest sense, then must recourse be had to a Figurative sense, or to some
distinction or limitation; one of which will surely clear the Text. 3. No
distinction nor limitation must be embraced, but that which has direct ground
out of the Scripture, and will naturally arise from the comparing of places
both different and agreeing. And the Figures must also be so explained, as that
we must have some plain places of Scripture, upon which to ground our
explication of them.
If these three Rules be not followed, the Scripture will be made as a Nose of
wax; we framing it to our opinions, not our opinions to it.

V. The word is most conveniently handled by way of Doctrine and Use.
The Word of God is most conveniently applied unto the Hearers by way of
Doctrine and Use. For this Course of Teaching is most easy for the Capacity
and Memory of the simplest Hearer, and most commodious for the Speaker himself.
For hereby he shall be sure to keep himself within the compass of his Text, and
to speak nothing but what is naturally grounded upon that Scripture which he
then handles.

VI. What a Doctrine is.
A Doctrine is some Proposition expressed in the Text, or else rightly deduced
from the same. If it be plainly expressed, it needs little proof, the Text it
self proving the same. And for such Doctrines they may be easily seen and
perceived by any.

VII. How a Doctrine is to be raised from the Text.
For the deducing of a Doctrine from the Text, this Rule is most sure and
infallible. Frame a true Categorical Syllogism, (chiefly of the first Figure)
whereof something in the Text being the medius terminus, and the Doctrine the
Conclusion, then the Doctrine is soundly gathered, else not.

VIII. The order to be used in the handling of a Doctrine.
The Doctrine, whether expressed or deduced, must be orderly and substantially
handled.

This (saving any man's better judgment) may be done very conveniently in four
parts.

1. By proposing the Doctrine, or setting down the Proposition, showing clearly
how it is gathered out of the Text.

2. By illustrating the same, both by a repetition of the same thing in some
variety of terms, to the number of two or three, (whereof the last (if it may
be) is to be the most short and pithy, that it may best stick in the memory,
and most delight the hearer) and also by some fit and apt similitude. But
herein care must be had, 1. Not to exceed, for Similitudes being chiefly for
delight, two are enough. 2. The Protasis must be a thing well known to the
Hearer, not some abstruse thing in nature, whereof he is more ignorant, and
less capable then of the Doctrine it self, which is tob e illustrated. This
were as if one should go about to explain an obscure thing by that which is
more obsure. Obscurum per obscurius.

3. By confirming it both by allegation of like places of Scriptures, which
tend to the same end, Two or three may suffice, for in the mouth of two or
three Witnesses shall every word be estabished, 2 Cor. 13.1. And by Reasons.

The Reasons may be taken from the Cause, Effects, or any place of Logic,
which (if they be strong and lightsomely delivered) do much affect.

4. By explaining the Doctrine, and that by speaking of both or one of the
terms of the Proposition, whether shall seem most needful, showing both the
Kinds, Degrees, Causes, Effects Adjuncts, etc. thereof, or some of those as
shall be most behooful. But it is to be remembered that these explanations must
be used only in matters as concern the most necessary points of Religion, or
some most excellent virtue, or notorious vice, or something that the Hearer
does not in likelihood well conceive of.

By those four directions (if duly followed) the Doctrine will be plentifully
and substantially handled. And when the explanation is needful, it is best to
handle it last, that the mind of the Hearer may still hang, as it were, upon
the preachers mouth, desiring to hear him speak: for when a man thinks that
such a thing is true, which yet he does not fully understand, he is hereupon
the more desirous to have it fully laid open.

IX. How an Use is to be raised.
The Use is a Proposition deduced from the Doctrine, where the same Rule must
be observed, which has been already propounded: viz. The Doctrine must be the
medius terminus; the Use the Conclusion of a true Syllogism. Then is it a
right and well collected Use, else not.

X.
All Uses do respect principally, The Uses will have respect to the Judgment.
either the Judgment, or the Practice.

The Judgment.

1. For confutation of a false Opinion, which the present Point does well and
fitly serve to confute. 2. For confirmation of a Truth, or instruction to be
well grounded in the Truth, which the present Point serves to confirm and
manifest.
The Practice. And that either, The Uses which respect the Practice.


1. To reprove and terrify an Offender, that he may leave off and forsake his
sin: Or, 2. To admonish and exhort unto the performance of good duties: Or, 3.
To comfort, strengthen, and comfirm the Godly that they faint not.
XI. How the Uses are to be handled
The Uses also may be conveniently handled in this order. 1. Propose the Use
showing clearly how it follows from the Doctrine. 2. Amplify the Use and
enlarge it, that it may work with more strength and life upon the affections of
the Hearer. 3. Press it more particularly upon the present Auditory, and every
particular soul therein.


XII. Each Use may be severaly amplified.
The several Uses forementioned admit of several ways of Amplification.

XIII. An Use of Confutation how to be amplified.
An Use of Confutation may be thus amplified.

1. By a plain narration and description of the error to be refuted, and that
as year as may be in the very words used by the Adversary. 2. By showing how
contrary the Doctrine in hand, and the point to be confuted are each to other,
and how they cannot stand together. 3. By taking away such idle distinctions as
the Adversary happily does or may use to reconcile them. Or if no shift be, yet
by a concession, that if it were as they say and think, yet that would not
follow which they intend.
XIII. How an Use of confirmation and instruction is to be amplified.
An Use of Conformation of the truth, and Instruction to rest in it may be
amplified after the same manner that the former.

1. By declaring the Point to be confirmed. 2. By showing directly that it must
needs follow upon the Point in hand. 3. By answering such Cavils as are or may
be brought against it.
XV. How to amplify an Use of Reproof.
An Use of Reproof may be amplified,

1. By a clear describing of the parties to be reproved, namely, they that do
so and so offend, that no man may exempt himself that is guilty: and here it
will be best and most fit to use the very words of Scripture. 2. By declaring
certain Adjuncts of the fault: viz. 1. The Commonness of it, whereby the
Reproof will appear to be needful, and therefore the more to be attended unto.
2. The Dangerousness of it, to the Soul, Body, Name, Estate, of every of which
it is fit to give one or more pregnant examples. 3. The Unfitness and
unbeseeming of it, in respect of our Profession, Age, Calling, etc. 4. The
Easiness, or Hardness of leaving it, hereby to make such as are guilty, ashamed
not to overcome, or diligent to resist. And here the means would be propounded
to keep against it. 3. By meeting with such Cavils as are used in defense
thereof, or any Objection that may be made against the Reproof; which yet must
be done with the spirit of meekness, to prevent an occasion of grief to any
weak heart.
XVI. An Use of admonition or exhortation how to be amplified.
An Use of Admonition or Exhortation to the practice of a virtue must be
amplified.

1. By a lively description of the thing and parties, to whom and of which the
Exhortation is made, and is tob e pressed. 2. By a Declaration of the profit,
commodity and benefit that will arise from such practice (and here an example
is very fit and convenient) as also of the possibility of attaining to the
virtue by striving, where the means furthering the performance of the duty must
be declared. 3. By meeting with doubts and objections that may be made against
the duty, or why a man should not do it.
XVII. An Us of Comfort how to be amplified.
An Use of Comfort may be amplified.

1. By a description of the parties to whom it belongs, and that clearly that
no man may abuse himself. 2. By a declaration of the Comfort it self, how
needful, certain, great, constant it is, and here also examples are of great
force. 3. By meeting with the loose conclusions of carnal men, and setting them
down in brief, by showing how the comfort does not appertain to them: and also
of the doubts that a tender heart will never move against it, answering them
lovingly, where are to be showed the notes of the virtue that is the foundation
of the Comfort.
XVIII. A Caveat about the kinds and order of amplifications.
It is not necessary to use all the kinds of Amplifications, but such of them
as shall appear most convenient: nor to use them all in order, but so as shall
be best to delight, teach, and move the hearer.

XIX. The Conclusion of the Uses how to be ordered.
The Conclusion of all Uses is alike by an Apostrophe, wherein the most worthy
things must be in some variety of speech repeated, and urged upon every several
soul, with Interrogations more or less, earnest, as the Point requires: And
(if it may be) the whole ended with some pithy Apophonema, or the like.

XX. A necessary direction about the Uses.
All Points afford not every one of those Uses; or, if they do, yet some one of
them most principally, which must be handled more largely, and the rest more
briefly delivered. And the Minister must be sure to use as well Instruction and
Comfort, as Reproof, else the hearer will think hardly of him.

FINIS.
A brief of the ensuing TREATISE.
CHAP. I.

Deciphereth the enemy to be encountered from its I. Nature 1 A secret sin. 2
Sin. 3 The lusts of the flesh. 4 Enmity against God. 5 The vanity of the
mind. 6 Earthly members.
II. Places of residence 1 Flesh. 2 The deeds of the body. 3 The desires of the
flesh and of the mind.
III. Time of manifestation 1 The evil imagination of man's heart from his
youth. 2 The since wherein we are conceived and borne.
IV. Continuance 1 Sin that dwells in one. 2 The old man.
V. Power 1 Strong holds. 2 The sin which does so easily beset us, and
hangs so fast on us.
VI. Effects 1 An unclean thing. 2 The body of sin. 3 The motions of finne.
4 A warring law in our members. 5 The body of death. 6 The lusts of
concupiscence. 7 The deceitfulness of sin. 8 A root of bitterness. 9
Entising lust.
VII. Aim and end 1 The law of sin in our members. 2 The body of death.


Those it names profitably serving for the discovery of the same, as by the
conclusions deduced therefrom plainly appears.

CHAP. II.

Declares that the flesh with the inordilusts and affections thereof is to be
encountered:

Where is showed What it is to encounter it in Scripture phrase. How God out of
his goodness toward us, answerable unto the several forementioned names of
this our enemy, instructs us how to deal with the same.

CHAP. III.

(...) the persons by whom the flesh with its lusts and off (...) encountered,
viz.

The children of God On whom alone God is pleased to bestow the grace of
mortification. Unto whom alone the means tending thereunto become effectual.
Who alone in truth labor for mortification.

CHAP. IV.

Sbeweth the reasons why the flesh with its lusts and affections is to be
encountered:

There in respect of Its Nature. Its Effects shameful harmfull for body.
posterity. goods. good name.


Our selves 1 So vowed in Baptism. 2 Called with an holy calling. 3 Profess
our selves Gods children. 4 If we live after the flesh shall die. 5 At the
length shall (...). 6 The more we yield, the worse.
Others God Sin is his enemy. It grieveth him He injoyneth this duty.
Christ's Others Death. Others Christ's Work of redemption. Others Christ's
Blood. Others Christ's Himself.
Spirit Tempted. Others Spirit Grieved. Others Spirit Quenched. Others Spirit
Absenteth himself.
The holy Angels. The Saints Dead. Alive.
The wicked Not fit patterns of imitation. Others The wicked By our sins are
encouraged to sin.
The creatures. The Devil.


CHAP. V.

Discovers after what manner the flesh with the lusts and affections thereof
is to be encountered:

where is 1 How the flesh warreth against us, viz. 1 Covertly. 2 By faining
flight. 3 By open force and violence.
2 How we must war against the flesh, viz. 1 Sincerely in quality. 2
Impartially in quantity. 3 Discreetly. 4 Cheerfully. 5 Porcibly. 6 Seasonable.
7 Constantly.


CHAP. VI.

Describes by what means the flesh with the lusts and affections thereof is
to be encountered:

They are not 1 To walk carelessly and securely. 2 To connive or wicke thereat.
3 To consent thereunto. 4 To put in execution any of the deeds thereof. 5 To
fulfill the desires thereof.

But they are Extraordinary Fasting. Vows.
Ordinary consisting in Things to be avoided. Ordinary consisting in Things to
be attained.


Things to be avoided 1 Excess in things lawful 2 Harboring the causes of
our sinful lusts Ignorance. 2 Harboring the causes of our sinful lusts
Pride. 2 Harboring the causes of our sinful lusts Hardness of heart. 2
Harboring the causes of our sinful lusts Carnal confidence. 2 Harboring the
causes of our sinful lusts Infidelity.
3 The occasions of sin Evil company. Evil places. Tempting objects. Want of
a calling. Want of diligence in ones calling.
4 Unwillingness to fight. 5 Cowardice and carelessness.

Things to be attained Faith. Love Fear of God. Our selves.
Prayer Daily renewing of our Covenant. Holy wisdom. Watchsulnesse. Meditation
of Gods Nature. Gods Word. Christ's sufferings. Heaven.


Yea, we are to deal with our lusts as Joseph with his Mistress. Pharaoh with
the Israelites.

CHAP. VII.

Contains Motives or encouragements unto this spiritual combat.

By warring against our lusts, we purchase 1 Peace of conscience. 2 Daily
experience of Gods powerful resence. 3 Glory to God. 4 Continual fear
through the sense of continual weakness in our part. 5 A passage to slay
outward actual sins. 6 Ease in the end of our isurney. 7 A higher
detestation of sin. 8 Hatred of sin for sin.

CHAP. VIII.

Propounds necessary Caveats to be observed in this spiritual encounter.

A Christian must be careful 1 Not to be an hindrance unto himself in
vanquishing his (...). 2 Not to cast away his Armor, or in any sort yield. 3
To be wise in the application of Scripture. 4 To prepare for new contrary
winds. 5 To cry out against our lusts, being overmastered by them. 6 To beware
of the false bed of security. 7 To consider that all sins have not the like
proportion of labor in mortifying. 8 Neither to be too curious, nor altogether
careless of the first motions unto sin. 9 To ask pardon for secret sins.
10 Not to believe that the flesh is always mortified when it seems so to be.
11 To continue in the practice of mortification. 12 To be persuaded that faith
in Christ must precede mortification. 13 To distinguish between natural
spiritual, and carnal lusts. 14 Not to give over but fight even to the end.

CHAP. IX.

Explaineth the signs whereby to discern when we prevail against the flesh
with its inordinate lusts and affections.

They that are indeed mortified, or do in some measure prevail against their
lusts 1 Are Christ's, or in him. 2 Walk after the Spirit. 3 Are alive unto God.
4 Are freed from sin. 5 Are new creatures. 6 Set themselves against every
sin. 7 Grow in grace. 8 Hate sin. 9 Are careful to avoid relapses. 10 Have
a true sight and sense of their sins. 11 Are truly humbled, etc. 12 Cannot be
withdrawn from God.

CHAP. X.

Has the conclusion of the Treatise or application of the foregoing matter in
an

Exhortation unto the duty of mortification, urged from Necessity. Equity.
Vtility. Credit. Undoubted furtherance. Certain victory. Heaven it self.

Besides the forementioned particulars

There are also sundry Objections answered. Questions resolved. Depths of Satan
discovered. Forms of retired secret-selfetriall prescribed. Places of
Scripture compared and explained. Scripture-similitudes (especially) inferred.
Differences between the godly and the ungodly manifested. Necessary truths
made known.

THE DESTRVCTION of inbred Corruption OR, AN ANTIDOTE against Fleshly Lusts.
SUch is the dangerous estate of GODS children here upon earth; so many the
tribulations of the Righteous: that as they themselves are compared to
warriors, 2 Timothy 2.3.
their Life termed a war-fare: Job. 7.1.
So at what time soever, which way soever considered, they have need to be
watchful; still armed: Phil. 2.12.
always working out their Salvation with fear and trembling. Above them,
below them, behind them, before them, within them, without them, round about
them, on their right hand, on their left hand, in prosperity, in adversity,
well or ill, at home, or abroad, Gods children always in danger of their
spiritual adversaries.
do their many cruel, malicious, subtle, and incessant enemies lay Stratagems
to work their confusion.

Of those, Who be their chief enemies.
the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, are the principal agents.

The Devil, 1 Pet. 5.8.
who as a roaring Lion continually goes about seeking whom he may devour.

The World, Pet. 4.4.
which does even think it strange that we run not with them to the same excess
of riot, speaking evil of us.

The Flesh which lusts against the Spirit; Gal. 5.17.
and is so contrary thereunto, that we cannot do the things that we would.

Every of those severally, all of them jointly have sworn our destruction.
Them therefore are we so to oppose, resist, strive against, Iam. 4.7.
that the first may fly from us, 1 Ioh. 5.4.
the second be overcome of us, Gal. 5.24.
and the third crucified by us.

With this last as our domesticke enemy, The Flesh our most dangerous enemy.
our bosom traitor; yea, without whose assistance, neither the Devil could
seduce us, nor World entrap us, do we in the strength of the Almighty; in the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ; in the grace and comfort of his holy Spirit; and
in the light and direction of his Sacred Word cope at this time; confining our
selves (for our further profit, and more orderly proceeding in this combat)
unto the prosecution of these ten particulars. The order and method of the
ensuing Treatise.


1. The enemy to be encountered. 2. That it is to be encountered. 3. By whom it
is to be encountered. 4. Why it is to be encountered. 5. After what manner it
is to be encountered. 6. By what means it is to be encountered. 7. Motives or
encouragements hereunto. 8. Necessary Caveats to be observed herein. 9. How to
discern when we prevail against it. 10. The Application of the whole.
Of every of which severally and in order, at the pleasure of God.

CHAP. I. The Enemy to be encountered with: the sundry names whereby the same is
expressed.
THe Enemy to be encountered is the Flesh, Gal. 5.24. Col. 3.9. To. 7.23.
with the affections and lusts thereof; the Old man with his deeds; the law of
sin in our members warring against the law of our mind; and bringing us into
captivity to the law of sin which is in our members: The enemy to be encountered.
even our natural corruption and in-borne pravitie, which as a spiritual
kind of disease, gall, leaven and poison, daily diffuseth it self throughout
our whole man; so infecting the same, that as thereby we are made in our
selves unapt to any good, though most prone and ready to all evil: so most
bitter fruits are in us produced, even inordinate motions of the mind, will,
and affections, which do entice and stir us up unto sin, Iam. 1.14.
and are now and then acted and executed by the body, both inword and deed.

This is in Scripture made known unto us under diverse names, How it is in
Scripture made known to us.
which upon diverse and different respects are appropriated heereunto; as
namely, in regard of its nature, its places of residence, the time of its
manifestation, its continuance, its power, its effects, its aim and end, and
the like. Names from its nature.


Its nature; so is it termed.

1. A secret sin, as in that of David: Psalm. 19.12.
Cleanse thou me from secret faults, and that of Moses, Psalm. 90.8. Why termed
secret sins.
Thou have set our iniquities before thee; our secret sins in the light of
thy countenance; the word in the former derived from a Root which signifies
hid, (...) Chem. loc. com.
implying that our original sin or corruption of nature is hid even from our
very thought till it be revealed by the law of God, (...) 1 Samuel 17.56.
as the latter from a Root whence (...) which signifies a young man or
stripling is derived, that as a young man abides hid and unknown, till he
undergo either the domesticke change of a family, or some public office in
the commonwealth. So our original corruption till it manifest it self by its
inward stirring and outward acts of sin, is unto us wholly unknown, unto God
only known. 2. Sin, as in that of S. Paul. Romans 7.8.
But sin taking occasion by the commandment, wrought in me all manner of
concupiscence; Why termed sin.
even because it is out of measure sinful, yea the ground and root of all
other sins, as S. James testifies: Iam. 1.14.15.
But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust and
enticed, then when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin. To which purpose
S. Paul; Romans 6.12.
let not sin reign in your mortal body; that ye should obey it in the lusts
thereof. 3. The lust of the flesh, as in that of Paul, Romans 13.14.
make not provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof. And again,
walk in the spirit, Gal. 5.16.
and ye shall not fulfill the lust of the flesh. So fleshly lusts, 1 Pet. 2.11.
as in that of S. Peter; Abstain from fleshly lusts which war against the
soul: intimating, Why termed the lust of the flesh.
that as the same proceed from the flesh, and savor of the flesh, so are they
marveilous pleasing to sensuality; and such as the flesh does especially
delight in. 4. Enmity against God, as in that of S. Paul, Romans 8.7.
because the carnal mind is enmity against God; for it is not subject to the
law of God, neither indeed can be. 5. The vanity of the mind, as in that of
the same Apostle: Ephesians. 4, 17.
This J say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not
as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their mind, having the
understanding darkened, etc. All our fleshly lusts, our inward motions and
stirrings unto sin, they are but the vanity of our minds, how pleasing
soever to us. 6. Earthly members, as in that unto the Colossians, Col. 3.5.
Mortify your members which are upon the earth, fornication, uncleanness,
inordinate affection, etc. Members, 1. Why termed members.
because as in the fit and apt joining together of the several parts and
members of the body, fit for all manner of sin, then by the members of the
body the body is made fit for action. Behold J was shapen in iniquity, Psalm.
51.5.
and in sin did my mother conceive me. war against the soul. they are as
dear unto the heart as any member is unto the body, its right hand, Mat. 5.19.
and right eye, which without much ado it will not part withal. Earthly
members, Why earthly members.
as being the signs of the earthly man; and tend only to earthly pleasures
and contentments; still carrying and drawing our minds from an high valuing of
heavenly things, to a base esteem of them, and from a base esteeming of
earthly things, unto an high esteem of them.
Its places of residence; Names from its places of residence.
so is it termed.

1. Flesh, as in that of Saint Paul; Romans 8.1.
who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit: and again, Gal. 5.24.
They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts.
Why termed the flesh.
1. Because the Flesh is the instrument by which it is propagated. 2. The deeds
of the body, as in the forementioned Chapter; Romans 8.13.
if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.
Why termed the deeds of the body.
Because the body is the subject wherein they are, and instruments whereby they
are executed; visibly manifesting themselves in the same. 3. Ephesians. 2.3.
The desires of the Flesh, and of the Mind. Neither is it any marvel that
such as walk in the vanity of their mind, Ephesians. 4.17.18.
having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God,
through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their
heart; it is no marvel (I say) that such fleshly desires do reside in their
minds, and are in like manner obeyed in their outward members.
The time of its manifestation; Names from the time of its manifestation.
so it is termed.

1. Genesis 8.21.
The evil imagination of man's heart from his youth (or infancy and child's
age, the word whence youth here is derived, being spoken of Moses when he was a
babe, Exo. 2.6.) the same being in us, from the very hour wherein we are
formed; then especially first showing it self, when we first begin actually to
sin. 2. The sin wherein we are conceived and borne; as in that of the
Psalmist. Psalm. 51.5.
Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me: and
again; Psalm. 58.3.
The wicked are estranged from the womb, they go astray; so soon as they be
borne speaking lies. To this purpose Isaiah; Isai. 48.8.
For I knew that thou would deal very treacherously, and wast called a
transgressour from the womb.
Its continuance; Names from its continuance.
so is it termed.

1. Sin that dwells in one. Now then it is no more I that do it, Romans 7.17.
says S. Paul; but sin that dwells in me. 1 Ioh. 1.8.
If we say we have no sin (says S. John) we deceive our selves, and the
truth is not in us. To which purpose S. James. Iam. 3.2.
In many things we sin all. Our Savior for this cause directs us daily to
pray, and forgive us our sins. Mat. 6.12.
As a bold, saucie, quarrelsome inmate it will (though but as a slavish
Gibeonite) whilst we dwell here, dwell in us. 2. The Old man, Ephesians. 4.22.
as in that unto the Ephesians, That ye put off concerning the former
conversation, the Old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts:
and unto the Colossians; Col. 3.9.
Lie not one to another; seeing that ye have put off the Old man, with his
Works. Yet in other respects also it may be thus termed: Why to^med the old
man.
As 1. in respect of our state of corruption, which in the renewed estate we
change; so that our condition after calling is said to be new, and our
disposition before calling to be old. 2.
Its power; Names from its power. 2 Cor. 10.4.
so is it termed.

1. Strong holds: for the weapons of our warfare are not carnal (says S.
Paul) but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds. Strong
holds we know are neither easily, nor quickly pulled down: some one having
for many months together stood out against the furious batteries of most
puissant Princes. Such are our inbred corruptions, words will not make them
afraid; and if cowardly, or without our warlike engines, weapons and armor we
assail them, they will but flout us for our labor: faith, knowledge, hope,
prayer, tears, sighs, groans, etc. will have enough to do ere those holds
be pulled down. 2. Heb. 12.1.
The sin, which does so easily beset us; and hangs so fast on us: whereof
of our selves we can no more be rid, then a little child is able to encounter
a Giant; which sticking (as it were) in our marrow and bones, we are as unable
to shake off, as the black-more his color, or the leopard his spots.
Its effects; Names from its effects.
so it is termed, 1. Job. 14.4. Why termed an unclean thing.
An uncleanething; Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean (says Job?)
unclean, as in its own nature, being contrary unto God, who is holiness and
purity it self: so in respect of us who are defiled thereby, according to
that of our Savior. Mat 15.18.
But those things which proceed out of the mouth, come forth from the heart,
and they defile the man. 2. Romans 6.6.
The body of sin; as not only being in it self a monstrous body (in which
respect the names of Serpents, Why termed the body of sin.
Vipers, Lions, Bears, ravening Wolves, wild Swine, Asses, etc. are in
Scripture ascribed unto those, in whom there is nothing else but flesh and
corruption) but also daily bringing forth in us a monstrous brood of noisome
lusts, by all means provoking, egging, and enticing us to fulfill the same. 3.
The motions of sin; Romans 7.5. Why termed the motions of sin.
as which are continually stirred up by in-borne corruption in the heart and in
the mind; and do incite a man, and as it were solicit him to sin, which
being in themselves sinful, and coming from sin; so they egg unto sin,
and beget works which are sinful: hence Saint Paul describing simple women
that are carried away as a prey by cunning seducers, thus speaks of them, 2 Timothy 3.6.
that they are led with diverse lusts, that is, (as the word signifies) acted
and moved, impelled and driven this way and that way by many evil motions and
lusts. 4. To. 7.23.
A warring law in our members, even a law in our members warring against the
law of our mind, and bringing us into captivity to the law of sin which is
in our members: whereunto is agreeable that of Saint Peter; 1 Pet. 2.11.
Abstain from fleshly lusts which war against the soul: Gal. 5.17.
and that of S. Paul unto the Galathians; The flesh lusts against the spirit,
and the spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other.
5. To. 7.24.
The body of death. O wretched man that I am (says S. Paul) who shall deliver
me from the body of this death? Why termed a body of death
A body of death, as being a deadly thing deserving both temporal and eternal
death, as working the death both of body and soul, Iam. 1.14.15.
as engendring and bringing forth a brood of deadly sins, Heb. 6.1.
being nothing else but dead works, as being a most deformed and misshapen
body; yea destined to everlasting death, condemned to die, Gal. 5.24.
and to death must go. 6. The lust of concupiscence; 1 These. 4.5.
as elsewhere, evil concupiscence; Col 3.5.
as being the loathsome fountain whence the filthy streams of uncleanness
abundantly flow. 7. Heb. 3.13.
The deceitfulness of sin; as unto the Ephesians; deceitful lusts, Ephesians.
4.22.
as which in the end, notwithstanding of all their fair shows, Why termed
deceitful.
and goodly pretenses, will certainly delude and coozen us, if we repose any
confidence therein. 8. Heb. i2.i5.
A root of bitterness; which springing up in us, does both trouble and defile
us, daily producing in us much bitter fruit, the corrupt fruit of evil. 9.
Iam. 1.14.
Entising lust. But every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust
and entised, says Saint James. Entising as well endevoreth no less to entrap
us, then Dalilah did Samson; Thamar, Judah; fishers and fowlers, by their
baits, fishes and fowls.


Its aim, and end; Names from its aim and end. Romans 1.23.
so is it termed.

The law of sin in our members; as which would as a law domineere over us. So
also The body of death; first and the second; death corporal, spiritual, and
eternal.

This our natural corruption, those our inordinate lusts and affections, under
what form soever, by what name soever warring against us, are we valiantly to
encounter: Conclusions drawn from the names whereby this our enemy is
decyphered.
yea, those very names ascribed thereunto, do not a little further us in the
discovery of the same: as by our reviewing of them may thus appear.

1. Romans 8.7.
If it be enmity against God, Romans 7.24.
and the body of death, then it is one of the three great enemies of God and
man's salvation. 2. Romans 7.17. Romans 7.23.
If it be sin that dwells in one; and the law of sin in our members,
then it is a domestical and so a more dangerous enemy. 3. Psa. 19.12. Romans
8.21. Psalm. 51.5. Col. 3.9. Romans 7.8.
If it be a secret sin; the evil imagination of man's heart from his youth;
the sin wherein we are conceived and borne; the Old man; sin (out of measure
sinful:) then as there is no small skill to be used to find it out; so in
like manner is not the same to be slighted. 4. Gal. 5.24. To. 13.14. Col. 3.5.
To. 8.13. Ephesians. 2.3.
If it be the flesh; the lusts of the flesh; Earthly members; The deeds of the
body; The desires of the flesh, and of the mind: Then is the same pleasing unto
flesh and blood; after an especial manner delightful unto man's corrupt
nature. 5. If it be strong holds; 2 Cor. 10.4. Heb. 12.1. Romans 7.24.
the sin that does so easily beset us; a warring law in our members: then it
is powerful; not easy to be overcome. 6. If it be the motions of sin, Iam.
1.14.
and entising lust; then will not it let us alone, though we would peaceably
entertain the same. 7. Ephesians. 4.17. Heb. 3.13.
If it be the vanity of the mind, the deceitfulness of sin; deceitful
lusts: Ephesians. 4.22.
then how pleasing soever for the present, will it in the end prove treacherous
unto us. 8. If it be an unclean thing, Job. 14.4. To. 6.6.
a monstrous misshapen body of sin: then is it that whereof we are to be
ashamed, and which is of us both to be abhorred and loathed. 9. Heb. 12.i5.
If it be a root of bitterness: then as there is no true pleasure to be found
therein, and it self is the ground of all actual transgressions, whether in
word or deed, which are daily stirred up thereby; so if it be not daily wrought
upon, and the branches thereof lopt off by the axe of Gods word; the same will
prove so hard, and the branches thereof so many, so great, and so wreathed
together, that our after-labour will be but labor in vain.
Thus of the enemy to be encountered, with the names of treachery, tyranny,
cruelty, sensuality and guile so plainly, (as it were in capital letters)
written on its forehead; that he that runs may read them, and accordingly
avoid the danger: And so of the first particular.

CHAP. II. That the Flesh, with the lusts and affections thereof, is to be
encountered.
NO small difference there is between our temporal and spiritual adversaries:
Differences between our temporal and spiritual enemies.
with those we both may and must be reconciled; with these to admit of
reconciliation, is no less impossible then unlawful: Those may love us, and
(how soever) we must love them: These will always hate us, and we must always
hate them: with those we may for a long time live in peace; howsoever carry our
selves peaceably toward them: with these we both are and must be daily at
deadly feud; yea though we would let them alone, yet will not they let us
alone; and by our not encountering them, do we encourage them the more eagerly
and fiercely to set upon us. Such is the flesh, a deadly, daily, treacherous,
tyrannical, domestical, and guilfull enemy; it daily and by several ways
would destroy us: accordingly must we daily and duly desire and seek its ruin;
2 Cor. i0.5.
casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ: A duty which is in the Scripture both commanded and
commended: the true nature thereof being both largely and significantly
pourtrayed therein; as also the constant practice thereof, under most
Exhortations unto Repentance, renovation, regeneration, mortification, and the
like, implicitly urged.

This is, To deny our selves. Mat. i6.24.
To make our selves spiritually Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heavens sake. Mat.
19.12.
To forsake all that a man has. u. 14.33.
To be dead to sin. Romans 6.2.
To be baptized into Christ's death, To. 6.3.4.
and buried with him by baptism into death. To be circumcised, Col. 2 11.
with the circumcision made without hands. To hate our life in this world. Ioh.
i2.25.
To enter in at the strait gate. Mat. 7.13
To make a covenant with our eyes; Job. 31.1
set a watch about the door of our lips; Psalm. i4i.3.
rule our spirit; Pro. 16.32.
and take heed to our ways. To be turned from darkness to light, Psalm. 39.1.
and from the power of Satan unto God. Act. 26.18.
To arise from the dead. Ephesians. 5.14.
To break up our fallow ground. Ier. 4.3.
To circumcise our selves to the Lord, Ier. 4.4.
and take away the foreskinne of our heart. To wash our heart from wickedness.
Ier. 4.14.
To loath our selves for the evils which we have committed in all our
abominations. Ezekiel. 6.9.
To rent our hearts, Joel. 2.13.
and turn unto the Lord our God. To deny ungodliness and worldly lusts. Tit.
2.12.
To keep under our body, i Cor. 9.27.
and bring it into subjection. To suffer in the flesh and cease from sin. 1
Pet. 4.1.
To sell all that we have, Mat. i3.44.
and buy the field with the treasure therein. To forget our own people, Psalm.
45.i0.
and our fathers house.


Yea, such is the goodness of God toward us, that (under what name soever,
after what manner soever this our enemy comes against us) we are instructed
how to deal with the same, and avoid the foil.

Behold, it comes against us, with its name written on its forehead: How
read thou?

The evil imagination of man's heart from his youth. Genesis 8.21.


We must not walk any more after the imagination of our evil heart: Ier.
3.17.
Ier. 4.14.
vain thoughts must not be suffered to lodge within us: 2 Cor. 10.5.
we must cast down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God.

An unclean thing. Job. 14.4.


Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, 2 Cor.
7.1.
perfecting holiness in the fear of God: Ephesians. 5.26.
we must be sanctified and cleansed with the washing of water by the word:
Ier. 4.14.
we must wash our heart from wickedness, that we may be saved: Heb. i0.22
we must get our hearts sprinkled; and our bodies washed with pure water: i
Pet. 1.22.
we must purify our selves in obeying the truth through the spirit.

Secret sins. Psalm. i9.i2.


We must call upon God to be informed thereof, Ibid.
and accordingly cleansed therefrom.

The sin wherein we are conceived and borne. Psalm. 51.5.


We must call upon God to purge, Ibid. 7.
wash, and cleanse us therefrom. Iam. 1.18.
To beget us with the word of truth, that we may be a kind of first fruits
of his creatures: borne again, Ioh. 3.3.5.
borne of water and of the Spirit; 2 Cor. 5.17.
and so in Christ, new creatures.

The body of Sin. Romans 6.6.


The same must be destroyed: Ibid.
knowing this (says Saint Paul) that our old man is crucified with him, that
the body of sin might be destroyed; that henceforth we should not serve sin.
Col. 2.11.
The same in like manner must be put off, as the same Apostle writes
elsewhere.

The motions of sin. Romans 7.5.


We must not lodge them; Ier. 4.14.
either slight them; but according to the means of knowledge bestowed upon us,
oppose them, lest we become vain in our imaginations, Romans 1.21.26.
and God in justice give us up unto vile affections.

Sin. Romans 7.8.


We must be dead thereunto: Romans 6.2.
Romans 6.i2.
we must not let it reign in our mortal body to obey it in the lusts
thereof: Romans 6.13.
either yield our members as instruments of unrighteousnes unto sin: Ier. 4.14.
we must wash our hearts therefrom: Heb. 1i.24.
we must refuse to enjoy the pleasures thereof.

Sin that dwells in one. Romans 7.17.


We must not consent thereunto; but so oppose it, To. 7.20.
that we may say with Saint Paul, now if I do that I would not, it is no more
I that do it, but sin that dwells in me.

A warring law in our members. To. 7.23.


The law of our mind must war against the same; Ibid.
that as, the flesh lusts against the Spirit, Gal. 4.17.
the spirit may in like manner lust against the flesh.

The body of death. To. 7.24.


We must be sensible thereof, and even long to be delivered therefrom, saying
with Saint Paul, Ibid.
O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death?

Flesh. Romans 8.1.


We must crucify the same: Gal. 5.24.
we must not walk after the same; Romans 8.1.
we must not live after the same; Romans 12.8.
we must not make provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof; To.
13.14.
we must not war after the flesh; 2 Cor. 10.3.
we must not mind the things thereof. Romans 8.6.


Enmity against God. Romans 8.7.


We must not favor the same, either yet enter into any terms of
reconciliation therewith, Ibid.
as which is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be.

The deeds of the body. Romans 8.13.


We must through the spirit, Ibid.
mortify the same, that we may live.

The lusts of the flesh. Gal. 5.16.


We must not fulfill them: To. 13.14.
we must crucify the same; Gal. 5.24.
we must not be led away with them; 2 Timothy 3.6.
we must not be drawn away of them; Iam. 1.14.
2 Pet. 2.i8.
we must not be allured through them; 1 Pet. 2.i1.
we must abstain from them.

Strong holds. 2 Cor. i0.4.


The weapons of our warfare must not be carnal, Ibid.
but mighty through God, to the pulling down of them.

The desires of the flesh and of the mind. Ephesians. 2.3.


We must not fulfill them, Ibid.
as heretofore we have done: 2 Chro. 15.12.
but enter into a covenant to seek the Lord God of our Fathers, with all our
heart, and with all our soul.

The vanity of the mind. Ephesians. 4.17.


We must not henceforth thus walk as other Gentiles walk; Ibid.
but endeavor to be renewed in the spirit of our mind, Ephesians. 4.23.
Romans i2.2.
transformed by the renewing of our mind, 2 Cor. 3.i8.
and changed into the image of God from glory to glory, even as by the spirit
of the Lord, that Christ may be formed in us, Gal. 4.19.
and as we have born the image of the earthy, 1 Cor. 15.49.
we may also bear the image of the heavenly Adam.

Earthly members. Col. 3.5.


We must mortify them; Ibid.
we must put them off; Ibid. 8.
we must not yield our members, as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin.
Romans 6.i3.


The old man. Col. 3.9.


We must put off concerning the former conversation, Ephesians. 4.22.
the old man which is corrupt, according to the deceitful lusts; not
contenting our selves till we know assuredly, Romans 6.6.
that our old man is crucified with Christ.

The lust of concupiscence. 1 These. 4.5.


Every one of us should know how to possess his vessel in sanctification and
honor, Ibid.
not in the lust of concupiscence, even as the Gentiles which know not God.

The deceitfulness of sin. Heb. 31 13.


We must exhort one another daily, Ibid.
while it is called to day, lest any of us be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin.

The sin which does so easily beset us. Heb. 12.1.


We must lay aside every weight, Ibid.
and the sin that does so easily beset us; that we may run with patience
the race that is set before us: Ibid. 4.
yea, we must even resist unto blood, striving against sin.

A root of bitterness. Heb. i2.i5.


We must look diligently, Ibid.
lest any of us fail of the grace of God, and s this root of bitterness
springing up trouble us, and thereby many be defiled.

Entising lust. Iam. 1.14.


We must be careful not to be allured thereby, 2 Pet. 2.18.19.
lest being of the same overcome, of the same we be brought in bondage.

In a word.

We must always walk so warily and circumspectly, that in what kind soever,
after what manner soever, under what name soever, this our dangerous and deadly
enemy shall assail us, we may instantly oppose it, resist it, strive against
it, give it the foil. Thus, that the Flesh with the lusts and affections
thereof is to be encountered; and so of the second particular.

CHAP. III. By whom the Flesh with the lusts and affections thereof is to be
encountered.
THe persons which are to perform this duty, The godly are the only
mortifiers of sin.
and by whom alone the same is indeed performed, are the children of God, Iam.
1.18.
whom of his own will he has begotten with the word of truth; Act. 15.9.
purifying their hearts by faith: and bestowing upon them as well a true sight
and sense of sin, as an unfeigned hatred and detestation of the same: they are
such as have the spirit dwelling in them, Romans 8.i3.
through which they mortify the deeds of the body. And they that are Christ's
have crucified the Flesh with the affections and lusts, Gal. 5.24.
says the same Apostle: they are such (as having learned Christ, Ephesians. 4.22.
and been taught by him) put off concerning the former conversation the old
man, which is corrupt, according to the deceitful lusts: they are such as have
put off the old man with his deeds, Col. 3.9.10.
and have put on the new man which is renewed in knowledge after the image of
him that created him: they are such as are already called to the knowledge of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the belief of his glorious Gospel, men and
women already sanctified and in part regenerate, Psalm. 40.6.
even those whose ears are already dug, their eyes opened, Act. 26, 18.
and themselves turned from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan
unto God; must take uncessant and unwearied pains, with constant and
perpetualll endeavors more and more to subdue, beat down, mortify, crucify,
destroy and vanquish all and every of these wicked, sinful, and unlawful
affections, lusts, inclinations and habits that are in them, till they have
even pulled them up by the roots, and cast them quite out of their hearts.

1. Even the best of Gods children have corruption.
It is manifest enough, that there is even in the best and most holiest of Gods
children a great deal of corruption, an evil eye which must be plucked out,
Mar. 9.43.
and a bad hand that must be cut off: not a few spots, and wrinkles,
infirmities and imperfections, evil lusts and affections which must be done
away while they are here on earth, (how far soever they are proceeded in the
new birth) they do but know in part: 1 Cor. i3.9.
there is something lacking in their Faith, 1 These. 3.10.
so in their Love, Holiness, Humility, and such other graces; Iam. 5.17.
even Elias himself being subject to like passions as we are. Why corruption
is suffered to abide in Gods children.
And this the Lord suffers for the greater glory of himself, disgrace of
Satan, and good of his own children. Needs must it tend greatly to the praise
and glory of God, shame and disgrace of the Devil, that the Lord knows how,
and is able to keep and preserve such weak and feeble vessels as we are
against all the power of Hell: and to make them Conquerers over Satan in that
very flesh, which is so polluted with sin, and was once depraved by the Devil.
No less tends the same to our good, God being pleased hereby to humble us,
and to exercise those gifts and graces of his Spirit that he has bestowed
upon us. 2. Gods children must not wink at their own sins.
It is no less evident, that they are not to connive at their own sins, are
not to bear with sin in themselves; nay, of all others must walk most
circumspectly, lest either through sin they do wound their own consciences,
or give occasion unto the enemies of God to blaspheme. 3. The more corruption
is slighted the more it increases.
Its also without question, that the less careful they are in subduing their
lusts, and the more they are by them slighted, they get the greater strength,
and put the Saints to a great deal of trouble which they might have easily
avoided. 4. The grace of mortification bestowed only upon the Saints.
It is (in like manner) found true by experience, that on them alone God is
pleased to bestow the grace of Mortification, and unto them alone; so to bless
the means tending thereunto, that they become effectual. Many seem to have
it, who notwithstanding have it not.
True it is, that as of old, the Philosophers by the very light of Nature,
abstained from most gross sins, out of their love unto Virtue, writing
excellent Books in the commendations thereof: by whose painful labors (though
hereby they gained unto themselves not any thing else but humane applause, or
the commendations of men) God of his mercy did much good unto others, (as the
Bees gather honey to the profit of others, not their own) they in the mean
time glorying in those virtues, and condemning others better then themselves,
who notwithstanding never knew the inward working of chastity, temperance,
modesty, humility, gravity, and the like virtues, by themselves commended (not
unlike the Pharisees, whose life outwardly seeming blameless, as also their
cruelty, greedines, and pride, artificially covered under the veil of outward
Preaching, Prayer, Almesdeeds, Phylacteries, and such like, wanted not they
applause of the people, howsoever inwardly they were wholly unmortified, and
uncircumcised in heart) so there are now not a few whose carriage is outwardly
commendable and their conversation unblameable, especially at some times, and
in some companies; yea, who often outstrip even the children of God, in
bridling their tongue, and restraining their passions of anger, grief and the
like, which notwithstanding are yet in their sins, daily denying the power of
godliness, wholly ignorant of their inward heart; yea such, of whom it may be
truly said, that their Oblations are vain, Isal. 1.13. Pro. 21.27.
their Incense and Sacrifice (even their best and most pious works)
abomination unto the Lord; Mat. 5.20.
and except their righteousness do exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, they shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. 5. Neither can it
be denied, but that as the Lord is pleased to bestow on them alone the grace of
Mortification, and unto them alone, The godly the only persons which do in
truth labor for Mortification.
so to bless the means tending thereunto, that in them they become
effectual: so they are the only persons which labor and endeavor for the
same in sincerity and truth; which by all means possible labor to obtain
this precious jewel, and hid Manna of inward grace, the Circumcision of the
heart; and are accordingly blessed in their expectation: Ioh. 4.24.
They know that all the worshippers of God must worship him in Spirit and
truth: ^ Ioh ^.5.
They understand that God is light, and in him is no darkness, who beholds all
iniquity, especially inward, whereof Angels, Devils and Men may be ignorant:
They have also that glorious knowledge, Psalm. 45.13.
that Christ's Spouse is all glorious within, as accordingly must all the
Bride-Maidens, arrayed with the glorious garments of the needle-worke of the
Spirit; who shall be presented chaste Virgins to Christ; and who having fought
hitherto against the evil one, and kept their garments unspotted with the
corruption that is in the world through lust; as through grace they have begun
in the Spirit, so through grace they shall end in the spirit, and not in the
flesh. How then can it otherwise be, but that they should practice this duty of
Mortification? but that being thus endued with the Spirit of grace and of
glory, they should obey the good motions thereof, inspiring them, and knocking
at the doors of their souls, to the keeping especially of their hearts with
all diligence? Pro. 4.23.

Between them and the rest of the world grace has made such a change, as there
is between them that dwell in a fair house of great height, Simil.
and full of many great lights, and them that dwell in a low dark house, whose
windows remain always shut, those can discern in a manner of every thing,
these not take notice or view any thing. Difference between the godly and the
ungodly.
So the Saints through the abundance of the light of God in them, can epsy
even a moate in the Soul, whereas the ungodly who will not permit the holy
light of Gods convicting, reproving, improving word to have passage in them,
abide still in darkness, having their hearts haunted, as it were with Zim,
Ochim, Isa. i3.21.
and Jim, in stead of more comfortable guests.

The Saints know that God dwells in their hearts, as his own Tabernacle, with
the Son and holy Spirit, which therefore must be well kept, cleansed,
purified, and washed by the blood of Christ, and water of his sanctifying
Spirit, that uncleannes may not enter therein.

To this end, 2 Chronicles, 23.13.
as Iehoiada the Priest put a great guard of Princes and Priests about young
Ioas, that wicked Athalia could not come at him to harm him; Simil.
which made her cry out Treason, Treason. So the Saints left Satan should at
any time get entrance into them, get themselves guarded by the word and Spirit,
Prayer, Repentance, Watchfulnes, holy fear to offend God, and grieve the
Spirit by whom they are sealed unto the day of Redemption: Ephesians 4.30.
yea as the Elders which sat with Elisha in his house, 2 King. 6.32.
at his command shut the door upon bloody Iorams messenger, and held him fast
thereat, the sound of his masters feet being behind him; Simil.
so the Saints understanding that evil motions are as it were Satan's
messengers, or harbengers, to take up his lodging for him, whom he immediately
follows, through grace, they so resist the same, that either they do not
enter, or if they enter, they get no footing, and are compelled speedily to
depart.

In the wicked indeed he gets a renewed entry at his own pleasure; but not
so in the Saints, He seeks rest, but here he finds none. Thus that the
Saints do, and are to encounter the Flesh, with the Lusts and Affections
thereof: and so of the third Particular.

CHAP. IV. Why the FLESH with the lusts and affections thereof is to be
encountered.
NOt without cause are we to encounter this our Enemy, and do what in us
lies to oppose it, resist it, subdue it, destroy it, if either we consider it,
our selver, or others.

It, Reasons why the Flesh is to be encount^ed. From its nature.
and that both in regard of the nature thereof, and effects produced thereby.

Its nature, vile, odious, abominable, ugly and loathsome, like the vomiting of
a dog, a Sowes wallowing in the mire. The Scripture does accordingly decipher
it by the names of filth, Isa. 4.4. Zech. 3.3. 2 Cor. 7.1. 2 Pet. 2.20. Rom
6.19. Mat. 15.11.
filthy garments, filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit. The Worlds pollutions,
uncleanness, a defiling thing, and the like. Thus if a man should view it even
as it is, in its own proper colors, he could not but loath and abhor the
same.

Its effects, From its effects. Romans 6.21. Shameful.
both shameful, and hurtful. Shameful, as which makes men and women its
vassals and slaves (for to whomsoever we yield our selves servants to obey,
Romans 6.16.
his servants we are to whom we obey) coozening and deceiving them at its
pleasure; Heb. 3.13.
proffering as largely as the Devil sometime did Christ: Mat. 4.4.
All these things will I give thee if thou will fall down and worship me. But
in the mean time not being able to perform any whit of its promises:
Hurtful, Hurtful. Job. 20.5.6.7.8. etc.
as whose pleasure is only momentaneall, but bitterness everlasting, yea,
which warreth against men's souls, bodies, posterity, goods and good name.
Souls, To our Souls.
by blinding their understanding, reason, and judgment; and bringing them to a
reprobate sense: so that they will not be brought to the knowledge of the
truth, Psalm. 58 5.
but are like the deaf Adder that stops her ear, which will not hearken to
the voice of charmers, charming never so wisely; Isa. 30.9.
even who will not hear the Law of the Lord. Hos. 4.11.
So, by taking away their heart, i Tim. 6.10.
and piercing them through with many sorrows. So by destroying their souls.
Pro. 6.32.
So by seducing the will and affections, and making them worse and worse, every
unmortified Lust being a wound in the Soul, a gash in the Conscience: so by
inclining the Soul to maintain those sins, whereunto they themselves are
principally addicted: so by distempering their souls, that there is no peace
therein, they themselves disquieting themselves in vain, Psalm. 39.6.
traveling in pain all the days of their life, Job. i5.20.
sin not suffering grace, as it were to manifest it self in the least
measure unto those, but disturbing them by unnatural thoughts, as by the
insatiability of that whereunto it inciteth. The Sluggard must have a little
more sleep, the Drunkard a little more drink; the covetous more money; the
lascivious more Concubines. So, by its importunity which will admit no
denial, forcing them oftentimes to commit what in their judgment they do not
approve. So by promising them contentment which notwithstanding they find not,
there being indeed neither pleasure nor profit in sin. So by galling their
Conscience after the commission thereof, whether in adversity or prosperity, as
the examples of Ahab about Naboths Vineyard; i King. 21.27. Dan 5.6.
and Belshazzar, when he drunk wine with his Concubins in the vessels of the
house of the Lord sufficiently imply, whereby it comes to pass that they
fear when there is no cause of fear. Lev. 26.36.
To our bodies.
Bodies both directly and indirectly: directly, Pro. 23.29.
as which occasioneth bodily diseases and distempers; as (in like manner) death
it self: Deuteronomy. 28.21. Romans 6.23.
indirectly, by affecting or inflicting the mind, whereby the body cannot but
be so disquieted, that even in laughter the heart is sorrowful; Pro. i4.i3.
and the end of that mirth is heaviness: Pro. i7.22.
for amerry heart does good like a medicine, but a broken spirit dries the
bones: as David found by experience. Psalm. 32.3.4. To our posterity.
Posterity, as the examples of Pharaoh, Ahab, Jeroboam, Iehu, with others
manifest, according to that of Moses from the Lord. Deuteronomy. 28.18.
If thou will not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, etc. cursed shall
be the fruit of thy body. In Hell, when many both Parents and Children shall
meet, these may blame those as the especial cause of their Condemnation. Goods
both directly and indirectly, To our goods.
directly, Pro. 6.26.
as because of the whorish Woman, a man is brought to a morsel of bread:
whereof the Prodigal Son had particular experience. Luc. 15.16.
Indirectly, as which brings a curse upon the goods which they have
painefully gotten by graceless children. Unfaithful servants, costly (tho
fruitless) Physic, and such like. So that often, Hag. 1.6.
what they earne is put as it were in a bag with holes, Eccles. 2.6.
and what they painfully gather is heaped up to give to him that is good before
God. Yea, sometimes it falls out that a man to whom God has given riches,
Eccles. 6.2.
and treasures, and honor, and he wants nothing to his soul of all that he
desires; yet God gives him not power to eat thereof, but a strange man shall
eat it, agreeable to that of Job. Job. 27.i6.17.
Though he should heap up silver as the dust, and prepare raiment as the clay,
he may prepare it, but the just shall put it on, and the innocent shall divide
the silver. Job. 20.i5.
As a little before, He has devoured substance, and he shall vomit it; for
God shall draw it out of his belly; yea, God makes their Table a snare unto
them. Psalm. 69.22. To our good name.
Good name, according to that of the Wise man. The name of the wicked shall
rot: Pro. 10.7.
and that of Job, He shall perish for ever like his dung. Job. 20.7.
It makes them odious both to God and good men. Is not the Flesh then with the
lusts and affections thereof to be encountered? Is not the same to be mortified,
as in regard of its nature: so the woeful and dangerous effects of the same.

Our selves. Reasons from our selves.


First, because we have so promised and vowed in Baptism; renewed the same at
our participatio^ of the Lords Supper, even to forsake the Devil, and all his
works, the pomps and vanities of the wicked world, and all the sinful lusts
of the Flesh. If then we would not become forsworn and perjured persons, as
it were Soldiers forsaking their colors, casting down their weapons, and
running away from their Captain: we must faithfully keep touch in the
performance of our Covenant; accordingly arming our selves to this battle.

Secondly, we are called with an holy Calling; i Pet. 1.14.
As obedient children (says Saint Peter) not fashioning your selves according
to the former lusts in your ignorance; but as he which has called you is holy,
so be ye holy in all manner of conversation. Because it is written, be ye
holy, for I am holy.

Thirdly, to be the children of GOD, and so consequently enemies unto our own
corruptions, Romans 8 7.
which are enmity against GOD.

Fourthly, Romans 8.13.
because If we live after the Flesh we shall die; but if through the Spirit,
we do mortify the deeds of the body, we shall live.

Fifthly, we shall be victorious against the same. God will so accept of our
weak endeavors, that he will more enable us to hold on; yea, so strengthen us,
that through him we shall do valiantly in crucifying this Old man, mortifying
these earthly members, subduing this body of Sin, and putting to death this
body of death. We are weak indeed in our selves, Romans 8.3i.
but if God be with us, who can prevail against us? not Goliath against David,
our gyant-like sins against us, being under the Almighties protection, and
clothed with the Armor of God.

Sixthly, the more we yield unto our lusts, Pro. 30.i5.
the more will they insult over us; being so unreasonable that they are never
satisfied; like the horsleech whereof the Wiseman speaks, that the more it is
given, the more it craves, and is never satisfied: like the fire, which the
more is cast into it, burns the more: yea, 2 Per. 1.4.
notwithstanding whatsoever corruption is in the World has proceeded from
lust, yet is not contented, but still desires to corrupt more. If thou give it
an inch, it will take an ell: if it can get but in its head; it will quickly
wind in its whole body. If it once take possession of the Soul, it will not be
an easy matter to dispossess the same: entertainest thou it in any measure?
it will quickly force thee to give it good entertainment.

Others, GOD. Reasons from others. GOD.


First, Sin is Gods enemy. Every Lust has in it the seed of Rebellion, and
as it increases, so rebellion increases.

Secondly, the same grieveth him, as which opposes his Mercy, Truth, Patience,
love, and every thing else in him, Simil.
if we must not do that which will grieve our earthly Parents, much less that
which grieveth the God of Heaven.

Thirdly, he enjoyneth us to perform this Duty, whose Commandments do not
admit of a Dispensation: yea, bind our Consciences, and impose upon our Souls
a necessity of doing what he commands.

Christ. CHRIST.


Whose death through our sinful lusts is despised, his work of Redemption
vilified, his most precious blood troad under foot, and himself as it were
pulled down from Heaven, and crucified afresh.

The Spirit. SPIRIT.


Who is hereby extremely both tempted, grieved and quenched, yea forced to
withdraw it self (as it were) and to forbear those comfortable operations,
which it did once work for our good, insomuch as at length we shall have no
feeling of it, and scarce be able to discern whether it be in us at all, yea
or no.

The holy Angels. The holy Angels.


Who rejoicing at the conversion of sinners, do therefore grieve at their
impenitencie.

The Saints departed. The Saints departed.


As whose consummation of bliss is through us hindered; for if we belong unto
God, they without us cannot be glorified; if Reprobates, our sins must be
ripe, and come to the height ere everlasting judgments shall be inflicted on
us, till which time neither can they be perfectly glorified.

Alive. Alive.


As who grieve at our impieties, mourn for the abominations by us committed.

The wicked. The wicked.


First, Col. 3.7.
whose lives are not fit patterns for our imitation.

Secondly, Elies Sons. 1 Samuel 2.17.
To which purpose the Lord by the Prophet Jeremiah. Ier. 2.33.
Why trimmest thou thy way to seek love? therefore have thou also taught the
wicked ones thy ways.

The Creatures. The creatures. Hos. 4.2.


As upon whom judgments are inflicted for men's sins and which being for our
cause made subject to vanity, Romans 8.20.21.
groan for the day of Redemption: when they shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the children of God.

I may add,

The Devil himself. The Devil himself.


As who shall thus displease him, Gods adversary, and our most deadly enemy.

Yea else;

Notwithstanding of our outward Profession, our Religion is but vain; Romans
2.29.
for he is not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is that Circumcision
which is outward in the Flesh; but he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and
Circumcision is that of the heart, in the Spirit, whose praise is not of men,
but of God. Thus why the Flesh with the lusts and affections thereof is to be
encountered: and so of the fourth particular.

CHAP. V. After what manner the Flesh with the lusts and affections thereof is
to be encountered.
AS in temporal warfare so in this Spiritual skill is no less requisite then
strength, Skill requisite in encountering the Flesh.
especially having to do with such a cunning, deceitful, and subtle
adversary, as the Flesh is, who for the most part prevails more by secret
cunning, then open force. Experience also shweeth that our mightiest Enemies
have received most notable foyles of the weakest Christians, but else careful
and skillful in the use of their armor.

Now that we may know how to war against the Flesh, we are first to take
notice how the Flesh warreth against us. Whereby we shall be the better enabled
both to defend our selves, and offend it.

How the FLESH warreth against us. How the Flesh warreth against us.


This may be specified especially in three particulars.

First, Covertly.
that sometime its manner of war is covertly, and under color of virtuous
affections; that thereby we may be intrapt at unawares. So did the Flesh
deceive both the Daughters of Lot. Genesis 19.31.
And the firstborn said unto the younger, our Father is old, and there is not
a man in the earth to come in unto us, after the manner of all the earth Come
let us make our Father drink wine, and we will lie with him, that we may
preserve seed of our Father. A goodly bait to draw on Incest. Not unlike was
NABALS answer unto David's messengers. 1 Samuel 25.10.
There be many servants now adays, that break away every man from his master.
Shall J then take my bread and my water, and my flesh that I have killed for my
sheerers, and give it unto men, whom I know not whence they be? Agreeable
hereunto was the ground of Ahabs desire of Naboths Vineyard, 1 Kin. 21.2.
Give me thy Vineyard (said he unto him) that I may have it for a garden of
herbs, because it is near to my house, and I will give thee for it a better
Vineyard then it; or if it seem good to thee, I will give thee the worth of it
in money. Herein does the Flesh resemble Harlots, The Flesh an harlot.
as they garishly attire themselves, that they may draw affections; so does
fleshly concupiscence garishly adorn and paint over the things desired, 1
These. 2.5.
that by their seeming beauty (as Paul speaks of a cloak of covetousnes) they
may bewitch us. Genesis 3.6.
And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was
pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of
the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her husband with her, and
he did eat. Oh how glorious seems wealth to a covetous eye! It is the way to
reputation, Note.
the best proof-armour of defense from wrongs, the only self-sufficient
condition here on earth. Oh how goodly things are high Places, Honors, and
Dignities in the eyes of the Ambitious! No vicious desires do so insinuate
themselves into well-disposed natures as those which are colored and cloaked
with the show of virtues. Goliahs sword lay hid under an Ephod, 1 Samuel 21.9.
as much wickedness does under the pretense of Religion.

Secondly, By faigning flight
That at other times it saineth flight, that thereby for the present it may draw
us into its ambushes, and (for the time to come) into carelesnes, Security,
Presumption, throwing our selves into occasions of evil, and the like. When
the Flesh may seem to be mortified but is not.
The Flesh indeed may seem to be mortified, as when the occasion is removed;
when it is not violent, but quiet; when it is removed but from one sin unto
another; when through terror in the conscience it is restrained from desired
acts; and the like: but herein puts it tricks upon us, Josh. 8.15.
and (as Josuah by his flight from the Inhabitants of Ai, Judge. 20.39.
and the Israelites from the Benjamites) gets no small advantage against us.

Thirdly, With open force.
that when It cannot prevail against us by any of the former ways, then as a
roaring Lion sets it upon us with all its force: yea, and at some times so
prevails, that the very best and strongest of Gods Children are for a time
brought into very great straits, as S. Paul instanceth in himself in the
seventh to the Romans.

Add hereunto, that

It Is not in jest with us; Other considerations about the manner of its fight.
it does not drouzily or unwillingly fight against us: Its at no time idle,
neither through delay or negligence lets slip any opportunity, whereby it may
in any sort get the mastery. It Is not partial, see king the mastery over this
man, but in the mean time willingly vanquished by another; yea, it uses no
small discretion in its fight; seasonably laying hold of all opportunities, as
time, place, company, complexion, age, and such like. Thus how the Flesh
warreth against us.

How we are to war against the Flesh. How we are to war against the Flesh.


It must be sincerely, impartially, discreetly, cheerfully, forcibly,
seasonably and constantly.

Sincerely.

Both, in respect of the quality, Sincerely.
and quantity of those things which we are to oppose; Both in respect of the
quality and quantity.
quality, we are not to mortify actions either natural or indifferent, we
are not to oppose the motions of Gods good Spirit, we are not to strive against
the means of grace, but against our sinful and fleshly Lusts: quantity, we
must not oppose one alone, Iam. 2.10.11.
but as well all as one; for whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet
fails in one point, he is guilty of all: for he that said, Thou shall not
commit adultery, said also, Thou shall not kill; yea, who so allows of one,
cannot but allow of others, howsoever one sin is enough to damn any, though
there were no more.

Impartially. Impartially.


Not mortifying or opposing, one which happily we like not in the mean time
entertaining another, some bosom sin by us respected, but equally behaving our
selves toward all, being content (as Abraham at Gods command, Genesis 22.16.
to kill his beloved son) to mortify our best beloved sins, our Agags, our
darlings. 1 Samuel 15.13.
Saul thought he had done well in sparing Agag, having killed the poorer sort
of Amalekites, but through his disobedience his Kingdom was rent from him.

Discreetly. Discreetly.


First in opposing and striving against our darling sins, and then in
crucifying the rest. Goliath being killed, 1 Samuel 17.51.
the Philistims quickly fled. Ahab being wounded, how easy was it to have
discomfited his Host? 2 Samuel 17.2.
If David had been killed (according to Achitophels good Counsel) then would
all the people have returned in safety unto Absolon. As therefore the Aramites
directed by their King did especially set themselves against Ahab, 1 King.
22.31.
so must we against our beloved sins.

He that would rid his ground of trees does not lop them, (for they would grow
again) but diggeth them up by the roots: root we up our best beloved sins;
so shall our others as branches of a fel'd Tree quickly wither.

Cheerfully. Cheerfully.


As who thus do but what God requires of us, by whom we shall be assisted in
the performance of the same, and whereby we shall receive no small benefit to
our whole man; yea get a particular assurance, that we are Christ's; for they
that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. Gal.
5.24.


Forcibly. Forcibly.


As which will not be driven away without force and violence, you may rate away
your dog by a few angry words. But what cares our Flesh for words? In
dealing with it we must be void of compassion; the more cruel the better.
Thus being cruel, we have compassion on our own Souls. The more we spare
sin, the more hurt we our selves: the more we favor our lusts, the less
do we favor our selves David would have had Absolon kindly dealt withal; 2 Samuel 18.5.15.
but Ioab thrust him through. Thrust we sin through, so shall we not need fear
its future rebellion. Deal we with sin, Simil.
as with old Agues harshly and roughly, till it be gone. Deal we with our
lusts as the Pri^sts of old with the beasts to be sacrificed, cut their
throats, and so offer them up in sacrifice unto God, which indeed will smell
sweetly in his nostrils. Old wounds must have corrasive plasters. So sin
before it can be done away. It Is the cutting off of our right hands, the
plucking out of our right eyes. Either must we put violent hands on the Flesh,
with the lusts thereof, or it will upon the sudden rush upon us.

Seasonably. Seasonably.


Herein delay is dangerous, when corrupt inclinations do even begin to stir,
then are they to be resisted, opposed, striven against, we must not give our
Lusts any time of truce, any rest at all: though at first they may be easily
overcome, afterward they cannot so be. Simil.
A Serpent the older it grows, the more venom it has, as a Lion the greater
strength. A stain the longer it continues, the hardlier can it be washed out.
A Tree the longer it stands, the hardlier can it be plucked up; thus it is
with sin. The first motions thereto, are like Lions whelps; let them continue a
while, they will be as young Lions; let them have liberty to get out at the
tongue, they will prove ramping and roaring Lions. We must not dally or delay,
we must not take its word or expostulate therewith: we must not give it any
respite, but instantly lay the Axe to the root of the Tree.

Its no Repentance to leave Sin, when it leaves us, Note.
or to give it over when we can commit it no longer, we must not let it alone
till it die it self, but kill it whilst it might yet live.

Constantly. Constantly


As who must still go on in the work of Mortification, Mortification a main
work.
proceeding day by day, and hour by hour without intermission, from one
degree to another. There Is no business so much concerns us as this, which is
therefore to be set before all others, we must follow it as the Day-labourer
does his labor day by day, not making so much as one loytering day. This work
is never at an end. Though we should live Methuselahs days, yet might we
still employ our selves herein. We weed our Gardens, Simil.
and are ever weeding: Sins are ill weeds and grow apace: our hearts are a
Stepmother to goodness, a natural mother to vice, and therefore as in that
fruitless, so in this too too fruitful. The Captain that batters the enemies
sort a day or two, Simil.
and then gives over, gives the more courage to the Enemy and loses his
labor. So is it, if we war not unto the end, if we continue not our course
of Mortification. 2 Kin. 13.19.
If Ioash had smitten the ground five or six times, then had the Aramites
been rooted out; so if we would be constant in opposing our Lusts, they would
at the length give over. Judge. 16.22.
As Sampsons hair being cut off, grew again; so will sin if, we do not
daily ly keep it under. We must not with the Hypocrites mentioned by Isaiah
hang down our heads like a bull rush for a day; Isa. 58.5.
but constantly persevere in the practice of this duty. Thus after what manner,
the flesh with the lusts and affections thereof is to be encountered: and so of
the fifth particular.

CHAP. VI. By what means the Flesh with the Lusts and Affections thereof is to
be encountered.
IT is not enough that a Soldier have skill, or know how to encounter his
enemy, but also he must be so provided of Armor and Weapons, both offensive
and defensive, that he be not constrained with shame and loss to turn his
back in the day of battle. As therefore we have learnd how to encounter this
our spiritual adversary; so are we in like manner to take notice by what
means the same may be encountered.

The means are not. By what means we are not to encounter the Flesh.


First, To walk carelessly, and securely till we shall experimentally find our
selves to be encountered hereby,

Secondly, to connive thereat for a time, till we shall judge our selves to be
better fitted and prepared for the encounter.

Thirdly, consent thereto, though but in show, as if thus we should be quickly
freed therefrom.

Fourthly, any of those deeds of the Flesh, whereunto we have consented, as if
we should not be troubled with any more.

Fifthly, fulfill the desires of the flesh; obey sin in the lusts thereof,
and for a time go so far therein, as the swinge of our corrupt heart would
carry us, as if our yielding unto sin would make us loath it, and the taste of
the pleasures of sin in action, did not increase our natural thirst after
iniquity.

But they are either extraordinary or ordinary.

Extraordinary. The extraordinary means.


Fasting and vows, whereby extraordinary sins especially which possess us,
(as so many Devils) are expelled. I have sworn and will perform it (says
David) that I will keep thy righteous judgments; Psalm. 119.106.
and again, Psalm. 39.1.
I said I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue. Psalm.
69.10.
With him also it was usual to fast, as in like manner it was with St. Paul, 2
Cor. 6.5.
who accordingly charge Husbands and Wives not to defraud one another, 1 Cor.
7.5.
except it be with consent for a time, that they may give themselves to fasting
and prayer.

Ordinary. Ordinary means.


Consisting as in the avoiding of such things as may further our lusts; so in
the attaining of such as may repress the same.

Things to be avoided. Things to be avoided.


1 Excess even in things lawful. Excess in things lawful.
We must not go to the utmost of them; for if we do, it is a thousand to one
we shall exceed from the utmost confines of lawful liberty, there is but a
small step to the border of unlawful delights, wherein how easily may a man
fall that comes so nigh them? Simil.
As he that would not fall into a ditch must not come nigh it, and he that
would not be drowned, shun even the rivers brinke; so that we may not be
drunk, that we may not profane Gods Sabbath, that we may not be lascivious,
ambitious, covetous, or the like: we are in respect of these outward things to
abridge our selves of our lawful liberty, being sparing in meat, drink,
attire, sports, ease, 2 Samuel 23.15.
sleep, and the like. Oh, said David, that one would give me drink of the
water of the well of Bethlehem that is by the gate; he would not drink
thereof, but poured it out to the Lord. The like was Abraham's, Genesis 14.23.
in refusing the King of Sodoms offer touching the spoil by him recovered. The
like Saint Paul, who had learned in whatsoever state he was in therewith to be
content, Phil. 4.11.
knowing both how to be abased, and how to abound: every where and in all
things instructed both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to
suffer need; yea, as excess in things lawful is dangerous in respect of our
selves, Excess dangerous in respect of others.
so it is also in regard of others: as is implied in that of Saint Paul, 1 Cor.
8.9.
But take heed lest by any means this liberty of yours become a stumbling
block to them that are weak, for if any man see thee, which has knwledge,
sit at meat in the Idols temple, shall not the conscience of him which is week
be emboldned to eat those things which are offered to idols? and through thy
knowledge shall the weak brother perish for whom Christ died? wherefore if
meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the world stands,
lest I make my brother to offend. As therefore Daniel purposed in his heart
that he would not defile himself with the portion of the Kings meat, Dan. 1.8.
nor with the wine which he drank; so must we resolve not to abuse our
Christian liberty, 1 Cor. 7.30.
but so to rejoice as though we rejoiced not; and to buy, as though we
possessed not, and to use this world as not abusing it.

2 The approving liking, Harboring the causes of our sinful lustss
entertaining, and harboring the causes of our inordinate lusts and
affections, viz.

Ignorance; Ignorance.
whereby we become alienated from the life of God; Ephesians. 4.18.
of which the Lord by his Prophet, Hos. 4 6.
My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge.

Pride; when men think it a disgrace to show forth the power of Religion. Pride.
The contrary whereof we read in King David, 2 Samuel 6.22
who would yet be more vile (then he had seemed to Michal) and would be base in
his own sight, the same being before the Lord, and to set forth his praise.

Hardness of heart; Hardness of heart. Romans 2.5.
A main cause of impenitency. But after thy hardness, and impenitent heart
(says Saint Paul) treasureth up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath,
and revelation of the righteous judgment of God.

Carnal confidence; Carnal considence.
whereby man makes flesh his arm, and trusts in it.

Infidelity; Infidelity.
when men will not believe in God, do not persuade themselves of his
perfection and all sufficiency, as neither of his mercy and truth, or other his
attributes.

3 The occasions of sin; yea, The occaons of sin.
the very appearance of evil. Happily we may fall into an occasion, Note.
as one sailing by Sea meet with a storm, or one traveling by land be
assaulted by a robber, but we must not seek an occasion; for he that willingly
runs into danger deserves to pay for his rashness. Even the priests were to
abstain from wine or strong drink, Levit. 10.9, 10.
when they went into the Tabernacle of the congregation. And the Nazarites,
Numb 6.3.4.
not only to abstain from wine and strong drink, but also they were to eat
nothing that was made of the Vine-tree, from the kernels even to the husk. To
this end were the Israelites, as to eat unleavened bread seven days: Exodus
12.15.
so even the first day to put away leaven out of their houses. lest happily the
having of it in their houses might have been an occasion to make them to break
the commandment. Note.
So soon has the heart given a secret consent to the defire of evil doing,
as it consents to adventure on the occasions of evil doing. The withdrawing of
a man's self from these things, is a pulling of the fuel from the fire, as the
adventuring upon them does blow the coals, and admister fuel also. Those are
diverse; as

Evil company: Evil company. Psalm. 119^ 115.
Depart from me ye evil doers (says David) for I will keep the commandments
of my God. Prove. 4.14.
Enter not into the path of the wicked (says Solomon) and go not in the way
of evil men. And again, Be not among Wine-bibbers, Prove. 23.20.
among riotous eaters of flesh, as a little before. Pro. 18.20.
He that walks with wise men shall be wise, but a companion of fools shall be
destroyed. He himself found it by experience, 1 King. 11.4.
his wives turned away his heart after other gods, and his heart was not
perfect with the Lord his God, as was the heart of David his father.

Evil places: Evil places. Genesis 14 12
By reason of the evil company, as Sodom unto Lot, Mat. 26.58
the judgment hall unto Peter, Genesis 42.15
Pharaohs court unto Joseph, 1 Kings 22.32.
Ramoth in Gilead unto Jehoshaphat; Tavernes, Alehouses, and Stage-playhouses
unto many.

Tempting objects: Tempting objects. 2 Samuel 11.2. Josh. 7.21.
as was Barsheba to David, the wedge of gold unto Achan, the painted beauty and
garish attire of whores to many: Genesis 39.12
good Joseph would not stay alone with his mistress, and holy David prayed,
Psalm. 119.27.
To turn away his eyes that he might not behold vanity. As in like manner, Job
31.1.
Job made a covenant with his eyes.

Want of a calling: Want of a calling. Note.
for those who have nothing whereon to employ themselves the devil usually
uses to set on work.

Want of diligence in ones calling: Want of diligence in ones calling.
for a man is never in better temper, then when by a conscionable walking in
his calling he keeps himself closest unto God.

4. Unwillingness to fight.
Unwillingness to enter the lists with this our spiritual adversary: which is
indeed for the most part occasioned partly through the sense and feeling of our
weakness, Whence this let comes.
partly through the supposed force and strength of our adversary, partly
through our fear of the foil, and conceived impossibility that we shall not
prevail, partly through the pains and diligence which we must use herein,
and partly being loath to forgo the pleasures of sin.

5. Lazi. esse and cowardice.
Laziness and cowardice; Security and carelessness, as whereby this active and
vigilant enemy receives more courage, and in like manner more easily
vanquisheth us.

Things to be attained: Things to be attained. Faith. Act. 15.9. 1 John 5.^0
Ephesians. 6.16. Ephesians. 3.17.


1. Faith: As which purifieth the heart over comes the world, and is a shield
whereby we may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked; yea, whereby Christ
dwells in our hearts. 2. Love: Love. Joh. 14.15.
If ye love me (says our Savior) keep my commandments. 3. Fear: Fear of
God.
both of God and our selves; God, according to that of Solomon, Prove. 16.6.
By the fear of the Lord men depart from evil; and that of Saint Paul, 2 Cor.
7.1.
Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit,
perfecting holiness in the fear of God, implied in that speech of Abraham
unto Abimelech, Genesis 20.11
I thought the fear of God was not in this place, and they will slay me for my
wives sake; and that of Joseph unto his Mistress, Genesis 39.9.
How can I do this great wickedness, and so sin against God. Our selves:
Feaze of our selves.
As where by we shall keep on our harness, have our weapons in readiness,
be always on the watchtower for the discovery of our approaching enemy; yea,
this fear will make us distrust our selves, deny our selves, renounce all
carnal confidence in our selves, and be the cause of our safety. Thus always
fearing, shall be always blessed. Acts and Monuments.
Pendleton the proud cowardly yields and forsakes Christ, making shipwreck of
a good Conscience; whereas on the contrary, fearful Sanders stands for the
truth, sacrificing his life for the same in the midst of the fire. 4. Fervent
praver unto God.
Fervent and frequent prayer unto God at set times: As at other times upon
occasion of some idle thought, tempting object, or evil motions unto sin,
frequent ejaculations or short meetings with God, both are of daily and
continual use, and will prove no less useful unto us, then they must be
usual with us; Neh. 2.2, 4
As Nehemiah by occasion of King Artaxerxes his question, Why is thy
countenance sad, seeing thou art not sick? this is nothing else but sorrow of
heart, secretly prayed to the God of Heaven, and was graciously heard. So being
fearful of our lusts, Simil.
afraid of our natural inbred corruption, if we do but pray unto God through
Christ, questionless we shall be comforted; yea, I may truly affirm that
hereby especially we are daly kept from the execution of our corrupt and evil
inclination. Whosoever cannot pray, Neglect of prayer how dangerous.
neglects prayer, or prays not in faith, is at all times under the dominion
of sin, in bondage and sla* very to his lusts, daily running into the very
excess of riot. 5. Daily renewing of our Covenant.
A daily renewing of our Covenant with God: and that both in respect of our
outward members and inward affections; calling every of them as it were to an
account, and both showing them wherein they have violated their allegiance unto
God, and directing them how to oppose the flesh, and conform themselves to Gods
will. 6. Holy wisdom in the practice of the contrary to that evil whereunto we
are incited.
Wisdom in the constant practice of the contrary to that evil whereunto we
are incited: as to strengthen a crooked staff, it must be bent backwards.
Thus, being tempted to gluttony, we must fast; to covetousness, be liberal;
to intemperancy, be sober; to revenge, love our enemies; to prodigality, be
thrifty; and so in other particulars, Gal. 5, 16.
Walking in the Spirit, that we may not fulfill the lusts of the flesh; Note.
This is to cross and thwart our fleshly inclinations, which abates
corruption, and blunts the point even of Satannicall temptations. Neither will
it be amiss at some times to turn away the bent of affection to another
object, though happily not the contrary, as who must be brought on by degrees so
far to deny our selves and curb our corrupt nature, as to do the very contrary
unto that it commands; yea, herein also shall we manifest our wisdom in
subduing our lusts, An excellent point of wisdom.
and preventing sins to come, if we do punish our selves by fasting, giving
to the poor, or otherwise, for sins already committed. 7. Watchfulness:
Watchfulness.
as well over our inward affections as outward members; as well over the
motions that arise within, as the words and deeds that come forth. This is to
consider our own ways, What watchfulness is, and wherein manifested.
a looking to our hearts, eyes, ears, tongues, hands, feet, and whole man.
This is to mark what we think, say, and do, whether we go, to what end, by
what warrant, and upon what calling. This is to keep the heart, and so the
whole man with all diligence. Hereby shall we exactly know what corruptions we
are troubled with, The profit hereof.
what things hurt us, what do help us, whether we grow stronger or weaker,
whether corruptions decay or increase, whether our soul fares well or ill.
Had David been watchful over his eyes, 2 Samuel 11, 2.
when he beheld Bathsheba, he had not with her committed adultery; had he been
watchful over his ears, 2 Samuel 16.4.
when he heard Ziba's treacherours report, he had not so rashly condemned
innocent Mephibosheth; had he been watchful over his heart, 2 Samuel 24.2
he would not have so vented the pride thereof, in bidding Joab go number the
people; Genesis 19.33
had Lot been so watchful as he should, his daughters had not so couzned him;
Mat. 26.33
had Peter not been too confident of his own strength, he had not denied his
master; when we presume most of our own strength, Note.
then are we in most danger; when we are most distrustful, most suspicious of
our selves, then are we in most safety. Simil.
The more gates a City has, the more ways the enemy may enter; the more
windows a house has, the more ways may a thief break through, and therefore
the more care and watchfulnes is required for prevention. Our little City has
store of gates, our house store of doors and windows, we must therefore be
watchful over them, lest ruin come upon us ere we be aware. 8. Spiritual joy
and gladness, Spiritual joy and gladness.
in the worship and service of God, and the things which concern his glory;
when the soul rejoices in God, it opposes whatsoever displeases him; Prove.
2.10.
When wisdom enters into thine heart, and knowledge is pleasant unto thy
soul, discretion shall preserve thee, I protest by our rejoicing, 1 Cor. 15.31.
which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord (says S. Paul) I die daily. 9.
Spiritual and holy medition, and that 1. of Gods nature, Spiritual meditation
of
2. of Gods word, 3. of Christ's sufferings, 4. of heaven it self.
Gods nature: Gods Nature. Psalm. 5.4.
that he is not a God that has pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil
dwell with him. The foolish shall not stand in his sight, he hates all workers
of iniquity. Prove. 5.21.
That the ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondreth all his
goings. Heb. 4.13.
That there is no creature that is not manifest in his sight, all things being
naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do, Romans 2.6.
who will render to every man according to his deeds; to them who by patient
continuance in well-doing, seek for glory, honor, immortality, and eternal
life. But unto them that are contentious and do not obey the truth, but obey
unrighteousnes, indignation and wrath. This is the will of God, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3
even your sanctification; and therefore as he which has called you is holy, 1
Pet. 1.15.
so be ye holy in all manner of conversation.

Gods word: Gods Word. Romans 1.16.
as being the power of God unto salvation; quick, and powerful, and sharper
then any two-edged sword, Heb. 4.12.
piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints
and marrow, a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. Gods sword
which does most wound Satan and kill the body of sin, which in like manner
through the assistance of Gods Spirit shakes the very foundation of man's
corruption. Does it incite us unto covetousness? what says the Word? 1 Timothy
6.10.
The love of money is the root of all evil, which while some coveted after,
they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many
sorrows: unto whoredom, what says the Word? Heb. 13.4.
Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. Unto wrath and envy, what says
the Word? Job 5.2.
Wrath kills the foolish man, and envy slays the silly one Unto falsehood,
what says the Word? Lying lips are abomination to the Lord. Pro. 12.22.
Unto drunkenness, what says the Word? Pro. 23.29.
Who has woe? who has sorrow? who has contentions? who has babbling? who
has wounds without cause? who has redness of eyes? they that tarry long at
the wine, they that go to seek mixed wine Unto theft, what says the Word?
Exo. 20.15.
Thou shall not steal. The like might be instanced in every other particular.

Besides, the Word contains a twofold Catalogue the one of blessings for the
penitent, the other of judgments for the impenitent. Moses in the 28. of
Deuteronomy, laying down as it were a brief of both, as more briefly Saint
Paul unto the Romans, Romans 2.9.
Tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil, of the Jew
first, and also of the Gentile. But glory, honor, and peace to every man that
works good, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile. The due meditation of
either, with the certainty as well of the one as the other, serving not a
little to further us in our mortification.

Christ's sufferings: Christ's sufferings.
An especial furtherance unto mortification. 1 Pet. 4.2.
For as much then as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh (says Saint
Peter) arm your selves likewise with the same mind; for he that has suffered
in the flesh has ceased from sin: that he no longer should live the rest of
his time in the flesh, to the lusts of men, but to the will of God. Hereof the
same Apostle informs us in the second Chap. Who his own self (says he) bare
our sins in his own body on the tree, 1 Pet. 2.24.
that we bring dead to sins, should live unto righteousness.

Heaven: Heaven,
who so looks for Christ from Heaven, cannot but lead an heavenly life, for
our conversation is in Heaven (says Saint Paul) from whence also we look for
the Savior, Phil. 3.10.
the Lord Jesus Christ. So unto Titus, Teaching us that denying ungodlines and
worldly lusts; Tit. 2.12.
we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, looking
for that blessed hope, and the glorious Appearing of the great God, and our
Savior Jesus Christ. Thus Moses. He chused rather to suffer affliction with
the people of God, Heb. ii.25.26.
then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the Reproach of
Christ greater Riches then the Treasures in Egypt; for he had respect to the
Recompense of the Reward.

Finally, that we may indeed mortify our lusts; deal we with them as Joseph
did with his Mistress, and Pharaoh with the Israelites.

For Joseph.

1. Being tempted by his Mistress to lie with her, Genesis 39.8.
he gave her at the very first, a flat denial. 2. He yielded sufficient
reasons for his refusal, 3. Though she spoke unto him day by day, yet
hearkened not he unto her to lie by her, or to be with her. 4. When being
occasionally alone in the house with him, had caught him by his garment, saying
lie with me; he left his garment in her hand, and fled, and got him out.
So being tempted by our lusts and entised, We are to deal with our lusts, as
Joseph with his Mistress.
do we flatly refuse to yield unto them; render we also reasons of our
refusal, that thereby they may appear the more unreasonable, as from the duty
which we owe unto God, the injunctions which we have received of him; the
variety of blessings, whereof (through his blessing) we are daily made
partakers. The unexpressable joys in Heaven laid up for mortified persons: the
severity of Gods justice to be shown on the impenitent: the filthiness and
pollution of Sin; with sundry the like. But if yet they will not be gone,
supposing to weary us with their importunity, we must be as resolute in
refusing, as they in urging, even stopping our ears at their insinuating
persuasions. Yet if at any time having some advantage, they make use of it, and
lay hold on us, leave we our garments with them, and get us gone, rather then
they shall force us to yield, and to become defiled; be we content to forgo
goods, good name, friends, yea our very lives, that we may be presented chaste
Virgins unto Christ.

For Pharaoh. 1. He made the Israelites, Exodus 1.10.11.
bondslaves.

2. He wisely compassed their destruction in the death of their children,

3. He commanded that the Male-children should be drowned. So 1. Make we
bondslaves of our lusts, as which then will quickly be gone from us. 2. Do we
wisely compass their death, Deal we with our lusts, as Pharaoh with the I
raelites.
even at their very conception, at the furthest their birth, being then weaker
then (afterward crushing the viper in the very shell) not suffering the same to
come in, though knocking at the door of our hearts. 3. Cast them in the sea,
drowning them by the tears of true repentance.


Object. God I thank thee, Lu. 18.11.
that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers. I find not
my self troubled with evil motions, and fleshly lusts, as are others: I never
had such evil thoughts, or have been at any time assaulted with strange
temptations, as such and such complain themselves to have been: I doubt not
but that I may spare the pains that are here required, and y^^ do well enough.

Ans. 1. Thy condition is not unlike unto his, Simil.
who being desperately sick, is notwithstanding persuaded, that he is in good
health; or the fool's, which conceives himself to excel in wisdom. The
more insensible thou art of thy lusts, and of thy spiritual bondage under
them, the more art thou in bondage unto them, the more is thy whole man under
their slavery. 2. Naturally we are Eagle-ey'd in respect of other men's
corruptions, but purblind in respect of our own, being hereof even willingly
ignorant. 3. Whom the Devil has once captivated, and marked for his own, he
suffers to walk according to their hearts desires; not troubling them as it
were any further, as being already his own in full possession. Note.
Neither indeed cares he, which way he bring men under, provided he may in
thrall them one way or other. 4. Unless thou oppose thy corruption, and use
the means here prescribed for the killing of thy lusts; undoubtedly they will
in the end kill thee, and be the everlasting destruction both of thy body and
soul.

Ob. But thus should I here live uncomfortably, Gods Word.

1. It Is only at some times, God is pleased to visit them by some great cross
or temptation. 2. Mortification, has in it indeed pain and sorrow, sin having
a strong heart, and so not soon killed, the same sticking as fast in our
nature, as a tooth in our head, or our soul to our body, which will not be
driven away without force and violence. 3. Though weeping may be in the
Evening, Psalm. 30.5.
joy comes in the Morning: though our afflictions are many, Psalm. 34.i9.
yet does the Lord deliver us out of them all. Simil.
The Sun is sometimes eclipsed, sometimes darkened by Clouds; wait a little
while, it will show it is light. Our life seems uncomfortable: it will not be
long ere we shall abound with comforts. Imagine we that any of us should fall,
Simil.
and thereby break a leg or an arm, though in respect of the pain, we could
wish our selves in a manner out of the World; yet being well set, and carefully
dressed, and daily growing more and more in strength, we live in comfort, that
all shall be well: we are contented to sow in tears, Psalm. i26.5.
even to endure the painful dressing thereof, that we may reap in joy by
enjoying the use of the same, as aforetime. Not unlike is our condition in this
World; but much more comfortable, as being more certain. 4. This World is not
our place of mirth; and in us sorrow must needs precede joy: Ioh. 16.20.
Verily, verily, I say unto you (says our Savior) that ye shall weep and
lament, but the World shall rejoice; and ye shall be sorrowful, but your
sorrow shall be turned into joy.

Ob. But if through Christ we obtain salvation,

1. Because Christ's sufferings are available unto no other, Christ himself;
Luke 9.23.
If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross
daily and follow me. Tit. 2.14.
3. That he gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar People zealous of good works.

Ob. But many have here in this world used diverse and sundry means to bring
their body under, as by watching,

It Is no wonder, shows of Will Worship at all; Wherein Mortification chiefly
consists.
as to wear hair-cloth, scourge ones self, go on Pilgrimage, and the like:
so it consists not wholly in the others, watching, fasting, and the like; but
especially in the crucifying of the inward Lusts and Affections, which do even
reign and domineere in them. 2. Because they persuade themselves that by those
they do merit at the hands of God the forgiveness of their sins, with life
everlasting, then which, what can more cross their present and future well
being? 3. Because God has thus in justice dealt with such sorts of persons
from time to time, Ier. 2.13.
even that by forsaking the fountain of living waters, they should dig unto
themselves rotten cisternes.

Ob. Note.
Neither can I be free therefrom in any place, at any time, or in any
condition, the same, even at Prayer in the Church: at the public or private
reading the Word, etc. bending its forces against me, to withdraw my mind from
Gods service, and subject the same to its slavery: so that what to do, or what
course to take, that those motions may not be turned into actions, I am even at
my wits end.

Thy condition is such, humiliation; yet are they not to be contemned, though
usual in the Saints, but by all means to be opposed, abhorred, loathed,
encountered, we must not feed them, either by meditation or occasion: our
hearts being of a Gunpowder disposition, whom a very spark of opportunity
inflames, and sets all in a combustion. Now the means, Through the Spirit the
preceding means become effectual.
whereby as well the former means become unto us effectual, as our daily
lusts (how great soever) kept under, and further and further weakened, proceed
not indeed from our selves, though daily showing their efficacy in us, but
from the good Spirit of God. Through the Spirit do we mortify the deeds of
the flesh; Romans 8.13.
as Saint Paul implies. No man can mortify sin unless by the Spirit, Simil,
as no man by ordinary means vanquish a strong armed man without Weapons. We
are as able with our little finger to shake the Foundation of the Earth, as to
shake off one sin by our own strength. 1 Cor. 3.6.
PAVL may plant, APOLLOS water, but GOD alone gives the increase: though our
hearts were never so willing, and our pains in subduing our Lusts both
continual and extraordinary; yet if the Spirit do not accompany us, all is
nothing worth, as through whom alone the forementioned means are blessed, and
work together for the best unto us.

How the Spirit helps our mortification.
But how does the Spirit work toward the mortifying of Sin?

sinful thoughts and actions. 2. by stirring up an hatred of them, and grief
for them. 3. by kindling fervent Prayer, to get strength against them. 4. by
bringing to mind sentences of the Word, which are as a sword to cut down sin.
5. by making us watchful against sin, to avoid all occasions of it, and use
all sanctified means against it.

Spirit is of such absolute necessity; How to obtain the Spirit.
what means are there to be used for the obtaining of the same?



Things to be avoided, Things to be avoided.
1. Resisting the Spirit, as did the Jews. Act. 7.51.
Ye have always resisted the Spirit (says St. Stephen) as your fathers have
done, so do ye. This is, when men by arguments, reasons, and ocular
demonstrations laid before them are convinced in their consciences of the
truth; yet knowing that they are truth, will notwithstanding set down their
resolution not to do it. Ephesians. 4.30.
2. Grieving the Spirit, that is, the commission of any thing that makes the
Spirit to loath the Soul. 2 These. 5.19.
3. Quenching the Spirit, that is, carelessnesse in the using of the means of
grace, whereby the Spirit is increased, or not cherishing the good Motions
thereof, in the practice of such Duties as the Spirit moves us to do.

Things to be performed. Things to be performed.
1. We must out of a sense and feeling of our own weakness, acknowledge our
inability, either in abstaining from that which is evil, or performing that
which is good. 2. We must get an assured knowledge of the excellency of the
Spirit, and allsufficient operation herein. 3. We must even hunger and thirst
for the Spirit. 4. We must by continued Prayer be earnest with God, to bestow
him upon us, as is manifestly employed in that of our Savior. Luke 11.13.
If ye then being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children: how
much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask
him? 5. We must cherish every good Motion of the Spirit in our hearts, either
to pray, or to hear, or to meditate, or to praise GOD, etc. not suffering the
same to lie without Practice: Thus, by what means the Flesh with the Lusts and
Affections thereof is to be encountered; and so of the 6th. Particular.

CHAP. VII. Motives, or encouragements unto this spiritual Combat.
AS the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, 2. Cor. i0.4
but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds: so fight we not
as uncertainly, 1. Cor. 9.26.
not as beating the air, but in the assured and certain hope of a glorious
and fruitful victory. Arguments whereby a Soldier may be induced to fight.
Many are the Arguments whereby a Soldier may be stirred up to fight; desire
of revenge: fidelity to his King and Country; love to his Captain and
Fellow Soldiers; an ambitious desire of honor; fear of present danger, and
future shame, if the enemy be not resisted; The equity of the cause; Ignorance
of the enemies strength and forces: An enemies weakness, and cowardice;
remembrance of former Victory; with sundry the like, but with most this is the
main, even the love of gain, the hope of an ensuing rich booty; probability of
a goodly spoil: The very same is the Christian Soldiers condition. Many
motives we have to induce us to mortify our concupiscene, whether habitual,
or actual: See the fourth Chapter.
the flesh with the inordinate lusts and affections thereof (as I have already
showed at large) but not any allureth us more (if so much) then the hope of
profit; an assured expectation of many rare, sweet, excellent and comfortable
Fruits ensuing hereupon. To this end let me here offer a brief of them unto
your view.

1. By fighting against our lusts, we obtain.
We obtain unspeakable peace, and quietness of soul, even that peace of
conscience that passes all understanding. 1. Peace of conscience. Phil. 4.7.
Being at war with our corruptions, we are at peace with our own souls: yea,
most friends to our selves, when we are most foes with our Corruptions. As
war abroad, Simil.
is found to be a present remedy against civil dissentions of Subjects; so
war with sin is the cause of our tranquillity with our selves. A bloody
war does often occasion a settled peace; by warring against our Lusts we
reap this benefit. Did we consider, that nothing causes the God of Heaven
to srowne upon man, but sin; that he is a consuming fire, Heb. 19.31.
and an everlasting burning; that it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands
of the living God; that a wounded Spirit none is able to bear; Pro. 18.14.
that with the ungodly even the stones of the field, as in like manner all
other creatures are at variance, would we harbor within us any thing that
might displease God? would we not cut off if it were our right hand, and pluck
out our right eye, yea, part with our very Lives at his command? Note.
how much more war against our earthly members, thereby to be reconciled to
him? Did we but consider the excellency, utility, sweetness and worth of peace,
whether outward or inward, spsrituall or corporal, with our selves or others,
God or Man, we would not thus serve our lusts and pleasures, we would scorn
to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; we would willingly renounce if it
were the whole World, rather then deprive our selves thereby of Gods favor,
and the comfortable fruits of the same. Do we war against our Lusts? we are
not at war with our Maker. War we against our Lusts? our Souls dwell at
rest, our consciences void of terror, amazement, disquietment. Crucify we the
Flesh, with the affections and lusts thereof? we shall have little or no
leisure to take causlesse unkindnesses, to pick needless quarrels, and to
provoke others against us by our injurious carriages; yea, Prove. i6.7.
our ways thus pleasing to God, even our enemies shall become our friends.

2. We have daily experience of Gods powerful presence.
We have daily experience of Gods powerful presence accompanying us, whereby
even we (of our selves poor silly weak creatures) do maintain war against
such potent Adversaries, yea further and further grow upon them, and put them
to the worst. What made the Judges (whom God raised up to defend his People) to
fight so valorously against the Enemy, but the certainty they had that GOD went
along with them? Does not the Captain of the Host of the Lord still accompany
us to fight for us? Psalm. i8.29.
By the Lord have not we run through a troup, and by our God leaped over a
Wall? Does not God gird us with strength, and make our way perfect? Makes he
not our feet like Hinds feet, and sets us on high places? Teaches not he
our hands to war, so that a how of steel is broken with our arms? and
should we not then be encouraged to fight? A great wonder.
Is it not wonderful, that such weak and silly Creatures as we are, should
so prevail over Satan that powerful Prince of darkness, as not to yield to
the smallest motion of Sin with pleasure; but (as the Mariners of the Sea by
pumping clear the Ship of the water, Simil.
it draws, lest by the neglect thereof, the same further and further
increasing) the Ship should sink) but earnestly to oppose it, expelling the
same, partly by not yielding thereunto, or if upon the sudden we yield, by
repenting thereof, and refusing to yield obedience thereunto, yea doing the
contrary with pleasure and thanksgiving to our gracious God, through whom we
are thus enabled in some measure to subdue our lusts? Oh the joy and gladness
abounding in our hearts, when our GOD strengthens our hands to war by degrees
to overcome those inward Beasts, Serpents, Cockatrices, young Lions, and
Dragons! Indg. 4.2i.
I assure my Soul that Iael rejoiced no more in taking the Smiths hammer, and
therewith fastening a nail in Sisera's temples, 1 Samuel 17.51.
and David in cutting off Goliahs head with his own sword: then the People of
God boast of Gods power, and rejoice in his Name, when they overcome the
wicked one, by quenching his temptations, which are like fiery darts to slay
the soul; they rejoice I say in that power of GOD inabling them (like Judah as
bold as Lions to resist their enemies, Genesis 49.9.
and defend their right, Simil. Genesis 49.14.
when others (like Issachar couching under burdens) are slaves unto Satan and
their own lusts.

Sometimes indeed the Saints are wounded and blacked with these fiery darts; The
Saints gain by their former falls.
but they are never wholly overcome, nay even from hence do they through Gods
goodness reap no small advantage. Psalm. 68.i3.
Have they lien among the pots? they rest not till they be as the wings of a
Dove, covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold. Find they
themselves in any sort defiled? they run to the fountain opened to the House
of DAVID for sin, Zech. 13.i.
and for uncleanness. Yea, as great Soldiers when their blood is once drawn,
are the more inflamed with desire of revenge: so are they further encouraged
unto a swift pursuit of Satan, that they may bruise his head, and of
themselves to take an holy revenge for their security and negligence in
suffering the presence of God (which is to them as the Nazarite hair unto
SAMPSON) to be taken from them. Does Satan watching his time, take them at
unwares; as the Philistims shaved off SAMPSONS locks whilst he was asleep?
Judge. 16.19.
Do they at any time fall through lack of circumspection? Through grace they
lay the same to heart, and so redouble their forces, that they may overcome and
tread down that Prince of darkness, Romans 16.20.
being persuaded that the God of peace shall bruise Satan under their feet
shortly. Through grace do they profit by their haltings, not to halt any more,
being careful in the mean time that their haltings may be healed: Heb. 12.13.
therefore lift they up the hands that hung down, and the feeble knees, and
make strait steps for their feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of the
way. They learn wisdom by experience, as David did, when he perceived the
falsehood of Saul his father in Law, he ever suspected him thereafter, and
labored always to avoid those snares which he laid for him: Judge. i6.3.
and Samson when he took the doors of the gate of the City; and the two posts,
and went away with them, prevented the treachery of the Philistims (by whom
once before he was deluded) which laid wait all night for him in the gate of
the City, Gods Saints (I say) by their holy fear, watchings; experience of
Satan's deepnes, and their own weakness, learn to be more circumspect. Oh
the loving kindness of God, The unspeakable goodness of God.
who has reveiled all the wiles of Leviathan, the peircing and crooked
Serpent, his cruelty, his importunity, his vvatchfulnesse, the diverse vvayes
whereby he hides the nature of sin, that the bitterness thereof be not
discovered, as also the naughtiness of our own hearts, ready at all times to
give him entertainment; if through his goodness we did not watch over the same
with all diligence. What a good God have we, who not only fights for us, but
also advertiseth us of all the enemies of our salvation! Much was the King of
Israel obliged to the Prophet of God, 2 Kin. 6.9.
for revealing unto him the King of Arams purposes against him, Simil.
as whereby he did more then once avoid the danger; but much more are we to
our gracious God for reveiling unto us by his faithful Ambassadors Satan's
manifold guiles, who is at all times, and in every place, and with every lust
ready to deceive us; standing at our right hand to be our Adversary: yea for
our sakes fiercely rebuking him. Zech. 3.2.
And the Lord said unto Satan, The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, even the Lord
that has chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee: Js not this a brand plucked out of the
fire? Though we at some times fear to be overcome; though we may doubt that
we are indeed overcome; though we may be as it were at the very last cast
even ready to faint and give over; yet through the power of God are we so
preserved, that not any shall pluck us out of his hands; yea, Hos. 14.5.
as the dew revives the withered herbs, the meditation of foregoing comforts
shall so revive us, that our youth shall be renewed like the Eagles. Oh for
pity, Psalm. i03.5.
that our God should thus by his powerful presence accompany us, and out of
his affectioned love toward us, be ever arming us by his counsels, comforts,
exhortations, threatenings, etc. and yet that we should at any time give place
to the Devil, in making provision for the Flesh, Romans 14.13.
to accomplish the lusts thereof!

3. No small glory does redound unto God. No small glory does redound unto God.
He that made the withered stick of Aaron to bring forth fresh flourishing
Almonds, Number. i7.8.
and made the poor man's withered hand to become whole, Mat. i2.i3.
to the glory of his name; and in like manner opened the eyes of the blind,
Mar. 8.23.
even the same powerful God, by our daily Mortification, and the subduing the
remainder of corruption wherewith we are diseased, defiled, wounded, gets
glory to himself, as who not only forgiveth our iniquities, Psalm. i03.3.
but likewise heals our infirmities. To what end were we created, but to
set forth the glory of God? Delaying to mortify our Lusts, we delay the
performance of that duty, for which we came into the World: A necessary
consideration to further Gods glory.
would we but consider that howsoever Satan with his Adherents has done
what in him lies to hinder us from the remission of our sins, from
renovation in Christ's blood, from sanctification of the Spirit, as in like
manner he has gone about to hinder the power of the Word, and blessing powered
upon the Sacraments, and the Blessing that accompanies the sanctified fiery
furnace of affliction; out of which the Children of God come like purified
gold; yea, and would hinder deaths sting to be taken away, and so us from lying
down void of sin, pure chaste Virgins for Christ; and yet that he is let
in every of those his designs, would we by denying to mortify our Lusts, thus
rob God of his glory? i Sam. ii. 2.
As the men of Iabesh Gilead answered Nahash the Ammonite requiring that he
might thrust out all their righteyes, and lay it for a reproach upon all Israel.
Give us seven days respite, that we may send messengers into all the Coasts of
Israel, and then if there be no man to save us, we will come out to thee. So
might we, Satan endeavoring by his continued and reiterated temptations to
draw us unto sin, that if we should not be succored, we were unable to
withstand him. Simil.
But as they were delivered on the seventh day: So inasmuch as herein Satan
aims at the eternal reproach of our gracious God, and of his dear Son
Jesus Christ, and holy Spirit, with the shame of the holy Angels, our
attenders, and our own who are the Israel of GOD, seeking to pierce our souls
and bodies through with the speace of sin, 1 Samuel 18.11.
as Saul cast a spear at David to have nailed him to the wall. Our gracious
God, who is jealous of his own glory will undoubtedly by inabling us to oppose
this our spiritual Nahash, and our sins his Ammonits, thus glorify
himself. His head is already broken in the person of our Savior: at sundry
times also he has had notable foiles given him by Christ's members, being no
more able to prevail against them, then Goliath against David; the Egyptions
against the Israelites, the Canaanits against Joshua and his Successors: What
remains but that we should still continue the war, until in the full and
final Mortification of our lust, to the everlasting praise of Gods glory, he
be trod under foot; As Naamans servants unto him; 2 King. 5.13.
My father, if the Prophet had bid thee done some great thing, would thou not
have done it? how much rather then, when he says to thee, wash and be clean?
So may I unto you. If the Lord would for the glory of his own name require us,
to part with our goods, good name, lives; yea even the salvation of our Souls;
we ought willingly to assent thereunto, much more when for our further and more
comfortable fruition of those requires us, but to mortify our Lusts.

4. Through our remnant of corruptions mortified by grace, We obtain a
continual holy fear, out of the sense of our own weakness.
we obtain continual fear, through sense of continual weakness on our
own part; for certain it is, that if the Lord should leave us, but for a
time; the very smallest temptation were of force to overcome the strongest
Christian; Note.
the least fiery dart of Satan, which he takes out of his own Quiver, being
indeed extremely venomous, crooked and deceitful. The Wine that Noah drunk
deceived him, who notwithstanding was not purposely excessive therein. He had
strength no doubt to have overcome a stronger temptation, if God had not left
him for a season: What a mean temptation was David's looking on Bathsheba, the
damsels questioning of Peter, Dalilahs feigned tears unto Samson? The Sins I
confess in which the Saints fall thereby, as also the dishonor of Gods Name,
and the Churches damage through the same be not small; yet the LORD that
brought light out of darkness, Gods children profit by the sins of others.
does even hereby work for the good of others, as who learn from the same,
that even the best are unable to stand by themselves; and that if even the
strongest sort of Gods Giants, bright shining Stars in the firmament of God;
have notwithstanding now and then slipped, yea fallen into gross and great sins;
they themselves weak babes in comparison of the other, must be so much the more
watchful over their own ways, working out their own Salvation with fear
and trembling. Note.
They are daily practiced in the work of Mortification, do not with Cham and
Shemei, scoff or rail at the falls or miseries of the Saints; neither with
the filthy flies feed upon the sores of the Beast, leaving his whole parts,
Simil.
neither (as those that would go into a Chyrurgions Shop, and take a
profitable Instrument, serving to the cntting away of dead flesh, and therewith
kill themselves) do they enter into the great Book of Gods Scriptures, so
wresting every thing, that the Word of life becomes unto them the savor of
death; and Christ a stone of ease to his own, 1 Pet. 2.6.
a precious stone, and a sure Foundation; becomes unto them a stumbling
stone, and a Rock of offense; and the threatenings of the Word, which to the
godly are terrors to terrify them, and are said in the Proverbs to be the
corrections of the Lord, Pro. 17.i0.
are scoffed at and counted but wind, Ier. 6.10. Ezekiel. 7.7.
an echo or sound of an hill; but taking notice of their own corruption, and
how easily they themselves may be thereby intrapped; they walk warily, always
taking heed lest they also fall. Oh how many out of the faults of others gather
poison, and not honey with Samson out of the Lions belly! Luke 13.2.
The Jews in the days of Christ justified themselves in comparison of those
on whom the Tower of Shilo fell, but were willed of Christ, in like manner to
repent. Others have fallen, how soon may we? He that thinks he stands, 1
Cor. 10.12.
must take heed lest he fall. Too too many there are which imitate the falls
of the Saints, i Sam. 3i.5.
as Saul's Armor-bearer after the evil example of his Master, did in the like
manner slay himself. Simil.
As Saul killed himself with his sword wherewith he had foughten against his
Adversaries, Many imitate the Saints falls, but do not with them repent.
so are there not a few which use the falls of the Saints as swords to run
their souls through, falling by their example, as though God would be as
merciful to them in their presumptuous fearful falls, as to those who fell
through the violent flood of forcible and sudden temptations, or as though it
lay in their hands to repent, as those extraordinary persons who had
extraordinary repentance, given them of the Almighty that they might be
examplars of Repentance: hereof though the Wicked make these ill uses, or
rather abuses, yet are Gods Children, like good Husbands: Simil.
They profit always, both by the virtues of the Saints, and their infirmities;
as good Husbands will make good use even of dongue. They learn, I say, hereby
to work out their own salvation with fear and trembling. Note.
They learn also to take heed they fall not when they suppose themselves to
stand; yea they also see a thousand infirmities in themselves which they would
never have marked, if both they themselves had not fallen in some, and observed
to have fallen in the like.

5. We obtain hereby a passage to slay our outward and actual sins: We
obtain a passage to slay our outward actual sins.
for when the Cockatrice is crushed in the shell, how shall it come to be a
fiery flying Dragon? Simil.
When the leakes of the Ship are stopped, and the water which came in thereat
emptied out, how shall it sink? and if the defects of an house be repaired, it
cannot ruin.

It is much more easy to quench the first sparkles of fire, then when they
have increased into great Flames. Through curbing our inbred corruption we
prevent many actual rebellions. How to prevent actual rebellions.
Let we the fire burn within, even give way unto our inbred lusts, (how well
soever we look to the outside) impossible it is, but that the flame vvil
burst forth in some one or other fleshly Lust; Mat. i2.34.
for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, and the corruption
that is in the World is through Lust. 2 Pet. 1.4.


well reformed.

good in appearance and show, the sundry sorts of virtues wherewith it is
covered, or rather hypocritically colored, do but make the same more
detestable to God. When the Fountain is polluted, Simil.
can the streams be wholesome? Because the Apples of Sodom are outwardly goodly
and beautiful, must it needs follow that they are not dust within? Because the
Situation of a City is pleasant, 2 Kin. 2.i9.
must it needs therefore be granted, that the water is not naught; or the land
barren? Who will call the froth of the Sea good for the whiteness thereof, or
a foul wall pleasant because overcast with lime? or a Black-amore fair though
farded all over? Where there is inward sanctification, there is indeed outward
reformation; but this without that is merely counterfeit, in which regard
worse is by far the condition of hypocrites, then that of Atheists, as to
whom many woes belong; Math. 23.29.
Woe, woe, woe, with a witness.

6. We shall have less to do in the end of our journey, We shall have less
to do in the end of our journey.
if all our days we be breaking up our fallow ground. Oh how comfortable is
this if we would duly weigh it in the just balance of the Sanctuary! If we
have from time to time taken a particular account of our own ways: How to
judge our selves every day.
If we have at the least twice every day censured the false deceitful
treacherous heart, and her doleful train of earthly members: if we have
arraigned the traitor and her followers, the eye, the ear, the tongue, the
hand, the foot: if we have demanded them in Gods steed, whether they have
been all the day gathering or scattering for God, or against him, upward or
downward, glorifying God or dishonouring him; at home working in our fathers
service, or wandering with Dinah from our fathers house; Genesis 34.1.
when the answer comes as in the presence of God, it will either be accusing
or excusing, or deceiving (if we be not the more circumspect, and jealous over
our selves upon consideration of bypast deceitfulness) or flatte^ing. Now we
(as I said before) being in the room of of God, must give and pronounce a
right and just sentence, Simil.
every day and night; for as it is with them that justify the wicked, Pro.
17.15.
and condemn the righteous, both are abomination to God, so to condemn our
selves that day, when Gods Spirit has bin working with us in every good work
and duty (though on our part in great weakness and infirmity, as well in
abstaining from evil, as performing of that which is good) is no small injury
to God, as who hereby hides his manifold benefits bestowed upon us, and thus
either in censuring the dispensation of his grace, (because it is not according
to our wishes, or according to our sense and feeling, or as we have received of
his Majesty in times past, or as others receive) or not acknowledging the same
with thanksgiving. How dangerous it is for us rashly to condemn our selves.
Thus I say to judge our selves, as it is dangerous: So is it no less
unprofitable, neither furthers it our Spirit in progress to Life eternal; nor
does it provoke the good Spirit of God to help us, since his Majesty gets
such an evil reward at our hand; nor get we hereby our consciences pacified,
either yet obtain our hearts desire. It were best then as is manifest by the
light of the Word (and I have found by experience dear bought) to let our
souls keep silence to God, and to thank his Majesty every day for the least
measure of grace; Note.
for indeed the least blast of the wind of the Spirit, is not only
miraculous, and above deserving, but also above the highest measure of
thanksgiving, either in this world, or in the world to come. Let then murmuring
depart, and thanksgiving keep her room, whereby we shall obtain as greater
peace of conscience, so greater increase of grace, to Gods both approbation and
acceptance.

Again, What we are to do when the Conscience does justly accuse us for
crimes committed.
if after trial the conscience does justly accuse us in such and such points
of blemishes inwardly and outwardly unknown to any; in ward, unknown either
to Angels or Devils; outward, unperceived even by the most judicious Spirits
(for of gross sins or such others, as holy men of God would judge worthy of
censure, I do not now speak) we are in no ways to flatter or justify our
selves. In these blacks and blemishes I would counsel thee poor soul not to
flatter thy self but deeply to accuse thy self, with great remorse. Thus
censuring thy self, thus repenting for the sins of the day past, yea the
sins of thy best, holiest, and most zealous actions, thou shall go to bed
with the voice of joy and gladness, of praises and thanksgivings. After that
thou have felt and uttered that which Jeremy speaks. Ier. 3.22.
It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions
fail not; They are new every morning; thou lie down with an assurance of
pardon; thou lie down as it were without sin; as who both grievest for thy
sins committed, and resolvest to lead a new life. Have thou performed this?
Psalm. 127.2.
joyful will thy nights rest be unto thee, God giving his beloved sleep; They
certainly that have tasted this, and of this will say Amen to it.

But this trial is yet to be abridged into a narrower room. An exact and
compendious form of self examination.
Ere the evening come, we may not only forget the days wanderings, as in like
manner the good influences of Gods goodness toward us; but also we may be
many times hindered from this great, necessary, profitable, and commendable
trial, what by our selves through sleepines, and what by others; it being
likewise a maine policy of Satan to make us put the same off from one time to
another, whence it comes to pass, that the work becomes more difficult
(this dongue requiring to be swept out every day, and we unable to remember two
or three days wanderings) It is then most requisite for the good both of soul
and body, for the obtaining of that precious jewel tranquillity of mind, for
the weakening and overthrow of the Devils forces, to turn days into hours, as
hours into minutes. If in praying, reading, conferring, Meditation, hearing of
Gods word, and the like, we be unfaith full, The delay of self trial how
dangerous.
by the least delay of this self-triall, and selfjudging, Satan gets too
much advantage toward the troubling of our tender Consciences, contrarily. If
at all times, in all places, in all companies, and upon every occasion, out of
our particular secret, separate walking with God; we shall take our selves to
do, demanding of our selves as it were, What we said? What we thought? Whether
we edified our selves and others? Whether we glorified GOD or not? Whether we
remembered our selves, the Church, our end, the great day, our heavenly
inheritance, though but by one ejaculation, or some Pilgrims looks; we should
quikly perceive the benefit, much good would it work to our selves and others.
Thus should we find what good we have received by others; how we have been
affected with the company of the ungodly (as whether we have vexed our souls
or not, whether we have reproved sin with boldness, or failed herein:) in what
state our conscience stands, as whether or not we have had mercy to keep
the same undefiled; and the tenderness thereof continued, the same being in us
both at home and abroad, as a sweet companion. Hereunto if we be attentive;
thus if we do employ our time, gathering withal the good things which we
have seen and heard abroad; as in like manner making use of all good
provocations to sharpen us, (though this sort of iron to sharpen iron is very
rare) the good which we shall reap hereby by will much ease our souls, and
augment our spiritual treasure. Thus if we would do (I will not boast or
whisper that I have exactly thus done, yet others have with all their might
endeavored herein, and mind through the assistance of Gods good Spirit so to do
unto the end of their Christian Race) we should thus doing get great
abundance of extraordinary Christian joys and ravishments, as pledges, or the
earnest of the Spirit given to us, under the hope of the fullness of eternal
joys. If we have left off those glorious exercises, (not any ways hindering
either praying, reading meditating, or any other spiritual work in the
Vineyard; but rather much furthering the same) If I say we have omitted them,
do we blame our selves, if we have gotten dumb tongues in stead of open,
withered hearts, in stead of mollified, dirt for gold, blindness for eye salve,
poverty of grace for riches, beggarly clothes for raiment of white linen; for
a feasting, a troubled conscience, a show of godliness, for the power thereof;
small mire and dew in place of great waters, senslesnesse for watchfulnes, and
tender feelings. If this be thy state, doleful is thy change, fearful this
desertion. Thou must repent in time, getting thy heart and endeavors enlarged,
mightily and sincerely renewing thy Covenant with God, whereby thou shall at
the length perceive why the Lord has absented himself so long; and again
enjoy his sweet presence, and the glorious tokens of his affectioned love.

7. We do further and further hate sin.
We obtain hereby a further and further hatred of sin, an higher and higher
detestation thereof, with all the several sorts of the same. In the
Ceremonial law the same was shadowed under leprosies uncleanissues, unclean
birds beasts, fowls, leprous garments, as also by the uncleanness of men and
women, Levit. 11.12, 13, etc.
whosoever was defiled by any of those was to be purified from his
uncleanness. In the verity are all these figures accomplished; Let us cast off
the work of darkness (says the Apostle) and make no provision for the flesh to
fulfill the lusts thereof. Romans 13.12.14.
He says not, cast off the work, but the works of darkness, not the lusts,
but the lusts of the flesh. So elsewhere, he says not, purge out one part of
the old leven, but purge out the old leven, 1 Cor. 5.7.
that is every part, the remnant crummes thereof, like to that where he says
that I may present you as a chaste Virgin to Christ. 2 Cor. 1i.2.
Will the Lord Jesus look upon any unclean person? Shall it be perfected
where it was not begun? So the same Apostle; Ephesians. 4.22.
Put off concerning the former conversation the old man, which is not a part of
sin, but all the old garment thereof, as men when they go to bed put off all
their clothes, or those that cast away an old, ragged, torn, and worn
garment, whereof they are ashamed, and never intend to put on again) and put
on that new man which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness, Ephesians. 4.24.
even all the parts, not one part alone of the garment; we are to abstain even
from all appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.23.
and to be so sanctified, that our whole Spirit and soul, and body be
presented blameless unto the coming of our Lord JESUS CHRIST; we must
abstain even from the garment spotted with blood. Simil.
As the Nethinims left not in the Temple of Solomon any unclean thing not
swept away: So must every one of us be a spiritual Nethinim in our own soul,
to sweep away all uncleannes; yea, the least idle thought; Math. 12.42.8.
for it is not a King like Solomon that comes into this Temple, but one in
every respect greater then Solomon the Sovereign of the whole World, who
neither will nor can abide any uncleanness. His house, Note.
his bed, his garden, his tabernacle, his temple, (a Christian Soul is all
those) cannot be too neatly and cleanly kept. Deserves not such a guest who is
purer then the Heavens, and abides not where impuritie is entertained:
deserves not he (I say) to dwell in a pure heart peculiar to himself? yea, so
jealous he is, that he cannot endure that any other should come there, and
being the great high Priest himself with the seven eyes, cannot be deceived
with a show of purity; but (unlike unto the jealous Husband in Numb.) knows
both when, how, Number. 5.i2.
and by whom his bed has been polluted. If our Saviors first coming
required preparation of his way in our hearts, Math. 3.3.
and his continual presence with us; namely, since he went to Heaven, and
married us to himself, Hos. 2.19.
in mercy, truth and compassion, the like; how then should we think to be
arrayed, who are continually called to the marriage of the Lamb? If this
standing continually by the preaching of the Word and Sacraments, benefits,
promises, corrections, etc requires such preparation; deserves not his last
coming greatest preparation of all, 2 Pet. 3.i0.11.
when the Elements shall be dissolved, and the Earth burnt with fire (which
notwithstanding never sinned, but was subjected to vanity for our sins? What
manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness? Alas
for pity, we weigh not such counsels and directions, prescribing us to cast
away all our Idols, (as Rachel, Leah, Genesis 35.4.
and the family of Jacob gave them to be buried ere ever they went to Bethel.)
Alas, I say, and so may we all, we have journyed to Gods Bethel with our
Idols of abomination, taking hold on the horns of the Altar with hypocritical
Adonijah, 1 King 1.50. and 2.28.
and bloody Joab; yea, which is worse, we think to come to the Bethel of
Bethels, GODS holy House in Heaven, notwithstanding we reserve yet some Idols
not cast away, which are of us secretly worshipped, putting as it were a wall
between God and us, as did the Idolaters mentioned by Ezekiel. Ezekiel. 8.7.
If such were their secret, how great think we were their open abominations?
Satan's policy.
O strange policy of the Prince of darkness, by whom thousands are brought
through the wicked imaginations of their heart, under that fearful woe; even
who call evil good, Isa. 5.20.
and good evil, that put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put
bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter! how are they deceived with the false,
arrogant, and perverse opinion of their own heart, about true repentance
inward and outward? dreaming be like, that actual abstinence from actual
sins is sound and sincere Repentance. Mar. 6.20.
What availed it Herod to abstain from many actual sins, in the mean time
retaining one Idol, his sin of Adultery, or Incest? Isa. i.1i.i2.13.14.
What availed it the Jews to continue their Sacrifices, observe the new
Moons, and Sabbaths, offer incense, etc. in the mean time living in
hypocrisy? Could the Lord away with the same? were not both themselves, and
their whole Worship abomination in his sight? The intention of the heart not
sufficient of it self.
Neither is it enough to allege the intention of the heart, if in the mean
time their conversation be sinful: Iam. 3.15.
such wisdom comes from beneath. He that abhors one sin will abhor all;
Note.
and they that rightly have respect to one of Gods commandments, as they are
Gods commandments, will have respect to them all; as he that breaks one,
breaks all; for the Commandments are so linked together, that if one be broke,
all will dissolve, except that one be repaired: Simil,
and as they that broke one of the Acts of the Medes and Persians (though
unrighteously decreed) were put to death; Dan. 6.15.
and they that maintain any one Rebel, Simil.
are accounted of as if they had maintained all the Kings enemies, (as
accordingly Abimilech the Priest with all his Fathers House were slain by Saul,
1 Samuel 22.18.
for his supposed Conspiracy with David, in giving him of the Shewbread, and
Goliahs sword) and they that break any one Statute, are as well liable unto the
Kings censure, as if they had broke them all; 1 King. 2.46.
(as Shemei found by experience through his going out of Jerusalem, contrary
unto Solomon's direction) so are all those liable unto the severity of Gods
justice, The danger even of one sin unrepented of.
which do wittingly and willingly maintain in themselves any one reigning
bosom sin. May not an house set on fire in any one part, be at the length
burnt to ashes, as well as if it had been set on fire in sundry places? will
not one cord as well hang a thief, as many? may not Saul be as really slain by
his one (one) sword, 1 Samuel 31.4,
as he had been if every Philistim had given him a stab with a several one?
nay, further: May not a Nail in the hand of Iael as well destroy Sisera, Judge.
4.21.
as Baraks Sword or Spear could have done? a stone out of a sling, no less
fell mighty Goliath to the ground, 1 Samuel 17.49.
then his own sword cut off his own head? May not a man as well be drowned
in a pond or pit of water, as in the middle of the Ocean? I may yet descend
lower. May not an hair throttle one? a fly choke one? a crum of bread
occasion a man's death? It is thus with sin, with every sin, with the small
lest sin, even the least wandering thought, the least idle word, the smallest
sin (if any can be so truly termed) deserves Hell fire.

8. We do hereby attain unto a true hatred of sin, We hate sin for sin, or
as it is a breach of Gods Laws.
not so much for the punishment thereof, as for it self. For even Reprobates,
though they hate not sin as sin, or because it is a transgression of Gods
Law; yet may they hate it in respect of the punishment ensuing thereupon: and
so in outward appearance seem haters of sin. But Satan herein, howsoever
with the Painter he draws the color of the fire; yet cannot he paint the
heat thereof: The ungodly not true haters of sin.
though his Instruments seem haters of sin; yet are they not so in truth,
but for by respects. They do not hate sin for sin, as the Saints do in
heart, and outwardly testify in word and deed. Mortification like circumcision.
This precise Mortification answers very prettily to the Figure of
Circumcision: as all the foreskin was put away; so will not the Lord have any
one sin to remain in his Saints unmortified: which they are not accordingly
to oppose, hate, and persecute unto the death. This sort of true Repentance, as
it is prophesied in the Person of the penitent Idolaters; Isa. 27.9.
so is it verily accomplished in all penitent sinners, to whom our God makes
all sin (and that for sin) so odious and detestable both inwardly and
outwardly, that they cast it away like a menstruous clout, crying against their
Sins, hence away, in token of their extreme indignation thereat. We understand
that the Jews in sign of that inward hatred that they had at our Lord and
Savior without a cause, cried, Away with him, away with him, Luc. 23.18.
we out of this should gather an infinite and endless hatred against sin, The
Jews hatred of Christ an Argument to work in us hatred of sin.
as through which our Lord taking upon him our sins, suffered all this. We
must even so hate it as to cast it out, to afford it no entertainment, and from
our very hearts to cry against it, Hence, away, away with it: yea, daily and
hourly to run unto God by Prayer for the assistance of his Spirit against the
same; Note.
that if those pricks of the Flesh may not wholly be removed, and we wholly rid
of this Old man during our abode here in this vale of misery; Romans 6.12.
yet that sin may not so reign in our mortal bodies that we should obey it
in the lusts thereof.

Thus ye see, that howsoever our good God is pleased to leave even in his
dearest Saints some dregs of corruption (as the Canaanites were left in the
land, Jude 2.3.
for the further trial of the Israelites) yet as out of the belly of the Lion
Samson had honey, Judge. 14.8.
so even out of them, and in the daily mortifying of them, the Saints gather no
small store of fruitful benefits, and heavenly comforts, sweeter then the
honey and the honey-combe. Thus of the motives or encouragements which we have
unto this spiritual Combat; and so of the seventh Particular.

CHAP. VIII. Necessary Caveats to be observed in this spiritual Encounter.
AS in temporal Warfare, it is ordinary for the General of the Army to direct
his Soldiers how to behave themselves in the Battle, Directions no less
needful in this spiritual, then they are in the corporal warfare.
when, where, how, and against whom to fight; what Weapons to use, what courses
to take, to daunt the enemy: how to discern and make use of advantages;
against whom especially to bend their forces: how to prevent the enemies
Stratagems; and so in other particulars: no less requisite is this course in
this our spiritual Warfare. 2 Samuel 21.15.
Skillful David may venture too far to the endangering of his life: 2 Samuel
11.16.
wary Vriah may step into the forefront of the Battle, and fall; when as
another standing had been fitter for him. 1 King. 22.32.
The Captains of the King of Syria may mistake Jehosophat for Ahab; 2 King.
14.12.
Amaziah may provoke Iehoash to his own overthrow; 1 Samuel 4.3.
the Israelites may so rely upon the Ark of GOD coming amongst them, as if
assuredly they should be saved from their enemies, that as well they themselves
shall be vanquished, as if taken by the enemy. Benhadad with his two and
thirty Kings that helped him may be drunk, 1 King. 20.16.
not dreaming in their jollity that an handful of Israelites shall vanquish
both him, them, and their populous Armies. Thus may it befall us in
encountering the Flesh. Caveats therefore being prescribed, accordingly must
we follow our prescriptions.

The Caveats are these. The Caveats.


1. We must not be lets unto our selves in vanquishing our corruuption.
We must not through our worldly mindedness, or unnecessary employment of our
selves about the things of this world, be lets unto our selves in vanquishing
our lusts, as ESAV deprived himself of the blessing through his wearisome
hunting; and the Gadarens bad CHRIST depart out of their bounds; Mat. 8.34.
and the wicked Jews caused God to depart frm the Temple. Ezekiel. 10.
How can those vanquish their lusts, which do not so much as to this end set
the least time apart? 2. We must not cast away our armor or in any sort yield.
We must not cast away our Armor, or in any sort yield; but still keep firm
our confidence in GOD; For, if any man draw back, his Soul shall have no
pleasure in him: Heb. 10.38.
Whereunto that of the Psalmist agrees. For lo, Psalm. 73.27.
they that are far from thee shall perish: thou have destroyed all them that
go a whoring from thee. 3. We must be wise in the application of Scripture
unto our selves.
We must not apply unto our falls of infirmity such places of Scripture as are
to be understood of theirs that sinned presamptuously (as that of Eli unto his
Sons. 1 Samuel 2.25.
If a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him?) or such as are
spoken of Reprobates; as that unto the Hebrews, Heb. 6.4.
It is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the
heavenly gift, etc. if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto
repentance. And again, Heb. i0.26,
If we sin wilfully after we have received the Knowledge of the Truth, there
remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of
Judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries. So that
of Peter: 2 Pet. 2.20.
For, if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world, through the
knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled
therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them then the beginning,
etc. 4. We must prepare for new contrary winds
We must prepare our selves for new contrary winds to hinder us in our
spiritual sailing to Heaven: though already we have been assailed by diverse:
neither must those so daunt us, as that we are not to imitate Christ's
Disciples, Ioh. 6.19.
who when through the vehemency of the Tempest their Ship could not sail,
endeavored notwithstanding to row. Though we cannot go on in the course of
Godliness so swiftly as we would, we must notwithstanding go on, tho in a
smaller degree. 5. We must cry out against our sins.
When we perceive our selves to be over mastered by any temptation, and even
forced as a forced woman; 2 Samuel 13.19.
then must we with Thamar (forced by deceitful Amnon in the privy Chamber of
our heart) openly cry out against the Devil with a penitent heart, that the
Lord may avenge our quarrel, 2 Samuel 13.29.
as Absolon was stirred up to be avenged of Amnon. 6. We must avoid security.
We must beware of the false bed of security and deceitfulnes of sin,
(notwithstanding our experience of Gods former presence) lest any ways
delighting therein, Cant. 3.2.
we be driven to seek Christ, but lose our labor. Justly does the Lord
punish this sin of security by desertion, then which what can be more
grievous to the Saints? Grievous undoubtedly it was unto David, Psalm. 51.8.
when being thus chastised, he cried unto God, Make me to hear joy and
gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice. Cast me not away
from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me. Restore unto me the
joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit. Jonah was asleep,
but the stormy tempest, and stinking belly of the Whale awaked him. David was
asleep, but the sword awaked him. Noah was asleep, but Chams scorning awaked
him. In this bed lay the Israelits, but 70. years Captivity awaked them. Oh if
we could learn wisdom by their folly, and their after repentance stir us
up unto repentance! If God thus punish his own children for their security,
Note.
what shall be the Portion of the wicked that are in a dead slumber? how sudden
and strange, how fearful and terrible, how horrible unutterable shall their
wakening be? Such was Cains, Achitophels, Pharaohs, Indasses, Saul's,
Abimilecks, Belshazzars and diverse others; how fearful they were here, their
ends show; how lamentable their last shall be, when at the blast of the Trumpet
they shall rise out of their graves, Mat. 25.i2.
that of the foolish Virgins may declare; woe, woe, woe; woeful is their
condition when they shall behold the terrible Judge coming in flaming fire to
render vengeance unto all such as know not God, 2 These. 1.8.
neither obey the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. If the beginning of their
sorrows be so terrible, what will the end be? O who can express the the
thousandth part of that which they shall then feel? If their entrance into
Hell be so fearful, what are the fire, worm, blackness of darkness,
perpetual separation from God, his Angels, and Children, and whatsoever might
afford them any comfort? Then shall not we repent that God has been pleased
here to awake us by his gracious corrections, and merciful visitations out of
the bed of security: then shall our mouths be filled with laughter for our
deliverance out of the captivity of Babylon. Then shall not we forget to sing
our perpetual Hallelujah, when we shall experimentally feel an actual
difference made between the wheat and the chafe, the gold and the dross, the
good fishes and the bad, the good ground and the evil, the fruitful tree and
the barren, the sons and the bastards, the sheep and the goats, the good
figs and the rotten, the woman's seed and the Serpents, Gods children and
Satan's. Then shall we with one mind and voice bless the glorious Trinity,
that as our wakening differed from the wickeds, so also our Portion. Oh blessed
be our God, Psalm. i7.15.
we shall behold his face in righteousness, and shall be satisfied when we
awake with his likeness. 7. All sins have not the like proportion of labor in
mortifying.
We must not think that all sins have the like proportion of labor in
mortifying; the greatest is to be employed about our inward inbred corruption,
as being our greatest and most deceitful enemy, opening the door to all the
rest. Ier. 39.3. Simil.
As when the gates of Jerusalem were made open for Nebuchadnezzar, all his
Nobles, Servants, and Soldiers; in like manner entered thereat, ruining as well
Jerusalem it self, as the Temple of God which was the beauty thereof. So, if
our hearts shall once admit that cruel Nebuchadnezzar the devil, such a rout
will also enter in, that thereby as well the powers of the soul as body, shall
be captived, and more hardly used, then those Kings whom Adonibezek kept in
slavery; Judge. i.7.8
when this is by Satan misused, defiled, or polluted, complain we unto God,
as Gods people did of Antiochus Epiphanes for polluting their material Temple.
Psalm. 79.1.
O God, the Heathen are come into thine inheritance, thy holy Temple have they
defiled, they have laid Jerusalem on heaps. So shall we find that as
Antiochus (notwithstanding of his power and craft) was in Gods good time
severely punished, his pride abated, the pollutions of the Temple cleansed,
Idolatry abolished, Images broke in pieces, the blood of the Saints revenged,
the Temple re-edified and gloriously adorned: so Satan shall be dispossessed,
and we set at liberty. Ioh. 2.15.
As Christ's entry into the Temple of Jerusalem was powerful, to the casting
out of the buyers and sellers, and overthrowing the Tables of the
Money Changers, and seats of them that sold Doves; so shall his entrance be
into our souls to the ejection of Satan who has stolen thereinto. Then
shall Satan with greater shame be excluded, together with the whole rabble or
divellish host of wicked thoughts by him brought in, 2 Chronicles. 2.
then Azariah was shut out of the Temple by the Lords Priests, for presuming to
offer incense in the house of the Lord. Note.
Oh shameless impudent spirit, who has been thrust out of Heaven, Jude 6.
and compelled to depart out of men whom thou have possessed, Mat. 9.33.
and when we were dead in sins and trespasses wast through Gods mercy cast
out of us, Ephesians. 2.1.
and since the first time of our conversion art hated and abhorred of us; and
when the fiery flames of zeal and love were strong in us, (we speak it to
Gods glory) have been often vanquished by us, and been forced to fly from
us; yea, through the power of our pitiful God, and his blessing on our
prayers, watching, fasting, reading, meditating, on the sweet Word of Life,
conferring, retirednes, (whence have proceeded unspeakable Joys, yea rather
unutterable Ravishments, when we could have said with Peter, Mat. i7.4.
It is good for us to be here, and which we could abundantly discover, if it
were not lest the sense of the now want of them might wonderfully discourage
us, or that others the Saints of God should think that we glory in our selves)
and such like heavenly exercises have even trembled and quaked; how dare thou
now thou caitife, thou hell hound, thou damned wretch, thus usurp the seat of
God, or defile his holy Temple? even this shall add unto thy torments. Now
seeing that the full and absolute possession of the heart is that whereat
Satan mainly aims; it must be your care O dear sons and daughters of God,
to keep the same with all diligence: Pro. 4.23.
but if happily he has already got possession; you must by all means endeavor
to get him dispossessed, and thereafter still to be clensing and washing the
same from the filthiness he has left behind, which being but a little
neglected, will put you to a great deal of trouble; and as a root of bitterness
quickly manifest it self in its pernicious fruits. 8. Of the first motions of
sin we must neither be too curious, nor altogether careless.
Touching the first motions unto sin in us, (getting grace to resist the same
indeed, though not without great grief of mind) we must neither be too
curious, neither yet altogether careless thereof. Too curious, in a
substantial and deep trial of them, most of them being so vain and idle, as
we cannot imagine whence they should arise in us: To be too curious about them
is harmful.
Thus to do, were to go about a work both harmfull, impossible, unprofitable,
and cumbersome: harmfull, as whereby we hinder our peace of Conscience, and put
off a better exercise, even the true trial of our heart, with the sincere
Circumcision of the same: impossible, as who shall never be able to comprehend
their number, no more then we are of the Stars of Heaven, or sand which is
by the Seashore: unprofitable, inasmuch as when we have done all that we can
do, they are inevitable; not the holiest men of God, (extraordinary persons)
being freed therefrom: cumbersome, as which would continually employ us, so
that we should not perform any other duty, how comfortable or profitable
soever; the same being indeed as sudden, so through Gods goodness no less
swiftly flying away: To be altogether careless of them dangerous.
Altogether careless, as which proceed from an heart in part unsanctified. By
reason of them our tender Consciences must at some times deeply lament, even
that the house of the soul which should be filled with the glory of God, is
any ways filled with such smoke as arises from the fiery furnace of the heart
not wholly reformed. Simil.
That they may be restrained, the Stone must be put on the Wells mouth, our
hearts enclosed as a Fountain, not else to be opened, but when some springs of
heavenly waters are to be drawn from thence to refresh the thirsty soul,
Genesis 29.i0.
as Jacob when Rachel came to water her Fathers Sheep, removed the stone from
the wells mouth, and after they were watered, put it on again. 9. We must ask
pardon for our secret sins.
We must not in any case neglect to ask pardon for our secret sins which we
drink in, whereof we are not aware, and which seldom come to be remembered
of us. As we are to pray for the pardon of presumptuous sins, of the sins
of our youth, of sins known; so are we to pray to be cleansed from secret
faults, Psalm. i9.i2.
sins unknown: though unknown to us they enter in; Genesis 3i.30.
yet as Jacob (upon Labans complaint that his Gods were stolen) suspected no
doubt that some of his had them, Genesis 35.2.
and so could not rest satisfied till they were delivered unto him, and he had
buried them; Simil.
so may we suspect that we are guilty of no small number of them, and
accordingly pray to be forgiven them. 10. The flesh not always mortified when
it seems so to be.
We must not conceive that the flesh is indeed mortified, when it seems so to
be; for seemingly it may be, when indeed it is not; as when the occasion of
sin is removed, when it is not violent: when its act is removed from one
sin unto another; when through the fear of judgment it is restrained: when
the strength of nature is spent, etc. our evidence must be sounded, then in
those, else it is but very slender. 11. Mortification must be continued.
Having as well to our own as others thinking mortified our lusts, our work is
not then at an end. The heart is not so mortified, but there is still sinful
corruption in it, which requires continual Mortification. 12. Faith in Christ
must precede mortification.
We must not conceive that first we must be moritfied, and then lay hold on
Christ for remission of sins: for till we be (in some measure) assured of
the pardon thereof through Christ, we shall never soundly slay the same, Note.
mortification being indeed a fruit of faith. 13. Lusts to be distinguished the
one from the other.
In opposing our sinful and fleshly lust, we must carefully distinguish
between them and others; for all are not carnal, but some natural, as others
spiritual. Those from these may be thus differenced. Fleshly lusts how
discerned.
They are ever immoderate; They are for the most part unsavory and loathsome:
They are unto flesh and blood mavelous pleasing, and give corruption a
mavelous measure of Contentment. They leave nothing but vanity and vexation
of spirit behind them. 14. Howsoever, after many a fiery dart thrown at us,
we meet with many others, happily old ones made with a new devise; or it may be
new ones, wherewith we were never before either acquainted or assaulted; We
must not give over to fight even to the end.
yet must not we give over; but after the example of PAVL and other Worthies,
fight the good fight, Gal. 6.9.
not being at any time weary of well-doing as who in due time shall reap if we
faint nor. Had we but grace thus to lay the matter to heart, that if we fight
not, we shall live in slavery under the devil, the world and the flesh, of all
others the greatest, or rather the only slaves; but if we fight manfully, and
persevere therein, we shall be conquerors over all those, and as victorious
Kings trample Satan under our feet; we would seek to prevent our own misery,
and get an assured possession of glory, gather courage in our decayed spirits,
and lustily go on. Did we but call to mind how often the Lord has been
pleased heretofore to help, the same, 1 Samuel 7.1^.
would be as Ebenezer unto the Israelites to encourage us against our
spiritual Philistims. As the Israelites in after ages, reading how Joshua had
once before discomfited Amalek, Exo. 17.15.
and of the Altar which Moses did then build, calling it by the name of Jehovah
Nissi, that is, the Lord is my banner; could not but be encouraged hereby to
have wars with them; Simil.
so is it with Gods children calling to mind their former spiritual victories:
of whom it may be more truly said, then David did it of Saul and Jonathan: 2 Samuel 1.22.
From the blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty, the bow of Jonathan
turned not back, and the sword of Saul returned not empty. Note.
They have greater joy and gladness, with more pleasure and contentment, in
striving against their corruption of nature, (which by degrees they still
lessen and weaken) then the greatest soldier has to glut his sword with the
blood of his enemy. Strive we against these beasts (our beastly lusts) as
Paul fought with the Beasts of Ephesus; 1 Cor. 15.32. Beastly men either or
both.
those were outward, but these are inward beasts. If those had prevailed, they
would only have killed the body if these should, they would destroy both body
and soul: those might have been overcome with bodily weapons; these no
otherwise but by the whole Armor of GOD, Faith, Hope, Repentance, the Word,
Prayer, with the other pieces; yea, in fighting against these, Gods power is
after an especial manner manifested. Quit we our selves then like men, Judge.
16.39.
so dealing with our lusts as Samson with the Philistims, even by slaying more
of them hereafter, then heretofore we have done; as he more at his death then
in his life; yea, i Sam. 15.3.
as Saul should not have spared any one Amalekite, but utterly destroyed them
all: so do we destroy the whole brood of our sinful and fleshly lusts, not
sparing any one of these cursed Amalekits. Thus of the Caveats to be observed
in this our Warfare, and so of the 8. Particular.
CHAP. V. How to discern when we prevail against the Flesh, with its
inordinate Lusts and Affections.
AN enemy is not always vanquished when he seems so to be: Josh. 8.15.
Joshua and all Israel made as if they were beaten before the men of Ai, and
fled by the way of the wilderness; yet was it merely out of Policy, to draw
them out of their City, Judge. 20.39.
as afterward the Israelites to the same end used the same Stratagem when they
discomfited the Benjamites. It is thus with our Lusts, they may seem to be
mortified, when indeed they are not, but only wait their fittest opportunity
to do us mischief. Signs whereby to discern whether our lusts be mortified.
How then we should judge of them, many or few, great or small, strong or weak,
violent or peaceable, conquerers or conquered, discern we by these signs.

1. Gal. 5 24. They are Christ's.
They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts:
and they that are in him, walk not after the flesh, Romans 8.1.
but after the Spirit. How to know whether we be in Christ.
Art thou in Christ? then thou art a mortified creature, else not.

Q. How shall I know whether or not I am in Christ?

A. If thou walk in the light; 1 Ioh. 1 6.
if thou walk as Christ walked; 1 Ioh. 2.6.
if thou keep his commandments, 1 Ioh 3.24.
and have his Spirit in thee; if thou perseverest in the knowledge and
obedience of the Cospel: 1 Ioh. 2.24.
if thou art fruitful in good works; Ioh. 15.2. 2 Cor. 5.17.
if thou art a new creature, teh art thou in Christ.

2. Rom 8.1.
They that walk after the Spirit walk not after the Flesh. They walk after
the Spirit.
Walk thou after the Spirit, then walk not thou after the Flesh, but art
a mortified creature.

Q. How to know whether we walk after the Spirit.
How shall I know whether or not I walk after the Spirit?

A. If thou walk after the Spirit, then live thou not according to the
motion and guidance of the corruption of nature, but according to the motion
and guidance of the Spirit of grace and sanctification. Thou earnestly desitest
both to know and walk in the good way. Thou do in every thing run unto God
by prayer, that he would guide and direct thee. Thou resolvest in every thing
to please God. Thou preferrest his will unto all things else, profits,
pleasures, preferments, yea and thine own life too. Thou walk carefully,
warily, and circumspectly, always ordering thy steps with discretion, lest
thou should in any sort tempt, vex, grieve, or quench the Spirit.

3. Romans 6.1^. They are alive unto God
They that are indeed dead unto sin, are alive unto God, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. They do really and truly partake as well of the virtue and
efficacy of Christ's death unto Mortification, as of his Resurrection unto
newnes of life. Being on the one part mortified persons, in whom the death of
Christ has broken the force of sin, that it cannot reign, in whom the vigor
and force of sin (which is the life thereof) is crushed and extinct, in whom
sin cannot bring forth such bitter fruits as it was wont to do before
sanctification, Simil.
who therefore even as men who have so lost their bodily strength as it cannot
be recovered, are said to be dead while they live, how soever sin does still
remain in them, are truly said to be dead thereunto, because the power and
strength of sin is sore abated, and daily lessened and weakened, so on the
other part are they quickened and moved by the holy Spirit to do what is
pleasing, and acceptable in Gods sight. A difference between nature and grace.
It Is so in nature I confess as it is in grace, he that is corporally dead,
does not corporally live, but he that is spiritually dead, does spiritally
live, he is dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God, yea, his being dead
unto sin, Note.
does argue that he is alive unto God, as his being alive unto God, that he is
dead unto sin.

4. They that are dead are freed from sin. Romans 6.7.
They that are spiritually dead by mortification, They that are spiritually
dead to finne are freed therfrom.
they are freed (I say) from sin, not in regard of its infection, I confess,
nor in regard of its corruption, which cleaves to their nature, as skin to
their flesh, or as flesh to their bones; nor in regard of the temptations unto
sin, How a child of God is freed from sin.
the godly being subject unto all these whilst they are in this life; but in
regard of the guilt and punishment of sin, which is forgiven them through
Christ, as also in regard of the authority, dominion, rule, command, and
compulsion of sin, from which they are freed; so that although they do sin;
yet are they not led or ruled thereby. Art thou thus freed from sin? then art
thou spiritutually dead, a mortified creature.

Q. How to know whether we are freed from sin.
How shall I know whether or not I am thus freed from sin?

A. If thou have no purpose at all to sin, but determinest with David to keep
Gods righteous judgments, Psalm. 119.106.
and so in all things to please him. If thou art afraid of sin, and with
Joseph resistest the inticements which may provoke thee thereunto, Genesis 39.10.
shunning every occasion of sin, and curbing even thy sudden motions unto
evil. If thou daily call upon God to strengthen thee against the power of
sin. If sin daily decreaseth in thee, so that thou find its force and
vigor more and more abated. If thou art truly grieved at thine own and the
sins of others. If thou rejoycest at thine own, Romans 7.24.
and the spiritual freedom of others, loving thy dear Savior which has
freed thee, Romans 9.2.
and tendering the glory of him thy deliverer above thine own salvation. Thou
art thus freed from sin, and so spiritually dead; indeed a mortified creature.

5. 2 Cor. 5.17.
They that are new creatures are mortified creatures. They are new creatures.
Old things are past away, if all things are become new. The more renewed thou
art, the greater thy reformation is both in heart and life, the more do thou
prevail against thy corruption; the greater is thine increase in the practice
of Mortification. How to know if we be new creatures. An universal change.
Whether do thou not find in thy self an absolute change and alteration
from that thou wast heretofore? Have thou not now new eyes, New eyes.
leaving with delight to behold vanity, covenanting against Lust, and
searching into the wonders of Gods Law? Have thou not now new ears stopped
against the entisements of the Serpent, New ears.
and open to hear what God will speak? Have thou not a new tongue, A new
tongue.
not to sing the old Ditty of Nature, to lie, swear, backbite, flatter and the
like; but to sing a new Song to the praise of Gods name? Have thou not new
hands, New hands
not to smite with the fist of iniquity, nor to pull in with rapine and
robbery; but to distribute unto the poor, casting thy bread upon the waters,
and giving the right hand of fellowship to every good action within thy reach?
New feet.
Have thou not new feet, not to be swift to shed blood; but to run the way of
Gods Commandments? Art thou not renewed in thy nature, New nature. New gifts.
having new gifts, (Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, Humility, Prayer, etc.) New
delights (in the Word, New delights.
Sacraments, Prayer, Meditation on Gods Works, and the like.) New sorrows for
Sin, New sorrows.
for displeasing GOD, for the afflictions of Gods People) as in like manner new
desires, New desires.
after the purity of Nature, pardon of Sin, softness of heart, the presence
of God, audience in Prayer, and such like? New obedience, for its manner,
matter and end.
Art thou not new in thy obedience, both in regard of the manner of it, of the
matter of it, or end of the same, performing Gods commandments willingly,
diligently, uprightly, universally, carefully, at all times, and in every thing
aiming at Gods glory? New affections.
Art thou not new in thine affections, renewed in the spirit of thy mind? New
mind Ephesians. 4.23. New heart.
Have thou not now a new heart? for a stony, a fleshy heart: for an whorish, a
chaste heart: for a covetous, an heart weaned from the world: for a proud, an
humble heart: for an hypocritical, deceitful and false heart, a sincere,
plain, and honest heart: for a darkened, an enlightened heart: for a stubborn,
perverse and rebellious heart, an obedient and willing heart? New gesture.
Art thou not renewed even in thy outward gestures, being affable and courteous
to all, and walking circumspectly toward those that are without? If so, then
art thou a new creature, Col. 4.5.
a mortified creature, a conqueror over the Flesh, with its affections and
lusts.

6. A setting of ones self against all sins.
They that are in some measure truly mortified, do not approve or connive at
any one sin in themselves; but to set themselves against some, as that in the
mean time they are in like manner watchful over all others. Set thou thy
self against all sins? can thou not endure to give way unto thine own
heart in the entertainment of any one? Make thou it a matter of conscience,
as to abstain from public, notorious, scandalous, gross sins; so to
abstain from the least secret sin, every idle word, or wandering thought?
Leavest thou not any one Amalekite alive that thou can come at? Can thou so
far deny thy self as to forsake all and follow CHRIST? Renouncest thou daily
even thy bosom sins, thy darling sins, thy best beloved sins, of profit,
pleasure, preferment? Gal. 5.19.
Can thou not away with adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousnes,
idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions,
heresies, envying murders, drunkenness, revellings, with such like works of
the flesh, whether less or more manifest? Thou art a mortified creature. Simil.
As in nature death seiseth on all the members of the body (till which time who
can be said to be truly dead) so in grace, mortification must take hold on all
our earthly members, else it is but unsound and frivolous. Simil.
As in nature a man may live though he cut off one of his limbs; so may a man
in sin, though he cast away not one, but many sins The examples of Ahab,
Iehu, and Herod are pregnant to this purpose.

7 They that do daily grow in grace do daily mortify sin, They grow in
grace.
yet the more they do grow in the one, the more do they mortify the other, 2 Samuel 3.1. Simil.
As David's house did daily wax stronger and stronger, but Saul's weaker and
weaker; so being endued with the grace of mortification, grace will overcome
nature, virtue vanquish vice, faith, repentance, holiness, humility, love,
prayer, etc. increase, when as thy lusts will decrease. Growest thou not in
grace? Thou do. How will it appear? How to know whether we grow in grace.
Thou love grace; thou labourest for grace; thou highly prisest grace; thy
thoughts, words and works relish and savor of grace; thou can not away with
any thing that may in any sort hinder grace; thou art further and further
enamoured with the love of grace; thou still hungerest and thirstest for more
grace, and can not be satisfied with that thou have already. Thou art every
day more and more careful to avoid sin, more and more desirous to vanquish
thy corruptions, more and more careless of the things of this World. Thus
indeed appears it infallibly that thou growest in grace, and daily prevailest
against thy corruptions.

8. They hate sin.
They that do truly mortify their lusts, and in some measure prevail over
them, have anextreame hatred and detestation thereof wrought in their hearts.
Loathest thou sin? do thou truly hate and abhor it? questionless, thou
prevailest over it. Qu. How shall I know whether or not I do truly hate it?

A. If thou love the Lord, thou hate sin; How to know whether we hate
sin.
if thou can not endure to speak a good word of it, or for it; if thy daily
actions tend unto its ruin; if thou grievest exceedingly whenever thou
fallest thereinto, taking on thy self an holy revenge for the same; if thou
hate it not so much in respect of its effects, or punishment ensuing
thereupon, as its very nature, being a breach of Gods Law; if thou grievest
when it seems to have the better, but rejoycest when it is put to the worst;
then do thou hate sin, and so prevailest against it: by degrees vanquishest
the same.

9. They that do truly mortify their lusts, and prevail over their own
corruption, having once escaped the corruption that is in the world through
lust; are exceeding careful to avoid relapses therein, not again to be
entangled therewith. A burnt child dreads the fire; Beasts that have fallen
into ditches or pits, will beware of them afterward. The Bird that has escaped
out of the Fowlers ginnes, will avoid them another time. So the Saints
remembering their former misery and dangerous condition whilst they were slaves
unto sin, are so much the more careful to keep it under; to this end
shunning the occasion of sin, and abstaining even from all appearance of
evil. Has Peter denied his Master? he will do so no more. Has David been
an adulterer? he will be so no more. Has Noah been drunk? he will be more
wary in his drinking after. But if God for their leaving of him, or their want
of watchfulness and improving his graces shall be pleased to leave them unto
themselves for a time, even after their knowledge, and acknowledging of the
truth; so that they yield unto violent temptations, and fall into the very
sadness of their unregenerate condition; though they fall into the acts thereof,
they fall not into the love thereof. They do what they allow not, what they
would not, what they are heartily grieved for. Thou art careful to avoid all
sins, but especially thine own sins, thy formerly dearly beloved sins; herein
appears it that thou art a mortified Creature.

10. They that have a true sight and sense of their sins, do in some measure
mortify the same. Art thou acquainted with Satan's Stratagems? Art thou not
ignorant of his wiles? Discernest thou the deceitfulness of sin? Observest
thou the subtilty of the flesh, and how cunningly it would insinuate it self?
Know thou its traps and tricks, its ginns and snares, its baits and
allurements? Thou can not but in the like manner avoid the same. Thou will
not willingly run headlong unto destruction.

11. As before bodily death there is for the most part sickness, and at the time
of death both unwillingnesse to undergo it, and painfulnesse in undergoing the
same: They are truly humbled, and feel in themselves a great deal of
unwillingnesse.
so before this death unto sin, there is deep humiliation and dejection
through the sense and apprehension of Gods wrath wrought in us by the law of
God, Simil.
the soul being brought thereby, as it were unto the very gates of hell. There
is also no small unwillingnesse in us to undergo it, the Flesh having a strong
heart, and so loath to die; as in like manner no less pain, then to pull out
our right eye, or cut off our right hand. Have thou been thus spiritually
dejected and affected? thou art a mortified creature.

12. As on those that are corporally dead, neither alluring objects, flattering
speeches, golden promises, hope of pleasure, fear of danger, Not any thing is
of force to withdraw us from God.
or such like, do work at all: so if thou art indeed dead unto sin, thou will neither be terrified by threats, Simil.
nor tickled with pleasures, nor shall any allurements withdraw thee from God;
but still thou keep fast hold on God (though at some times in great
weakness) and continuest at deadly feud and open defiance with thy flesh, and
all its ad herents: thus how to discern when we prevail against the flesh,
and so of the 9th. particular.

CHAP. X. The Application of the foregoing matter.
HAving discovered the Enemy to be encountered; showed that it is to be
encountered, laid open by whom it is to be encountered; set forth the reasons
why it is to be encountered; declared after what manner it is to be
encountered: described the means whereby it may be encountered; made known the
Motives or Encouragements whereby we may be stirred up to encounter it;
propounded such necessary Caveats as are to be observed in this spiritual
Combat; as also manifested by what signs we may discern when we prevail
against it: What remains, but that as the Lord encouraged Moses to fight
against Og the King of Bashan ( fear him not, Numb. 21.34.
for I have delivered him into thy hand, and all his people, and his land, and
thou shall do to him as thou did to Sihon King of the Amorttes which dwelt
at Heshbon) and Moses encouraged Joshua from the Lord, Deuteronomy. 31.23.
(Be strong, and be of a good courage; for thou shall bring the children of
Israel into the Land which J swear unto them; and I will be with thee) as the
Lord himself after the death of Moses; Josh. 1.9.
(Be strong and of a good courage, be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed,
for the Lord thy God is with thee whithersoever thou go) and Joshua the
Captains and men of War that went with him, Josh. 10.24.
(Come near put your feet upon the necks of these Kings; Josh. 10.25.
fear not nor be dismayed, be strong and of a good courage: for thus shall the
Lord do to all your enemies, against whom you fight;) and Deborah Barak to
fight against Sisera; Judge. 4.14.
(up, for this is the day in which the Lord has delivered Sisera into thine
hand: is not the Lord gone out before thee?) and the Philistms one another to
fight against the Jsraelites; 1 Samuel 4.9.
(Be strong, and quit your selves like men, O ye Philistims, that ye be not
servants unto the Hebrews, as they have been to you, quit your selves like
men, and fight;) and Iahaziel the son of Zechariah a Levit did encourage
Judah, the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and King Iehosaphat; 2. Chr. 20.15.
(Be not afraid nor dismayed by reason of this great multitude: for the
battle is not yours, but Gods, 2. Chr. 20.17.
etc. Fear not, nor be dismayed; to morrow go out against them; for the Lord
will be with you.) So sending every one of you to fight the Lords Battles, by
warring against your own Lusts; I should in his name the more to incite you
hereunto, and further encourage you herein, conclude all with a word of
Exhortation.

What Argument might not be used for your encouragement? Arguments inciting us
us to war against our lusts.


Necessity. Necessity.
What more needful? Does not GOD command it, whose will both is and must be a
Law unto us? Is not the Flesh still plotting our destruction? Are we not the
further endangered, the more we yield unto it? Shall not our lusts be snares
and traps unto us, scourages in our sides, and thorns in our eyes, if we make
any covenant with them? Are we not thereby further and further defiled? Do we
not thereby further and further grieve the good Spirit of God? Is not our
communion, familiarity and acquaintance with God, further and further
interrupted? Are we not thereby further and further drawn to the commission of
gross and grievous sins? Will not this root of bitterness daily produce in us
most bitter fruits? Will not God be angry at our continuance herein? Can it be
otherwise but that he should inflict upon us heavy and fearful judgments by
reason of the same? Romans 8.i3.
If we live after the flesh, shall we not die? Shall we not both here and
hereafter be punished as perjured persons; Rebels against the GOD of Heaven;
contemners of his Admonitions; despisers of CHRIST'S death, and treaders under
foot of his most precious blood; grievers of the Spirit; breakers of the hearts
of Gods children? stumbling blocks unto the Ungodly?

Equity. Equity.
What more just or lawful? Is not sin Gods enemy? Is it not a murderer of
the Lord of glory? Does it not daily lust against the Spirit? Is it not one of
the maine enemies of our souls salvation? Does it not daily provoke and stir
us up to the breach of Gods Laws? Is it not a mere coozener and deceiver?
will it not beguile us in the end? Shall we not utterly miss of our hopes, if
we trust to its offers, and follow its allurements? will it not requite us with
loss in stead of profit, torment in stead of pleasure, shame in stead of
credit, pain in stead of ease, misery in stead of happiness, and Hell in stead
of Heaven?

Utility. Utility.
What more profitable? Do we not hereby obtain tranquillity of mind, and
daily peace of conscience? have we not hereby daily experience of GODS
powerful presence accompanying Us? Does not continual glory redound unto the
Majesty of the most high hereby? Is there not maintained in us an holy fear
and suspicion of our own weakness, whereby we are humble-minded? Do we not
by opposing our inward corruption, prevent and stay many outward actual
sins? Shall not have less to do in the end of our journey if all our days
we be breaking up our fallow ground? Shall we no hereby by attain unto an
higher and higher detestation of sin? Shall we not hereby make conscience
even of the least, of the smallest sins, as being breaches of Gods Law? Shall
we not hereby be assured of Gods love toward in Christ as well in the pardon
and forgiveness of our sins, as our continuance in the detestation and
mortification of the same?

Credit. Credit.
What can procure more? Shall we not hereby be esteemed of God, reverenced of
the Angels, honored of all good men? I may add, Mar. 6.20.
that as Herod bare no small respect unto John the Baptist (a pattern of the
doctrine of mortification which he urged upon others) so even the wicked will
in their judgment (whatsoever they do in their practice) approve of one that
is thoroughly mortified. Thus shall it be done to the man who mortifyeth his
lusts; he shall be honored of all; as in heaven most of all.

Undoubted furtherance and help from others, Undoubted furthrance and help.
new strength and courage put in ourselves.

What the Lord said unto Joshua touching his enemies, Josh 1.5.
There shall not any man be able to stand before thee all the days of thy
life: as I was with Moses; so I will be with thee: I will not fail thee nor
forsake thee. Says not he the like unto our souls touching our lusts, that
they shall not stand before us? he will go along with us; he will not fail
us or forsake us? Does not he go along with us? does not he fight for us?
has not that great Lion of the Tribe of Judah bound that strong one, Rev. 5.5.
and spoiled him, Col. 2.15.
setting us at liberty? Gal. 5.17.
lusts not the Spirit against the flesh on our behalf? are not also the
Angels ministering Spirits sent forth for our good? Heb. 1.14.
Do not they pitch their Tents round about our Tabernacle? Have we not in like
manner the benefit of the Prayers of all Gods people? yea more particularly (as
Vriah said unto David, 2 Samuel 11.11,
The Ark and Israel and Judah abide in Tents, and my Lord Ioab, and the
servants of my Lord are encamped in the open field. Simil.
Shall I then go into mine house to eat and to drink and to lie with my
wife? as thou live, and as thy soul lives, I will not do this thing) there
are some which do even sympathize with us in this Warfare, joining with us as
it were hand in hand, and setting their foot unto ours, being no less careful
of us (but rather more) then we are of our selves; which do even daily humble
themselves before God on our behalf, crying, calling, praying, knocking,
begging, interceding, Exodus 17.12.
and with Moses steadfastly lifting up their hands, that we may prevail against
our spiritual Amalehites.

Certain victory. Certain victory.
Not any duly and truly mortifying the flesh, with its lusts and affections,
either heretofore has been, or hereafter shall be overcome thereby, Tit. 1.2.
God that cannot lie has promised, Romans 8.33.
that if we do through the Spirit mortify the deeds of the body, we shall
live. As Joshua unto the people, Josh. 23.10.
One man of you shall chase a thousand; for the Lord your God, he it is that
fights for you as he has promised you. So may I say unto all such as shall
in truth war against their Iusts, though you had ten thousand of them in you,
you shall chase them away; for the Lord your God fights for you. Judge. 1.12.
It was the Angels speech unto Gideon, The Lord is with thee thou mighty man of
valor. It is no less true, even of the weakest Christian that does in truth
oppose his lusts; who may therefore triumph in the words of David. Ps. 60.22.
Through God we shall do valiantly, for he shall tread down our enemies: and
of Paul, If God be for us, Romans 8.31.
who can be against us?

Heaven it self. Heaven it self.
I have fought a good fight, (says S. Paul) I have finished my course, 2 Timothy
4.7.
J have kept the faith; henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day;
and not to me only, but to them also that love his appearing. Oh the promises
of great reward, if we shall fight lustily and persevere therein!

Whatsoever we have been heretofore, set we our selves now against our lusts.
The foregoing time of our ignorance, Act. 17.30.
God has graciously winked at, but now commands he all men every where to
repent. Some J know are men, yea mighty men of valor, others babes in Christ,
his young and tender lambs: let not those wax careless, but go on in their
might, that they may be saved from their spiritual Midianites; and let these
labor for strength and courage, casting all their care on God, who cares for
them. 1 Pet. 5.7.


O Jerusalem, Ier. 4.14.
wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved: how long shall
thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? 2 Cor. 7.1.
Oh let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit,
perfecting holiness in the fear of God. Romans 6.12.
Let not sin reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey it in the lusts
thereof. Neither yield ye your members as instruments of unrighteousness unto
sin; but yield your selves unto God, as those that are alive from the dead,
and your members as instruments of righteousness unto God. Romans i3.i2.
The night is far spent, the day is at hand; let us therefore cast off the
works of darkness, and let us put on the Armor of light; Romans i3.i3.
let us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in
chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying, but put ye on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts
thereof. Ep^h. 4.17.
This J say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not
as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their mind, having the understanding
darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in
them, because of the blindness of their heart, who being past feeling, have
given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleannes with
greedines. Col. 3.5.
Mortify your members which are upon the earth; fornication, uncleanness,
inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness which is Idolatry;
for which things sake the wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience.
Jn the which ye also walked sometime when ye lived in them. Ephesians. 4.22.
Put off concerning the former conversation the old man which is corrupt,
according to the deceitful lusts; and be renewed in the Spirit of your mind;
putting on that new man which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness: Tit. 2.11.
for the grace of God that brings salvation, has appeared to all men,
teaching us, that denying ungodlines and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world. Heb. 13.12.
Take heed brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief,
in departing from the living God; but exhort one another daily, while it is
called to day, lest any of you be hardened, through the deceitfulness of
sin, Heb. 12.12.
lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees; and make straight
paths for your feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of the way; but let
it rather be healed: look diligently, lest any man fail of the grace of God,
lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and thereby many be
defiled. 1 Pet. 4.2.
For as much as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm your selves
likewise with the same mind, for he that has suffered in the flesh has
ceased from sin, that he no longer should live the rest of his time in the
flesh to the lusts of men, but to the will of God; for the time past of our
life may suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when we walked in
lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, revellings, banquetings, and
abominable idolatries, wherein they think it strange that you run not with
them to the same excess of riot, speaking evil of you. 1 Pet. 2.11.
Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as strangers and pilgrims to abstain from
fleshly lusts which war against the soul; 1 Pet. 2.12.
having your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak
evil against you, as evil doers, they may by your good works which they
shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation.

Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might.
Ephesians. 6.10.11.
Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles
of the Devil; for we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this
world, against spiritual wickedness in high places; wherefore take unto you
the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and
having done all, to stand. Stand therefore having your loins girt about with
truth, and having on the breast plate of righteousness, and your feet shod with
the preparation of the Gospel of peace; above all taking the shield of faith,
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked; and
take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of
God; praying always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and
watching thereunto with all perseverance. Thus shall our corruption be
weakened, our flesh subdued, our old man crucified, the body of sin destroyed,
our consciences quieted, Gods Commandment obeyed, himself well pleased, our
selves both in soul and body here and hereafter really and truly blessed. Jude
24.
Now unto him that is able to keep us from falling, and to present us
faultlesse before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy: To the only
wise God our Savior, be glory and majesty, dominion and power now and ever.
Amen.

FINIS.

