THE Lord JESUS HIS COMMISSION (Under the Broad Seal of his HIGHNESS THE Royal
and Real Lord PROTECTOR of Heaven and Earth) as MAN, to be the alone JUDGE of
Life and Death, in the Great and General ASSIZE of the WORLD;

Proved and Improved before the Reverend Judges AT THE Assize holden at
Maidstone, March 17, 1655. FOR THE COUNTY of KENT.

By HENRY SYMONS, M. A. and Minister of the Gospel at Southfleet in KENT.

John 5. 22. 27. For the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment
to the Son, and has given him Authority to execute judgment also, because he
is the Son of man.

Hic ostendit, quod in ea carne venit judicaturus, in qua venerat judicandus.

Aug. de Civ. Dei, lib. 20. c. 6. Been terrena declinat, qui propter divina
descenderat, nec judex dignatur esse litium and arbiter facultatum, vivorum
habens mortuorumque judicium.

Amb. Tom. 3. lib. 7. in Lue. (...).
(...).
Sybil. Eryth. Vat. ut Eusebius. London, Printed by J. H. and are to be sold by H.
Crips in Pope's Head alley. 1657.

To the Truly Honorable HIS Deservedly Honored Friend Sr MICHAEL LIVESEY
Baronet, High Sheriff of the COUNTY of KENT.
Noble SIR,
IT is my ambition to put, not my Sermon, but my Service in Print; so much I
stand engaged to your Honor, that it is not the Dedication of my Sermon, but of
my self, that will satisfy you, nor that neither. I know this Critical, or
rather Hypercriticall, I had almost said, Hypocritical age, will censure and
slander me for pride and presumption in appearing so publicly, but the Orator
has made my Sen. de Ben. lib. 2. cap. 23.
Apology; Furtive gratias agunt qui in angulo and in aurem. They that give
private thanks for public favors; commit a theft for which they deserve
(though not to be burned in the hand) yet to be branded in their name for
ingratitude. This has caused me to proclaim my indearments and indebtments
upon the house top. It was my fear once (what was Furnius to Augustus Caesar)
Ne morerer ingratus. I have laid hold Erasm. Apoth. lib. 7.
therefore on this lock of opportunity, to publish to the world, what ground I
had to render such a Testimony of Gratitude. When I designed my self and
Ministerial service for Bristol, and to banish my self from mine own native
Country, by a perpetual Ostracism. and to say that which was written upon the
Tombstone of Scipio Africanus, Ingrata patria, ne ossa quidem Val. Max. lib.
5. cap. 3.
mea habes: unsought to, unsent to, on my part, you Barracado'd up my way with
Southfleet Living: Since which time I have fallen (fato nescio quo iniquo)
between the two Mil-stones of this age, Cavaliers and Cavellers, I mean,
profane sinners, and proud Sectaries, who endeavored to grind me to powder;
you always interposed your self to keep me from the malice of the one, and the
malignancy of the other. These storms alaid, perceiving that most men's
consciences were so festered with corruptions, that they hate him who rebukes
in the gate, and abhor him that speaks uprightly, Amos 5. 10. I resolved to
silence my self, because it was an evil time, ver. 13. and to observe that
rule, (...), to hide my self in some dark cloud or corner, and never to have
appeared in public any more; but to have concluded with Luther's Vadat mundus,
sicut vadit, nam vult vadere, sicut vadit. You then sued me with a Latitat, and
caused my personal appearance before the Judges, to answer se defendendo. Sir,
that such a broken potsheard (who did as little desire, as deserve to act any
part on such a public Theater) should be culled and called out by you, must
needs publish, your judgment was very weak, or your affection was very strong.
And because there is a Noverint universi upon your judgment, for the solidness
of it, I must acknowledge it was the vail of your Love that covered my many
defects and deficiencies for such an employment. You have been a fast and
faithful friend to me at all turns and times; You are none of those Glowworm
Amico's (with which this age more abounds, than Nilus with Crocodiles) who
promise and pretend much light and heat of love and affection, but being
touched and tried, have neither; but only the squalid and noisome matter of Your
servant Sir. You stood by me when it was little less than Treason to own a
Minister, who had sincerely begun with the Parliament-Cause, and did seriously
endeavor to keep the Parliament-Covenant. Wherefore having more reason, than
ever Aeschines had to Socrates, I Dedicate and Devote my self wholly to your
service. This acknowledgement had come out sooner, but that you were so serious
and sedulous to do your Country service, that you could not but have returned
Antipaters (...): But now hoping you shall have leave and leisure for
soulaffairs, I present that to you in whole, which you heard but in part. Time
was (by the Judges command) not Executor to, but Executioner of my Text, the
glass was the fatal Atropos, to cut asunder the life-thred of my Sermon, so
that I was Author operis imperfecti, I therefore here lay it forth, in the true
method it was composed. I preached it to you then to be a Star to guide you in
your present place, I present it to you now, to be a fiery Pillar to lead and
lighten you in your future pilgrimage. Sir, be pleased to let this Sermon be
another Jerome's Trumpet, to sound Judgments* Alarm always in your ears; I
can assure you it will be of serious consequence to you in your life, and of
sweet consolation to you in your death. But not to create further trouble
(verbum sapienti) I shall wind up all upon the quill of those words, which
were Paul's Prayer for good Onesiphorus, The Lord grant unto you that you may
find mercy of the Lord in that day, 2 Timothy 1. 18. Which is the daily Prayer of

Your obliged Chaplain, HENRY SYMONS.
From my Study in Southfleet, Nov. 1. 1657.
Reader, The absence of the Author, and his inconvenient distance from London,
has occasioned some lesser mistakes in this Sermon, which thou art desired to
amend Thus:

Errata.
Page 2. line 9. for profane, read profound. p. 3. l. 9. r. superficiem. p.
11. l. 15. r. principal. p. 16. l. 30. r. Sysamnes. p. 24. l. 27. r. qui. p.
25. l. 19. r. taken in adultery. p. 26. l. 38. r. faith. p. 27. l. 22. r.
center. p. 31. l. 5. r. Psalm. 50. v. 21. p. 32. l. 9. r. Arithusa. p. 34. l.
16. r. general.

The Text.
ACTS 17. 31. Because he has appointed a Day in the which he will Judge the
world in righteousness, by that Man whom he has ordained.
PAul being persecuted by the envious Jews from Thessalonica, v. 5. and
prosecuted by them to Berea, v. 13. is carried by providence to Athens, v. 15.
A place not more Famous for Learning, than Infamous for Superstition: which
Paul perceiving, his heart fired, the flame whereof vented at his tongue
against their Idolatry, v. 16, 17

The Philosophers readily encounter him, being joyful to meet with any
Champion that will combat with them, verse. 18.

With all celerity, yet civility they carry him to Areopagus, the highest Court
in Athens, v. 19. where he standing up in the midst of Mars-hill, makes a most
Elegant and Eloquent Oration, stuffed with so much Rhetoric, strengthened with so
much Reason, that they might have said, as Julian did of Christians using the
Heathens Learning, (...), Like birds we are wounded with Arrows headed with our
own Feathers. Here I might take occasion to acquaint you with the excellency
and necessity of Oratory, as a handmaid to Divinity; but I am not now in the
Rhetoric Schools.

I shall leave the Rhetorical part, and insist on the Rational, in which Paul
labors two things:

1. To convince them by Reason. 2. To convert them to Religion.
1. He spreads before them a draft of their own folly, showing the Masters of
Reason had forfeited their Reason, that such profane Philosophers should
worship a God, that they know not whence he is, what he is, who he is, where he
is: that a Bill should be sent to the Grand Jury of Philosophers about that God
that gives Being, Breathing, and every blessing, and they should return an
Ignoramus. Lucian (the Praevaricator in his age) did observe, that the very
Clowns and Corydons, neighbors to them, did deride the Philosophers, by
swearing by him that was unknown at Athens.

2. He presses on them their Being from in
God:

Which he confirms by one of their Prophets, but as we term them, their Poets;

(...). v. 28. A piece of Aratus an Heathenish Poet very delightful to King
Antiochus in his days.

Obs. A piece of an Heathenish Poet is in the Scripture: What offense then can
it be to be in a Sermon. We have three singular and sweet Arguments couched up
in this Discourse.

1. God made you, therefore you cannot make God.

2. God made you of better matter and metal than gold and silver, wood and
stone; now if a living Man be better than any Picture or Statue whatever, then
it much proclaims your vanity and weakness to make a God of that which is far
below your selves.

3. He made you of his Race and Kin, according to your nobler part (that
divinae aurae particula) your Soul, therefore your worship of him must be such
as principally flows from that, viz. pure and spiritual worship; as Cato,
though a Heathen, could affirm.

Si Deus est animus (nobis ut carmina dicunt)
Hic tibi praecipue sit pura mente colendus.
Having wrought conviction, he endeavors conversion, by pressing and
persuading them to Repentance, from the great and general command of God, ver.
30. The times of this ignorance God winked at, but now commands all men,
(...) i. e. superficium tantum intuens. Sanct.
every where to repent: i. e. God was pleased once to be an Overseer to the
world, but now he is Lord High Constable of the world, to command you to repent.

Obs. Repentance for sin is the first and great Gospel duty. Paul presses
this Inprimis upon the Philosophers, from Gods universal command both of
persons and places, All men, every where, to repent: How does this beat down
the flag of the Antinomians, or rather Autonomians, who say it is so far from a
Gospel duty to repent for sin, that it is a sin for to repent.

In my Text he gives the reason why it is so necessary to repent, because of
that rigid Judge, and righteous judgment, that are surely and certainly to
come, Because he has appointed a Day.

Doct. It will be a dangerous and dreadful thing for Philosophers, Orators,
Masters of Reason, the wisest and wittiest of men to be found in a state of
sin and superstition in the day of Judgment.

The words in themselves are a lively description of the great and general
Assize.

There are three things to be done about them.

1. Explication of the Terms. 2. Division of the Text. 3. Deduction of the
Truths.
First, To explicate and unfold.

1. He has appointed: (...) posuit; he has put it among the Records of
heaven, in his eternal Decree has fixed it.

2. A, Day: precisely a day artificial set and short; we read of less, not of
more, Matthew. 24. 36. Of that day and hour.

3. To judge: (...), divide and separate (si^ proprie, Pasor.) Judicio
Discussionis, Retributionis,
Aquin.

4. The World: (...), orbem terrarum, the rational, but sinful world: vile
Angels, wicked men.

5. In righteousuesse: (...), in equity; a virtue highly valued among the
Heathen, that the Philosopher says of it, it out shines the evening and
morning Star, and concludes with Theognis,

(...). Arist. 5to Eth. cap. 3.


6. By that man: (...), for (...) an Hebraism, Piscat. (...), very usual in the
Scripture, Lor. in loc.

1. Man, i. e. the nature and shape of a man, perfect man, though more perfect
than any man: Virum attamen ut supra virum. Orig. in Matthew. 1.


2. That man.

1. Per modum excellentiae, that good man; Job 1. 1. There was a man in the
land of Vz, i. e. one good man among many bad in Edom and Idumaea.

2. Per modum eminentiae, that great man, i. e. a Judge in power and authority,
a Magistrate Civil or Military.

Arma virumque cano. Virgil. Aen. 1.

Number. 27. 16. Set a man over the Congregation.

3. Per modum conjunctionis, that good man, that great man, that Ish, as
Critics observe; a man of men fitted to honor God and govern men. Jer. 5. 1.
Run ye to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now if you can
find a man; surely no hard matter in such a thronged City as Jerusalem was, to
find a man, but such a man (qualem vix reperit unum) as God requires, a good
and great man: This is a sweet and happy conjunction, when great men are good
men, and when good men are great men; far better than Plato's Commonwealth,
ubi Philosophi sunt reges, and reges Philosophantur.

7. Whom he has ordained: (...), pro (...) Grecism, Piscat. Per quem
decreverat, Vatab.

Obs. That man whom God has anointed to be man's Savior, he has also
appointed to be man's Judge.

Secondly, To divide the Text; in which are five parts.

1. The Author and Ordainer, he that commands Repentance, God. 2. The
circumstance of time, a day. 3. The felons to be adjudged, the world. 4. The
manner how, in righteousness. 5. The Judge, who? that man whom God has
ordained.
Thirdly, To deduce and derive the Truths, which though they are very many, yet
I shall contract, or rather extract the virtue of these five parts, into this
quintessential Doctrine:

Doct. That God has given that man Christ Jesus, the power and prerogative for
the judicial transactions of the day of judgment.

In the profecution of this Point I shall show you,

1. (...), That it is so. 2. (...), Why it is so. 3. (...), How he is so.
First, (...), That it is so: And here I shall summon both Law and Gospel to
give in their evidence to confirm this Truth.

I. The Law, which says it can witness, that Enoch the seventh from Adam
prophesied, Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints to execute
judgment upon all, Jude 14.

Give me leave to make the best of my witnesses evidence; and this I shall do
in four particulars.

1. Observe the antiquity of this Truth, Enoch the seventh Omne vetustum
venerandum.
from Adam (i. e. in that particular direct line) who lived (as Chronologers
affirm) 306 years in Adams days.

Obs. The end of the world was preached and prophesied in the beginning of the
world.

2. (...), Ecce behold, particula inserviens ad indicandum, incitandum, Ravan.

1. Not only for admiration of a thing as most wonderful, Isa. 7. 14. Behold a
Virgin shall conceive a child.

2. But also for attention to a thing as most certain, Matthew. 28. 7. Behold he
goes before you into Galilee. So here.

3. (...), The Lord, Personally, not Essentially. See who this Lord is, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. The Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be revealed from heaven with his
mighty Angels.

4. (...), He comes, the present for the future tense, to intimate (says Mr.
Perkins) to us the certainty of his coming: the sense is, he shall as certainly
come, as if he were now a coming.

II. The Law justifies, that Solomon the wisest Prince and Preacher avows and
avers it, in his recantation Sermon, Eccles. 11. 9. Rejoice O young man in thy
youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the
ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes, but know thou that for all
these things, God will bring thee into judgment. Verba haec valde emphatica.
The words are ironical, and are Lavater.
a smart jeer to the Hectors and Ranters of his age: He does as Hosts, serve in
great cheer, but withal, sends after a saucy reckoning; Venite ad judicium.

2. Crier, Call in the Gospel that that may testify, or rather terrify with
its witness.

1. That affirms, it is one of the first principles in every believers
Catechism, Heb. 6, 2. and of eternal judgment. Contra principia negantem non
est disputandum.
Now to deny a principle in the Schools, much more in the Scriptures, is a
gross and grievous Solecism.

2. It can testify that its a Statute Law that was never yet repealed, nor
ever shall be, Heb. 9. 27. It is appointed unto men once to die, and after this
the judgment. This Statute stands in force as much for Judgment as for Death;
Judgment is as sure as death. Perhaps you will say, this witness speaks not
home to the point and purpose; It speaks enough to prove a day of judgment,
but nothing to prove Christ to be Judge in that day, Though Judge and day of
judgment be relata, and one does necessarily imply the other; Posito uno
relatorum ponitur et alterum.
so that I should not need to produce farther testimony; yet to let you see
what a full witness the Gospel is, you shall have it proved totidem verbis,
Romans 2. 16. In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ,
according to my Gospel. 2 Timothy 4. 1. I charge thee therefore before God, and
the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing.

Secondly, (...), Why so; here passing by many reasons, drawn;

1. From the pleasure of God to confer this royalty. 2. From the excellency
of his person. 3. From the fitness of his spirit. 4. From the convenience of
his affinity. 5. From the end of his death and resurrection. 6. From the
rectitude of his vision. 7. From the merit of his desert, appretiative: all
which you may find in Aquin: sum. part 3. quest. 59. art. 2. in conclus. 8. I
shall only insist on the equity of it; why this man should be Judge, he has
suffered and sustained infinite and unparralleld injuries and indignities.
1. He was all his life slandred, scorned, scoffed, persecuted. 2. He was
basely, barbarously, falsely, unjustly, ignominiously put to death by the High
Court of Justice, where of Pontius Pilate was Lord President. 3. He has ever
since his resurrection and ascension been kept from his throne in Kingdoms and
Consciences.
1. Kingdoms.

1. Tartaria, puts up the Devil. 2. Turkey, Mahomet that impostor. 3. Jews,
their Moses. 4. Rome and the greatest part of Europe, Antichrist. Rev. 13. 13.
5. England, and those places that have cast off all these, yet do not set up
Christ, but do in some sense worse than they, for many defy Christ, deny
Scripture, break Covenants, abuse liberty, slight Magistrates, despise
Ministers, contemn Ordinances, hate the godly, live as if hell it self were
broke loose, or as if this were the time of Satan's being loosed from his
thousand years confinement and imprisonment, to be their dear and dread
Sovereign. Rev. 20. 3.

2. In Consciences; how is Christ put by his throne in every man's heart? what
strange Sovereigns do they serve and submit to? Sin, Satan, World.

Haec tria, pro trino numine.

How daily is Christ crucified by sin, Heb. 6. 6. how often is his blood shed
profanely by unworthy receiving the Sacrament? Therefore it is but just and
equitable, that that man and Master, that supreme Sovereign should come to
account with the world in general, and with every person in particular, for
these affronts and insolences, that those his enemies that would not have this
man to reign over them, should be brought forth and slain before his face,
Luke 19. 27. It is most just that those who would not be ruled by his Scepter,
should be ruined by his Sword.

Thirdly; (...); How so, or what manner of Judge he will be, such a Judge as
never rode Circuit in the world before.

1. He is the supreme Judge, Rev. 19. 16. King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
the Lord Chief Justice of the King of Heavens Bench, that sheafe in Joseph's
vision, unto which all the rest give obeisance.

2. Sole Judge, none joined in Commission with him, John 5. 22. The Father
judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son. It is true, God
the Father judges autoritative, Saints interpretative, but Christ only
executive.

3. Universal Judge; Judge of all flesh, Gen: 18. 25. and more too, orbis
terrarum, of the Devils also, whether they be in the center of the earth, or in
what ever region of the air. Heb. 12. 23. The Judge of all. Romans 14. 10. We
shall all stand before the Judgment seat of Christ: Emperors, Popes, Princes,
Potentates, Peasants, all must hold up their hands at his bar to be tried for
their lives.

4. An omniscient and all-knowing Judge; he is sagax animi, he has notitiam
legis and facti, he knows every point and punctilio in the Law, every act and
accent of men's sins. Rev. 2. 2. I know thy works, whether good or bad, the time
when, the place where, the parties with whom, the manner how, the end
wherefore. Heb. 4. 13. All things are naked and open to him with whom we have
to do. An allusion to Anatomizing, wherein every vein and muscle is seen.
Christ's eyes are more seeing and searching than the Sun (that oculus mundi)
the worlds overseer. Rev. 2. 23. And all the Churches shall know, that I am he
which searches the reins and the hearts.

5. A powerful Judge; no evading, nor avoiding his summons or sentence, no Non
est inventus, can be returned, if in earth, air, sea, or hell, Christ will
find him, and fetch him out. Psalm. 139. 9, 10. We must all appear, 2 Cor. 5.
10. Nolens volens Christ will fetch and force every one; Heu miser quo fugias
latere er it impossible, apparere intolerabile. Ansel:

6. A visible Judge; he shall come not only by his power and spirit (as was
Origens opinion) but also propria persona, in his humane nature (though
glorified) which he had here on earth. Rev. 1. 7. Behold he comes with clouds,
and every eye shall see him, and they also which peirced him.

7. A glorious Judge; he shall come attended with all the pomp and power of
heaven, Matthew. 25. 31. The clouds shall be his Chariots, innumerable regiments
of glorious Angels his guard, the Archangel his Trumpeter, to sound an alarm
to dead, and dread the hearts of all impenitent wretches. I wonder not the
Sun shall be turned into darkness that day, Matthew. 24. 29. When the Sun of
righteousness shall display his glorious rays. Omne majus lumen extinguit
minus.

8. A convincing and clearing Judge, Jude 15. (...), a Forensicall word used in
Courts of judicature, signifying to prove a crime against one clearly,
evidently, unanswerably, that nothing can be objected against the proof;
people shall set their hands and seals to their own execution.

9. A righteous Judge; 2 Timothy 4. 8. (...), the only righteous Judge, who is
not, cannot be moved, nec prece, nec praetio, no sparing, no partiality, no
favor, no affection, no fear, but suum cuique. Romans 2. 6. Who will render to
every man according to his deeds and deserts.

10. A speedy and expeditious Judge.

1. He will come unexpectedly. 2. He will have done suddenly.
1. He comes unexpectedly. Christ's coming is compared to a snare, Luke 21. 35.
how quickly is the poor bird in a snare when it little expects it, Fistula
dulce canit volucrem dum decipit auceps. It is likewise set forth from a theifs
coming in the night, 1 These. 5. 1, 2.

Vt jugulent homines surgunt de nocte latrones. Juvenal:


When men are fast asleep, and little dream of them; yea our Savior tells us
he shall come as the flood upon the old world, Matthew. 24. 37, 38. in the spring
time when things were in their prime and pride, when nothing was feared or
expected.

2. He will dispatch suddenly; there will be no need of Empannelling Juries,
swearing witnesses, pleading of Counsels, but every one shall be (...), every
man's conscience shall be witness, Jury, Judge, Qua fiat ut Aug.
cuique opera sua bona vel mala cuncta in memoriam revocentur, and mentis
intuitu mira celeritate cernantur. Matthew. 22. 12, 13. Friend how came thou
in, not having on thy wedding garment? and he was speechless, and he said, take
him, and bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter darkness, where shall
be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

11. A dreadful and terrible Judge; one that comes in fury, 2 These. 2. 8. in
flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Rev. 6. 16, 17. And said to the Mountains and
Rocks, fall on us and hide us from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and
from the wrath of the Lamb, for the great day of his wrath is come, and who
shall be able to stand?

12. The ultimate and last Judge; after him never comes another Judge; We read
Exit tyrannus, regum ultimus: yet it may be possible, yea probable that another
may come after him, notwithstanding that Prophecy.

Mars, Puer, Alecto, Virgo, Vulpes, Leo, Nullus.

But after Christ, no more assize or Sessions, Judge or Jury: the stage of this
world once burnt down like Jerusalems Temple, it can never be built up again:
in this sense Christ is an eternal Judge, because his sentence stands, never
to be revoked to all eternity.

And thus have I done with the explicatory, to come to the applicatory part,
wherein I shall be somewhat longer, for it is my intention this day to be like
a Jews debtor, to give more for use than the principle comes to.

This truth will be very useful and profitable for a sixfold end: it is

1. A Taper, to inlighten our understandings by information. 2. A Touchstone,
to try our spirits by examination. 3. A Trumpet, to alarm and awaken all
supine and secure sinners by terrification. 4. A Fire, to kindle and inflame
the affections of the godly by exhortation. 5. A Star, to guide us to the use
of means by direction. 6. A Cordial, to comfort all drooping languishing
spirits by consolation.
Use 1. It informs us eight things.

1 Information: Is to show us the vanity and folly of those people, that either
think, or say, That those Ministers who spend their time in preaching
judgment, show they want judgment in their preaching; was not Paul a
judicious preacher? yet he here before the sage and subtle Philosophers,
presses repentance upon them from the consideration of this Judge and
Judgment; yea, when he preached before the Judges, he preached such a
thundering Sermon of judgment, that he made the Judges heart to tremble, Act.
24. 25. the Judge stood so arraigned at the bar of his own conscience, that
you would have thought the Judge had been the malefactor, and the prisoner the
Judge. I am confident there never was a time that more called for the preaching
of the certainty of judgment, and the severity of the Judge, then these times
do. Of which I may truly say with him, most people metum et memoriam ultimi
Aug: Sermon. 120. de temp.
judicij amiserunt, never was there a time when this subject was less
believed, or less beloved. Certainly, if Chrysostom were (according to his
then fancy) to preach to the whole world, he would leave his old text, (of
Psalm. 4. 2. How long will you love vanity?) and preach Christ's judiciary power
and proceedings, against carnal, formal, and hypocritical Gospellers; it
were very needful to preach on this subject every Sermon, to print every
Sermon that is preached, to fill Churches, shops, stalls, houses, holes with
them, to dog cursed miscreants (as that good man did his Atheistical son
Junius, with Bibles) until they are apprehended with this Hue and Cry. But to
close and conclude, there is enough in that text to answer all cavills and
scruples. Act. 10. 42. And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to
testify that it is he which was ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and
dead. If Christ's coming be so nigh as 1656. as was strongly (though strangely)
asserted by an admired Rabbi at Paul's not long since, as you may find it
quoted in the Atheist Bible, I mean in Lillyes Almanacke; then surely it is
high time to alarm dead and drowsy sinners by the Gospels Trumpet, before
they are summoned by the Archangels Trumpet.

Inform. 2. That few persons will be found judgement-proof when they hold up
their hands at the Bar before this so rigid and so righteous a Judge.

Most men and women will not know (as Bellizarius Procop.
once told the proud Ambassadors of the Goths) where to hide their heads.

Hear that dreadful and direful text able to strike you dead for fear, which
I take with learned Diodate, to be understood of this Judge and judgment, Rev.
6. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. And I beheld when he had opened the sixth Seal, and
lo, there was a great Earthquake, and the Sun became black as Sackcloth of
hair, and the Moon became as blood. And the stars of heaven fell unto the
earth, even as a Fig Tree casts her untimely Figs when she is shaken of a
mighty wind. And the heaven departed as a scroll, when it is rolled together.
And every Mountain and Island were moved out of their places. And the Kings of
the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief Captains, and the
mighty men, and every bondman, and every freeman hid themselves in the dens,
and in the rocks of the mountains; and said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on
us, and hide us from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the
face of the Lamb. For the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able
to stand?

Those men that when on earth were not afraid of the noise of a Lion, are now
affrigted at the voice of a Lamb. Those before whose wrath none were able to
stand, themselves now are not able to stand before the wrath of Christ. But not
to insist on generals, to descend to particular Generalia non pungunt.
persons, as they are expressed and implied in this text.

1. To begin with Ministers (that you may see I am not partial) do we make
such full proof of our Ministry, as 2 Timothy 4. 5.
that we may be judgement-proof? How few of us that are able Ministers of the
Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 6. That study to approve our selves to God, workmen that need
not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth, 2 Timothy 2. 15. That
preach Christ crucified, 1 Cor. 1. 23. that make manifest the mystery of
Christ, as we ought to speak, Col. 4. 4. not with enticing words of man's
wisdom, but in the demonstration of the Spirit, and of power, 1 Cor. 2. 4. that
cry aloud and spare not, and lift up our voices like trumpets, and show the
people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins, Isai. 58. 1.
That make a difference and distinction in our praying and preaching, and take
forth the precious from the vile, Jerem. 15. 19. that will not give the
childrens bread to dogs. In a word, that can wade through honor and
dishonor, evil report and good report, 2 Cor. 68. not puffed up with the one,
nor dejected by the other. But to use Pompey's verses,

Non me videre superbum
Prospera fatorum, nec fractum adversa videbunt.
Proh dolor! How few Luthers shall you find that weigh Satanas sit Lutherus,
modo Christus regnet.
nor value not their names! Ridleies that repent of spending too much of their
time at Chesse-playing! Ignatius's, so studious and yet so pious, that every
time they hear the clock strike, say, there is one hour more for them to answer
for! Chrysostom's that had rather have their bodies torn asunder with wild
beasts, than give Christ's body to be torn asunder by men worse than wild
beasts! Augustin's that desire God may find them preaching or praying in that
day. Cyprians, whose thoughts of the day of judgment, make them forget the day
of their martyrdom. Nazianzens, whose thoughts of their last accounts dry up
their marrow, and wast their bones. Though I would not make that doubt which
Chrysostom did in a Sermon of his to the Ministers, Whether any of them could
possibly be saved? yet this I may safely say, that every one of us have great
cause to fear (who have not preached to others, or not preached to others as we
ought) that we shall be found cast-awayes, 1 Cor. 9 27.

2. Kings and supreme Magistrates who are mentioned in the text, how few of
them are Patres Patriae, as the Heathen called them, and as the holy Ghost
explains it, Isai. 4 23. Nursing-fathers, whose care of, and compassion to
(...) quasi (...).
their people, is the same with Fathers to their children, that impoverish them
not by taxes, excises, oppressions, but endeavor to enrich them, counting
their peoples wealth their best treasury; as King James gives advice to his son
Prince Henry in his book called (...).

Hinc illae lachrymae: Most of supreme Rulers are as Pliny spoke of the Roman
Emperors, Nomine Dii, natura Diaboli, monsters not men, murderers not
Magistrates; witness Saul, who when he had forfeited his Kingdom by sparing
Agag, how does he hunt David as a Partridge in the mountains, slayes the
innocent Priests, runs to a Witch at Endor.

Witness Herod, who preferred one Coranto of that Minion Herodias daughter,
before the precious life of John Baptist, of whose godliness he was convinced
in his own conscience. Besides this, our English Chronicles afford us too much
sad matter for this subject; witness Henry 4. and Richard 3 I profess I have
often admired at the madness and folly of many, who will jeopardize their
estates, lives and souls for such persons, who came to their places by unjust
deposings, poysonings, perjuries, murder, incest; who carried themselves in
their places with pride, profaneness, lust and luxury, tyranny, oppression,
exaction, their lives being the best comment on that text, Dan. 4. 17. God
sets over Kingdoms the basest of men. God gives the kingdoms of the earth
to them he never intends to give the Kingdom of heaven. To conclude this truth
with that message which godly Mr. Buchanon sent to King James when he lay a
dying: Remember me to him, and tell him, I am going to a place where few Kings
come. Kings are as rare meat in heaven, as Venison in poor men's kitchins, as it
is in the Dutch Proverb.

3. Judges, how few of them that find others not judgement-proof, will be found
judgement-proof themselves? they are Kings creatures, who as their masters and
makers are usually bad, so they are seldom good. Zeph 3. 3. Her Princes within
her are roaring Lions, her Judges are evening Wolves. Where Princes are Lions
for their power, and roaring for their prey, there likewise are the Judges
Wolves (crudelium emblemata) they fleece, they flaw, they feed, they feast
themselves upon the poor Clients, as Wolves do upon sheep and Lambs, and they
are evening Wolves that have had no prey, very ravening and rapacious, Luke 18.
2. Our Savior tells us there was in a City a Judge that feared not God nor
regarded man: Oh how happy had the world been if there had been but one Judge
thus corrupted, and one City thus abused! but alas! how have all Kingdoms,
Cities, Counties been pestered with multitudes of such Judges as have neither
piety toward God, nor pity toward man; Divine writ, humane Histories; yea,
our own Chronicles abound with Exempli gratia's of them, Psalm 82. 2, 3, 4, 5.
How long will ye judge unjustly, and accept the persons of the wicked? Defend
the poor and fatherless; do justice to the afflicted and needy, deliver the
poor and needy, rid them out of the hand of the wicked. They know not, neither
will they understand, they walk on in darkness; all the foundations of the
earth are out of course.

What should I trouble you with them, who troubled others while they lived,
with injustice, oppression; as Felix who looked for a bribe of Paul, Acts 24.
25, 26, 27. Ananias who commanded Paul to be smitten, Acts 23. 2, 3. Gallio who
suffered Paul to be beaten, and cared not for it, Acts 18. 17. But especially
above all, the Lord chief Justice of unjust Judges (Pilate) who was warned of
his wife, knew that out of malice the Jews had delivered Christ, professed
upon all he heard, and had examined, he found no fault in him; yea, he had
terrors of conscience upon him that made him afraid, and yet to continue
Caesar's friend, he is an enemy to Christ, justice and his own soul, John 19. 6,
Matthew. 27. 18, 19.
8, 12, 13, 14, 15.

As for humane Histories, Surely Persia was pestred with multitudes of such
Judges, that Cambyses their King was forced to put Silanes to death, and
command his skin to be plucked off, and to be nailed to the Tribunal, and put
Olanes his son to be set on his Fathers Throne, that both he and all other
Judges might ever after be afraid to be unrighteous Judges. Surely Rome was
much infected, that Alexander was forced according to his Sur-name, to be
Severus, Lamprid. in Sever.
to smother Taurinus a corrupt Judge with smoke, commanding the Praeco to cry,
Fumo pereat, qui fumum vendidit.

But our histories afford us too too many instances of the bribery, injustice,
partiality of Judges. I shall read their charge in the words of the Author,
Britannia habet Judices Gild. de excid. Brit. orth. page 1010.
protegentes, etc. Britain has Judges protecting (but to wit) protecting the
guilty, robbers, adulterers, swearers, forswearers. I am loath ulcus refricare,
else I could easily prove, that one of the greatest causes of our late
miseries, was the corruption of our Judges. But dis-gratias a Writ of ease is
issued out against such Judges.

4. Lawyers, how few of them that truly plead the causes of their Clients
without fraud or falsehood: How few of them do (as Pericles did to his gods)
pray to the Lord to set a watch before their mouth, and to keep the door of
their lips. How do they make the Law (which is the Wall to fence off the people
propriety) a broken, bowing, bending Wall, sometime to this side, sometime to
that, to this sense and that sense, as it will at that time best fit their
turns; How few but make

Candida de nigris, and de candentibus atra.

Evil, good; and good, evil; make darkness light, and light Isai. 5. 2.
darkness. How few but parget over rotten causes with the made mortar of the
Law, whereby they appear white and sound. I have often admired why the Lawyer
in behalf of his fraternity, took distaste at our Saviors reproving the
Scribes and Pharisees for being graves, that which appears not, and the men
that walk over them are not aware of them; and all that satisfies me is, that
his conscience flew in his face, and accused him that he and they were those
graves, that with flourish't words, as with grass, did cover rotten and
stinking carcasses and Causes, of which Juries were not aware: they care not
what cause they plead in, nor who the Client is they plead for, nor who the
party they Acts 24. 12.
plead against. Aperi bursam, and ego aperiam buccam. If the client will open
his purse mouth wide for his Lawyer, his Lawyer will open his mouth wide for his
Client; and so make good that sad and strange saying of that famous Lawyer
Nevessan, He that will not venture his body, will never be valiant; and he that
will not venture his soul will never be wealthy.

5. Soldiers, how degenerated are they from the first Army of believers that
was raised as we read of in the Scripture, Genesis 14. 14. Abraham Captain General
of all those forces that rescued Lot. Where take notice of two particulars.

1. The General does not detain, nor suffer to be detained any of Lots, or of
the King of Sodoms goods: It Is a Martial law made since Abraham's time, that
goods of their own party taken by the enemy, and retaken by their own forces,
should lose their propriety. See v. 16.

2. He does not plead nor pretend an absolute conquest, he would have smiled at
such a Riddle, yea hist at such a paradox, that those who went out with him in
their persons, or staid at home, and sent to him their purses, and sent up to
heaven for him their prayers, should be accounted a conquered nation. Caesar
wished he had such Soldiers as were in Alexanders days; we may say, oh that
we had such Soldiers as were in Abraham's days. But we find the Poet a Prophet,

Nulla fides, pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur, Lucan. lib. 10. Bell. civil.

Venalesque manus: ibi fas, ubi maxima merces.
Luke 3. 14. When the Soldiers had some desire to know of John Baptist, what
to do that they might be saved, he tells them, that they must do violence to no
man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with their wages. How are these
Rules inverted by most Soldiers? they offer violence to every man, acccuse any
man falsely, are not content with their pay, but will have plunder and free
quarter into the bargain. How hard a matter would it be to answer one that
should ask this question, Cui bono do Soldiers serve? I know some will be
ready to answer, to fight the Lords battails, to withstand foreign invasions,
to subdue intestine rebellions, and to preserve Princes in their Royalties,
Parliaments in their Privileges, and people in their Liberties. I cannot deny
but that they may do such things, and must do, or else cannot be able to
justify the lawfulness of their calling. Yet for the most part, they serve for
nothing else but to maintain Princes in their Tyranny and oppression,
Parliaments in fear and subjection, people in vassalage and slavery. I read of
Xerxes, that viewing almost an innumerable Army of men, fell on weeping,
saying, Where will all these men be within an hundred years? If he thought
that for his sake (or rather sin) they should be in hell, it might well make
him weep.

6. Rich men: How few of them that are rich toward God, Luke 12. 21. Rich in
faith, James 2. 5. Rich in good works, 1 Timothy 6. 18.

Inopem sua copia fecit.

Their plenty in temporalls, and poverty in spiritualls. Riches for the most
part are not ladders to lift men's souls to heaven, but to let them down to
hell: Riches to most men are as wind and quill to bladders, puff them and swell
them with profaneness; they make gold their God, and worship that in the
stamp, which they abhor to do in the statue. These are such as the Apostle
could not mention with dry eyes, Phil. 3. 18, 19. Their minds are so taken up
with earth, as they have no leisure (nor love) to look after heaven. As the
Duke d' Alva told H. 4. of France, asking him whither he had observed the late
great Eclipse: they are so taken up with minding their Hawks and hounds, and
worse employments, that they have no time to mind God, Christ, grace, poor,
nor their own immortal souls. See an instance in that rich man, Luke 16. 19.
Here is minding back and belly, no praying, reading, singing, or releiving
Lazarus, etc. Oh that all rich men would but seriously weigh two places of
Scripture, they are able to make their hearts tremble; Math. 19. 23, 24. Then
said Jesus unto his Disciples, verily I say unto you, that a rich man shall
hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven. And again I say unto you, It is
easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to
enter into the kingdom of God. Philip was wont to say, An Ass laden with gold
would enter any City-gates; I say, not enter the City-gates of heaven. Luk 6.
14. Woe unto you that are rich, for you have received your consolation. Rich
men usually have their heaven on earth. Consolation here, and desolation
hereafter. Luke 16. 25.


7. The ordinary and Common sort of people, bond and Praeter paucissimos
quosdam qui mala fugiunt, quid est aliud pene caetus Christi norum, quam
sentina vitiorum.
free, as in the Text; who live more like Bruits then men, Cretians then
Christians. We may say of most of them as Plato said of the Argentines, they
live as if they should never dye, and come to judgment for all their oaths,
whoredoms, cosenages, etc.

Heu vivunt homines* tanquam mors nulla sequatur,
Seu velut infernus fabula vana foret. Salv. de Pro.

They call and count judgment a bug-beare to scare children; They have made a
Covenant with death, and with hell are they at agreement, Isa. 28. 15. Tell
them of an Assize on earth, wherein they are much concerned, either for land or
life, they like the Devils believe and tremble, James 2. 19. But tell them of
an Assize in the air, wherein they are most concerned for their eternal life,
they little believe it, and less tremble at it. David in (Psalm. 14. 1, 2, 3.
The fool has said in his heart, There is no God: they are corrupt, they have
done abominable works; there is none that does good. The Lord looked down from
heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did understand
and seek God. They are all gone aside, they are all together become filthy,
there is none that does good, no not one.) And Paul (Romans 3. 13, 14, 15, 16,
17, 18. Their throat is an open sepulcher, with their tongues they have used
deceit, the poison of Asps is under their lips, whose mouth is full of cursing
and bitterness; Their feet are swift to shed blood; Destruction and misery are
in their ways; And the way of peace have they not known; There is no fear of
God before their eyes.) joined together, give a most exact description of such
persons as these are. It is as true of our time, as true in the time.

Multis annis jam transactis,
Nulla fides est in pactis,
Mel in ore, verba lactis,
Fell in cord, fraus in factis.
I may partly English it in our Singing Psalms.

Help Lord, for good and godly men,
Do perish and decay;
And faith and truth from worldly men,
Is parted clean away.
Who so does with his neighbor talk,
His talk is all but vain;
For every man bethinketh how,
To flatter, lie and feign.
Luke 13. 24. Strive to enter into the strait gate: most are so far from
striving to get into heaven, that they strive to get into hell; they ride post
to get thither first, for fear there should be no room for them in hell, the
only place of honor and happiness in their opinion. Alas! whose faces blush
not, eyes weep not, hearts bleed not (if any sparks of good in them) to see the
most of poor people like the country about Eugubium, Quo magis aliena divitijs,
eo magis exuberat vitijs; the more poor, the more profane; the more barren,
the more base. If they, John 7. 49. did condemn the rabble to be accursed,
because they did not know the Law; then may we safely mistrust them, that
neither know the Law, nor believe or obey the Gospel.

Inform. 3. The reason why godly men and Ministers are so much discontented,
yea 2 Cor. 5. 13. (...). insanimus. Beza.
mad; when they see any injury or indignity offered to the person, offices,
government of the Lord Jesus Christ. Oh how (say they) shall we be able to look
the Lord Jesus Christ in the face, when he comes as a Judge, if we suffer or
endure it. For Christ to have just occasion to say to any of them, as Absalom
to Hushai about 2 Samuel 16. 17.
David; Is this thy kindness to thy Friend?) would be a torment as bad as hell;
and therefore they cannot bear the least wrong to Christ. Servetus condemned
Zwinglius for harshness and rashness; but Zwinglius answered; In alijs Epist.
ad Servet.
mansuetus ero, in blasphemijs in Christum non ita. Injuriam contra me
patienter ^ult, contra Christum far non potui.
I can bear any wrong done to my self, but against Christ I am not able,
says Jerome. Inv^niar sane superbus, modo impij sidentij no^ arguar, dum
dominus patitur. Luth. Epist. ad Staup.
Let me be accounted proud and passionate, so I be not found guilty of sinful
silonce, when the cause of Christ suffers. Luther. Sometimes to be dumb in
Christ's cause, is as bad, as at sometimes to deny Christ's cause, yea indeed
dumbness is denial; and they know what sad consequences will follow thereupon,
Matthew. 10. 33.

Inform. 4. It renders the reason why the godly so little weigh and value the
judgments of men, because tbey eye the judgment of Christ. What cares Joseph,
though he be accounted incontinent; Naboth a blasphemer; Job an hypocrite;
Michaiah the troubler of Israel; Paul a pestilent fellow; Luther the Trumpeter
of rebellion: they (and all other believers) do say in Paul's words; With us it
is a very Jusii non humana judicia sed aeterm judicis examen aspiciunt, et ideo
cum Paulo derogantium verba despiciunt. Ans. Acts and Mon.
small thing, that we should be judged of man's judgment, he that judges us is
the Lord, 1 Cor. 4. 3, 4. They well know how erroneous the men of the world are
in their judgment, they call white, black, and account ciphers figures, and
figures ciphers. Thou art an heretic, said Woodrosse the Sheriff to Mr
Rogers the Protomartyr in Q. Mary's days, That shall be known (said he) at
the day of Judgment. Romans 2. 2. We know Gods judgment is according to truth,

Inform. 5. What good ground all persons have to get into favor with Jesus
Christ, who is to sit Judge upon the life and death of their bodies and souls
for all eternity. Pro. 29. 26. Many seek the Rulers favor: how do men desire
to ingratiate themselves into the favor of the Judge, though but of Nisi
prius, if they have but an action of the case to try, what suings,
solicitations, presents? how much more to this Judge, who when he has killed
the body, is able to cast soul and body into hellfire, Matthew. 10. 28.

Inform. 6. How to demean our selves under all wrongs, either national from
public Magistrates, or particular from private persons, patiently wait upon
this righteous Judge. Eccles. 5. 8. If thou see the oppression of the poor,
and violent perverting of judgment in a Province, marvel not (murmr not) at
the matter; For he that is higher than the highest regards; yea so regards,
that he will right and revenge all thy unjust and injurious sentences. James 5.
6, 7. You have condemned and killed the just, and he does not resist you, be
patient therefore brethren until the coming of the Lord. Oh remember John
Husse, Jerome of Prague, with many other, sufferers and sustainers of injuries
and indignities, who did not appellare Caesarem, but Christum.

Inform. 7. It shows us how greatly and greivously they offend, who ascend
Christ's judgement-seate, arraigne men at their bar, pass sentence of death
on all those that are not of their way, opinion, party, side, judgment; many
judge themselves the greatest Christians, because they are the greatest
Critics to judge others. I shall endeavor to clear this, that he or she that
is the greatest censurer, is ever the greatest sinner, the more critical, ever
the more hypocritical.

1. The rash judging of thy mouth is a trumpet to proclaim the real juggling
of thy mind. Mark 14. 70 Thou art a Galilaan, thy speech agrees thereto:
Stinking breaths argue rotten lungs, and rash judging rotten hearts. Matthew. 12.
34. Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. Such water as is in
the pipe, such is in the spring; the metal of the bell is known by the
clapper.

Era puto nosci tinnitu: pectora verbis,
Sic est; namque id sunt utraque, quale sonant.
2. Christ calls thee, and the Scripture accounts thee an hypocrite.

1. Christ calls thee so; Thou hypocrite, pluck first the Matthew. 7 5.
beam out of thine own eye; he that sees strawes in other men's eyes, and has
beams in his own, is an hypocrite; he that says and sees all things are
yellow in others, it is sure his own eyes are troubled with the jaundise.

2. The Scripture accounts thee so; James 1. 26. If any man among you seem to
be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, this
man's religion is vain; that religion which lays and leaves the reins loose
to the tongue, to slander men for their present state, and to censure them for
their final, it is but a videtur quod sic, a dissembling counterfeite
religion, for so (...) properly signifies. Prove. 26. 23. Burning lips and a
wicked heart, are like a potsheard covered with silver dross. Os maledictum,
cor malum. Luth. A censorious mouth and a corrupt mind are like a potsheard
covered with silver dross, which show and shine fair to the eye, yet the one
is but earth, and the other is but dross. Burning lips of men's persons in hell
show their tongue is set on fire from the hell of their own hearts, James 3. 6.

3. Thou art an impudent and audacious hypocrite, thou pretendest fair to
Christ, and yet thou put him by his chair, robbest him of his royalty; to
be Judge of men's final estate is Christ's prerogative. The Pope is a notorious
hypocrite, he pretends himself to be Christ's Vicar, yet he thrusts Christ by
all his royalties, he pardons sins, enjoynes penances, pilgrimages, dispences
with Christ's Injunctions, disposes of Kings and Kingdoms, and blasphemously
affirms, Per me reges regnant. Qui judicat fratrem, tantum crimen clationis
incurrit ut cui tribunal assumit, and ejus judicium praevenit. Ans.
What art thou but another usurping Pope, jostling Christ from his royal
tribunal, and sets down thy self, acting his part, and exercising his power,
summoning and sentencing by thy Bulls, people to eternal death and
destruction? Would it not be an impudent part for any private man to summon in
the Country, to sit in the Judges place, to act his part, to pass sentence of
death? much more is this.

4. Thou art an obstinate and obdurate hypocrite, thou perseverest in this sin
against the clear light of Scripture, charging and commanding to forbear all
such rash and irreligious judging. Matthew. 7. 1. Judge not. i. e. rashly or
rigidly actions or persons for their final state Bern.
Noli esse alienae vitae temerarius judex. Romans 14. 10. But why do thou
judge? and why do thou set at naught thy brother? A chiding and checking
Apostrophe in an Interrogation. 1 Cor. 4. 5. Let us judge nothing before the
time: it is very dangerous to antidate and anticipate judgment.

5. Thou art a cruel and bloody hypocrite. Prove. 11. 9. A hypocrite with his
mouth destroys his neighbor; it shows thy nature to be brutish and bloody to
judge men's souls to eternal ruin and destruction, and to have no thoughts of
pity toward them. Did thou ever see a Judge pass sentence upon a poor
malefactor for the death of his body without tears or sorrow? how can thou
so readily and rejoycingly pass sentence on their souls? But to drive home
this nail to the head and heart, the persons thou judge, either are Elect or
Reprobate.

1. Elect, will thou condemn them, whom God has not, will not condemn. Romans
8. 1. There is therefore now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus:
v. 34 Who is he that condemns? The glove is cast down by way of a challenge,
and thou dare to take it up. Our Savior when he saw no man condemned the
woman in adultery, would John 8. 11.
not condemn her. But now God has not condemned his Elect, yet thou O vain
man wilt condemn them. Who art thou that judge another? James 4. 12.

2. Reprobate persons, thou condemnest them before their time. 1 Cor. 4. 5. Let
us judge nothing before the time. There is a time for every purpose under
heaven, Eccles. 3. 1. Now to meddle with any thing before that time, as it is
unseasonable, so it is unsafe. Our Savior would not torment the Devils before
their time, and will thou condemn thine own flesh before its time; Oh grutch
them not an inch of time, they are shortly to be tormented eternally in hell!
Be not so cruel a hangman as to hasten a malefactor that is to suffer within
an hour.

6. Thou shall have the hypocrites portion; Hell is the hypocrites Fee simple.
Matthew. 24. 51. And appoint him his portion with hypocrites; Hypocrites are
Freeholders of hell, others are but terants. Judas that grand hypocrite, Acts
1. 25. He went to his own place. Christ will be as forward to send them to
hell, as they have been forward to send others. Matthew. 7. 2. With what
judgment you judge, you shall be judged, and with what measure you mete, it
shall be measured to you again. My brethren, be not many Masters, knowing that
we shall receive the greater condemnation, James 3. 1. All that a man gets by
such judgment is greater judgment: thou provokest Christ (as Lot did the
Sodomites) to deal worse with thee then with them. Thus the Pharisees, those
eminent hypocrites are threatened with greater condemnation, Math. 23. 14. God
heats the Furnace of hell (as Nebuchadnezzar did his Furnace for the Dan. 3. 19.
three Children) seven times hotter for hypocrites than for other sinners.

Inform. 8. See what little cause Saints have too much and too immoderately to
lament the death and departure of their dear and near relations, either by
the flesh or spirit, they are not lost, but laid down in a full and firm
assurance of coming again; this Judge will send his Writ of Habeas Corpus, to
remove them from the prison of the grave. See how forcibly the Apostle presses
this argument on the Thessalonians, 1 Ep. 4. 13. That they mourn not as those
that have no hope. He renders the reason, v. 14. Those that sleep in Jesus,
will God bring with him. Every one that sleeps shall be awakened; the Curtains
of the grave shall be drawn, and every Lazarus shall come forth: then shall
that Scripture be literally true, Ephesians. 5. 14. Awake thou that sleep, and
arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee ligbt; Lumen gloriae.

2 Use, Is of examination; To try our selves by this Touchstone, whether we are
in the number of those that do believe this truth, That Christ shall shortly
come to be a Judge. I shall propose four Questions to be resolved by your own
hearts.

1. What interest have you in him? 2. What influence have you from him? 3. What
affections bear you to him? 4. What preparations make you for him?
1. What interest have you in him? Has a true and lively says entitled you
to, invested you with all his glorious benefits? Has a surpassing love matched
and married you to his person* Does faith make him your head? Does love make
him your husband? Can you not only say with Ignatius, our Love is crucified,
but also our Love is Judge. Hear (the not triumphant) but triumphing Spouse,
Cant. 6. 2. I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine. Have thou resigned up thy
self to be his, and accepted him to be thine, and that by a matrimonial
Covenant? Do thou love him as a husband, and not fear him as a Judge, then
thou expectedst him to come as a Judge?

2. What influence have you from him? Are you ingrafted branches in that Vine,
which suck all their sap, John 15. 4, 5.
strength, sweetness from it, whereby you bring forth all those delightful
fruits of prayer, fasting, hearing, meditation, conference? do you do all in
the name of Christ? Col. 3. 19. Are you persuaded you can do all things through
Christ? Phil. 4. 13.

3. What affections do you bear to him?

1. To his person. 2. To his people. 3. To his appearing.
1. To his person; Is his person the feate and center of thy affection? the
height and heaven of thy love? Can thou really and experimentally use the
Spouses sweet Periphrasis, as being ravished with his person, Cant. 3. 1, 2, 3,
4. Four times in four verses, Thou whom my soul loves. Is Christ all the love
of thy soul? has he the love of all thy soul? do all the parts and powers of
thy soul meet (as the beams of the Sun in a burning Glass) in the person of
Christ? Then is thy love pure and precious love; such as is in those believers
who shall admire the glorious coming of Christ as a Judge, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10.

2. To his people; have the Saints the chief room in thy heart and house? as
they had with Ingo King of the Draves, who placed his Peers in his hall, but
believers in his parlour, because they were to be Peers with him in a better
Kingdom. 1 John 4. 17. Herein is love made perfect with us, that we may have
boldness in the day of judgment. Those that truly love their brethren, shall
not only dwell in God here, but also dwell with God hereafter; Cotton in loc:
for the words are nothing else but an argument deduced from v. 12. on which
these words have their dependence.

3. To his appearing.

1. Do thou love it? are the thoughts thereof delightful? would the sight
thereof be joyful? 2 Timothy 4. 8. Unto them that love his appearing: the day of
judgment will be a day of coronation to all them that love his appearing.

2. Do thou look for it, expecting and waiting for it? as the Indians do for
the Suns rising in the morning, Tit. 2. 13. Looking for that blessed hope and
glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ.

3. Do thou labor for it? by prayer hastening the coming of the day of God.
2 Pet. 3. 12. Primitive Christians hindered this day by their prayers pro mora
judicij; but you hasten it, and with the Church desire Christ to add wings to
bring him swifter. Rev. 22. 20. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

4. What preparations do you make for him? do you as the wise Virgins prepare
your lamps with oil? Matthew. 25. 4. Do you get wedding garments against the
Bridegroomes coming? Matthew. 22. 11. Are you as his Spouse ready, decked and
adorned in fine linen, clean and white, the righteousness of the Saints? Rev.
19. 7, 8. Surely those that prepare themselves to entertain Christ as a
husband, do believe he shall come to be a Judge; because they desire to be
under Covert-barre, to be defended against all actions and endictments of that
Informer the Devil. That though he should punish them as he is their Judge;
yet he may spare them as he is their husband.

3 Use. Of terror, Blazing Aetna fears spectators; this burning Aetna fears
auditors; this may be to all notorious sinners (as the thunderclap was to
Caligula) make them run their heads in a hole, or as the handwriting was to
Belshazzar, Dan. 5. 5, 6. Make you to change your countenance, trouble your
thoughts, loosen the joints of your loins, and cause your knees to smite one
against another, as if they were at cuffs. This may make you change your name
to Magor-Missabib, fear round about; and your heart the land of Nod, the land
of trembling. See if thine eyes be not dazeled, hear if thine ears be not
deafned with that dreadful text, Psalm. 9. 17. The wicked shall be turned into
hell, and all the nations that forget God. Christ this Judge shall send and
sentence all sinners to hell, that lake that burns with fire and brimstone. And
though all sinners may tremble at this doctrine, yet some in an especial
manner, such as the Scripture has nominated.

1. All Atheists that make a mock and scoff at this Judges coming. 2 Pet. 3.
3. There shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts,
and saying, Where is the promise of his coming? They that deride Christ coming,
Christ shall deride them going.

2. All hypocrites, that make fair shows and fine signs of sanctity and
holiness, but are full of sin and wickedness, whited sepulchers, that appear
beautiful without, but are full of rotten bones and uncleanness within, these
shall be sure to receive double damnation, Matthew 23. 14. 27.

3. All apostates and backsliders, who followed their Admiral in a calm, but
forsook him in a storm. Christ shall have no pleasure in them, but punishment
for them, even to perdition, Heb. 10. 38, 39.

4. All seducers and deceivers, who bring in damnable heresies, and deny the
Lord that bought them, shall have swift and severe destruction, 2 Pet. 2. 1.

5. All adulterers and adulteresses, who defile the Temple of the holy Ghost,
break the holy Covenant, profane that sacred state of marriage, who walk
after the flesh, in the lusts of uncleanness, shall cheifely be punished by
Christ, 2 Pet. 2. 9, 10. Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge, Heb. 13. 4.

6. All covetous and cruel Cormorants, that want bowels of charity and
compassion to the needy and necessitous; all rich and riotous Dives's, whose
dogs have more pity on Lazarus's than they have, shall have judgment without
mercy, James 2. 13.

7. All rash and rigid censurers, who condemn others to hell, shall be by
Christ condemned to hell themselves, Romans 2. 1, 2, 3, 4.

8. All unrighteous Judges, who are guilty of bribery, injustice, oppression,
partiality, delaying the cause of the poor in the Courts of judicature, shall
find Christ a severe Judge to them, Eccles. 3. 16, 17.

9. All troublers and disturbers of the peace and prosperity of the godly, 2 Thessalonians. 1, 6, 7.

10. All disobeyers of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, 2 These. 1. 8, 9.

11. All non-lovers of Jesus Christ, who are reserved on purpose for Christ's
coming, 1 Cor. 16. 22.

12. All enemies and opposers to the glorious government and reign of Jesus
Christ, whose execution Christ will stand and see, Luke 19. 27.

There are four things which may amaze and astonish all profane sinners.

1 Cons: Who is this Judge?

1. In respect of himself. 2. In reference to your selves.
1. In respect of himself; he has the person of a man, but he has the power
of a God; he is mantled with Majesty, guarded with Angels, enraged with anger,
enabled to bring all profane wretches to a public trial for all your acts
of high treason against the crown and dignity of heaven; in a word, one into
whose hands it is (...)* to fall into, Heb. 10. 31.

2. In reference to your selves; he is one whose proffers you have rejected,
whose commandments you have disobeyed, Gospel disgraced, Spirit grieved,
Ordinances neglected, Government contemned, person slighted, blood despised,
preferring Barabbas before him, a sordid sin before thy sweetest Savior. Nemo
est qui id non aegre ferat, si quem interfecit, eum habeat sibi judicem, Roll.
in Romans A terrified Judge, will be a terrible Judge.

2 Cons. What shall be brought to light and sight by this Judge? all your sins,
not only your open and known transgressions, your drunkenness, whoredom,
swearing, cursing, lying, but also all your secret sins, your privy prancks,
secret plottings, underboard-dealings, putrid hypocrisics, Christ will rank
all your sins in battalia against you, Psalm. 50. Psalm. 21. How dreadful will
the sight of sin be to you? 1 Kings 17. 18. Oh how it terrified the Woman, the
Prophets coming to call her sins to remembrance! much more will Christ's coming
to call you for your sins to trial, astonish and amaze you.

3. Consider the sentence this Judge shall pronounce against you, Matthew 25. 41.
Depart from me you cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels! In this sentence every word has its weight of woe; you are charged
to depart from Christ, what pleasure shall you not loose? you are condemned to
fire, what punishment shall you not feel? it is impossible for you to
conceive, or for me to express, what punishment it is for you to be in
everlasting fire with the Devil and his Angels?

4. Consider the eternity of your duration in this woe and misery, your soul
shall be filled with final despair; there never will be any valley of Achor
for the door of hope, but thou must lie and live in those flames to all
eternity. This cuts and kills a man's heart, that his misery will last as long as
his life. Si addas eternitatem alicui malo, erit infinite malum. Drexel: Oh how
much more may the eternity of infinite torment terrify you!

4 Use. Exhort. To persuade Gods people, so to live as to show they believe
this truth; it is the vain glory of some, that they are mercy-proofe,
sword-proofe, Sermon-proofe; it will be your honor and happiness, so to live
as you may be judgement-proofe: what a glory will it be for you in such wicked
and wretched times as these are, to be Noah's, Lots, Joshuahs, Calebs? I dare
boldly say, that Religion was never more owned and honored in England by the
public Magistrate, both in precept and practice, and yet I must say, never
was there more profaneness, vileness, wickedness, then now is in the Land; not
only swarms (as ever) with drunkards, swearers, slanderers, murderers,
whoremongers, etc. but also with such unheard* of sinners, who have taken the
highest degrees, and have commenced, Ranters, Hectors, Trappans, and words of
Art, that all the Logic I have, cannot help me to understand; so far as I
can conceive, they are such as challenge God, defy Christ, deny Scripture,
scoff heaven, deride hell. Now what an honor will this be for you to be
heavenly tapers, burning in the damps of sin, stars shining in the dark night
of prophanness, to be like the river Arithusa, to run through the brackish
Ocean, and yet to retain your sweetness and freshness. Laus tribuenda
Muraenae, and if Cicero commended Muraena, that he had lived chastely in
incontinent Asia; how much more will Christ commend you for living purely and
piously in a profane world. Inter malos bonum esse, est immensae bonitatis.
Greg. in Job 1. 1. To be bad in any times is a sin, to be bad in good times is
a shame, to be good in good times is no praise, to be good in bad times is a
glory.

Use 5. To direct you to some means whereby you may be able to stand before
this Judge in judgment.

1. Repent for all your sins. Acts 3. 19. Repent you therefore and be
converted, that your sins may he blotted out when the times of refreshing shall
come from the presence of the Lord. Those men's sins shall never be sealed up in
Gods bag, whose repenting tears have been put up into his bottle. If one tear
of Alexanders Mother would wipe away all her faults, then much more, will
penitent tears, all the failings of Christ's Saints.

2. Get you garments made of the wool, and dyed with blood of the Lamb of God,
be sure to appear in your Pontificalibus on that day: you are then to be
Judges, bring your scarlet robes along with you, Matthew. 22. 11.

3. Daily arraigne your souls at the bar of your own conscience, pass
sentence of death and damnation on your selves. 1 Cor. 11. 31. If we judge our
selves, we shall not be judged. Those that judge themselves in their own
private Sessions, shall not be judged by Christ in his public Assizes. Amat
deus seipsos judicantes, non judicare. Aug. Christ loves to judge them that
judge others rashly, but not those that judge themselves religiously. The
Patriarch of Alexandria asked the Hermit how he spent his life, who answered,
Indesinenter culpando and judicando meipsum; who replied, This is the only way
to life and salvation.

4. Make Blastus the Kings Chamberlain your friend; keep good correspondency
with your own consciences, do you what God said to Abraham about Sarah, Listen
to it, whatsoever it says to thee. Maxima est vis conscientiae in utramque
partem. Cicero.
1 John 3. 20, 21. If our heart condemn us, God is greater then our heart; and
knows all things, if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence
toward God Conscience is Custos Rotulorum, who shall produce and prefer all
the bills of indictment against sinners, and read all the pardons signed and
sealed by the blood of Christ to Saints.

5. Get bowels of mercy to the afflicted members of Jesus Christ. Matthew 25. 31.
I was an hungry, and you gave me meat, etc. (Christ releived in his members.)
Come you blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world. Non habebit guttam, qui non dedit micam. Aug. As he
shall not have a drop that gave not a crumb, so he shall have an Ocean that
gave a drop.

6. Live in print; keep the copy of your lives free from blots and blurs, that
the characters thereof may be read by all. Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13. The grace of God
that has appeared to us, teaches us to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts,
and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for
that blessed hope and glorious appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ. Let
righteousness and religion, holiness and honesty, which God has united
together in his Word, appear together in your works; live and lead
Evangelicall, yea Angelical lives. 1 John. 3. 3. As having hope causes us to
purify our selves for that day, so purifying our selves, causes us to have
hope in that day.

7. Let the meditation of this rigid and righteous Judge be fixed in your
hearts before every action; this will wonderfully persuade you to be prepared
for this Judge and Nihil est quod magis proficiat ad vitam bonestam, quam ut
credamus eum judicem futurum, quem and occulta non sallunt, and indecora
offendunt and honesta delectant. Amb. lib. de Offic.
Judgment. It makes the young man to rejoice moderately in his youth, Eccles.
11. 9. It makes the Minister serious and sedulous in his ministry, 2 Cor. 5.
11, 13, 14. It makes the Magistrate diligent in his place, as it did the
Emperor Constantine, Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 29. Yea it has an influence on all.
M. Perkins reports of a gracious Gentlewoman, much solicited to be a strumpet
by an importunate suitor, who promised her to do any thing for her sake, she
desired him to put his hand into the fire, and hold it there a quarter of an
hour, to whom he replied, oh! that is an unreasonable request; to whom she
retorted, how much more unreasonable is your request, that would have me to
satisfy your lust to burn in hell fire to all eternity. Holcot reports of two
Soldiers coming to the valley of Jehosaphat in Judaea, that said one to the
other, this is the place where the geuerall judgment shall be, therefore I
will take up, said one of them, my place before hand, and so taking up a stone,
sat down upon it; but before he arose such trembling seized upon him, that he
remembered the day of Judgment unto his dying day. So that we see thoughts of
judgment have been advantageous to all sorts of persons; and I am sure they
would be a (...), to heal all diseases and distempers. If we Ministers would
read every morning a Chapter in this book of Judgment, and write it down in
the common place book of our consciences, with the pen and ink of meditation
and prayer, it would keep us from laziness in our places, and lewdness in our
practices. If you Soldiers would anoint your swords with the sword-salve of
judgment, it would heal all the wounds in your consciences, and keep you
from wounds for ever. If you Ladies would dress your selves every morning in
the glass of judgment, it would cure your black pimples, and cover your naked
breasts, those two famous Ensigns of strumpets. If you Hectors with your
Mad-dames, would perfume your beds with the musk of Judgment, it would cure
you of, and keep you from the Noli me tangere. If you drunkards would spice
your morning draughts with the Nutmeg of judgment: it would keep you from
reeling and spuing all that day. In a word, if all would seriously think of
being judged by the law of liberty, it would make them so to speak, and so to
do, as they might hold up their heads in that time, James 2. 12.

Use 6. Of consolation to all the friends and favorites of Jesus Christ: out
of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah comes better and sweeter honey, then out of
Sampsons Lion; Judges 14. 8.
come precious souls, here you may satiate (you cannot surfeit) your selves.
When this Judge comes, then is the time for you to lift up your heads, Luke 21.
28. Then is your time of refreshing from the presence of the Lord, Acts 3. 19.
Then is your marriage day, Rev. 19 7. Then is your Coronation day, 2 Timothy 4. 8.

There are four things that are breasts of comfort and consolation to you.

1. The near and dear relations between you and the Judge; he that is Judge
on the Bench, was your Advocate at the bar, your friend at the board, your
husband in the bed; it is he that suffered for your sakes, satisfied for your
sins, interceded for your prayers, pleaded for your persons. What made the
Apostle so peremptorily to ask that question, Romans 8. 34. Who is he that
condemns? it is Christ that dyed. Quomodo Christus cum damnabit, quem propria
mors redemit. Amb. lib. de Jacob. cap. 6.

2. The shortness of the time; it will not be long before this Judge comes,
though I dare not say with Alsted. in his Chronol: that 1657, should be the
year, because the numerall letters are found in mundi conflagratio; nor yet
with Napier that 1688 shall be the year, for those are Arcana coeli; yet I may
say with Bucanon, if 1600 years ago were ultimum tempus, that then this is
ultimum temporis. I may say with Tertullian, this is clausulum seculi: with
Austin, Christ is in proximo: with Cyprian, he is supra caput; yea I may say of
some here, as was said of Simeon, they shall not depart this life before they
shall see the Lords Christ, Heb. 10. 37. For yet a little while, and he that
shall come, will come, and will not tarry. The original is very full and
emphaticall, every word has its weight, to show not only the certainty, but
especially the celerity of his coming:

(...), yet a little very little while. (...), who is on his way, (...)
instabit, Paraeus. (...) At: makes no delay: the sum is, he is on the wing,
he comes post, he will be here before most are aware.

3. What this Judge brings with him, Rev. 22. 12. Behold I come quickly, and my
reward is with me. Christ comes with his hands full of wages and rewards. 1
John 3. 2. We know when he shall appear, we shall be like him, 2 These. 1. 10.
He shall come to be glorified in all his Saints, and to be admired in all them
that believe. Its not possible for me to express, nor you to conceive, what
wages Christ brings with him: it is beyond rhetoric and reading. Coelum and
Christus non patiuntur hyperbolen.

Quicquid dixero minus erit.

Yet I shall adventure to give you a taste of the fruit of the heavenly Canaan,
which may suffice and satisfy you, until your blessed Josuah shall lead you
into it.

I shall for method-sake divide these blessings, into benefits for the body,
benefits for the soul, and benefits for both.

1. Benefits to the body. Which are of two sorts.

1. Privative. 2. Positive.
1. Privative; there shall be a releasing our bodies.

1. From all miseries. 2. From all necessities. 3. From all deformities.
1. From all miseries.

1. From penury and poverty, those dura tela; there shall be no beggar in that
heavenly Israel.

2. From toil and labor, no

Redit agricolis labor actus in orbem.

As when night of death comes no man can work, so when day of glory comes no
man shall work; all holy days, heaven is nothing else but an eternal play
day.

3. From the yoke of servitude and subjection, Political, Oeconomicall,
Ecclesiastical: then will be the year of release, the universal Jubilee,
then shall God be all in all. 1 Cor. 15. 28.

4. From persecution; no dogs nor devourers there; the dogs shall be cast into
the kennell of hell, to hang and howl for ever.

5. From those three arrows, of sword, plague, famine, Rev. 21. 1. No more
Sea: this world is that Sea, these three the billows which break the bones of
men, and backs of Kingdoms.

6. From all diseases and sicknesses, all pangs and pains, all Doctors and
Physicians Recipes will be useless there, heaven's a probatum est against all
maladies.

7. From death; no crying or dying there; in that Church no bell to toll the
passing knell; in that City no bills of mortality printed.

2. From all necessities.

1. From food and sustenance, we shall not live with the Salamander in the
fire, with the Camaeleon by the air, but we shall live by the eye, Rev. 7. 16,
17.

2. From raiment, studying, marriage, etc. Matthew. 22. 30. As the Angels of God.

3. From all deformities; no monsters, nor mishapes in heaven; that rectifies
all.

2. Positive benefits to our bodies.

1. Our bodies shall be perfect and personable, without spot or blemish, better
then if made of wax and alablaster, no need shall our Ladies have then of Peter
and Paul, or black spots. Phil. 3. 21. Glorious bodies.

2. Immortal and incorruptible; heaven has embalming spices to keep our
bodies for ever. Adam had (Vt scholastici) a posse non mori, a non posse non
mori, a mori non posse; this last shall then be our condition.

3. Spiritual and transparent, like Venice glasses with water in them, which
show all the parts and proportions of the things in them. Corpora beatorum ita
erint diaphana, ut oculis intuentium appareant venae, humores, viscera, nervi,
ac tota omnium partium harmonia. Thom: in Add: q. 85. act. 1.

4. Active and agile, they shall sequi ad nutum animae, they shall move, though
not in instanti, yet tempore imperceptibili.

5. Mighty and powerful; Luther is persuaded that the bodies of the Saints
shall be of that strength, that they shall be able to toss the greatest
mountain like a ball.

2. Benefits for the soul; Si tanti vitrum, quanti margarita, if the Cabinet be
thus rare, what shall be the jewel; surely Christ will not do as the
Egyptians, build stately Temples without, and have nothing but dogs and
Crocodiles within.

1. The privative benefits that shall accrue to our souls are:

1. Freedom from sin, that great troubler of our spiritual Israel, the bane
and burden of our souls; Hic praeceptum est ut non peccemus, ibi praemium est
non posse peccare. Aug: ad Bonif: lib. 7. cap. 7. tom. 7.

1. Our hearts, those bottomless Oceans of pollution and profaneness shall be
emptied, we shall never be more troubled with hardness of heart, with
straitness in duties, with hypocrisy in our actions, with unbeleife in the
promises; but our hearts shall be Camaerae regis, the Courts of God, and
presence Chambers of Jesus Christ.

2. Our understandings shall be freed from mists and fogs of ignorance, those
Israelites shall be delivered from Egypt. Ignoramus shall never be acted more
by them.

3. Our judgments shall be freed from errors, it shall be truly said of them,
which is falsely said of Popes, they cannot err.

4. Our wills shall be freed from all impurity, imperfection, unability,
unwillingness; heaven will make us all conformists, the wheels of our wills
shall sweetly and swiftly move about with the primum Mobile of Gods will.

5. Our memories shall be freed from oblivion; amongst all the rivers in
Paradize, there shall be no amnis oblivionis; amongst all the Laws of heaven,
there shall be no (...); all good things shall be so imprinted with indeleble
characters in our memories, that no aqua fortis shall be able to eat them out.

6. Our consciences shall be freed from all impurity and unquietness. Bernards
fourfold conscience shall be abbreviated into one; the bad and quiet, the bad
and unquiet, the good and unquiet; into a good and quiet conscience, that which
is not only the heaven upon earth, but also that heaven of heavens.

7. Our affections shall be freed from all distemper and disorder; they shall
never more make our souls Bedlamhouses: those untamed horses shall not
overthrow the Chariots; but those strings shall be so well tuned, that they
shall make melodious music.

2. Freedom from Satan and his temptations, no Devil shall ever stand at our
ear or elbow, to inspire wicked motions, or to incite us to vain actions, he
shall never rub our temples with his Opium of poisonous suggestions. Rev. 12.
7, 8. He was once sued with an Ejectione firma out of heaven, he can never
gain possession again.

3. From the fear of hell and damnation, you shall have an eternal
acquittance and discharge given you under the hand of Jesus Christ.

4. From the fear of Gods displeasure, that inferni limen; God will for ever
lift up the light of his countenance upon you; nothing but smiles from God.

2. Positive mercies to your souls.

1. Your souls shall be filled with perfect knowledge, (scibilia in quantum
scibilia) all the essences, and first qualities of things, which now are hidden
from us, all the riddles in Scripture shall then be resolved, yea the whole
Arc which now is dangerous to pry into, shall then be opened, and we shall
know all that is needful and comfortable for us to know about Gods council of
election and reprobation, the Trinity in Unity, the hypostatical union, etc. 1
Cor. 13. 12.

2. With perfect holiness and sanctity of our natures: happiness is nothing
else but holiness completed and crowned.

3. Enjoyments jointly to souls and bodies.

1. We shall sit Judges upon them that have slurd and slanderd us, 1 Cor. 6. 2.
The Saints shall judge the world. 1. Comparative, Matthew. 12. 41. 2.
Interpretative, they shall approve of the sentence, Psalm. 119. 137. 3.
Accessorie, they shall sit on the bench with him, Matthew. 19. 28.

2. You shall enjoy the company of Christ and Saints.

1. Christ; you shall obtain that (which was Austin's desire) viz. to see
Christ in the flesh, John 17. 24.

2. Saints; you shall see and know all the Saints from Adam to the last that
entered into heaven, Heb. 12. 23.

3. All the treasures and pleasures of heaven, set forth and shadowed out to
you from sundry similitudes and comparisons, as crown of life, power over
nations, feasting, marrying, summed up in the joy of the Lord, Matthew. 25. 23.

4. The presence and person of Almighty God, Matthew. 5. 8. You shall see God,
not only with a mental, but also with a corporal vision, which is the (...) of
heaven and happiness.

5. The continuance and duration of all this happiness which is for ever, Psalm.
16. 11. In thy presence is fullness of joy, at thy right hand are pleasures for
evermore. 2 Cor. 4. 17. A more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. The
words in the Original are so full, that we can scarcely render them in English,
so nigh as we can come, is, that if Aeternitate magis aeterna. Bez. in loc.
there be an eternity more then eternal, this is it. As it adds much to the
misery of the damned, that their torments are eternal, so it adds infinitely to
the comfort of the Elect, that their joys are eternal and everlasting.

And thus have I done with my Text in general, to come to the occasion of this
Assembly in particular.

1. To you much honored Lords; It is the honor of To the Judges.
this people, that Judges of such integrity and ability, should come this
Circuit. It is the happiness of the Preacher to have such Judges ears and
hearts to speak to, that have always been observed for their devotion and
piety; in their attention to retention of
the Word; which emboldens me to spread these four Petitions humbly before your
Honors.

1. When you are in the place of temporal, think often on eternal judgment;
let your heart be the true Philosophers stone, which turns all these earthly
matters and metals into golden meditations, such thoughts will warn and warm
your hearts, quicken and carry on your spirits in your weighty affairs,
comfortably and courageously.

2. Execute temporal, as this Judge will execute eternal judgment; Fiat
justitia ruat mundus, give me leave thus to English it, so execute judgment as
if the world were now a ruining, that so spectators may learn alphabetum
judicij extremi, as Luther phrases it.

3. Maintain the honor of that Potentate from whom you have your Commission.
Prove. 8. 16. By me Princes rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the earth.
Let your lips speak, plead, pronounce, sentence, even to death for Christ, if
the offense demerit it* If any should be brought before you for saying the
Protector were a Reader, judge whether here be any thing spoken against the
Lord Protector, as some obtrectators have falsely accused me, whose unjust
calumny did occasion the printing this Sermon. Hi mala de dulci flore venena
legunt.
traitor, a tyrant, an usurper, would you not severely punish him, and that
very justly?

If any shall be brought before you for calling Christ a bastard, impostor, no
God, a cursed Coppin was then to be tried for such like blasphemies.
go are at the left hand, and many such like, which I tremble to name, least
Christ should strike me dead for repeating such blasphemies. Let Christ, who is
your Lord Protector now, and shall be your Judge one day, find as much favor
from you; stand you as much for Christ now you judge, as you would have Christ
stand for you when he is your Judge: you must shortly come to your verse;

Nuper eram judex, jam judicis ante tribunal.

As your grey-hairs are ornaments to you as you are Judges; Judge Ask dyed
before the next Assize.
so they are warnings to you as you are men, Psalm. 82. 8.

4. Countenance and encourage the painful and faithful Ministry, be to them
as the Oak to the Ivy, support them by your power, that they may shade and
shelter you by their prayers.

I have three things to press upon your Honors to this end.

1. The near relation between Magistrate and Minister Primum in unoquoque
genere est mensura caeterorum.
at first; Exodus 4. 14. Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? And God commands
fraternall care and correspondency. v. 16. He shall be to thee in stead of a
mouth, and thou shall be to him in stead of God. Though you are the elder
brethren, and carry away the honor and inheritance, and we only have an
annuity for term and time of life, yet we are your brethren;

-- Dat Justinianus honores,
At genus and species cogitur ire pedes.
2. Your dear concernments, I may say of your lives and livelihoods (as Judah
said of Jacobs Benjamin, Genesis 44. 30.) are bound up in the lives and liberties
of the Ministers. Magistracy and Ministry are to the body politic (as the two
legs are to the body natural) upon which Commonweals stand, by which they
go; if one of these be broken, or cut off, the other must needs fail, and the
whole body fall. Yea the blind Sampsons for zeal lay hold on both these
pillars, and pull them down together.

3. The famous and flourishing state of that Nation where the Magistrate and
Minister mutual support one the other, the Magistrate by his person and power,
the Minister by preaching and prayer: it is a more hopeful and happy Asterisme
to a Land, than Castor and Pollux appearance together is to the Sea. When more
holy and happy days in Israel, then in David's and Hezekiahs reigns? who
encouraged the Seers, and listened to their voice, though reproving for sin, and
particularly, Thou art the man, 2 Samuel 1^ ^7. When more flourishing times for
Church and State, then in Constantines: and in England, then in Q. Elizabeth's?

I shall conclude all with Jehosaphat his charge to his Judges, 2 Chronicles 19. 6,
7. Take heed what you do, for you judge not for man but for the Lord, who is
with you in judgment; Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you,
take heed and do it, for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor
respect of persons, nor taking of gifts.

2. You worthy Patriots, the fixed Stars in the Orb of To the Justices.
this County, whose sweet and gracious influences, we the inferior bodies have
often received, and do with all humble thankfulness acknowledge, especially
those three late ones.

1. The clearing the County of vagrants, the pest and shame of England.

2. The suppressing the multitude of Alchouses, those nurseries of vices and
villainies, yea the very shops and Synagogues of the Devil. Surely your actions
(if Reverend and religious Mr. Bolton were living) would cause him to recant
that saying of his in his Sermon before the Judges at Northampton, Anno 1630.
that it was not so hard a work to win Dunkirke, as to get down an Alchouse; Oh
that Dunkirke, could now be so easily taken.

3. Your pressing the Acts and Statutes against the profanation of the Lords
day: I see you have found out that Law which Solon could never find, viz. a
Law to put all good Laws into execution, you are truly (...), such as are
living Laws, and make the Laws to live; you have put clappers into those bells
which make music in the ears of Gods people, but ring a doleful knell to the
hearts of the wicked. Worthy Sirs, Quo pede cepistis, go on, and give me leave
to add my mite to your treasury.

1. Have a very vigilant eye over the inferior officers; a fault in the first
concoction, can hardly be rectified by the other digestions.

2. Be very impartial in your justice, let that never be said of your justice;

Dat veniam corvis vexat censura columbas.

You have heard of Rete Vulcanium, which caught great ones as well as mean
ones: Oh when scarlet drunkards, and worshipful swearers are brought before
you; do not receive them with Your Servant Sir, nor dismiss them with such
another Complement as their greatest punishment; but let it be said of your
tribunal, what was said of L. Cassius Val: Max: lib. 3. cap. 7.
Praetor of Rome, Scopulus reorum, a rock to break all proud and profane waves
and ways. Oh remember the charge God gives you, Deuteronomy. 16. 19, 20. Thou shall
not wrest judgment, nor respect persons, neither take a gift, but justice,
justice, shall thou do. Oh imitate that admirable pattern, Job 29. 12. and
18. Deliver the poor that cry, and the fatherless, and him that has none to
help him; cause the widows heart to sing for joy, put on righteousness, let
it be your garment, let judgment be your robe and diadem, be eyes to the
blind, and feet to the lame, fathers to the poor, and break the jaws of the
wicked; make Kent as Villamont. lib. 3. cap. 4. of his voyages.
Sardinall in Syria, of which it is reported, that no Turks, Saracens, Moors,
can dwell, but dye before the years end. Oh let no common drunkards, profane
swearers, or deboise wretches dwell here, but make them depart before the year
end, that that scoffing Proverb of Kent and Christendom may be out of date.
For the Lords sake, sinners sake, yea your own souls sake, put to your helping
hand: methinkes I see some dawnings of reformation again, there was a glorious
Sun shined in our Hemisphere some ten years ago; but like Amos Sun it set at
noone day; some rays seem to appear again, lay hold upon them, lest we be
left in Cimmerian darkness, and it be said of England, that its worse with her
in the end, then it was in the beginning.

3. You eloquent Tertullus's, whose tongues are like To the Lawyers.
so many Orpheus his pipes to allure the Judges, Witnesses, Juries, auditors to
you; remember you shall be called from the bar to the tribunal, to give
account to this Judge of all your pleadings before the Judges: take a dram of
the powder of Judgment, and lay it upon your tongues every time before you
plead, it will be a special preservative, to keep your tongues from
blistering, and your consciences from festering.

4. You Witnesses and Jury men, anoint your lips with To the Jurors.
the oil of Judgment, it will cure you of and keep you from the stinking
breath of false witness, or a false Verdict.

To close and conclude all: (...), Men of Athens, not by nation but by nature,
you have itching ears after news and novelties, and it has been the course
and custom of Preachers to please you with such things, that you might applaud
them with Hic est ille Demosthenes; but I better know the worth of yours and my
soul, then to fool and flatter them so away. I have endeavored so to preach
this day (not only as King James said of a conscionable Chaplain of his) as if
judgment were behind your backs, but as if it were before your faces, I should
be glad so to defeat your souls. I have read of a famous cheat that was put
upon a Bulgarian King that was a Heathen, by one Methodius a Painter, who was a
Christian; he being desired to draw a rare piece of his art in this Princes
Palace, promised he would, and did accordingly; which when he had finished the
King came in full freight, with expectation to have seen his Hawks flying,
Hounds running, Forests green and flourishing, etc. But behold there was a
hideous Map of the day of Judgment, heaven in its blacks, the earth on fire,
the Sea in blood, men and women crying, Devils roaring, etc. Which did so apale
and amaze him, that he presently turned from a Pagan to a Christian.

You have come this day with expectation to hear a Sermon, garnished with
streines of Rhetoric, adorned with the flourishes of the Fathers, crowded with
invectives against the times, stuffed with scoffs and jeers of Sectaries and
Anabaptists, the usual stuff of these Sermons; but unexpectedly you meet with
a Sermon of Judgment, as lively drawn before your eyes, as if it were
pensilled upon the wall with a beam of the Sun; Oh that it would amaze your
hearts, affright your spirits, terrify your consciences, that of profane
people you would become pious and holy; I should be glad with all my soul to
put such a holy and happy cheat upon you, to cozen you with heaven in stead of
hell. I have often admired at that place, 2 Cor. 12. 16. Being crafty I caught
you with guile: I have endeavored after some such cunning in catching your
souls this day, and if I have failed of my purpose, yet I am satisfied. In
magnis and voluisse sat est.

FINIS.

