Peter pursued, OR Dr. HEYLIN Overtaken, Arrested, and Arraigned upon his three
Appendixes, 1. Respondet Petrus. 2. Answer to the Post-haste Reply. 3.
Advertisements on three Histories, Of

Mary Queen of Scots, King James, and King Charles.



Patched together in his EXAMEN HISTORICVM, For which the Doctor is brought to
Censure,

By WILLIAM SANDERSON, Esquire

Ne quis vestrum patiatur ut alienarum rerum inspector.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Leach, 1658.

The Preface.
REaders of Books may be divided into three sorts, 1. for Edification, 2. for
Recreation, 3. for Cavillation. But the last are the worst, who peruse writings
of purpose to pick quarrels with them; which proceeds from an ignorant critical
kind of pride or malignancy of Spirit, and may be compared to the Horse flesh
flies, who in the end of Summer cannot see, yet by chance fall upon sound
flesh, fly-blow it first, and then feed upon it. I should not apply this kind
of reading to any particular person, but that Dr. Peter Heylin appears so in
the Appendix to his Respondet Petrus, and in the other two Appendixes to his
Examen Historicum, wherein he falls upon the most frivial passages, and in a
snarling petulant way.

I shall here only acquaint the Reader, that Doctor Heylin has been too hasty
in the Answer of my Post-haste Reply to his Respondet Petrus, which Answer was
not till now made public. Printed indeed it was, immediately after his former
Appendix, but by the persuasion of his friends, I did suppress it (excepting a
few private Copies) until now that I find him with another Appendix in Answer
to that Reply of mine, which I here publish out of a respect to him, lest the
world should think so great a Master of defense should fight with a shadow or a
non ens: It Is worthy enough of him, how little soever the worth may be in it
self. And yet in earnest I could have been content to have spared my self and
the Readers pains herein, if the Doctor had been so ingenuous to have craved
pardon of me, as he has done by letter of that other person (as I am informed)
with whose Histories he quarrel as he does with mine.

POST-HASTE: A REPLY TO PETER (DOCTOR HEYLIN'S) APPENDIX; TO HIS TREATISE,
ENTITLED Respondet Petrus etc.

BY WILLIAM SANDERSON Esquire

LONDON, Printed for the use of the Author. 1658.

The Contents
PEtrus his Preface examined; A castigation of Doctor Heylin for his ill
Manners to the late Primate of all Ireland; And his scandalizing Doctor
Prideaux at Court in diverse false Informations; With a Copy of his Answer to
each; And the Protestation he was compelled unto to clear himself; The
Character given by Doctor Hackwell of Doctor Heylin; Three passages replied
unto and confirmed as before; With some seasonable good Couusell to the Doctor,
if he have the will to accept thereof.
POST-HASTE.
A Reply to Peter (Doctor Heylin)
His Appendix to his Treatise, etc.
THere is a Treatise come forth the other day, Entitled Respondet Petrus; or
an answer of Peter Heylin to Doctor Bernard etc. And although it be very large
to small purpose, yet at the 109th. Page, he adds an Appendix in answer to
certain passages in Mr. Sandersons History of the late King Charles, relating
to the Lord Prymate, The Articles of Ireland, and The Earl of Strafford. And
(as if it were so memorable a business to be kept upon Record) he gives us
punctually the day, when he began to undertake this Task, and the time of his
finishing; In which I find little else true, but the confessing of his
infirmities, and his unfitness to enter into disputes etc. Instead of clearing
himself, he has added more spots to his former.

Indeed Petrus has made have; for notwithstanding the extremity of the season
(as he says) and his languishing quartanague, he hobled up his answers for the
middle of the Term following, with as much ease, as Hoggs eat Acornes, or
Pigeons pick Pease. Yet he was interrupted the publishing, by the undertakers
with him; a dead vacation not profitable for the vent thereof; And so it came
not forth until just the first day of this Midsomer Term; By it, he has both
thriftily gotten the advantage of sale, and enforces his adversaries to hunt
dryfoot after him a whole long Summers Vacation; contemptible Grasshoppers
compared with such a son of Anak as himself; Only Petrus considers wisely,
that although convicia spreta exolescunt etc. Short lived Pamphlet^ (with which
he has been often banged) pass away upon the breath of Rumor, but for him to
be enrolled upon record in the body of an History, what is it less, than for
him to live defamed, and dye detestable, a scorn to these times and an
ignominy to all ages following? But who can help it, if a Man will make himself
such? I wish he be not prophetic in it, which by this book he has put hard
for, Let him not blame me, it is the malefactor himself (not the judge who
pronounces justly) that is the Author of his own ruin.

And thus in brief we have the Preface to his large Treatise; which I shall
leave to such, whom it may concern, if they conceive it worthy of answering,
for I find some learned Men are for the Negative, as if he had been in it, his
self-revenger, and next door to a felo dese, rather to be pitied, than opposed.

I shall only take notice of his Appendix, and show him to the Reader by that
light by which he longs to be seen (wherein Petrus falls upon me) not so much
answering as to show how little he deserves it. I have been a while
considering, which part to take of that double Counsel of Solomon in the like
case, Answer not etc. And yet answer etc. I concluded upon the latter in this
Post-Hast, that the Term might not want an interlude at the ending, as well as
it had by his Book, at the beginning of it.

And now let me meet my Petrus, who spends 17 whole Pages in the combat with
me, taking in his large Frontis piece or the Contents of his Appendix, which
might have well stood for the whole. So have we seen a daring coward practice
on the Stage to sense with his supposed foe, when all that while it was but
with his own hat and feather. How much time does Petrus spend, to hear himself
speak, imagining the Reader to be bound up to his sense and audience.

Indeed I had warning heretofore not to meddle with him, and was told, that
although he was blind, yet he with his helpers, could see as far into a
Millstone as any other Man: And that if he should be concerned in my History
(as how could he escape) he would reprint himself, and be thereby well paid for
his pains.

And truly I conceive it no discretion for me, to make it my business other
than to dry-blow beat him, since he is not herein worthy of bleeding. For to
say much were but to give him further occasion to assume fresh credit of
copeing with the deceased, now at rest, whom he has endeavored to disturb,
even the most Reverend name and living fame, of that approved learned Prelate,
the late Archbishop of Armagh, Prymate of all Ireland.

But to be a little serious with him, it is no news for Doctor Heylin to be a
disturber of pious and eminent Men, while they were living, of which (now he is
not like to live long himself) it is time to think upon repenting, I shall upon
this occasion only instance in his demeanonr toward Doctor Prideaux, at and
after the taking of his degree in Oxford Anno 1635. Who catching at some
particulars which fell from Doctor Prideaux in the discussing the questions
Doctor Heylins desturbance of Doctor Prideaux.
given by Doctor Heylin, scandalized him at Court to the late King being then
at Woodstock.

An Ecclesia authoritatem habeat
In fidei controversiis d^terminandis, Informat ex Arti^ul: 20.

Interpretandis sacras scripturas, affi^m.

Decernendi ritus et ceremonias.
Upon which the Doctor was compelled to make his defense; with a protestation
under his hand against those false Informations given in against him;
Pretending to have been cross to the Articles, and in special to the 20th, of
the Church of England, branched into positions viz.

1 That the Church is Mera Chimaera.

2 That it teaches and determines nothing,

3 That controversies might better be referred to the Universities than to the
Church.

4 That learned men in the Universities might determine of cont^^ve^sies
without the Bishops or acquainting them with them.

To these Doctor Prideaux was fain to make answer, which to satisfy the desire
of the Reader (not being heretofore published) I shall give him a transcript as
follows viz.

The answer of Doctor P^ideaux to the Information given in against him by
Doctor Heylin.

These passages imperfectly catched at by the Informer were not positions of
mine, (for I det^st them, as they are laid, for impious and ridiculous) but
oppositions acco^ding to my place proposed for the further clearing of the
truth; to which the Respondent was to give satisfaction. And this general
protestation I hope takes off all that can be laid against me, in the
particulars. Notwithstanding to touch on each of them as they are laid.

1 To the First, I never said that the Church was Mera Chimaera as it is, or,
has a being, and ought to be believed; but as the Respondent by his answers
made it: In which I conceived him to swerve from the Article, where his
questions were taken.

2 To the Second my argument was to this purpose, Omnis actio est suppositorum,
vel singularium.

Ergo Ecclesi^ in abstracto nihil docet, aut determinat, sed per hos aut illos
Episcopos, Pastores, Doctores, etc. homo non disputat sed Petrus et Johannes.

3. 4. The Third and Fourth may be well put together: my prosecution was, that
the Universities are eminent parts, and Seminaries of the Church, and had
better opportunity to discuss controversies, than diverse other assemblies; Not
by any means to determine them, but to prepare them for the determination of
Ecclesiastical assemblies, of Synods, Counsels, Bishops, that have superior
Authority, wherein they might do service to the Church, and those superi^urs
not perscribe any thing unto them; As the debating of a point by learned
Counsel, makes the easier passage for the Benches sentence: And this was urged
only as commended, not as necessary.

The Queens Almoner was present. Informer.

I am told noe. Doctor Prideaux.
For he departed (as they say) that were in the same seat with him, being
tired, as it should seem, by the tedious preface of the Doctor Heylin.
Respondent, before the disputations began; but be it so, or otherwise, to what
purpose this is interposed, I know not?

Upon an occasion of mentioning the absolute decree, Informer.
he brake forth into a great and long discourse, that his mouth was shut by
Authority, else he would maintain that truth contra omnes, qui sunt in vivis
which fetched a great hum from the Country Ministers that were there.

This Argument I confess was unexpectedly cast in by another, Docto^ Prideaux.
but bent (as I took) it against some what I have written in that behalf, which
the Respondent, not endeavoring to clear, I was put upon it to show, in what
sense I took absolutum decretum, which indeed I said, I was able to maintain
against any, as my predecessors in that place had done, This was not in a long
discourse, as it is suggested, but in as short a solution as is usually brought
in Schools, to a doubt on the by.

And from this I took off the opponents further proceeding in obedience to
Authority; whereupon if a hum succeeded, it was more then I use to take notice
of, it might be as well of dislike, as of Approbation, and of other Auditors as
soon as Country Minnisters. A Hiss I am sure was given before, when the
Respondent excluded King and Parliament from being parts of the Church; But I
remember whose practice it is to be (...) I had rather to bear and forbear,
(...)
and end with this Protestation.

Protestation.
THat as I believe the Catholic Church in my Creed, Doctor Prideaux
Protestation.
so I reverence this Church of England, wherein I had my Baptism, and whole
breeding, as a most eminent member of it. To the Doctrine, and discipline of
this Church, have I often hitherto subscribed, and by Gods grace constantly
adhered, And resolve by the same assistance, according to my ability under his
Majesty's protection faithfully to maintain against the Papists or any other
that shall oppose it.. The prelacie of our Reverend Bishops I have ever
defended in my place, which I dare say has been more often, and with greater
pains taking than most of those have done, who have received greater
encouragements from their Lordships: I desire nothing but the continuance of my
Vocation in a peaceable course, that after all my pains taking in the place of
his Majesty's P^ofessor, almost for this 18* years together, my Such as
proceeded Doctors under him of whom Doctor Heylin had been newly one.
sonns especially, be not countenanced in my declining age to vilify me, and
vex me; so that I end the remainder of my time, (which likely must be short,
and cannot be long) in hearty prayer for his Majesty my only Master and
Patron; for the Reverend Bishops, the State, and all his Majesty's Subjects and
his affairs; and continue my utmost endeavor to ^oe all faithful service to
the Church wherein I live, to whose Authority I have ever, and do hereby
submit my self, and Studies, to be according to Gods wo^d directed or converted.

Thus was this learned and eminent Prof^ss^r of divinity traduced and
disturbed, let the application be the patience and disregard of the Reader,
when in this book he finds the like attempted by the same person, upon the late
Archbishop of Armagh.

And yet, what slender account is to be made of his language that way, may
appear by the Ch^racter, Doctor Hackwells Character of Doctor Heylin.
which a learned person, and one of note, George Hackwell Archdeacon of Surrey
and of Exeter College in Oxford, gives of him which I have under his own hand
in a letter of his to a friend; Where, speaking of Mr. Heylin (since Doctor)
whom he styles, the Patron of that pretended Saint (St George,) has these
words of him, viz.

In the second impression of his book where he has occasion to speak of the
Roman writers, especially the Legendaries he magn^fi^s them more, and when he
mentions our men he vilefies them more than he did in his first Edition; But
the matter is not much, what he says of one or the other, the condition of the
man, being such, as his word hardly passes, either for commendation, or a
slander.

By this you may see that my adversary had good cause to disguise his name, and
so would I too, were it under such an Ignominious character. This is the fourth
time he has done it. I expect in time he will make up the number of Labans
change of Jacobs wages. Here is a Proteus indeed (which he would have put upon
me) Annonymus, observator, observator Rescued, Rejoinder and now Petrus. It Is
well he h^ngs by his christian name; he has in this presumed, beyond any Pope,
who though they have assumed Paul, the fifth time, yet none has styled himself
Petrus. We have now the one half of him, we shall have the other the next,
either conjunctim, or divisim, it matters not.

He begins with his fancy of my being Doctor Bernards Reserve, in clearing the
whole proceedings of the Lord Prymate in the business of the Earl of Strafford;
and in the Examination and moderation of all passages, between Mr. ^' Estrange
and him. I shall satifie the Reader upon what occasion I undertoke it.

So soon as that Anonymus of an observator on Mr. l'Estrange, (...)
came to the Prymates hands, he was pleased to show it to me; and finding the
Author so apt upon a slender occasion to bleamish him; (supposing him to be
some Romish Agent whom he disdaining to Answer,) desired me in the pro^ecution
of my History (as it lay in my way) to vindicate him, (though not long after I
was told by his Bookseller, that the Author was Doctor Heylin In order
thereunto he acquainted me with such passages as did concern that of the Earl
of Strafford; whose commands I presently effected; intending (then) to have set
it out by it self, least the Doctors M^lice should Gangreen by neglect. But the
Lord Prymates decease immed^^t^ly following, it was referred to my ^^ist ^y
wi^h some fr^sh Notions more prop^r, which in my absence was neglected by the
Press; and at my return, they b^ing ins^rted have given cause of Interse^tions
in the Impression, between fol. 108 and 09. With which Petrus is so much
troubled, and spends his breath in a dispute with him^e^^, whether it were mine
or Doctor Be^na^ds? And why so jealous, good Pet^us? Append: pa. 142.
First (says he) because Mr. Sanderson before in his Preface makes Doctor
Heylin a person of some fame and great ability. That (possibly) might be my
mistake a^ the next in my speaking reprochfully, of him, in his: Indeed I
acknowledge that Doctor Heylin deserves Characters of several kinds, as most
men may discover, who consult his writings; and so Cato's, les^on learnt by him
long ago Convenient nulli etc. will better serve the turn to decipher him,
than m^e.

Secondly, (says he) Mr. Sand^^son in his History fol. 200. informs us, that
in Anno. 1635. There was a Synod held in Ireland etc. But in his foysted
Argument he speaks the Contrary. Good Petrus consult some tru^friends, that
will read aright to you, and you will find the several Folio's you mention,
not to be any thing contrary, which are too tedious to insert in this short
Castigation.

Three points there are in which Petrus fancies me, Three points of mine
quarrelled by Petrus.
to act for Doctor Bernard.

1 The acquitting the Lord Prymate from the distinction of a Political and a
personal conscience. And yet it is confessed by himself to have been done to
my hand by Mr. Howell's attestation of my history, (who was concerned in those
words.)

2 The proving that the Articles of Ireland were not abrogated, and those of
the Church of ^ngland inserted in their stead. And yet he has prevented any
further confirmation of either, by his own confessing of his being too much
credulous in beleiving and inconsiderate in publishing such mistaken
intelligence. Which are his own words folio 87. And I could wish that in the
Errata of the next Edition of his History of the Sabbath (if the world be ever
troubled with it again) he would Record this Ingenuity of his (being such a
rarity in him) so as to retract it, and howsoever he is much offended at the
Primates expressions, viz. Nor shames he to affirm as being a Notorious untruth
etc. Truly with me it seems a gentle penance for so presumptuous an assertion,
and pertinaciously continuing in it these many years, till he was thus
convict; defaming not only a single person, but a whole Nation.

3 That the Lord Prymate boar no grudge to the Earl of Strafford, so as to
advise the King to pass the Bill of Attainder. This (whosoever he accounts the
Actor) has been sufficiently cleared also, and needs no repetition here.

For the term of Sophistry, (for which he is also much offended with the
Prymate) he has in the Judgment of diverse, made it good, throughout his book,
which are so many, that they would find as much work for an observator, as he
says my History will afford him: I shall only trouble the Reader with one
instance (ex ungue Leonem, by this you may judge of the rest) which is in such
great Characters, that he who rides post, may read it without stopping.

It Is folio 63. where he repeating a Quotation of the Prymate in the conclusion
of his Letter to Doctor Twiss ^ viz* That Gregory the great, esteemed it to be
^he doctrine of the Preachers of Antichrist; wh^ at his coming shall cause both
the Lords day, and the Sabbath, to be kept, or celebrated from doing any
wo^ke;) Petrus, in his pretended answer, has blindly mistaken the Copulative
and, for the disunctive or (though the Prymate in the next words, had given him
warning of that Stumble:) And so upon a false sent he runs away with the Hunt,
as if it must necessarily follow from thence That it is the doctrine of the
Preachers of Antichrist that no manner of work be done on the Saturday or the
Sunday: And from that surmise, he makes an application (of which, I leave it to
others to give the sense.) What will become (says he) of our English
Sabbatarians and their Abettors, who impose as many restraints of this kind,
upon Christian people, as ever were imposed on the Jews, by the Scribes and
Pharisees? And in Conclusion he attempts to put out our Eyes also, in
persuading us again; That it is all one to say, on the Saturday and the Sunday;
as on the Saturday, or the Sunday; As if unity and division; conjunction and
separation, were alike with him: And it seems by this, that his Nature is most
addicted to the latter.

As for that great offense taken by him in the mistake of weakness, Append: p.
195.
for incredulity; and Idleness, for Inconsideration in the printing of the
Prymates Letter: There is no such difference, either in quantity or quality;
but that if he can swallow the one, (as he has done even now) he may as easily
digest the other: And it being but a copy, it might as well happen as other
greater mistakes have been in my absence between the Margin and the body of
that letter.

Though it is possible for Petrus to show his guilt of Idleness, to make more
work for the Press to no purpose. Which petulant brain of his, may be excused
by the want of that sense, which might divert his thoughts, otherwise.

And for what else remains, Append: p. ^47.
concerning the Bishops whether sent for, or sent to the King? Or whether the
Judges were willing or unwilling to deliver their Judgment against the votes of
the Parliament? I refer the Reader to what has been said in the History, too
tedious to recite.

As for the challengers threats with which he concludes, (hereafter) to commit
a public Riot on my whole History; and therein to be made immortal, by being
loud and troublesome. He that marches against the Ocean may no doubt take
abundance of Cockle-shells Captive. I confess ingeniously, there may be
mistakes in the body of so large an History, which will be amended in the next
Impression, as it is suddenly intended; wherein, your oblique Information, or
any civil advertisement of others will direct me: Seeing (as Petrus says)
abilities not governed by Infallibility, cannot exempt a man from being
obnoxious to mistakes, with which his own Pamphlets are pestered. But spare
your Intelligence in the disquisition of one particular concerning the Children
of Mr. John Hambden of Buckingham Shire, which is confes^ed an Errata, and must
be thus corrected: That he died of his wounds, and left three Sons complete
Persons both of body and mind; what ere sinister Report then gave occasion of
the mistake.

And now (Petrus) at parting: I could find in my heart to give you a little
good Counsel: Be not so wild an Ishmaelite, as to have your hand against
every man, and provoking every man's hand against you.

Take the advice given to your namesake: Peter, put up thy sword again into his
place. Leave off this cross^grain humor, studying the injury against such
Persons, as the late eminent Prymate, so far above you in learning and
reputation, that wise men look upon your language, like the barking at the
Moon; or a madman throwing up a sharp stone, which falls on his own pate.

This your last Book, having made you such a Bankrupt in point of reputation
with most men, that all the charitable collections of your numerous helpers,
will not easily recruite you.

I reverence your function, and mervail that many of your Books do so little
concern it, rather to the dishonor than otherwise, and I am not at all obliged
to respect your person. Your travail has been much earthy, at which you began,
had you continued that Journey, you might have amended your own ^^rours. What
is otherwise (as the observations of the Lords day, or of Persons of piety, who
were and are for it) you have been in a continual combat against both.

Your own friends conceive you unfortunate, to the disturbance of the Church in
each; For my part, so soon as I find you reformed, I shall contribute my
endeavors, that your credit, now out of joint, may be set right again. Your
own Pen that broke you must repair you, though as yet I am among the number of
those that therein despair. And as you have been a (...) (...) mish Clergy)
that ever was guilty of it. He began it whilst the Primate was living, and
prosecuted it after his death, with all the violence that might be expected
from an Enemy. As to the quotations he makes out of his own several undigested
Pamphlets to excuse himself, they have only this sense, viz. If the Scandal he
had raised on the Primate were but silently received (and so believed) he would
be quiet. His laying aside of that Argument is of no value, unless he had
revoked it.

Page 208.] As to that Page, I say again, what the two Honorable Persons
mentioned by me have given under their hands, and so attested, and also offer
their Oaths therein, is enough to satisfy all unbyassed Persons. And for his
Author he ^ow boasts o^, (yet names none) If he be a wise man, he will not be
willing to appear against the Primats own Declaration, and those other
Testimonies, besides the Improbability so fully showed heretofore: If he be not
wise, it is not much material. But I have done with it.

Ibid.] He confesses, that James Howel (to whose bare Name, he might have
added the Title due to him, being of better repute than Peter Heylin) has
quitted that distinction of a personal and political Conscience by his
Attestation of my History, wherein I have mentioned it, and is clear enough
expressed: But that Peter has a trick when he is at a loss to make a large
circumlocution about the sense, only to amuze the Reader; the thing is apparent
by his own words, wherein he was so conscious to himself, as that he had not
the face here to repeat them, which are these, If the Historian did say any
thing of it, it is expunged by Mr. Howel, whom it only concerns, when he had
perused his History, and passed his approbation of it, (Petrus Resp. pa. 144.)
so that his presumptuous conclusion is but a shadow, and will vanish with any
intelligent Reader.

Page 209.] For the abrogating of the Articles of Ireland; No rational
unbias^ed Reader but may be satisfied in the Doctors Misinformation of that
passage; and if he had not a brow that could not blush, he would not have
touched any more on that string: but seeing he will not own any Ingenuity in
the clear acknowledgement of his mistake, let him dye in it; I suppose few or
none live in that opinion with him.

Two pages following are spent in masking and unmasking himself, with so much
tergiversation, that I let them pass; only in page 210. I find him most galled
with that testimony which Doctor Prydeaux and Doctor Hackwell give of him, and
instead of healing the wound, he has made it more wide, and is therein found
indeed his own self Revenger.

As concerning Dr. Prydeaux (page 211.) first he professes himself to have
been his Enemy in that business, in that he says page 212. If he had been
called to the Hearing of it before the late King, it is not probable Dr.
Prydeaux had gone off so clearly with those evasions* 2. He acknowledges page
113. That the paper published was of Dr. Prydeaux own penning, and given by him
amongst his friends. 3. In page 214. That he opposed Dr. Prydeaux in his
Lectures De visibilitate Ecclesiae, and (affecting a singularity) went a
different way from him and other Tractates, in and about that time 4. He uses
those of the Waldens^s and Wickliffists, (as he styles them) very coarsly,
calling them scattered Conventicles, charging them with Heterodoxes in
Religion, who, I have heard and read, suffered very much under the tyranny of
the Sea of Rome. 5. He highly magnifies the Writers of the Church of Rome, and
in special Bellarmine for his cordial and stout maintenance of some fundamental
points of Faith, comparing him with any of the Divines or learned men of the
Reformed Churches, entituling him Nobilissimus Cardinalis, and so much himself
confesses; but by another Witness, I have been told, that he did also then,
and at other such times, accumulate diverse others, not only the like, but
greater Titles.

6. He confesses (page 215.) that upon this, Dr. Prydeaux censured him in the
Schools for a Papist, and one of Bellarmines Disciples. For my part, I cannot
but subscribe to so learned a Testimony: and if it be so, it were better for
him to appear the same, than thus to disguise himself to the dishonor of our
profession. This whole Relation speaks little or nothing to the Doctors
reputation; Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee. What he tells us
immediately after, of his two Sermons at Woodstock, and of the commendation
given him by some of the Court, as they must be his own Flatterers, so it
appears they were no judicious wise men by the overmuch latitude in it,
(ibid.) as if in those two Sermons he had done more against Popery, than all
the Sermons Dr. Prydeaux had preached in his life time; as it was an absurd,
ridiculous rant, so it is worse becoming his own pen to be the Trumpet
thereof. And how it agrees with his haesitation, whether the Religion of Popery
be I dolatrous and superstitious? (as he does in his Examen Historicum of Mr.
Fullers History) I leave it unto any man to judge, I am sure in it he strayes
from the Homilies of the Church of England, who do fully determine it. And what
that Error was which he preached in a Sermon at Westminster, for which the Dean
publicly rebuked him in the Pulpit, saying, Sir no more of that, and
persisting therein he stroke the Pulpit with his staff, saying, No more of that
I say, I leave to his own memory, it being very likely to be a kin to this.

And whereas he says (page 216.) that he maintained this position, that the
Church could not err, unless he have some unknown reserve, I know no point
concludes him more, to be what Dr. Prydeaux apprehended him, and so I begin to
think I was not at first much mistaken in conceiving of that Anonimous
Observator (Peter Heylin) who began to write to the disparagement of the late
Primat, to have been some Agent of the Sea of Rome.

Nay, as if he had not injured himself sufficiently, he goes on to tell us,
(page 217.) of the opposition he made to Dr. Prydeaux, and of his judgment in
the questions propounded, and of a check given to Dr. Prydeaux by the late
Archbishop of Canterbury. To what end is all this? is it, or can it be any
reputation for him thus to thwart Dr. Prydeaux? will he put his in the same
scale with him? Well, as we know Dr. Prydeaux was an eminent and a pious
person, so it appears Dr. Heylin was a Disturber of him, and has in this very
Book of his Examen Historicum confirmed it sufficiently, in the abuse of Mr.
Thomas Fuller, one of better reputation than himself; and therein (sooth for to
say) I cannot but commend him, he always aims at high and worthy persons, not
spending his Bolt (soon shot) upon such as are of mean* esteem. We have his own
Confession, and so the Crime is no new one, (as he says) but an old one, with
which seeing he has charged himself, what need we any further Witness? He
comes off but poorly from the Hiss, and is as much mistaken in his confident
conclusion; this whole Relation with all prudent men making very much for the
ho^our of Dr. Prydeaux, and Peter Doctors own disreputation. And so I leave him
in the dirt with which he has bespattered himself sufficiently.

Page ^19.] As for that misplacing of the words by the Printet, viz. Dr.
Hackwell Archdeacon of Surrey and of Exeter College, for Dr. Hackwell of Exeter
College, and Archdeacon of Surrey, was not so worthy his Discourse as thus to
spend six lines about it.

Now, as for Dr. Hackwells certificate of him (p. 220) it had been his wisest
way to have let that die also; first, the return he makes (p. 222.) to the
diminution of Dr. Hackwells abilities, charging him with weakness in penning of
his book, and affirming his own tale of St. George and the Dragon far excelling
him in the Answers, these are not to be heeded, being only his own testimony,
and will be as little effectual to the injuring of the same and worth of that
person, as what he hitherto vented, has been to the late Primat or Dr.
Prydeaux. For his language (p. 223.) of Dr. Reynolds and Dr. Hackwell (both
eminent professors of the Protestant Religion) and the rest of that gang (those
are his words) a Jesuit would have said little more; But still it is like
himself, as in the words thereafter following he has the like again, which I
disdain to repeat. And as to his magni^ying the Roman writers, the Legendaries,
he does not deny it, but defends himself in it. These being the Premises, the
Conclusion, (which he only denies) must undoubtedly follow, of Dr. Hackwells
cen^ure of him, viz. That his words will hardly pass for a commendation or a
slander.

And in (p. 224.) as to my saying that he has made good that term of Sophistry
^hrough^ut his Bo^k, he accuses himself of it, in the repetition of my words
by halfs, or disjointed: A^^for the rules of Grammar (which he would have the
world know he has not forgot) besides, that he descends too much from himself,
to make so long a narrative about it (better becoming some Country Pedagogue)
I am sure they are better sense, than what his Comment thereon does give them;
for in a word this is all, I having spoken of a Sophistry of his (in his book)
immediately before, I added, which indeed are so many, is not this clear enough
to be understood? viz. which Sophistries are ^o many? Yet Peter would have it
amended into a calmer word, viz. Errors, but they plainly relate to
Sophist^i^s; which I th^ught fit to instance in one of his (p. 225.) where he
maintains a Copulat: ve and a Disjunctive t^ b^ all one, and that which
himself here confesses, viz. that it is not material, in which sense they be
used, diff^reth little from it.

And so we have an end of him, though (p. 226.) he goes out like the snuff of a
candle, with an ill ^ent of some unsavory language against Dr. Hackwell, not
much to be valued; only let me tell him, as to his reputation, which he here at
last much boasts of, to have been with the generality of this Nation, certainly
he has looked on himself with some Multiplying Glass, for I can witness,
that with the Court and Parliament, Clergy and Commonalty, he had the least of
resp^ct, and as much of the general hatred as any of his profession; he being
indeed of such an harsh disposition, that few persons could consort with him:
And so he continued during the Court and Parliament, as appears by the speech
of a worthy Member, Sir Benjamin Ruddier, 7 November. Anno 1640. After he had
traced the proceedings of some of the Clergy, very much to their rebuke, he
complains about dancing upon Sundays, that they would fain be at some thing
that were like the Mass that will not bite, a muzzled Religion; they would
evaporate and dispirit the power and vigor of Religion, by drawing it out into
solemn specious formalities, into obsolete antiquated Ceremonies new furbished
up. And Mr. Speaker (said he) this is the good work in hand which Dr. Heylin
has so often celebrated in his bold Pamphlets. All his Acts and Actions are so
full of mixtures, Involutions and complications, as there is nothing clear,
nothing sincere in any of his proceedings, etc. and much more, which I forbear.

It Is true, this Dr. Heylin was entertained by some persons, a fit bold Agent
to be made use of in the opposing of such whom they pleased should be
affronted, and that for promotion (of which yet, they did not think him much
worthy) he would adventure upon the broaching any thing for several ends, and
this is his Character.

I shall only add this, that it had been very undecent in me to have dealt thus
with any other of his profe^sion, which I very much reverence in them; but he
has made himself so cheap and contemptible, by his often personal biting and
scandalizing eminent men, that he is held fit thus to be handled, he having
been, and is, the Bou^efeau of the age that disturbs all men; And as to my
self, for his further threats, I have learnt to despise them.

Then in his very winding up of the bottom of his Appendix, a Note (as he
calls it) overslipt him concerning the Affairs of Oxon. Not at all relating to
this difference, yet he directs the Reader to Folio () blank; but where, ^r in
what Book, or of what Author, by Name or Title, he does not express, only he
mentions Mr. Fuller, and Mr. Sanderson: Some Crotchet it seems, was in his
pate, which neither he, nor his Agent understood, and therefore we have it
imperfect. And so having prosecuted him thus far by pursuit, I shall now bring
him from his Arrest, unto his Arraignment.

The Arraignment OF Dr. PETER HEYLINS ADVERTISEMENT; ON The three Histories
Mary Queen of Scots, King James, and King Charles
Vindicated,

By the Author WILLIAM SANDERSON, Esquire

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Leach, 1658.

The Preface.
DId not my Judgment tell me, that Peter Heylin, Dr. of Divinity, his
A^v^rtisements were not the results of the wisest so^t of Readers, I should
willingly acquiesce in this difference: for as I have reason to think that
there are a Judicious party numerous enough on my side; so have I humility
sufficient to confess, that I may in some things be subject to mistake (with
which I am assured, his writings do abound) But yet, I cannot allow him such a
compleatnesse, and ine^^ability in his Exam^n, as to exclude my self from a
Vindication, or to swallow such large and hard Morsels before I chew them; the
passage of his Gou^et has been observed, that Mountains of Errors have gone
down with him, without reg^et.

For my ^elf, I am resolved, that nothing of passion, petulancy, or desire to
contradict, or vanity to clear my self, shall have any bias upon my Judgment,
to make me gratify my will, which reason and reputation does not command me to
observe. And truly (as I was desired by some friends) I could perhaps be
content to take this as his last potion, at this time, for once and no more;
but then, it is like he means to prescribe such others, as a diet or me to feed
upon, without observing of a mean, or resolving of an end.

And indeed concerning this Grand Examiner of other men's writings (this alter
Possevi^us, whose office he usurps) if any man were at leisure to Advertise his
mistakes, Erro^^, and idle passages, in some of his, especially h^s Geography,
Countries, Rivers, Nations and Names never in being; His whole History of Saint
George and the Dragon sufficiently de^ected by learned men, not to mention all
his erroneous opinions in his writings, he would find work enough, and should
have done well to amend his own mistakes, before he had meddled with others, and
to have brusht his own Coat, which in many places is ^o foul, that needs a
Rubber to clean it* But I forbear any more, and come to the matter.

The Arraignment.
THis Grand Censor is so far ingenuous, as to afford us a Preface to his
Advertisement on the History of the Queen of Scots and King James, and there he
tells us, That he having made an end of his Ecclesiastical Animadversions, he
enters upon matters civil, Historical (...) in those Histories. Yet he
confesses, in most men's opinions he might be better employed, for I cannot
herein find (saves he) any malicious or dangerous untruths destructive to the
Church of England, or to the same and honor of Prelates, or the regular
Clergy; And in the conclusion of the Advertisement (p. 28.) he says, he must
do right to the Au^hor himself, whom he looks upon, as a man well principalled,
and of no ill affection to the Church or State. I am obliged to his severe
Advertisement for this truth of the first, and to his favor for the last; but
not for his Aspersions upon me presently following, against my Expressions in
my former Post-haste Reply, which he is pleased now again (as before) to term
Scurrulous; and yet what cause have I to complain, when in his said Prefac^ to
th^se Advertisements, he compar^s most of our Scrip^uri^nts (as ^e sti^es them)
(Ecclesiastical or Civil) with the Ape-Carrier in the History of Don Quixot,
who cared not if his Comedy^s had as many Errors, as there are motes in the
Sun, so he might get money by them? Well boul'd Peter! But ^ere his Amanuensis,
or Clerk, Reader, made bold to beg his Masters Animadversion, whether Don
Quixot were a Poet and made plays, or a Scripturi^nt Ecclesiastical, or Civil,
because he is quoted comparative with such Writers? Neither so nor so (said the
Doctor) he was a warlike Champion, such another as St. George; Then (said his
Man) you being Testis ^emporum, and your Treatise being styled Examen
Histori^um, let him be called St. Don, or the other Do^ Geo^ge, both alike
Champions, and alike fit to be Recorded.

But in earn^st, the Doctor pro^esseth, that hereafter he resolves to lo^k back
upon his own Errors, and to redeem the time, because h^s ^ormer days were
evil, and in this resolu^ion it were ^appy for him to acquiesce, for which I
shall put ^im into my Pater N^ster, but never in my Creed. Thus mu^^ with his
preamble Preface.

The Doctors first Advertisement upon which he reads a Lecture, is taken out of
my Introduction, a mistake he says, naming [Folio 1. Mary, King Henry's
Sister] for his daughter (page the first.) An oversight of the Composer, the
Copy was true, and there being no Errata (in my absence) annexed either to
this, or the other Histories, with which he quarrels; the Readers Judgment may
amend such oversights with his pen, and never be be^olding to a Doctor of
Divinities Advertisments.

Fol. 2. [That King James the fifth, was the 108th. King of Scotland.] It may
come near the truth (says the Doctor) for King James the sixth, pretended to
be but the 106th. King, and quotes an old verse, Nobis haec invicta tulerunt
Centum sex Proavi, p. 2.) But there were two Kings Soveraignties questionable,
and never adjudged.

The next is [Fol. ^. that the Pope excommunicates King H. 8. and interdicts
his dominions, and moves the Emperor and French King to be his Enemies, to
palliate such potencie he procures an interview with them, at Nice in the
confines of Provence,] The Doctor confesses that this interview was between
the French King and the Pope at Nice, but far enough (says he) from the
borders of King Henry's Dominions, at which Henry was not present, p. 2.) Nor
do I say, he was; Nor did I mention the word Dominions in reference to the
place of Interview, but to the Popes malice of Interdiction. These
Advertisements refer to the Introduction of the History, and now follows the
History it self.

[Fol. 8. Prelate Bishops brought in by Paladius] but the Doctor cunningly
leaves out that which follows [having had (by their favor) (said I) Priests
and Monks before.] He allows of this as of my opinion, and the consent of some
of the Scots, taken (he says) from Buchanan a fiery Presbyterian, and
consequently a professed Enemy to Bishops, p. 3.) and ravelling into a long
discourse with this distinction, that Priests and Monks might instruct the
people, but not Gover^ed without the help of Bishops; and therefore he asserts,
that Prelate Bishops were not first brought in by Paladius, as the Scots say,
nor was that Church so long a time without Bishops, as the English
Presbyterians would have it, p. 4.) but as my History is not properly concerned
in that difference, nor do I consent to his opinion, and so it is but ipse
dixit Petrus.

[Fol. 15. John Calvin a Frenchman of Aq^itane] Not so (says he) but of
Picardie, p. 4.) some Authors disagree say I: Nor is it much material, no more
than the nex^, to which he skips, fol. 91.

[Fol. 91. The Lords of Aubigny take name from the village so called in
Aquitane] he says in the County of Berry, p. 4. (it may be so.)

[Fol. 20. And therefore to strike in with his Son and Successor she kept his
Fathers obsequies, with Magnificent solemnities in St. Paul's Church London,]
the obsequies of the French King Henry 2. performed by Queen Elizabet^: Not so
much (says the Doctor) on that ground, but to preserve her own Religion, the
honor of our Church with Papist Princes, p. 4.) We may agree in this too, it
might be for both; yet the political State interest (confederacy) is the usual
ground, and more obvious to the civil affairs, rather than to the
Ecclesiastical.

[Fol. 27. An hundred Marks a year was then sufficient for a single Minister]
Understand not (says he) a Mark 13 s. 4 d. English, but 13 d. ob. Scottish, p.
4.) and so he goes on, as to supply the pretended defects of my Expression, by
his Arithmetical observation, how much those different marks English and
Scottish amount unto: so that the Reader may imagine, it was my narrow opinion
[that so little, was sufficient for a Minister] but my discourse is full enough
and satisfactory; for speaking of the baldness of the Scots first Ministry, and
[their supplications (say I) for their maintenanc^, being as yet at the will of
the people, a reasonable pittance was thought sufficient contribution, etc. for
by compute of their own Lords of the Congregation, 100. Marks a year, was then
sufficient for a single Minister, viz. five old Pieces.] the very words of the
Record; And lest any Reader should be mistaken herein, the Margin has these
Notes, very small, a Scottish Mark is but 13 d. ob. sterling; an old piece 22 s.
in gold. But I am almost weary to answer the Examinors Advertisements so mean,
and yet so many, as I fear may tire the Reader outright, yet he makes haste,
and skips on, to fol. 53.

[Fol. 53. Claymed by Charles of Aragon, and Peter de Taracene, for the Isle of
^icile,] Having occasion to discourse of Trials of right by Combat, I mention
examples, and amongst others, these Challenges. He says no; It was once
intended between Peter King of Aragon and Charles Earl of Anjou, p. 5.) True
too, say I, they were two several Combats, several persons, at several times;
I say [claymed] he says intended, for neither of them ^ought.

The like he marks at fol. 55. [there were some preparations in King James time
intended, between Rey and Ramsy,] Not so (says the Doctor) but in King Charles
time, p. 5.) Certainly say I, an oversight of the Composer, for in my History
of King Charles, I mention that whole Trial very particularly, and therefore
this Advertisement so obvious, needs no reproach on me.

[Fol. 83. Katherine de Medicis, Pope Clements Brothers daughter,] he says she
was not, and ravels into her Pedigree to prove his Assertion, p. 5.) But then
take altogether, I said [that I may not omit the horrid Massacre throughout all
France, upon the Persons of the reformed Religion, called by the Adversaries
Hugonotes; the History is so horrid, and the more uncertain in particulars,
because the Papists piece it out with some excuses: but the truth was written
by one Ernest Varamond of Freezeland then living, An. 15^^.] And because I
would not be suspected to adulterate the story, I caused it to be printed in
another Letter or Character, (as it is usual when an Author recites another
words) so then it was not for me to alter those words (Brothers Daughter) not
being mine ^wn, but the Authors; Nor was it then, or is it now, necessary for
me to examine the neernesse of her relation, with which the Doctor troubles the
Reader.

Another monstrous mistake [fol. 89. Poictour] for Poictou, p. 6.) the letter
r. added by the Composer, and overslipt by the Corrector.

Another worse, a word mistaken [fol. 96. Duke] for Earl, p. 6.) what need Mr.
Doctor Advertise this, when the next line mentions him Earl of Arran, and so
throughout the Paragraph, and forty times before, and after?

Another, where I pray? Mary in fol. 149. a misname [Mettallan] whom afterward
is named Maitland, p. 6.) I do so, from his name Metallanus, where the Latin
writers mention him; and Maitland the Scottish writers call him, and here the
Riddle is resolved. Yet another, ten folioes before, viz. fol. 139.

[Fol. 139. History of Queen Elizabeth writ by Martin] he says Martin writ no
farther than King Henry 8, the rest possibly is clapped too by the Publisher of
that History, being Camdens Annals of that Queen, p. 6.) If the Doctor be not
mistaken in his possibly, yet I am right, to entitle the whole History to
Martin, whose name is to the Title page as the Author, be the Publisher
whomsoever the Doctor can find out.

[Fol. 156. The Leaguers for some Justice in their Rebellion elect Cardinal
Bourbon, a degree nearer the Crown than Navarr,] No says the Doctor, not so
near, p. 6.) and spends half a page to prove it, when in truth the word (as) is
wanting, as a degree nearer, that is, the Rebels would have him to be so
believed, to countenance their siding with him.

[Fol. 161. Sir Thomas Randolph bred a Civilian, taken from Pembroke College in
Oxon,] Not so says he; how then say I? That which is called Pembroke College,
was in that time called Broadgates, p. 7.) a pretty quibble. Nay then the
Doctor is out also, for Sir Thomas Randolph was not bred a Civilian, taken from
Pembroke College in Oxon, nor from Broadgates say I, Tom Randolph was indeed,
but Sir Thomas Randolph was made Knight some years after at Whitehall. Or thus,
Julius Caesar came out of France into England. Not so neither; but came out of
Gallia into Britanie. Or thus, Dr. Peter Heylin was a poor Scholar in Magdalene
College in Oxon. Not so says he, tell truth say I, Peter Heylin indeed was,
but Dr. Peter Heylin was never a poor Scholar there; O Sir, I cry your
Doctorship mercy, the Jesuit that taught distinctions, was but a Dunce to you
Doctor.

[Fol. 189. The other Title was of the Infant of Spain] he says that I leave
out the most material Title (viz. that is to say) from the Daughter of John a
Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, p. 7.) dear Mr. Doctor, how prove you this, viz. that
is to say, the most material Titlo? However, I do not leave it out, for
speaking of the treasonable designs against the right succession of Queen
Elizabeth, and her lawful Heir, mentioning several Titles in Dolemans Book
devised by the Jesuit Parsons; [The other Title (say I) was of the Infant of
Spain, and therein they use their Catholic Doctrine to make it up with
monstrous lies.

First from Constance daughter to the Conqueror, etc. (though our Chronicles
agree, that she dyed without issue.)

Secondly, From Elynor daughter to Henry 2. married to Alphonsus King of Castile.

Thirdly, And descends from Blanch his daughter.

Fourthly From Beatrice daughter of Henry 3. of England.

Fifthly, From the Portugal family of John a Gaunt Duke of Lancaster.]

Herein I express but what the Jesuit Parsons published falsely and
mali^iously to the prejudice of Queen Elizabeth and her lawful descendent; and
the fifth Title from John a Gaunt answers the Doctors Advertisement, and is not
left out; but why Mr. Doctor should join with the Jesuit, and assist him with
one most material Title, when none but Tray^ors could justly approve of any
Material or lawful T^tle but that of King James of Scotland, does somewhat
discover himself?

[Fol. 191. Hawkins, Drake, Baskervile fire some Towns in the lsle of
Dominica,] they fired (says he) some Towns in Hispaniola, and that Town of
Dominica, but not on the Isle, p. 7.) You are misinformed (Geographer) that
Town is named Do^i^go, and not Dominica; but I say again, they fired Towns in
the Isle of Dominica* one of the Charybes, and although you say that those
Islands had enmity with the Spaniard, it is no absolute reason, but that they
may deserve hostility and firing by ill usage of Strangers, which they did to
the English, thinking them Pirates; for so says the Pamphlet of that voyage,
published at their return, an. 1597. which I can produce.

How now? Hook here, look back about 40 Folioes; it seems his Clerk Amanuensis
overpassed this, of great consequence, another Misnomer [Fol. 157. Carmardin]
for Carw^rdin, p. 7) Nay then the Doctor must excuse me if I tell his mistake,
this Gentleman was near Kinsman to my Father, he discovered the Estate of the
Customs to Queen Elizabeth, he was conversant in my Fathers Family, I have seen
him sign his name very often, and can produce his letters (Carmardin.)

[Fol. 229. Sir Thomas Erskin created Earl of Kelly, and by degrees Knight of
the Garter,] No (says he) first of the Garter, and then Earl, p. 8.)

[Fol. 238. Sir John Danvers,] for Sir Cha^ls, p. 8.) O^ Sir, you are mistaken,
his name was Sir John, and not Sir Charles.

Fol. 293. The Lord Norris,] for Sir John Norris (says he, p. 8.) Nay then we
must be overtroubled with the Doctor, for I said [that the Deputy of Ireland
erects Mount Norris there* in memory of that gallant John Lord Norris, under
w^om he first exercised Arms.] It Is true, that when he first exxercised Arms,
the other was but Sir

[Fol. 261. Queen Elizabeth gave up the Ghost to God, on that day of her birth
from whom she had it.] Not so (says he) for she was born on the Eve of the
Nativity, but died on the Eve of the Annunciation, p. 9.) But I say again, that
she was born and dyed on the Eves of the Annunciation of the Virgin Mary.

Another monstrous mistake, and then the Doctor will have done as to this
History, but we must fetch a freak backward, whither think you? 253. folioes,
even to fol. 8. which escaped his helpers, but he will have it in.

[Fol. 8. Queen Mary of Scotland left her Kingdom to her Son, who was born a
King] Not so (says he) King James was born in June, and crowned in July, p.
9.) It Is true too: He was born in June, an. 1566. and styled King at his birth,
but because his Mother was compelled to quit the Regencie to her Sons
Guardians, and they to make her Resignation the more sure, crowned him
afterward. And we know that Coronation is but the ceremony of succession,
Kings successive, are by birth so before Coronation. And King James in one of
his speeches tells the Parliament of England, that he was not to be taught by
them, he being an old King, as ancient as his birthday.

And these are all the mistakes, and every one, that this Doctor of Divinity
can find out to Advertise. And thus have we been harrased, this History
suffering under censure in terms possitive by his Preface, but how prooved in
his Examinations of 262 large folioes, and how criminal, we submit to the
Readers judgment: And truly in my own conscience I stand justified for a
faithful Historian, excusable in those particulars, which he has marked for
grand Errors: when in so great a body, he is not able to find out any other
blemish. And yet these Histories have been heretofore pitifully observed by
Anonimus, his Agent, whom he patronizeth, and which I answered, and now but the
same again; And his Advertisements on the History of King Charles, not more nor
less than petty unnecessary Cavils, the Composers, Correctors, or Printers
escapes, which an ordinary Reader may amend. And by comparison we may observe
the Errors of his petty Apendix, which I have not heretofore noted, viz.

Querit, for texit; not, for non; of ore, for in ore; Midsomer last, for
Midsomer 1657; Archbishop of Canterbury, for Bishop of St. David's; Blesh, for
Bl^^soe; anno 1627, for 1629; Nassantiae, for Nassoniae; but three, for three
Dudlyes; at the Valley, for the Battle; of the first, for his changing of the
first design; William, for Millain; Proviso, for promise; Seas, for Scales; the
first, for the last; the least, for them last; and many more, his pages not
half way figured, and yet see how he bestrides me, if my feet but slip; and so
I leave him.

I am therefore at a stand with my self, if I shall need to trace him any
farther in my pursuit after his sent, which leaves so foul a favor, ere I
overtake him in the end; He being hereby brought and arraigned sufficiently
enough, (I conceive;) or leave him to the Judgment of the wiser sort, who have
good cause to blame me for exercising their patience with these unnecessary
Cavils (the Remains are no other than such like) which render him ridiculous to
the Reader, and may mark me for a fool, if I follow him any farther for the
present, having some occasions of business, that better concern me, at this
time.

Unless for some satisfaction to the Reader, it may be convenient for me to
Anatomise his Preface only, or short Survey (twelve pages) to his
Advertisements on the History of King Charles.

And therein his grave censure of that whole History at a clap, being no less
than 1150 large Folioes. So that (says he) no sense can be picked out of it,
but by circumstance and conjecture only, which defects (he tells us) he had
observed in the Histories of Queen Mary of Scotland, and her Son King James,
published without the name of any Author, but now laid claim to by the History
of King Charles, p. 34.) His nonsense is thus to be understood, viz. That he
would have observed the same defects in the former Histories, had he known them
to be Sandersons, but they were published without the name of any Author, till
now, that they are laid claim to by the Author of the History of King Charles;
this he would seem to say.

But in earnest, this his first Advertisement is so false, as that I expected
his craving pardon of the gentle Reader in his numerous Errata, annexed to this
his petty Pamphlet, by which Errata he appeears to have conned over his
Advertisements for to be published complete, and yet therein I find not this
untruth amended. A wonder to me, that none could read to him the Authors name
William Sanderson, in words at length, subscribed, not only to the Title pages
of those Histories, but also to this of King Charles. And then, to confirm his
bold Censure of the defects in the former (of Queen Mary and King James) he
refers us to a Learned Judicious friend of his, but shames to name him: Nor is
it ne^essary, he being belike of the Doctors gang, and may not be known. And
also he refers u^ to the Observations upon Persons and Passages, in the
Histories of the Queen of Scots and King James, p. 35.) Indeed these
Observations were published without a name or literal mark, and were sentenced
of all the Readers to be mean and scur^ulous, Yet the Author of those Histories
William Sanderson by name, vouchsafed to give Answer to that Libel.

And as concerning that Answer, the Doctor meeting me in the street at London,
his own invitation and his guide, conducted me into a Lane, and through a
narrow passage or Entry up to his Chamber, where he begged of me my Answer to
that Libel, which I sent him; and I profess to all the world I cannot of my
self find out that place: So then his Tale, p. 41. of my finding him out at his
Lodging, and what he insists thereon, is most untrue; But hereby it appears,
that the Doctor could not be ignorant of the Author of that Answer, and of
those Histories, and ever since, the Libeller is not known, and it is like he
being conscientious of his Crime, d^rst never reply thereto, nor has any
Person owned it, till now that Doctor Peter He^lin, the Grand Examiner and
Surveyor General, takes upon him to be suspected that Libeller, and quotes the
Libel verbatim, to strengthen his impertinent Advertisements, with malicious
calumnies to boot, on the whole bodies of those Histories, so that if the
Doctor cannot clear himself of being the Pa^er of that Libel, he now appears
plainly to be the Patron; and yet I must remember what I mentioned before of
him, concerning those two Histories of the Queen of Scots and King James, viz.
I cannot herein (says the Doctor) find any malicious or dangerous untruths
destructive to the Church of England, or to the fame and honor of Prelates, or
the Regular Clergy.

Which Histories are divided into several volumes, and according to the many
years Reign of these Sovereigns, and their times of Action, must therefore
necessarily be very large, viz. that of the Queen of Scots and her Son, etc.
262 large Folioes; the other of King James, 338. Folioes. and this of King
Charles, no less than 1150. Folioes. Yet we find them in a word rubbed over by
the Doctor, with the stains of a p^^u^ent Censure; and yet again, this self
same Doctor concludes in few words, and to render himself reproachful, for what
he had spoken before or shall say hereafter, he avers, But to reduce these
Items to a summa totalis as ^o the Histories, considering their length, there
is much which deserves to be laid up in the Registers of succeeding ages, p.
39.) And as to the History of King Charles. I cannot but acknowledge (says he)
that he has done more right to the King and the Church of England, than could
be expected in th^se times, V^inam sic semper errasset, p. 40.) so says Doctor
Peter Heylin, Testis Temporum, the grand Examinor of all Scripturients by his
Examen Historicum; but as others have censured him (Dr. Hackwell by name) so
say I, The condition of the Man being such, as his words hardly pass for a
commendation or a slander, his testimony as to the truth is not valuable, for,
or against any Man, or any writing.

And at the casting up of his Preface or Survey, concerning himse^f, an^ ^is
engagi^g against me, he says, that I have beat him with the Spit, and basted
him all over with gall and vinegar, the occasion of our quarrelling, p. 42. ^
but I answer, that as to the truth of our difference, I have before in my
Posthaste Reply, very faithfully and ingenuously set down the occasion to be
otherwise, and need not here to be repeated, it being summ'^ up to my hand in
his writings, viz. his own pragm^^icalnesse and love of revenge.

And this with modesty I may averr (whatever his malice can imagine to the
contrary) that these Histories sell well, holding up their first good price,
and thereby are valued in the commodious and profitable vent, with the general
acceptance of those that pay for them, an argument sufficient against Dr.
Heylins Censure.

But what occasion he intends forthwith to devise, of quarreling with other
Authors, we must expect some formal reasons no doubt. He being about (as we are
informed) to Animadvertise on the large volumes and elaborate work of Mr. Fox
his Books of Martyrs, for the Doctor could never endure those stories. And that
being soon dispatched, then we are to be assured of his Advertisements on Sir
Walter Raughleys large History of the World. And afterward he resolves to
publish a set form of Apology in excuse of his own works. And in fine (as the
best at last) he will examine himself, because (as he says of himself) his
former days have been evil, which all good men wish to be amended.

And so Good Night Peter.

The End.

