AN ANSWER TO A Scurrilous Pamphlet, INTITVLED, Observations upon a Complete
History of the Lives and Reigns of MARY Queen of Scotland, and of her Son King
James, of Great Britain, France and Ireland the Sixth. The Libeller without a
Name, set out by G. Bedell and T. Collins two Booksellers: But the History
Vindicated by the Author WILLIAM SANDERSON Esquire.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by George Sawbridge and
Richard Tomlins. 1656.

AN ANSWER TO A Scurrilous Pamphlet, etc.
Page first. Paragraph first.
THe first line names me, [One Mr. Sanderson (says he) who has lately written
a Book, which he calls a Complete History of Mary Queen of Scotland, and James
her Son, the Sixth of Scotland and first of England.] He is false in his first
Page; not vouchsafing to recite the truth* or to afford him the Title, K.
James; and goes on [that it is not a History, but a Libell, against all good
Men, and good actions, and with most servile flattery, prayseth and exalts
the bad, both Men and matters: That this whole Book is a Rapsody of Notes, and
scattered papers, without order or method, exceedingly defective, both in time,
place, and Nomination; unseemly and disjoynted* a style without understanding,
etc. The language dark, harsh and intelligible.]

Thus, his first page fills, and is false in all* In reciting my Ti^le which is,
A Complete History of the Lives and Reigns of Mary Queen of Scotland, and of
her Son and Successor James the sixth, King of Scotland, and (after Queen
Elizabeth) King of Great Britain, France and Ireland the first, of ever
blessed memory. And in all and every one of the rest* his scandalls, as to
every particular, I submit to to the sensure of wiser men than my self, and
honester than he the Observator, or these, his Booksellers, Bedell and Collins.

Page 2.
[But (says he) that you may the better know the Ware, Page ^
out of this man's shop, I shall give you his Character, and trace him from his
Parents.] His Father was a Gentleman, though poor; he was of kinn to Sir
Walter Raleigh, and in the time of his prosperity and greatness, was his
servant, entrusted with his Moneys, by which he became in Arreares in great
sums, which Sir Walter (after his troubles) sent for* But he pretended, that
Sir Walter should owe him 2000l. whereupon Sir Walter commenced a Suite
against him, and Sanderson being overthrown, and found in Arreares to Sir
Walter, in very great sums, was cast into prison, and there dyed a poor
contemptible beggar: And hence originally sprang all the spleen and malice of
this man to Sir Walter.]

His second Page wholly contains a scurrilous false scandal on my Father.

My Father now dead 25. years since, and then about 90. years of age, whose
extraction and descent anciently from Robter, Lords of Bedic in the Bishopric
of Durham, and as appears by his Pedigree inrowled in the Office of Arms,
without craving advantage of kin to Sir Walter Raleigh: the other a
Gentleman of greater Antiquity, and just and worthy memory; which might be
sufficient for the dead, but not for me now living to vindicate from slander, I
having no ambition to repeat his merits, as an advantage thereby to the dead,
or to me, no otherwise than in duty I am bound, thus far to proceed therein,
and farther to say, That my Father was bred up in the City of London under
Tutelage of Mr Allen, Queen Elizabeth's Merchant, (one so called for his
Maritime affairs) the most part of his youth beyond Seas: His elder brother
dying, he became heir to 700. pound per annum, land of Inheritance, in
several places, viz. In London, at Layton in Essex, (being his Country house
and land, of retyring,) at Tunbridge in Kent, at Barstable in Deavon; in
Ireland, of great value, until the Rebellion of Tyrone, and then sold for
1500. pounds; at Lambe^h, in Surry. At his return home, he settled himself in
a fair house, now the Hoope Tavern in St Magnus Parish London, his
Inheritance there with other Tenements, His Cote, Arms, and Name, with the
year of our Lord fixed in convenient places of that house do now evidence.
And in this condition he wa^ entrusted soly, to negotiate at Court* concerning
the Queens Part in all the Spanish prize goods. In which he was made
Commissioner, and thereby to attend the then Lord Treasurer Burleigh, and often
times to speak with the Queen, by favor of such as had relation to Her. Where
he, at 30. years of age, married Margaret the Daughter of Hugh Snowdale,
alias, Snedale, a Commander in the Queens Navy-Royall. In all this time, Sir
Walter Raleigh not qualified to keep other then ordinary Attendants, his
condition (a younger Brother, and unsettled) enforced him, like a gallant
Gentleman (I confess) and honorably, into Foreign parts, France, Ireland,
and several expeditions at Sea, to raise his fortunes by the Sword: and
certainly Sanderson was never his Soldier and disdained to be his Servant.
But, Sir Walter returning home to his Center the Court, his Sisters Daughter
(Mrs. Snedale) married to Sanderson, who was become the Queens Customer and
Farmer, for the Over-lengths of Broad-cloaths; was pleased to descend so far,
as to be a continual guest at Sanderson's House, then in London, and Layton in
Essex, and his best friend, it seems; whither he brought his Wife a Guest,
himself then in disgrace concerning her, (I will be civil.) And as Sir
Walter's occasions had need, (^ourtiers not being over-nice to make them often)
he engaged Sanderson for him in 16000l. and was indebted besides to Sanderson,
in several sums of money, as his Cash-books do yet evidence, amounting to
4000l. (the Observator says, but 2000l.)

And Sir Walter, in his journey toward his Arraignment at Winchester,
Sanderson with other Gentlemen being in sight upon Hounslow-hea^h, Sir Walter
was pleased to stop his Coach, and said Nephew Sanderson, upon my soul, I am
more grieved for my engagements and debts to you, then for any other sufferings
that may befall me* And good Mr. Leivtenant (of the Tower, sitting beside him)
what ere becomes of me and mine, I beseech the King to be good to this worthy
Gentleman: Both of them weeping, upon my oath, that was present.

And after Sir VValters reprieve, became Suites in Law between Sanderson, about
Sir VValter's debts, and Shelbury the Solicitor: But, that Sanderson was then
indebted, or ever Arrested, or sued for debts of Arrears to him, or cast in
Prison, or dyed in Prison, a poo^ contemptible beggar, Page 2.
is most untrue and scandalous; for Sanderson lived some years in the Strand,
where he dyed, and was embalmed many months, until his Sons came over from
beyond Seas, and buried him in the Parish Church of Savoy, leaving Lands of
inheritance to his Children, that live without begging; and so ^o original
cause of malice, in my Father or Me, to Sir Walter Raleigh, with whom, in the
Tower my Father and Mother, Page 2.
my Self and Brethren, were very often, in visits of civility, and respect to
each other; and afterward, even at his Chamber door, the night before he
suffered* For after S^r VValters Sentence, and Repri^ve to the Tower close
Prisoner, (and friendlesse, he says) only Mr. Lessells, my Ladies friend, did
not leave her. This Gentleman can tell, that Mr. Sanderson, by his interest
with the Lord Treasurer Salisbury, procured the effect and prayer of her
Petition, to visit her Husband, and to be close Prisoner with him; and but
time, for it was said, she suddenly conceived.

But to evidence, that Mr. Sanderson's condition, was not likely to seek his
Fortune, by serving Sir Walter, I am put upon the Readers patience, for my
excuse and pardon, to add something more. For virtues consist not in Negatives.

My Father was not wanting in the commendable mystery of the Merchant
Adventurers; witness those long since printed Tractates, and many Manuscripts
and Papers, which I have of his (and one Malynes his Assistant) for the
discovery of the secret mystery of Bullion and Moneys the exchange and
rechange, single and double usance of Moneys amongst Me^chants; the Cambio
Regis, of which the Treasurers, Burleigh and Sackvile, would say, That
Sanderson understood the Theory and Practick more, then most English Merchants.
Sir Abraham Dawes did profess, that he knew Mr Sanderson a worthy Merchant;
and certainly, (said he) in comparison of him, many of us are but Pedlars.

And being very well seen in the matter of Moneys and Oar, he Farmed of King
James the Mines Royal of England, and so set hundreds of men at work, to his
great expense and loss, in Darby-shire, VVorcester-shire, Devon, etc. where
abouts I have been often with him.

He would complain of his deficiency, but was highly affected to Learned men
and Arts; witness his own words, which so pleased Camden, that famous
Scholar, and his friend, that he put them into Latin. Non me suscepit gremio
divina Mathesis,
Nec studiis, (agnosco dolens) stellis ve doceri* etc.
They are fully expressed and graven upon the English great Globes; which Globes,
when that excellent Mathematician Wright, and the rare Artizan Molineux, could
not find any other person, willingly to disburse above 1000l. to perfect them,
my father did: They are yet in being, great and small ones, Celestial and
Terrestrial, in both our Universities, and in several Libraries (here, and
beyond Seas:) The Inscription and Dedication to Queen Elizabeth, with
Sanderson's Coat of Arms and Name upon them, do manifest; for which, Garter,
then principal K. of Arms, (by the Queens command) advanced the bearing of
Sanderson's Crest, anciently the Talb^^, and his Motto, Rien sans Dieu, with an
addition of a Globe Terrestrial, affixed to the Sun in luster, proper, with
this Motto, Opera Mundi, to him and his h^ires for ever.

The Terrestrial being first presented to Queen Elizabeth, at an entertainment
at my Fathers house (then Newington-Butts) upon which she was pleased to
descant, The whole earth, a present for a Prince; but with the Spanish Kings
leave, she said, alluding to his Emblem, a Spanish Genet, in speed upon the
Globe of the Earth; his fore-feet overreaching, with this Motto, Non su^^icit
Orbis. At her second entertainment there, she receiving the Celestial said,
Thou have presented me with the Heavens also: God guide me, to Govern my part
of the one, that I may enjoy but a mansion place in this other.

And afterward, he employed Wright and other Mathematicians, to compose and
frame, that then admired double Sphere, presented by Sanderson to Prince Henry,
with a Manuscript of the use thereof; not long since remaining in the Library
of Saint James. He knowing my Fathers affection to Arts, commended Bloys, a man
of skill pretending to the perpetual motion, which was endeavored at my
Fathers house, then at Islington, and brought to excellent observation, and at
his cost and charges. A mighty Wheel it was, of large Circumference, erected
upon Beams, with massy bolts of Iron, fastened to each spoke, which being set on
going, in their very declining and descending of each in turn, shot their Bolts
from the Center to the out-Circle, with such force in the fall, as raised the
next spoke and bolt from his Center, who performed his part as the last before;
and so in course: which at the first motion was of that might and swiftness,
as, with horror and noise of clattering the bolts, affrighted the Prince and
company, the first that saw its motion: But then in an hour, lessening by
insensible degrees, the force weakened and wasting, the Motion at last stood
still. It was framed and set up in a very large Barn, no other room being
capable of the Circle.

What need I number up his affection to the Art and uses of Navigation, to
find out the Longitude and Variation, of the Variation of the Needle; as may
appear by the work, the various intricate Maze, and Labyrinth of Lines and
Circles, drawn upon several superficies of Bodies, do demonstrate the
endeavor. His extraordinary sole expense and charge, with his own two Ships,
the Sunshine and Rainbow, set out by him under command of that famous
Navigator, John Davis, for the North-West passage, called by him Fretum Davis;
where he named sundry places in reference to his Undertaker, as, Sanderson's
Tower, Hope Sanderson, in honor of his Memory, and encouragement to others;
They are so mention^d upon all Globes and Maps, here and beyond Seas, that ever
I saw since. The particulars of all these, you may read in Hackluits Voyages
and Discoveries, with Letters, Dedications, and other passages, to confirm what
is here said. And at the return of Drake and Cavendish from compassing the
Earth, in honor to them, and their Memory, which he desired, and in favor to
him, they performed, Baptizing two of his Sons after their Sirnames: Drake died
in the West Indies at Saint Dominica; but another Brother returned, both of
them in pursuit after Sir Walter Raleigh, in his last unfortunate Voyage.
Another Son cast away on the Coast of America; called then Norombega: Another,
in discovery of the North-west passage, with Captain Waymouth: Another, in the
East- Indies* Another, of some note, first, in the West Indies, and afterward
eight years a Commander with the Dutch against the Portingalls in the East-
Indies; then in Ireland, Scotland, Swethen, Germany; and lastly, (but the first
Colonel) that ever carried a double Reigment of 2000. men by Sea, about the
Norway ^ape, to the Emperor of Mosco, in service at Smolensco, against the
Pole, where he was basely murdered by that Scot, Sir David Lesl^, as you may
find mentioned and enrolled upon Record, in the Office of Arms. So much for
my Father and them, and now, with favor, also for my self.

Page 3.
[For this man himself (says he) he lived, for ought I could ever hear (he
has enquired) at first, very obscurely, and studied Herauldry.]

I never durst presume to the knowledge of that noble Science and Study,
Herauldry, other then an admirer of that, and such like, honorable Studies,
becoming a Gentleman, not to be wholly ignorant of, in some proportion; nor am
I, in this particular, so far proficient, as to distinguish a Bar in Bearing,
to signify a Bastard.

And so much acquainted I have been with Littleton, as to be Secretary to the
Master of the Wards and Liveries, until his death, who succeeded Cicell, the
Earl of Salisbury.

[He tells us (says he) that he was servant to the Lord Rosse, Page 3.
in his Spanish Embassy; a fit Servant no doubt for such a Master; for what
that Lord was is notoriously known to most men, yet living.]

I tell you so now, but never before, that I was secretary to the Lord Rosse,
being Ambassador extraordinary, to the King of Spain, who though well known to
many men, whilst he lived, yet I believe (by your favor Sir) Not notoriously
known to most men yet living. You notoriously, are mistaken; a million to one,
that is odds enough. How ever, expect not of me, to ravell into your meaning,
what that Lord was?

In my return homewards from Spain, and after some stay in France, I came to
Court; where it pleased that very reverent Prelate James Mountague, Lord Bishop
of VV^nchester, to receive me near his Person, during his life; He having the
honor to be admitted into King James Bedchamber (never any Church man so,
before or since:) Prelate of the Garter, and Privy Counselor* and some have
since observed his power with that King and great interest in Ecclesiastical
affairs, (an Observator, concerning him therein, must amend his mistaken
notes) his virtues and learning, I did reverence; my poor endeavors could
merit but little, though I had the means and occasion to improve, and so much
of his esteem, which continued me in grace and favor which his right Honorable
Brother the Earl of Manchester, Lord Privy seal; and the Lord Mountague: Who
were pleased to own me, a professed servant (as I am) to all that noble family.

He was at the siege of Breda under the Earl of Oxford, Page 3.
to whom he gives the title of debost Lord.

Not to be wholly ignorant of war, and a fair occasion offered, I was at the
siege of Breda with the Earl of Oxford; secretary and paymaster to the
Regiment* and very often upon duty; and the Ensign being hurt, I bore his
colors in the march into Cleveland and at the taking in of the Town of Cleve,
but a volunteer in arms: being often sent over into England, to attend our
Council of War here, who disposed the English, in reference to that design,
of assisting the Dutch, against the house of Austria. And in my Book, taking
occasion to answer the calumnies throughout the History of great Britain,
wherein the Author, Page 161. [Oxford (says he,) was of no reputation in his
youth, being very deboshed and riotous, and having no means, maintained it by
sordid and unworthy wayes] In answer to whom, I derive that Earls high
extraction, and descent from his first Ancesters and their Creations; this man
(say I) was now returned home from travel, to recover his former debaucheries,
etc. And my observator suffering the other words from One printed 1653.
quarrels now with mine, which rebukes the other, but modestly as to the truth.

And certainly, Sir, these employments of mine, are not over contemptible, Page
3.
nor masked, unless to your obscure condition, [That can not learn (as you
say) that this man, meaning me, had ever any relation to the Court, more than
at large; until he became secretary to the Earl of Holland, when he was
Chancellor of Cambridge (which he never was (wise aker) but of the University)
where he behaved himself (you say) so corruptly, that he was in great disgrace
and scorn, turned out of his place, for taking bribes of diverse Scholars, to
make them Doctors and Batchelors of Divinity, when the King came to an
Intertainment at Cambridge, (With the Mayor he means) so that for a long time
after, those men were by every boy, called Sandersons Doctors.]

How this Scandal does trench upon the University in general, and upon the
worthy Graduates, then Commencers, in particular, I submit to their wisdoms;
not minding to mix so grave an Accusation, with petty single Interrest of other
things, in this place; but, to refer the Vindication as an Appendix to this
Discourse, being of some consequence to be considered by it self, and that not
briefly neither: For, until this Libeller without a Name, no other Calumniator
durst ever be so impudent, as once to tax those proceedings upon them or me.

[A pretty while after, he says (which was many years before) he married the
late Queens Landresse, and so might perchance creep (again) into her chamber
below st^irs.]

A scandal upon her, of double sense, as if I had crept thither before
Marriage; to which her self makes answer, That she is a Gentlewoman tender of a
scandal, and of the ancient Family of Tyrrill, and Sister to the now Sir
Edward Tyrrill of Thornton, in the County of Buckingham, Knight and Baronet.
That by her Office and Title, (Mrs. Landresse to the Queens Body) and by her
birth besides, was always a Companion above stairs, for a better woman then a
Libellers Wife, were he of more fame then him we suspect; and as for her
honesty, she never had a Damarah to her Daughter, before she had a Husband. And
Mr. Sanderson was able with above a 1000l. to buy her this place, and not to
beg it. That she never falsified her Oath* nor was perfidious to her
Sovereign. This is somewhat sharp Sir (a woman's honor is concerned) it is her
own inck I Will assure you, without any gaul of mine Sir; and you are well that
it is no worse.

[And now (says he) I shall proceed to examine some particulars in his Book,
Page 4.
and decline any thing concerning the Queen of Scot^, or that part of the
story.]

It is the first part of my History (the whole containing above 600. large
folioes) to which his Reading has not reached so far before, being 128 folio,
and not a fault to be found.

[Only he will observe some passages of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, that I give a
harsher censure upon Essex and his offenses, then any Writer heretofore.]

Not by a hundred. He loves Traitors with his heart, it seems, and b^ no means
would have them, nor their Treason harshly censured. I^ I thought it were not
dangerous for his health, I could turn him to the Authors; for so he finding
the truth, might despair and hang himself.

Then he traverseth back again, and but^ a word. [He seems (says he) to
intimate out of some discourse, between Secretary Davison and Queen Elizabeth,
that she would have had the Queen of Scots poisoned by Pawlet and D^ury, which
they refused.]

All Authors herein, English, Scottish, Latin, French, Spanish, do intimate a
cunning unwilling willingness in Queen Elizabeth, to stain her honor in the
blood of the Queen of Scots, her Kinswoman, and next to succeed to this Crown;
and yet desirous to be rid of her one way or another, she treats with Davison,
out and in, what to do. He to be quit of the mischief (by example of Burleigh,
for the hasty execution of Norfolk) advises with Hatton, and utterly refuses to
engage any further, until the Council encouraged him. Davison watching her
doubtful humor* asked her plainly, if her mind were altered? No, (said she)
but some other course might be taken: And demanded if Pawlet had returned his
answer, whose Letters directly refusing to undertake it, as neither honorable
nor just, she, in a chafe, said* That there were many amongst them, that would
do more in their own cause. But Davison told her of the infamy, injustice, and
hazard to Pawlet and Drury: For Madam (said he) if you allow the fact, you draw
upon your self danger and disgrace; and if you disallow it, you ruin them and
their Posterity.

Upon all these dissemblings, I concluded.

Hereby (said I) appears foul play, intended by another (no doubt) wicked way,
which Pawlet and Drury boggled at to perform; and yet we see what daubing there
was on all sides, to cast the blame and after-shame on any, to keep the stain
and blot from the eminent actours, Folio 128. But to all the other stuff, his
nonsense, Tua non mordet; I pity his ignorance, and disdain to answer, but
refer to the History, Folio 127.

Page 5.
He has skipt over the first Book of my History, 262 Folioes, without any
other faults then as before. He threatened much matter amiss: Is this all? [A
History (you said, page 1.) a Libell against all good men, all good actions,
servilely exalting the bad, both men and matter.] to be hitherto only insisted
upon in Essex Treason, and he the good man, and his, the good matter? But let
us see the second Part, where he in^ists upon Sir Walter Raleigh, and begins
his Observations upon King James, whom he lamely commends, the better to abuse
him, and basely to calumniate after.

For he tells us [that King James failed in King-craft, Page 5.
being overreached (says he) in his treaties by all Princes and States* his
spending more in frivolous Embassies than would have raised an army to to have
settled his childrens Inheritance.] Simply said! [That he refused to be head of
all the Protestant Princes in Christendom, whereby he might have given Law to
this World.] What an oversight was this? [But he inclined to their enemy the
Papist, and so ruined the one, and advanced the other.] How prove you that Sir?
[That his accession to England was thought the greatest happiness* but has
proved the greatest^ misfortune to both.] And why? [for, after a miserable and
wasting civil War, we see his posterity overthrown, and cast out of their
inheritance very unlikely to repossesse it.] And was King James the cause of
these calamities? [No not altogether] who then? He has found the only cause.
[The secret predetermination of the all seeing God, other reason no man
knows.] The guilty will not acknowledge, til the last dreadful day of
account, when the sentence shall say, Go ye cursed, etc. All this while he is
busied with Kings, but talks to himself, and so I escape his censure; not a
word of me or mine.

Page 6.
But now, oh now! How pitifully he pays the poor Scots, [A people (says he)
once famous for War, and high reputation; now the most despicable conquered
people upon the face of the whole earth (bate me an ace, quoth Bolton^ worse
then the Jews?) their modelling all reformed Kirk, has now no where a being;
and the nation subjugated to a foreign power? etc. This is the Lords doing
and mavelous in our eye^.] And after his pitiful search into humane
Judgment [Much of this he attributes to the greatness, power, and prodigality
of that Nation in their access to England, insolent and proud.]

And is this all Sir, that you can find out, to be the efficient cause of their
great miseries? Nay he has met with more. [perchance (says he) for some
falsehood and treacheries, even to their own Princes] Is it even so, Sir, the
Lord have mercy upon all other such sinful souls? But how [conquered and
subjugated to Foraigne power] is past my comprehension, or how can he hold
forth all this, without public Censure?

Page 7.
But enough of this (he says) now have at my Book and me.

[I now will take notice (says he) of such aspersions as this Author bestows
on particular persons of honor and worth, through his whole Book, he makes it
his business to rail at good men and defend the bad.]

He being come to Folio 284 of my History, finds no other aspersions then as
you have heard. And now you may wonder who these good men are? why, who but
traitors? He means them in the very next line, Cobham and Ra^eigh the men, and
Treason the matter. But Raleigh sticks most in his stomach: and truly it
regrets upon mine, for me now again, to re-rip up the mis-actions of the dead:
but I am challenged, he accuses me* I do but defend my self.

Where, Page 7.
in the Character of Raleigh (he says) I allow him a grand enemy to the
Spaniard, and opposer of the peace; yet immed^atly after believes him a
conspirer with the Spaniard, but tells us not in what particular. Folio 284.

You have forgot ten lines before Folio 283. Where I say, that at the entrance
of the King, he was presented by Sir Walter Raleigh with a manuscript of his
making, against the peace with Spain, it was his Table-talk, to beget more
esteem, which took accordingly (this answers my first assertion) and the way to
unbend him was the work of the Spanish faction, either to buy him out of that
humor, or to abuse him into worse condition, which was effected by this way,
Folio 283. And so, I enter instantly, upon the plot of treason, and conspiracy,
with Watson and Clark; two Span^sh Priests; Cobham and Brooks with others;
Gray and Raleigh, etc. Fol: 283. And there I tell you and afterward [In what
part^cular he should have served him.] And I proved the particulars by Cobhams
confession Fol* 285. That Raleigh had agreed that he should treat with Aremburg
the Spanish Ambassador for 600000* Crowns, to advance the title of the Lady
Arabella to this Crown: That Cobham, under pretense of traveling, should
prosecute this design in the Low Countries, Flanders, France, and Spain; and
to carry three Letters from her to the Archduke, Duke of Savoy, and King of
Spain. To meet Raleigh at Iersey, the place of his command, and there to agree,
etc. and Raleigh to have 7000 Crowns for his expense, Fol. 285. You are now
satisfied.

[That Raleigh's Jury was called at the Bar, being of Middlesex Jury, Page 7.
against whose persons he did not except.]

Nor could (said I) for they were his Peers, the most able sufficient of
Middlesex, where the fact had its Scene, Folio 284.

Nor did (says he) for Raleigh knew them not, being a packt Jury, wanting
honesty and understand^ng.] Any Thief at Newgate may say so, and refuse their
Verdict.

It is a scandal upon the Proceedings to say [ That the intended Jury was
changed over night.] For these were of Middlesex, and ordered long before to
attend at Winchester; many of them Justices of the Peace, Sir Ralph Coni^by,
Sir Thomas Fowler, Sir William Roe, Sir Edward Peacock, and others, the most
able for estates, worth, and knowledge; a fairer Trial was never afforded in
Treason, with favor of the King, who took off the Assistance of three of his
own Council, Sergeant Crook, Mr. Solicitor, and Sir Francis Bacon, as not to
overcharge the Prisoner with too much Pleading: And three things more therein I
observe in the whole proceeding before; not to be used rigorously, for no
torture was forced upon any Examinant; nor inordinately, none pressed to accuse
another; and yet here was Brook against his Brother Cobham, and he against his
deer friend Raleigh: Not precipitately, for it was a long time ere they came to
Trial, and Raleigh allowed to sit down with pen, inck, and paper.

Page 8.
[ The Arraignment is in Print, he says,] where those Authors speak more
against him say I. [ But he will yet demand of me, 1. Why Cobham was not
brought face to face? 2. What it was that ever Cobham accused Raleigh of. 3.
Whether ever any man was condemned by a single witness?]


1. I answer to the First, The Court and Judges gave it for Law and Reason,
that it was not necessary in Treason: So the Prisoner may outbrave any
Witness, and cause him to change his Confession, as might be suspected Cobham
would do, in compassion to Raleigh, being himself condemned, and willing no
doubt now to save the other.

3. And to the Last, I say, That it was most usual and Legal, where many
Circumstances, as here, do conduce to the truth. It was Raleighs policy to
have but one Witness in the Conspiracy; thereby he meant to escape, either
that Cobham must accuse him, or none can, and he but One, Raleigh might be
safe. If A. conspire a Treason only with B. and he with C. and he with D. who
can prove this Treason, if not by One of them, and Circumstances also? If any
one of these confess it, need we more Witness to accuse himself and the
other? A* Murderer is met with a bloody sword, coming forth of the Kings
Chamber, and he killed: is not one Witness sufficient? Cobham accuses
Raleigh, and he denies it: In Star Chamber, then, and Chancery, now; for
matters of Tittle, his Denial or Oath does not acquit him, in propria Causa,
much less in Treason.

2. And to the Second, see Brooks, and Cobham's, and others Confessions, which
confirm him a Traitor throughout; concluding, that Raleigh was the instigator
to the Treason, Fol. 285.

The first of Edward the sixth, which requires two Witnesses, was repealed by
the first and second of Philip and Mary, reducing all to the Common Law, which
is by one Witness.

[But he assures us of a Letter of Cobhams, Page 8.
written to Raleigh the n^ght before his Trial, to clear him from Treason;
which Letter, he says, was produced at a Committee of Parliament, by Mr. Carry
Raleigh.]

I answer, That all the several Letters were read contradicting themselves,
and each the other (as Delinquents in Treason use to do) and therefore were
adjudged not satisfactory, as to acquit^ either of them then. And for this
pretended Letter showed to the Committee, you should have inserted here, if not
ashamed of it: But to do you Justice, I will set it down, as it was offered in
the Trial, which was not needful in my History; nor now, but to convince your
ignorance.

Seeing my self ( says Cobham) so near my end, and for the discharge of my
own Conscience from the blood, which else would cry for vengeance against me:
I protest, upon my salvation, I never practiced with Spain by your procurement.
God prosper me in this my affliction, as you are a true Subject, for any thing
that I know. I will say with Pilat, Purus sum a ^anguine hujus: So God have
mercy on my soul, as I know no treason by you.

This is somewhat satisfactory until you hear more: But, you are mistaken* to
say* it was the last Letter, the night before the Trial: I will clear your
intelligence with a truth, and with the very last Letter indeed, which he writ
to the Lords Commissioners, the night before Rale^gh's trial.

I have thought ^it ( says Cobham) to set down this to my Lords; wherein I
protest; on my soul, to write nothing but the truth. I am now to come near the
period of my time, therefore I protest the truth before God and his Angels.
Raleigh, four days before I came to the Tower, caused an Apple to be thrown
in at my window, the effe^t thereof was, to entreat me, to right the wrong I
had don him, in saying, that I should come home by Jersey, which under my hand
to him, I have retracted. His first Letter which was thrown in, in the same
manner, wherein he prayed me write to him a Letter, which I did. He sent me
word, that the Judges were at Mr. Aturney's house, and there was good hope,
that the proceedings against us should be stayed. At Aremburgh's coming,
Raleigh dea^t with me, to procure a Pension of 1500l. a year, for which he
promised, that no action should be done against Spain, but he would give
knowledge before hand. He told me, that the States had audience with the King.
He has been the Original cause of my ruin, for I had no dealing with
Aremburgh, but by his instigation. He has been the cause of my coffeehouse.
He advised me not to be overtaken with Preachers, as Essex was, and that the
King would better allow of a constant denial, than to accuse any.

And now Raleigh being asked what he could say to this last Letter, writ with
his own hand over night, from a dying condemned man; He answered, I say, that
Cobham is a base, dishonorable, poor soul.

I have been told, that Mr. Carry upon some pretense, was a suitor to the
Parliament for somewhat of Sr. VValters (no matter now for what: I shall have
time to tell him that, and more also, in another place hereafter) and Mr. Carry
was like to carry it, when a worthy Member stepped up, and laid in his way a Bar
in Law, That Treason taints the Issue: upon which, came out a Letter to the
Committee, which could never clear him, nor the Treason: If I be mistaken, let
him help me hereafter, when he shall hear more of that in due place and time.

But wherein [ may one perceive my spleen against Sir Walter Raleigh.]

For I remember, the first time that Mr. Carry Raleigh came to Court, commended
by Mr. Lessells, and called mostly Mr. Carry; to whom I was very civil; for Mr.
Lessells called him my Cousin: And afterward, an occasion was offered for me to
do him kindness: One Saintravy, a Frenchman, had affronted him at Court,
which by means of my noble friends, was examined, where Saintravy utterly
refused to submit, about the boxing. It was urged besides, that Saintravy
called him, The Son of a Traitor: The Lords laughed (for Mr. Lessells was by,
who was said to be like him) and Saintravy being rounded in the ear* smiled,
and said, That he was sorry to be mistaken; and so made it the worse, and the
wound wider, to those that were told the meaning: However, my respects and
service appeared to Sir VValters Kinsman, which approves me without spleen.

Page 9.
[That Cook the Attorney (he says) being retired from the Bar, wh^lst Sir
Walter was sentenced ^or Treason, Page 9.
to^d his man, that he accused him but of Misprision:] And swears, [Upon the
word of a Chr^stian, Sir Edward Cook's own mouth told him so, since.]

Cook, that had both charged him home with direct Treason, and indeed very
unseemly, and often, called him Traito^, thou Traitor Raleigh, to his face,
should but turn his back from the Bar, and in an instant, after Sentence, mince
his Treason to misprision, is most unlikely: [ And to tell it since] to one
without a name. But, we see how he swears, [ as he is a Christian;] perhaps he
is none: No body, who will give him credit?

[Having (he says) done with his Treason, he descends to his Travells, 14
years after,] which he accounts in my H^story, to be Foli^ 459. and as yet, no
other faults to be found.

Page 10.
[That King James (he says) forbad Sir Walter's Book, Page 10.
for some passages in it, which offended the Span^a^d, (a far-fetched reason)
and for being t^o plain with the faults of Princes.]

I answer, Certainly King James, and all other Princes, had cause of complaint:
For, his whole Book sets out the Eastern Monarchs with much glory, and exclaims
against Chr^stian Princes, as most inhuman, tracing all the English Sovereigns
from the Conquest, esp^cially Henry the Eighth, whom, for his Daughters honor,
(Queen El^zabeth) Sr. Walter might have spared from gall and bitterness she
raising him from nothing who rewards her with ignomy of her Father; Nor could
he love the child, whose Sire he hate^: and King Ia^es perhaps might observe
more, to repress the wickedness of such a person, who under pretense of
t^king a vice in the Father, intended cunningly to stain the whole Race: He
covertly leaving the Reader in great doubt of Queen Elizabeth's merit, whom he
had reason to set out, not in silence; whether in fear, or in fraud, I judge
not.

He says, Page 10.
[That the Lord Chancel^or Verulam told Sir Walter, that his Commission from
the King, under the great Seal of England, to be General of his Forces by Land
and Sea, and Marshall-Law over his people, was as good a pard^n for all
offenses, as the Law of England could make him.]

It was without example, that the Lord Chancellor of England should give his
opinion and counsel against the King, and in case of Treason too, and tell it
to the Traitor himself, convict, after Examination, Trial, Verdict, Sentence,
and but Repr^eved? No Sir, no man of judgment will give you credit; a scandal
upon his discretion, if not more, his alleagance: If you be mistaken, amend it
in your Reply, I expect it.

But I answer, how often this was urged by Sir Walter, and the other Argument,
Singularis Testis, I refer to the Relation of his Trial; wherein I say again,
(as other Authors profess) He tired the Court and Jury with impertinencies, as
to those two points especially. And in earnest, I have collected from the most,
even from that Manuscript entitled, Sir Walter Raleigh's own writing, and from
the best Records that I could meet with, besides the Reports of diverse hearers^
and all conclude, and expressly mention (except that of his own) that he tired
the Court with impertinencies, as to the matter: His Divinity, Law, and Reason
were answered, and overruled by the Judges opinion, which is the certain rule
to all Iuries, as to matter of Law. And yet this my Libeller fathers all upon
me* as if I only meant to make him g^ilty.

He says, Ibid.
[That Raleigh and Kernish did truly believe in the Mine, not with Chymicall
tricks, as this trifling liar (says he) would intimate.]

The Frenchman says none but a Bastard-Gentleman gives a True Gentleman the
lie.

But Sir, to return your lie with a truth, I shall say more concerning your
chymicall Mine. Mr. Carry Raleigh your voucher, writ a fawning clawing Epistle
to a worthy Gentleman Mr. James Howel* to recollect what he had writ of Sir
Walter. To which he replies, and not to recant, but to rechant what he had said
before. May 1645* For he again calls it, an ayrie supposititious Mine which
turned to real belief in his undertakers of that voyage to their undoing. And
^ells Mr. Carry, that Sir Walters only son, Walter Raleigh, at the storming of
Saint Tome said as much in effect: Come on my noble hearts (said he) this is
the Mine we come for, and they who think there is any other, are fools. His own
Father was none. Nay, you shall find Sir Robert Baker his Historical
Narrations say so too, and King James his Declaration makes it evident to be
but a deceit. But I find what this Libeller would have of me, as was bestowed
by that ingenuous Author upon Mr. Carry: who advised him to let Sir Walter rest
quietly in his grave, that his virtues may live in you ( Mr. Carry) as he (to
abuse him) says they do, no doubt; and ever since to this counsel it seems he
has been silent, at least in public, and serviceable to Mr. Howell. As no
doubt this Libeller also, may in time become so serviceable to me.

Page 11 12.
And, for all his Apology and pretenses in this whole Page, Page 11.
filled up with scurrilous language, I mean not now to meddle with, any
further. My duty to the truth was to relate the narrative of the Treason,
sufficiently proved, and all those passages in reference to that, and Kemi^h
death, and my observations upon all, necessarily conducing; I refer the Reader
to my History, being too too large to insert here again.

He is troubled [That I should say, Page 11, 12.
that Sir Walter had but a mean estate, which he meant to make up by his
voyage.] And says, [That he may thank King James for the meannesse of his
fortune, who took away Sherborn from him; but when King James came into
England, Raleigh was Lord Warden of the Stanneries, etc. all which he lost for
his supposed Treason.]

He may thank King James, he says, for the meannesse of his Fortune and
reckons up his Offices under Queen Elizabeth (not a foot of Land his Father
left him.) All which he got (with your favor) by free grace of Queen
Elizabeth, and might have kept that, and deserved more (King James was
bountiful) which himself lost and forfeited, for unfaithfulness to his
Sovereign Lord and King, her S^ccessor; and thereby had left him but a mean
fortune, which he designed to advance, by his Voyage: And were he innocently
executed, why was Mr. Ca^y Raleigh's pretensious, and claims in Parl a^ent, in
reference to Sir Walter, laid aside, before himself was cleared of taint in
blood, and so lost his claim by Parliament; which concludes also Sir Walter
guilty, without dispute; when Mr. Carry had all advantage of his friends by
Parliament to help him to it.

Page 13.
To confirm what I have said, Page 13.
[They had matter e^ough to take away his life, ^n this his last business,
since his first Trial.]

Sir Walter was bound, not to infest the main Land of the West- Indies, and so
he promised the King, who assured Gondoma^ so much; and to satisfy their
jealousy, Sir VValters Letter (if any such) might be sent to Sa^nt Tome for
his security; which therefore aggravates the fault of Sir Walter.

Besides, his biting jests upon all, not sparing his dread Sovereign, for
admitting them, the more true, the wider skar: Many such of his, like the wound
of a chewed bullet, the ruggedness makes the hurt incurable. And besides, that
which the Frenchman Manwa^i^g confessed of him to the King, as he reported
since to Mr B. ^. a Gentleman of wo^th, who will justify his report to be so
foul so treasonable against King James, that may satisfy any good subject he
deserved. death: Not that I take upon me to reveal it, being unwillingly
enforced to speak thus much against the dead, who has paid the debt due for
his offenses here, and no doubt enjoyes his pardon and forgivness hereafter,
with my Christian zeal and charitable affection for ever.

Page 14.
And now my Libeller skips back again, Page 14.
to Folio 365. and to pick out some scandalous passage there, he meets with the
Earl of Pembrok, and his Brother Montgomery, whom I did but mention, and that
justly, [That they were men of considerable Descents, though of no great fame
in their Merits.] And he concludes, [That my passage in the main parts of i^,
is true, and cannot be denied.] Yet, he says, [That I confess the King was
kind to Montgomery* which he fetches out of Folio 592.] Not worth the turning
over so many leaves, to prove his false Quotations and matter.

Page 15.
Then in a moment, Page 15.
[ He takes notice of the poisoning of Overbury*] which is in the beginning of
the History of King James; I list not search the folio, and he tells me not
where [Overbury and Essex's Wife: that I extenuate that foul murder:] not with
any exception to the truth of the story, but with his own selfe-pride, to make
us believe he knew somewhat of the matter, and repeats only what I have said.

But he regrets upon Sommerset, for begging from Raleigh, Sherborn, which he
got by begging from an other before. Indeed Sherborn sticks in his stomach: It
is the Note of another, not of me, That the seat of Sherborn had been the
successive Inheritance of Traitors. Our Libeller has a mighty mind to it; he
may in time, no doubt, deserve it, and more, upon the same score.

As for [ Overburies Character, of pride etc. Thrasonicall etc.] which he
denies, let him read Sommersets Arraignment, where Sir Francis Bacon sets him
out in the same terms, and mentions the most of all my matter, and what I
said of Overburies pride.

Page 16.
[Haply (says my Libeller) Overbury might have some tincture of pride in him,
Page 16.
as indeed who would not, etc.] You seem to be a pert, proud, dandy-prat indeed.

But ah! out upon his simplicity [That happily (says he) Overbury had threatened
this Gentleman in some illegal pro^ects, Ibid.
of which, they say, he had always store, which he offered to Somerset; and
therefore he is not only contented* his Body should have been poisoned, whilst
alive; but he will, as far as in him lies, if any would believe such a fellow,
murder his fame too, after his death.]

I protest religiously, that I read this his simple scandal over and over
again, ere I could imagine the man meant it by me; so much I profess
Christianity, so little I am guilty of projects, and was so young then, and
unacquainted, that I scarce knew Overburie's face: Surely he means another, his
best friend, the grand Court-projector, and so styled; I never was any.

Page 17, 18.
He hunts counter, hook here, Page 17, 18.
and fetches a freak out of Folio 429. [A scandal he calls it upon the Lord
Kensington etc. for imitating the Earl of Carlisle in his fine cloths, and
calling him the natural son of the Earl of Warwick.] And so he ravells Into
the reason of his Birth and Parents, which I had no mind to meddle with; but
for satisfying any mistakes therein, I styled him the Natural Son* Let him
consult the reason, why the Parliament of Hen. 8. styled the Princess
Elizabeth, Natural Daughter to King Henry the eight* The rest not worth the
answer, nor the foolish flirt that follows.

Then he falls again upon my mistakes, from whence would you think? Out of my
Preface, Page 18.
where he finds, [That King Henry the eighth was a Lutheran, when he lived
(says he) and died a Papist.] And to prove it, [He cites the Execution of More
and Fisher* for being Papists, and multitudes more, for not subscribing to the
six Articles, which were rank Popery.]

So then, he concludes for me, That Henry the eighth had been a Papist, and a
Puritan, and, as Sir Walter says in his Preface, died an Atheist. And indeed,
Will Summers, the Jeaster, on a sudden very sad, told them the reason, That he
had been at Tiburn, where Priests were hanged for being Papists, and some
others at Smithfield burnt for Protestants; but, was resolved to save himself,
and no way better, than to be of King Henrie's, Religion, which is (said he)
none at all.

Page 19.
[He tells us, (says he) Folio 487. that all our Marriages with Spain have
been unfortunate to this Crown, Page 19.
and then ravells into the story of the Black Prince (as if he had Married in
Spain) this is his own inference, not mine.

No less then 487. Fol. from the Preface* where we left him; it seems I must
skip thither too. I speaking of Prince Charles his Treaty with Spain, However
(said I) the ill success of our former marriages and medlings with that
Nation, being malignant to us; witness the Black Prince his Voyage into Spain,
to settle Don Piedro, etc* his body either corrupted by the air, or by their
Drugs impoysoned. What is this to any Marriage? But then indeed* I instance our
ill success in Prince A^thurs sudden death, with Katharine of Austr^a; and
Mary of England, with Philip of Spain. Now, said I, to parallel those abroad
with others at home to our own Subjects, the first, with Edward the fourth; the
last, with Henry the eighth, from them there proceeded two Queens, Elizabeth's,
as never could produce greater examples of happiness to England. But our
Libeller has a malice to our French Matches, and comparatively gores them
through the Spanish sides* It may be so, both have been bad enough, what is that
to me? Yet, in this, I desire to satisfy another, not you.

Page 20.
My mistakes, [ That the Duke and Yelverton had no communication in the Tower.]
Page 20.
And why? [ Because Belfore that said so, was not Lieutenant then, but after
Moor, which was since.] and could not Belfore be acquainted with what was done
before, and so a sufficient Author to report it?

[The like of Ree and Ramsey's Duel.]

Discoursing of Combats, tempore Iacobi, I mention many before and since, in
reference to time, and give a hint of these (of late) two Scots, meaning the
year (lately) when I write this History, 1655. for all men may know* it was in
King Charles his time, and so to be understood from my own words.

To carp at me, [He cleers Chelsey house, that the Duke did not buy it, but had
it for nothing; and bids me ask the Countess of Middlesex, whether she did not
tell him so?]

A pretty employment to enquire of a Lady, whether Nobody does belly her?

The like of Copt-hall, [And that my mistakes, ignoranc^, and errors are
infi^ite, in language and matter.]

Page 21.
And concludes with the like counsel to me, as to one Sir Edmond [Read more,
Page 21.
and write less.]

For which I shall give him a fee, as no doubt Sir Edmond did, who turned his
back to his advice and bad him busse his bum.

Not to die in your debt, I return my counsel to boot: In your Reply (if you
please) belie not the dead, nor abuse the living, lest the dirt of both bedaube
your self, and you deserve the final sentence; your first Libell to the fire
by the Hadgman's hands; your next about your neck: Beware the Gallows.

Three Letters from Doctor Samuel Collins, Regius Professor, and Provost of
Kings College in the University of Cambridge, concerning the Commencement; and
Mr. Sanderson.
To the Right Honorable, the Earl of Holland, Chancellor of the University of
Cambridge.
RIght Honorable, my very good Lord, and our only Patron, etc. -- I might take
occasion of your Honors late bounty to the University, but wanting no such
occasion at any time, I make bold to open my mouth in the cause of such
extremity, as the wisest amongst men charges us not to be silent in: The
rather, because it may be my words of triumph, in such late plenty of
Commencers (as the fashion is of Fathers when they create) has given some
occasion of misreporting the Action. Truly, tender of your Honors inviolatest
reputat^on; yea, and the indemnity of the meanest of them, that belong to your
Honor: for your Honors own sake, I may boldly affirm, not any one unworthy,
that I know, either Doctor or Bachelor in Divinity, or Commencer, in any
kind; but sundry of them rather Paragons; only One, the most suspected for
insufficiency, yet, offered to give Caution to keep his Acts; then which,
nothing could be more required at the strictest. When we consulted about them
in the Consistory, the Names of sundry were set down in Paper, for most
allowable, even by them of the Heads, that held backward most. Lack of Time,
and lack of Living, are too slender exceptions in my opinion, not only against
his Majesty's Largess at his coming, and glorifying of his Triumphs all we
could (The glory of the King, being the multilitude of his people) but against
worth and sufficiency, wheresoever such at any time fail of Time or Living. If
your Honor had seen what past in this kind under other Chancellors, and
namely, in conferring the Master of Arts Degree; yet, that Degree opens way to
holy Orders in men, perhaps not otherwise worthy (a perilous consequence) Here,
few Masters of Art, nor any unworthy; And for the Graduates in Divinity, they
were all Ministers before, and so no danger of the foresaid ill consequence. We
had but two Doctors now, more then we had in the last sickness time, or rather
three less, as that number increased soon after; yet then, his Majesty came
not at all amongst us.

Now, both King and Queen, and all, deserves more and more Scholars by far,
than that time, which had nothing but woeful necessity to excuse it. This for
the general, that your Lordship conceive no regret upon Rumors, I have
presumed (one of many) yet, in my zeal to your Honor, wherein I come behind
none.

For Mr. Sanderson in particular, a man of most useful abilities: That he has
not wronged your Honor, whatsoever some may suggest, I am not only told, but
do verily believe, that he never compacted with any for that courtesy; and one
of them at the instant before these flashes broke forth, told me as much of his
own accord, Doctor Grant by name; and, I think, the rest will say no less, if
they were deposed, as many have been: If afterward they made him any voluntary
requital for his service, which is more then I know, (yet, the most that can
be surmized) yet, neither any fee abated to the University thereby, and the
parties, in escaping other charges, think themselves no doubt well dealt with,
as well they may. So with my prayers for your Honor, etc.

Your Lordships Beadsman, and most humble Servant* Samuel Collins.
Cambr. Kings Coll. 4th. April. 1632.
To the right Worshipful, my very good friend, Mr. Doctor Bing, in London,
Chancery lane.
SIR,
FOr your wonted good News, etc.

For our number of Doctors and other Commencers; Why? could there be less, to
glorify such a Triumph, as his Majesty's vouchsafed Presence, and that with
his Queen, and all, so full of honorable courtesy, of all sides? Remember,
how many of late in the sickness, no such cause as now, and far more of kin to
pretense.

Neither do I coneeive, but that the Gentleman you speak of, whom I had the
good luck to know of late, Mr. Sanderson, our Noble Chancellor's Secretary,
has both kept his word to the Doctors, and increased beholdings to his Lord,
without any the least blemish to reputation. This you may avouch, that I was in
the Consistory at the debating, and no man in the Paper, to whom just exception
lay, that I can now remember.

The worst was, that one was short in living, by which reason, I had never been
a Doctor; for, I was bare Fellow of a College, and my Father charged me on his
blessing, not to allege Poverty against taking my Degree. Doctor Caesar only
lackt time, for I disputed on him my self, and he won so much approbation
then, as he might as easily have been Doctor, as Bachellor of Divinity, if he
had had time: But he is a Noble-mans son and of Oxford, and so merits the more*
As likewise Doctor Gray, a rare Scholar, one of them that commenced now by the
King. I must leave you, I see: only know, that which bred all, or most, of the
Scruples, which was intended, for more satisfaction, viz. To defer it till next
Term. God keep you, Amen.

Your assured poor friend, Sam. Collins.
Kings Coll. Camb. 2d April, 1632.
To the Worshipful, my very good Cousin, Mr. Prinn, these, by the Wardrobe in
London.
SIR,
IN much heaviness, etc.

Now concerning your question of the Doctors, whereof our friend is One: Sir, I
know not what they can say there, as I said before; but, for my part, as I
acknowledged publicly before them all in the Regent-house, when it was my turn
to speak loudest, I see not how we could do his Ma^estie less honor, for so
great grace as he had don Us. If you had seen when Bishop Harsnet was
Vice Chancellor, or heard what was said of it, when they went out by Clusters,
and every body that would be, was consecrated Priest, (as the Scriptures say of
Ieroboam's times I think) where it was so much the worse* because Masterships
of Arts, which is an introduction to Orders, was bestowed so commonly; but not
one Minister made the more, for all the Doctors and Batchellors in Divinity,
that Commenced by the King now. I confess, I presented many* whom I know not
by face: but I am much assured of their sufficiency, and have good grounds,
either all, or most of them, ^ome in the Superlative, these are the Batchellors
of Divinity that I speak of: As for the Doctors, I can say more of them, and
more groundedly. I was first in the Con^^story, where the Agitation was
freshest, and not so hot, perhaps, as afterward, when it came to younger men's
handlings: But sundry of them were approved then by all, even by such as held
back most; and their names taken, and set down in writing, for men meet to
pass; nor any just exception, that I can remember, to any of them all. As for
lack of Living, let them look to it that affect that Degree: My best friend,
that dra^e me to Commence, almost with a curse, unless I obeyed him, was wont
to say, That Degrees were the reward of Learning, not of Living. I had not a
penny more, then a bare Fellowship of a College, when I Commenced. As for lack
of Time, truly if that be not fit for his Majesty to dispense with, what is
fit? Doctor Caesar lackt time, but first, he is a Privy- Counselors son and,
an Oxford man, and had time more then enough there; and satisfied so well in
his Disputation here of late (whereof I am witness, because I disputed upon
him) that but for lack of Time, he had gaine^ his Doctorship with the same
facility, that he did his other Degree in Divinity then. Other exceptions I
remember none.

Mr. Sanderson has, in my opinion, done neither the University discredit, nor
the Church disparagment, nor his Lord, our Chancellor, disservice or
disreputation, nor swerved from his word given to the Doctors, which was, that
we should have sufficient men, and to pass by head, as I take it they did, or
in effect did, by most, or all.

Acts indeed we lack, and Cautions were not given for them; but are they kept
when given, as of late in the sickness? does it not end in a forfeit to the
Proctors and Bedles, etc? So then, it is all one for the manifestation of the
worth of the parties, or the young Scholars profiting by their Acts, whether
they had given Caution or no, if it may end in forfeit, as it has usually. One
of the Commencers, whose sufficiency was most suspected, offered Caution to
keep his Acts.

Having much to say, taking leisure and pleasure to satisfy your good mind,
and clear the fame of our University, and her f^iend, in a word or two, I
commend you to God.

Your assured loving friend, Samuel Collins.
April 3d. 1632.
We whose names are hereunto subscribed, being clear from any relation or
interest, to any persons herein concerned, have perused the several Bills of
Commencers names, corrected, and after engrossed; and also the Letters, Papers,
Certificates, and Testimonies, concerning the said Commencement, at the
University of Cambridge, and the proceedings therein, abundantly satisfactory:
And we do unanimously believe them to be the Originalls, and some of us do know
diverse of them to be so; especially, those of Doctor Collins. And we do agree
and conclude, that Mr. Sanderson, then Secretary to the Earl of Holland,
Chancellor to the said University of Cambridge, is clear from any the least
blemish, corruption, or disrepute therein. And according to the expressions in
sundry of the said Testimonies, so in particular, and in the words as Doctor
Collins has attested, so say we:

That Mr. Sanderson has not wronged the University,

Nor the Church,

Nor the Chancellor.

Nor are the Commencers insufficient, but rather most worthy.

Nor has he done amiss herein:

But rather increased beholdings unto all.

Math. Brooks. D. D. Tho. Swaddling. D. D. Tho. Bird. L. L. D. Pel: Salmon. D.
M. Coll. Med. Land. Soc. Amias Reading. B. D.

20th. June. 1656.
FINIS.

