SAINTS LIKE CHRIST: OR, Somewhat of truth delivered to the Congregation at
Headly in Hampshire.

By Jo. Symmonds, M. A.

1 COR. 15.48. As is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the Black
Spread-Eagle at the West end of Paul's. M.DC.L.

^o the Nobly Descended, gracious Christian and virtuous Virgin, ^rs SUSANNA
MILDMAY.
May it please you,
I Have made bold in venturing into the world to make use of your Worships
name, that so I may pass ^ith the less molestation in these ^^oublesome
times. It is an age of ^^ouble, and that not alone in the world, and amongst
men of the world, but such that profess to Christ, and I hope are in Christ.
These latter own themselves, and what is theirs as men and fleshly, too much;
and what is Christ's and spiritual not enough; The contention in the church of
Corinth partly arose from men's overmuch affecting singularity, one was of Paul,
another of Appollo, another of Cephas, another of Christ. It may be some
boasted of their circumcision, some of their Baptism, some of both Baptism
and circumcision, some it may be gloried that they had meddled neither with
Baptism nor circumcision; if not so, yet it is more then conjecturall that
some boasted that they were hearers of such a one, and of such a ones
Congregation: and from this outside-worke highly extolling their choice and
way, slighting and abasing others, caused strife. The Apostle blames for this
contention, and shows that the way of Christ is to take from men, as men, all
glorying. It is unbeseeming the eye to hate the foot, because the foot sees
not, it is enough that it is of the body: so should not Christians that have
more excellent gifts, villifie them that have not attained to their perfection,
or trouble to see others differing in judgment in some low things from them;
for in the body of Christ unity may stand with diversity: there may be
diversity in respect of forms and yet unity in spirit; for men may enjoy God in
different forms, God may dwell in them that regard a day, and in them that
regard it not; God may communicate himself to them, and so make them alike
within glorious; by enjoying his glorious presence. Forms are to be reverenced
(knowing of some there is use) as they wherein Christians may walk and be
useful one to another; yet mere being in forms makes not Saints, nor does
uniformity in forms breed true unity. True unity of members is from those
members union with the head. And as souls are in unity with the head; so will
they grow into a unity one with another. It Is the new and spiritual birth
whereby souls are one with Christ, and like Christ that makes them at on with
Christians, and true Christians look upon all that profess to Christ not as in
forms, but as possessing Christ; and as they find Christ living in them do
they esteem them, and account them precious, knowing that a precious Christ
makes precious Christians, and that they will keep their excellency let the
times and places be never so bad they are cast into. Right Worshipful, you are
young, and yet some bad days you have seen, people of all Ages, Sexes,
qualities very bad, some ill savor in every place by reason of corruption have
you to your annoyance met withal; And God knows what more you may, whilst
here in the body. You know what has kept you right in these crosse-walkings,
and also what has preserved you and enabled you to keep your sweetness, has
not a Christ guided you? has not a Christ communicated himself to you? I have
high thoughts of your Noble self, and I am persuaded never a whit above you,
but that you are as high as I take you to be, and that is in Christ; whom you
have found all in all unto you, and on whom you rely to carry you through what
remains of sufferings as your part and portion, that at last you may sit down
with Christ in his Throne even as he is set down with his Father, in his
Fathers Throne: and as you are such as he is in this world, so you may be like
him in the world to come, participating with your sweet Savior, and blessed
redeemer in his glory to your perfect happiness. You have an inside like Christ
now, a soul glorious; you shall have an outside like him also, body glorious,
body and soul glorious, all glorious. Toward the enjoying of which so far as
my daily prayers may help, you shall be sure of them, praying to God on your
behalf. And upon this account I tender my self.

Your Worships devoted Servant, to serve you, in what I may, JO. SYMMONDS.

1 John 4.17. As he is, so are we in this world.


THat which makes Christ's appearance delightful and giving soul-content to
Christians is love, and that which makes the appearance of Christians
delightful and pleasant to Christ is love. (...). Simele gaudet simili. Joh.
13.1 1 John 4.19
Like is very much won and pleased with its like, a loving Christ with loving
Christians, and loving Christians with a loving Christ: A merciful Christ with
merciful Christians, and merciful Christians with a merciful Christ: A holy
Christ with holy Christians, and holy Christians with a holy Christ. Cant. 1.2
Christ's love to Saints is better then wine, Cant. 4.10
so is the Saints love to Christ much better then wine, The savor of the good
ointments of Christ causes the Virgins to love him, Cant. 1.3
and the smell of the ointments and garments of those Virgins, being holy
Saints, and Christ's Spouse, Hos. 14.5, 6, 7
is like the smell of Lebanon, where pleasant and odoriferous trees, herbs and
spices grew in abundance; No spices (not the best nor sweetest of all Created
things) yielded so pleasant a savor to Christ as the graces, Cant. 4.10
and actings of those graces, of his Sister and Spouse did.

Christians, you see your blessed state, you are like Christ, Gal. 2.20 Romans 1.5
and loved of him, it may be you are neither like men of the world, nor loved
of them, you may be never the worse for this, Jo. 15.19
nay, it may be the more happier, for differing so much from them, and being
hated or slighted of them. Our conformity to the world Christ never commends,
but on the contrary (in Scripture) often discommends and bids us beware of it;
Ephesians. 5.11 Romans 12.2 Mat. 20.25, 26 2 Cor. 6.14
It Is conformity to himself that Christ invites unto and expects, and as Christ
would have it so, Saints desire it may be so; They care not who disapproves of
them and theirs, 1 Cor. 4.3 Humanum diem vocat humamanum judicium.
so Christ approves, who blames them, so Christ commends them, who slights
them, so Christ honors them; They (it may be) cannot say when they see
rich-men, that they are like them, rich as they are rich; or if they see men
advanced to worldly honors, that they enjoy such honors and dignities, or if
they see people beautiful or gorgeously apparel'd, they cannot (it may be) say
they have so fair a face or rich clothes, etc. Saints think they are rich
enough, honorable enough, that they are very fair and gallant, if like Jesus
Christ. In respect of many worldly enjoyments that the sons of men possessed,
it is probable the sons of Zion could not say they were like them, yet this was
their comfort, that they had the witness of the spirit, Romans 8.16
that they could say they were like God, they were holy souls, like the holy
God; union with God brought forth likeness to God; 1 John 4.15, 16 Deus charitas
est, quid pretiosius? Et qui manet in charitate, in Deo manet, quid securius?
Et Deus in eo, quid jucundius? Haec gloria christianorum magna est.
a blessed God dwelling in them makes them blessed souls; Exceeding blessed and
ever happy are they, that from in-dwellings of Father Son and Spirit in them,
can say God is holy, Christ is holy, the Spirit holy, and we as Saints delight
to be holy, and so to be like Father, Son and Spirit: The Apostle speaks
largely in his own and Saints commendation in uttering a few words, saying, As
he is, so are we in this world: He had spoken much of God, and of the Son of
God, 1 John 4.16
and of Gods dwelling in Saints, and of Saints being born of God, 1 John 4.7
and knowing God, and having labored with his Divine and Heavenly Rhetoric,
he endeavored to give God the honor due unto him, and he would not let slip
an opportunity of magnifying the grace of God in Saints, 1 John 3.1 1 John 5.12
and how much they were dignified by enjoying God, and as to extol their
greatness and goodness in the world, so to cheer up themselves, that had
received such kindness of God, and that they might with boldness stand up
pleading their own dignity and blessedness, 1 Pet. 4.14
against all the reproaches, disgraces and scorns of the world, he holds out
God, and then himself and Saints: As he is, so are we in this world.

We shall look upon the Text as it has relation mainly to God, as making out
himself to us in Jesus Christ, Loquitur hic de conformitate, in puritate and
innocentia vitae. Hem. 1 Pet. 1.15 2 Cor. 5.21. Luke 6.36.
and to Saints through grace enjoying God within, and by that enjoyment
striving to be like God in holiness, righteousness, mercy, love, patience,
longsuffering, goodness, gentleness, etc. And although it is impossible for
Christians to be such as God for purity and perfection, Haec conformitas nostri
cum Deo in imitatione and cona^u, and omni puritate and perfectione posita est.
Romans 8.29
yet through the Spirits help may they imitate God, and for the manner of
living holily, strive to be conformable to the Lord, So that as God is a God of
love, Christians are Christians of love: that love that is in a Christian to
God, it is but a son, it is but a fruit of the love that is in God to a
Christian, it is but the springing forth of somewhat of God himself planted
within in the soul, Eccles. 1.7
it is but a stream running back to that Sea from whence it came, returning God
his due; like for like; love for love; a Saint knows love deserves love; Gods
love is love; 1 Jo. 4.19
In this way of love he acts freely, 1 Pet. 5.2
and so is like God, it is as ordinary for a Christian to love, as to live; for
what maintains his being as a Saint, produces love to the ornament of his
being. As it rejoices in having the life of a Saint, Gal. 2.20 Act. 4.20 Psalm.
40.8
so it is pleased in doing the work of a Saint, laying out it self in what is
pleasing to the Lord; Joh. 7.18
God cannot but act what is good, and what tends to his own glory; take a Saint
as having God living in it, 1 John 3.18, 19.
and from that living of God in it acting, it does what is good, and also tends
to the glory of God; 1 Cor. 15.58
It knows it is not lost labor to be doing for God, and that it is not in
vain. There is infinite good in God, and there is some good in a Saint;
Infiniteness in God enables God for infinite work, God is able to do like
himself, beyond what a soul can think or conceive; A soul that enjoyes somewhat
that this all-good-God gives out in his love through Christ, 1 Cor. 15.10
is in his actings according to what he receives, and as that receiving springs
and sprouts out; Omnia gratiae divinae tribuit.
A spark of fire will do what a spark can do, and a drop of water what a drop
may: indeed it cannot do so much as the Sea, or Element of fire can do; It Is a
Christians joy that of Christ's heavenly fullness it receives some grace, Joh.
3.34
Christ has what he has without measure, a Christian in measure; a Christian
is glad that it finds Christ saying, 1 Cor. 15.48
As is the heavenly such are they that are heavenly, and that by the spirits
work it is fashioned to be like Christ now it is in the world, and so changed
into the same Image from glory to glory. 2 Cor. 3.18
And though it live in a wicked world amongst wicked men, yet it is not like
them, but it is like him that is heavenly, it is not conformable to those it
lives withal without in the body, but to him that lives within, in his soul;
Dearly beloved, what are you? what can you now say for your selves? can you say
you are like Christ? have you a life like Christ? have you a conversation like
Christ? are you clothed like Christ? Col. 3.12
have you put on (as the Elect of God (holy and beloved) bowels of mercies,
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering, forbearing one
another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any,
Christus non tantum nobis est donum, verum etiam exemplum. Miraculosae actiones
Christi, mentem nostram de veritate doctrinae ipsius confirmabunt. Peculiares
actiones, quae sunt ipsius officii propriae, hae ut expiatoriae peccati nostri
fuerunt: ita salutis fiduciam in nobis alent and confirmabunt.
even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye: The actions of Christ should be
instructions of christians, yet consider rightly of Christ's actions, some were
miraculous, as fasting forty days, raising the dead, etc. these are not to be
immitated, because they cannot, yet these may help to strengthen our faith, and
confirm us concerning the truth of the Doctrine of Christ. Some are peculiar
actions belonging to his office, as to redeem, or make intercession, etc. these
also are proper to Christ only. Morales actiones, quibus legi morali
satiisfecit, hae nostram vitam and mores ad dilectionem Det and proximi
excitabunt.
Some are moral, these last are only imitable; you may take all thus, some
actions there are of Christ which he did as God, some as Mediator, some as man.
The last are binding to us to follow: every action of Christ's is for our
instruction some way or other, and careful ought we to be to make use of it as
we should, that so none of Christ's doings do not pass by us un-observ'd and
taken notice of, but that we rightly ponder them, Omnis Christi actio, nostra
est instructio, sed diversimode, etc.
that what is to be admired and wondered at, we may admire and wonder, what
invites to praise, let them have it, and what is to be imitated, let them be
set before us, and strive to imitate, and though we cannot act to perfection,
yet let us act with affection, and though we cannot do as we should, yet let us
desire to do it, and though the bodies pace be slow, yet may your souls be
nimble; Paul though he could not take hold on, yet did he reach out to those
things that were before; And be sure to send love to Christ, and let that tell
him that all of soul and body is following after. And that whatsoever your
doings are, yet your desires are right, for they are to please him, and glad
would you be to be comprehended in that saying of the Apostle; As he is, so are
we in this world: Blame none for desiring this, to be like Christ; He that is
like Christ, is very excellent, and the more this likeness is perfected, the
nearer is the soul to glory. It Is an excellent discovery of a virtuous soul, to
see it continue good, let the times, places, and people be never so bad: and so
doubtless it manifests a heavenly excellency within, when a soul that lives in
this wicked and ungodly world, appears in life and conversation heavenly, and
shines out in a dark world though not with so clear a light, as Christ, yet is
his light and shining out like Christ; A handsome imitation from some, is as
pleasing as great action from others; Lord! thou art not strict to mark what is
done amiss, look not on our actings which are imperfect, but Lord consider
what our desires are, how we desire to conform to thee, and help Lord with thy
spirit; As thou art a loving God, let us be loving christians, as thou art a
glorious Husband, let us be a glorious Spouse, as thou art a
soul-pittying-Saviour, let us be soul-obedient Saints; As thou art a fountain,
a Sea, let us be streams, at least drops, and though we are not of such worth
as thou O Christ, Quantum unusquisque est in^oculis Dei, tantum est, etc.
yet let us be true coin, and as pounds and pence may have one stamp, and the
least though not of so great a value as the best, yet of some value; Mark us
sweet Jesus for thine, though the mark be never so small, that so what the
Pharisees messengers answered thee concerning the Image and superscription upon
the Tribute-money, saying, it is Caesar's, so Lord let the Image and stamp upon
our souls be Christ's. That so our life, our love, our actions may be such as
Christ's, Christ and us may have one way, one will, one affection, one mind, our
bent and purposes the same with Jesus Christ: Now the work goes on, now is the
mirth, now thriving, when all agree in one, when all the Soldiers do like the
Captain, all the servants like the master, all the followers like the leader,
all the members as the head directs, and that there are no divisions; commands
answer with obedience, examples suitable to the pattern, learners like the
teacher, Saints like the Savior, As he is, so are we, etc.

Obs: True Saints are such that are very like Jesus Christ.

There is some special singular thing in Saints that is not in men of the
world, there is a singular virtue in a Jewel that is not in another stone,
which makes it esteemed, there is a peculiar choice excelling in Saints that
makes them so extold, there is somewhat in them that others have not seen, nor
known, 1 Cor. 2.10
which is manifest to them by the spirit, they are begotten of God, and so come
to be like Christ as children of one father are like one another: A holy Christ
the Son of God, and holy Saints children of God, Heb. 2.11
all of one; for which cause Christ is not ashamed to call Saints brethren, and
from this brotherhood it is that Christ and christians are good friends, that
there is so much union, peace and affinity, that they can speak together,
confer together, dwell together, feed together, lodge together, and live
together, the God of Christ, the God of Saints, the Father of Christ, the
Father of Saints, it is the words of Christ, the soul-delighting words of the
Elder brother to the Younger, sent by Mary as a message of comfort to the
Disciples, Ad perturbatos Discipulos accurre. Io. 20.17
Go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father and your Father,
and to my God and your God. Here Is a cordial, the Disciples were troubled at
their Masters being crucified, and it is likely were very much grieved, Christ
forgets them not, but sends them news of his Resurrection and of his Ascending
into glory, and that they should ascend likewise, for his Father would not
entertain him alone, but them also; The inheritance of glory belongs to Saints
as well as Christ, all Gods children shall partake in this kingdom, Romans 8.17
The spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children
of God, Donorum patris caelestis sunt participes.
And if children then heirs, heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ. Christ
had bled freely for them, and his message is sweet to them, willing his should
know what glory is provided for them, 1 John 3.2 Phil. 3.21 Rev. 3, 21
and therefore tells them they should be like him, their vile bodies made like
his glorious body, and sit with him in his Throne, those that are like him in
grace, shall be like him in glory, they that are partakers with him in bearing
the cross, shall be partakers with him in wearing the crown. Christ is
fashioning his daily for himself, and when he has brought his work to that
perfection here, that they come unto the measure of the stature of the fullness
of Christ and to perfect man, Ephesians. 4.13
he will remove them to glory; for the church is heavens nursery, and as Christ
sees fit he draws out those precious plants that are like himself, and sets
them with himself; Small pieces of gold are looked to and kept safe; if like
Christ you are well enough souls, it is no matter who you are unlike; if
fashioned like Christ, it matters not how different you are from all others,
you are as you should be if like Christ.

The choice work of Christ is about souls,

Saints are very like Christ, because whatsoever is found in a Saint as a
Saint, it is really one with Christ, some thing flowing out from Christ; In
Saints there is plenitudo vasis the fullnes of a vessel; but in Christ is
plenitudo fontis, a fountain-fullnesse. The Schoolmen say that Christ is as the
fire, Christians as things lighted at that fire; Vt ignis, and ignita.
the fullness of the fire is such that light a thousand torches at it, it is
not diminished. Fire is not diminished by what is lighted at it, but by the
abatement or diminution of the fuel, now Grace in Christ cannot be diminished,
it is not subject to any decay; it is as he himself is, the same to day and for
ever. Christ could not be perfect if subject to change; I conceive without
offense I may say, that as a thing lighted at a fire is like the fire that
lighted it, so Saints receiving grace from Christ are like Christ from whom
they receive that grace; Joh. 1.16
as children are like their Parents, so Saints like this everlasting Father,
Isa. 9.6
who is their father.

to be with them. Affections meeting with a right object draw all after; If
the affections be won the whole man is obtained so it is with Christ; where his
love is pitched all his excellences will fasten. If Christ meet with one in
whom his soul takes pleasure, that soul cannot do amiss. How kind are men
where pleased, and what pleases but somewhat is suitable? Somewhat in David
that liked Jonathan, 1 Samuel 18.1
caused him to close with that soul-friendship, and to continue to the
hazarding of his own life, David's friend. Men love to live where they like, and
with whom, so does Christ, and that is in Saints; they are the persons he
likes, and in them are the places he desires to make his places of residence.
Let a man find a place that he likes, its of force enough to bring him to live
there. You need no other argument to draw him thither; the mind is of force
sufficient to make him effect what he effects, let the place be in the way to
heaven or hell; The mind has a great hand in the salvation or damnation of men;
Romans 8.6
God make our minds spiritual that so we may love what is spiritual. A
gracious Christ loves gracious souls; here is nothing more like him, nor
nothing more delightful to him; his heart is ravished with them, exceedingly
taken with them, so that nothing satisfies him but being in them, and by being
in them, appears the unity; and by the unity the amity, and by the amity is
manifested likeness. Paul agreed with Saints he being made like them; wonder
not then at Christ's friendlines with Saints; it is but the society of the
Bridegroom with the bride, of the head with the members of a man with himself.
As Christ's love has its perfect work on believing souls, so he that is the
perfect worker has his dwelling there: happy host that has such a guest,
blessed spouse that has such a Husband blesed soul that has such a friend,
happy body that has such a head. The Lord fashion us like Christ, and we doubt
not of enjoying him.

1 Pet. 1.23 Jam. 1.18 Simile generat sibi s^i^^
time for time, as the first Adam begat a son in his own likeness, so the
second: Rom 5.19
Nature makes us like the first Adam, grace like the second, there is a Certain
likeness betwixt the birth of nature, and the birth of grace. Much of the birth
of Saints as Children of Christ, may be held out (as in an emblem) by the
natural birth God showed much mercy to let thee be a man such an excellent
Creature, That God that has set thee so high, Psalm. 8.6
that made thee to have dominion over the sheep and oxen, the beasts of the
field, the foul of the air and the fish of the Sea, might have made thee the
lowest, the contemptiblest of all these, this is not all the mercy yet, hears
more, in that thou have thy lot in heaven amongst Saints in the good land,
where the gospel shines and wherein God in mercy dwells. It is a poor business
for all this to brag of these things, unless thou art born aagain of the
spirit, for it is the new birth that makes thee inheritour of the glorious
things of Christ. Once born is not enough, Judas had that but not the second,
the execellent name of Christians of right is by the second birth. Thou may
by thy first birth be a play-fellow with Saints, as children meanly descended
may be with the children of Nobles, yet not Noble nor share in the inheritance
or titles of honor: The five foolish Virgins were companions a while with the
wise, Math. 25.
but at length separated, so may carnal men, men once borne with Saints, men
twice borne; but God will find them out when he separates the precious from the
vile, when he makes up his jewels: and gathers the wheat into his barn, then
it will little advantage a soul that it has had a good name when it is found
with a bad soul, Quid tibi prodest vocari quod non es.
that it has eat and drunk with the Saints, when it shall enjoy no
inheritance with them, but be shut out into outer darkness. Mat. 22.13, Quid
tibi prodest ista memoria, si ubi es, torquris, et ubi non es, laudaris? Cor.
15.21.22.
It may be thou may leave somewhat behind thee, that Carnal men may
commend thee for, what comfort is this if you should be in the lake that
burns with fire and brimstone, in a word, the first birth let it be never so
perfect sets us but in a miserable world, higher it cannot advance. Neither
King nor Noble happy by natures birth; it is the second birth gives perfection.

By this souls are very holy, what Conceptions are in souls by Christ, they
are very like Christ himself, holy; Spiritus Jesus, spiritus bonus, spiritus
sanctus, spiritus rectus, spiritus dulcis. etc.
spiritual, heavenly. The seed of man may corrupt: but not the seed of God,
where he casts his grace there will be growth and fruit suitable; wheat brings
forth wheat; and barley brings forth barley; every seed a body like it self; so
does Christ. There are no more holy, heavenly, spiritual children then they
that have the Father of Heaven theirs, An everlasting father begets everlasting
children a holy father holy children, Saints. 2. By this they are blessed, they
that are begotten of blessed Christ, are bless souls, a happy man may have
children, and yet they may not be happy, a good man may have bad children, but
it is not so with Christ, all Christ's children are Good, all his offspring
according to the spirit happy. If he beget Paul, he shall have occasion enough
to magnify his birth: laying aside the first birth, he bosts not of that: it
is the second rejoyeth his heart: al blessed privileges came by the second,
the first compared with the second are but as dung and dross. 3. By this they
are precious, a precious Christ begetting causes precious souls begotten. The
Kings daughter is glorious, Ps. 45.13
all glorious, every limb glorious, within and without glorious, Ephesians. 5.27
as of Christ without spot or wrinckle, Col. 1.22 Quatenus consideratur in
Christo, non solum sine macula est, sed infinito decoro exornata, etc.
or any thing like it, holy, unblamable, and unreproveable: the heart pure,
upright, sanctified throughout, the hands clean, the life faultlesse, without
defilement, walking in all gods ways blameless.

These expressions as they have relation to Christians, are to be understood of
the righteousness of Christians, as they are considered under the Covenant of
grace and of the Gospel, not of legal perfection but of an Evangelical
innocence and uprightness, not as they are in themselves, but as in Christ
the precious.

Christ is full of Love, peace, goodness; so are Saints his children, children
endewed with love, peace, goodness. Water taken out of a fountain, rellisheth
like that in the fountain, fruit is suitable to the tree? It Is so with Saints,
they are streams of a good fountain, they are fruit of a precious tree. Fruit
of life, growing on the tree of life, living streams begun, and nourished by a
living fountain. A loving Christ brings forth loving children, Christ the
Prince of peace, sons and daughters of peace; Christ that is all good conceives
to his goodness.

6. They that are born of Christ affect what is good, what is heavenly. The
birth of Creatures is maintained with such food as he that begat it is, A man's
birth with man's food, drought will starve it. Earthly things nourishes not a
heavenly birth, the world is a stepmother that will starve it, they are the
breasts of Christ's Consolations (that as it desires) must nourish it; It Is bread
of life, and water of life, and food of life that it must have; Wisdoms food
and feasts, feed and banquet wisdoms children. Every Morsel, Saints eat that
nourishes them, must have somewhat of Christ, he is living food for living
souls. I am (says Christ) that bread of life: He that eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, John 6.
dwells in me, and I in him; He that eats and drinks him shall live for
ever. Souls, consider what food you feed on; Creatures nature appears much in
the nourishing: they desire, and eat; A beast is pleased, if it may have beasts
food; A man if man's food, so hear. The first Adams children are contented with
the worlds food, give them worldly things they are pleased, if the world will
give them plenty from her Cupboard, they look not after any other; But the
second Adams children are not thus pleased, they must have somewhat from
heaven, they will bless God for loaves, but they will not be quiet with them,
if they have not somewhat else, they have souls also to care for, these must be
satisfied, or all is not well with them; Hungry souls are restless, Christ
shall not be unsought unto till they are filled. I need not bid you examine your
selves, what diet pleases you, you are pleased as you are; If worldly, with
worldly things; if heavenly, with heavenly things. I could tell what preaching
would please you all, but I forbear; I am sure, no preaching pleases Saints
but the preaching of Christ, God in mercy give all you that have been born but
once, one birth more, a second birth; then will you long for the food that
nourishes you to everlasting life.

etc. that is in Saints, and which they hold out in their conversation, sets
out in some sort Christ. A gracious man has much of Christ; whatsoever truly
names him gracious, is Christ. Books bear their names from what is in them; And
houses and lands (usually) from those that possess them. We may guess what
the fountain is by tasting of the stream, what the book is by the title. If
such and so much of the delicateness of Christ be in earthen vessels, what is
in glory it self? if poor man be of so much worth that has but one small drop
of this Ocean in him, what is the Sea it self worth? A man may conceive a Rock
of Pearl to be of a great value, when a small dust is so much worth. True
Saints though they have but little of Christ, yet may it lead you to this, that
if Christ in a creature be so eminent, and his graces make them lovely,
doubtless, he as in himself is exceeding eminent and lovely. Saints at most are
but as it were the picture, or image, now if the Image be admired, much more
the person that is represented. An Image may be like the substance, so a Saint
like Christ. Christ is known other ways, yet in some measure this way, by
Saints.

2 Ep. Ioh. 6. Multi sunt in mundo impostores. Matthew. 24.24.25.26.
they live but are dead, there are many deceivers in the world, the world is
full of soul-cheats, hardly any place free. The time is fully come, Christ
prophesied of, there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall
show great signs and wonders: in so much that (if it were possible) they shall
deceive the very Elect. Behold, I have told you before. Wherefore if they shall
say unto you, Behold, he is in the desert, go not forth: Behold, he is in the
secret-chambers, believe it not; Such Impostours are deceitful, Matthew. 24.5.
and shall deceive many, beware you. They shall use the name of Christ, as
their color or pretense, and such are likely (unless there be great heed
taken) to deceive; Seamen are spoiled by Pirates, that hang out their own
colors, Prove. 7.14.
that harlot was winning that pretended honesty; Souls, know Gods Merchants are
vending as good Merchandise now as ever the world had held out, and the devils
as bad, he will keep market where God does, he has his cheats to vend, where
God has his truths. It is too hard a labor for me to find all the deceits
that are abroad, what lies in the heart of one man is not known; Ierem. 17.9.
the bottom cannot be searched, every heart has its deceits, and they are
many, the world is full, the devil has many large shops and many wares. I
shall give you the Evangelists counsel: Look to your selves, 2 Ep. Ioh. 8.
were you going to a fair, and one should say to you, look to your purses,
there are many cut-purses and cheats, how cautious would you be; Take heed of
your souls Christians, it is for them Satan goes about, he has what he aims at
if he gets them, and he never has his aim till he has them; But it is men,
not things, that I have in hand, you say you cannot tell who to trust, and I
say so too. Christ can discover all, the Lord hasten this work, he can find out
the man without the wedding Garment though the Guests perceive him not, Matthew,
22.11.
he can show you which are the foolish Virgins, which the wise, though they lie
together for a whiles undiscerned. It Is usual with men to think God such as
themselves; Psalm. 5.21.
no wonder then that they take them for Saints that are like themselves. Too
too many go hand in hand to destruction. Your Carnal worldly men they take none
to be godly but themselves, and such as they are that are good Husbands, and
correspond with the world, doing (as they say) no man wrong, paying every man
his own, no Saints to them but these: so people that are got into such a form
of worship, they look upon none in Zion, but they that do as they do, all
others are in Babylon. Many will not pray nor perform any duty of Religion
with those that are not of their opinion; Oh strange! If this be not to have
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect of persons, what is? Could the
Apostle esteem highly of those that were gracious, and shall not we, whether
they were by nation, Jews or Gentiles, whether circumcised, or not circumcised:
if holy Souls pray, you may discern where Christ dwells, (they are true souls)
love such, Christ is holy, they that have him are holy, Christ is truth, they
have truth tha have him, Christ is merciful, so are they that are Christ's;
Trust not to my words, you may be deceived, and so may I; yet I shall give you
some hint of Saints that are so like Christ.

1. There are some that are very useful souls, these are like Christ; you know
how useful Christ is.

1. The prayers of Christ are useful, so are the prayers of Saints: Christ was
much in prayer for the Churches good, Psalm. 127.6.
so are Saints. Jerusalem is preferred above their chief joy, Nehemiah,
Daniell, Ezekiell, David, were praying souls, they were always mindful of
the church, and so were others that were gracious. Saints are very like Christ
in this, he prayed for his very enemies, so do they; he prayed for the Lords
strength to strengthen his church, so do they; Ioh. 17.15.
he prayed his church might be kept from the evil of the world, Saints have
this among their petitions.

2. The company of Christ is useful. How useful was Christ when in the flesh
to many distressed souls? what place came he unto that he did not do some good
in? how blessed are they that have his presence now, to cheer them, heal
them, help them according to their several needs; are not Saints thus to
their power? do they not exercise the gift given them for others good? It Is a
blessed condition, (I assure you a Saint that knows best how to judge thinks it
so) to live in such places where it may have the company of those that are
truly godly.

3. Christ is so useful that he holds out all he has to Saints, what he
possesses in grace or glory it is presented to souls, all is ready to do them
good. Here Is liberality, it is so with those that are Christ's, they think nothing
too dear to be spent for their brethrens good, a free Christ, Act. 3.32, 34.
and free Saints, ready to sell and part withal, to help the necessities of
fellow members. The hand will not keep money in it when the foot or other
parts need it; the foot will not fit still when the body requires 'its help.
There is a natural helping amongst members, so amongst Saints. There are few
like Christ in this, indeed few that are like him all; They are more like the
devil then Christ, they put out all they have to do mischief, body, Estate,
all goes if they think they may displeasure Saints; let them buy hell, they
may have time enough to complain of their bargain; They that are so unlike
Christ and Saints here, shall have suitable company, but it shall be neither
Christ nor any of his holy ones. The Lord grant you grace that in this you may
imitate Christ and be like him, in using what you have so for him and his, that
you may give up an account of your stewardship with joy and not with grief.

2. Some are very pitiful souls, they are pitiful from a Principle of grace,
these are like Christ. If they see a poor creature in an ignorant sottish
state, how do they bemoan him, take all opportunities possible to bring him to
the knowledge of the truth? Misericordia est vicina miseriae. Sen. l. 2. de
Clem.
A merciful man strives to be Neighbor to him that is in need, and who more
then the ignorant? Paul was very pitiful affected this way, so are they that
are like Christ, compassionate to their bodily needs; they strive to be
merciful as their heavenly father is merciful. They are excellent for showing
pity that are Christ's.

2. They commiserate the wilful, and strive to bring them to obedience, they
have learned Christ's language, crying out, why will you die O obstinate souls?
why will you cross Christ and at length bring an eternal curse upon your
selves? Psalm. 35.14.
they have such Yearning bowels after them, that it many times draws tears
from them. They may be ill dealt withal, and have many a mock and jeere and
suffering for their good will, yet this beats them not off, it makes them not
desist, but hold out, with Christ seeking their Good that cannot endure them;
Isa. 65.23.
You may see how Christ was, served yet what he did; I stretched out my hands
all the day, to a rebellious people: a people that provokes me to anger
continually to my very face: It Is so with many Saints, do not many preach the
word to such that are deadly adversaries to them, that abuses them to the very
face, nay, in the very time they are persuading them, 2 Cor. 12.15. Act. 7.57.
Summa mundi ingratitudo.
and the more a Saints spirit in pity is for their good, the more are their
spirits in rage against Saints to their hurt.

3. They have yearnings of soul after such that deviate from truth that go
astray in the wilderness of sin, striving to reclaim them, and to bring them
into the way of the Lord, to walk toward holiness, Act. 17.23
Paul was employed in such a business as this at Athens amonst a people that
were wandering after an unknown God, that went they knew not whither, Luke
15.4.
that worshipped they knew not what. As a man looks after a wandering beast to
bring it home, so does Christ a wandering soul; and this is part of the
employment of such that can say, As he is, so are we in this world. Ezech.
34.6, 7, 8, 9.
Christ is highly displeased with such that should look after scattered
souls, and are negligent, they walk contrary to him; but such please him that
are painful in preserving those are his, that undertake any employment for the
recovery of souls from error to truth, from out of the Devils common to
Christ's sold. They are dear friends to Christ, that to their utmost are
helpful to the purchased possession of Christ: you that are good servants to
Christ, you shall find him a good Master to you: be like him in action, and he
will make you like himself in the reward, he that works in his vineyard shall
have fair wages. Blessed are you that now serve not your selves but the Lord
Jesus Christ; this business will make Christ honor you; your striving to
reclaim such that wander from the commandments of the Lord: Dan. 12.3.
They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament: and they
that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever. God will
honor them that strive to save others. Jam. 5.20.
How like Christ are they that strive to convert a sinner from the error of his
way, and to save a soul from death? Is not such work Christ's work? do not they
follow him that works thus? When Christ works in us for making us like him, we
will work abroad to bring souls unto him.

3. They loath sin, they that are like Christ, they detest and abominate what
Christ detests. Sin is a devil (and who can abid him unless wretches that are
like him.) Sin will eat up a soul; can any unless a madman love that which
will utterly undo him? Sin brings plagues upon a man's self and all he has,
entertain not a guest that has such ill attendants, thou can not embrace sin
but thou must wound Christ: will thou show so much hard-heartednes as to wound
him that has suffered so much already, Isa. 52.14.
yea such sufferings, as never any suffered besides him, besides you cannot
sin against Christ but you must hurt your selves, yea your best part, Pro.
8.36.
your souls, but to cast such weeds aside and to speak of men and practices
fiting the place and time, and that is Saints and their behavior in this
particular toward sin, they abhor sin upon the same reasons and grounds that
Jesus Christ abhorres it, it is indeed Christ in them that makes them dislike it
if their dislike be such as it should be, there are souls that may have some
dislike of sin, yet they may not with a Saints spirit loath it.

1. Some there are that stand aloof from sin when it allures, because should
they yield, it may cause some disgrace to them, it may make some cast them off
that now they have favor withal, and whose favor it may be is more
beneficial for present then their sin can be, they are solicited unto. These
deserve no thanks from God, for love to God makes them not dislike sin, it is
the upholding of some reputation and credit amongst men that for present
restrains them. They say not, I have received mercy from Christ, how can I sin
against him that has been so good to me? but I have a reason of mine own,
says the carnal soul, and therefore I may do this or that, not but that he
loves the sin, but it stands not with his end for present to meddle with it.

2. Some are kept off from sin as the dog from the bone with the cudgel, the
fear of the Law deters them, feign they would be doing but then they fear
suffering, they think it might be beneficial to steal, but they like not
hanging, the money might help them but the halter would hurt them; Christ is
not beholding to these nor to any such, for love to him prevails not with
them; Mat. 14.5.
these are kept from evil as Herod at first from killing John for fear of the
people, Luke 22.2.
and as the Chief Priests and Scribes from killing Jesus, or the Captain and
Officers from offering violence to the Apostles. Act. 5.26.
That many are not more vile we may thank their fear of the Law, not their
love nor likeness to Christ.

3. Some are kept from some sins for fear of hell; Hell is not seen, and
therefore not much feared, men think strangly of hell, take heed you never know
it, this place of Torments is not much considered of now, or if it be, men
think they are far enough from it and may escape. If love to Christ keep not
from sin, fear of hell will not; it is the mercies of Christ that Paul presents
as a bait to allure to holiness, and draw men off from the world, Romans 12.1
-- Significans cogitionem miserecordiae Dei debere nobis esse stimulum ad vitam
Deo placentem transigendam.
mercies are very invitive, especially the mercies of Christ that are such
sweet and precious mercies, mercies that had never any like them, the world had
never such another in it for mercy as Christ. Mercies draw Saints to abhor
evil, and as God shall call you to be Saints, you will do likewise. Sin is
offense to Christ and goodness is pleasing to him. Saints (are acquainted with
him and) know it and strive it should be so to them, Christ and inside
Christians, have but one object of their love and but one of their hatred, viz:
good and all good, and that they effect together; evil and all evil and that
they reject a like, you may conceive of such to be Saints that go so right with
Christ.

4. Saints indeed, (souls like Christ they are such that aim at the glory of
God) in all their undertakings, it was Christ's meat and drink to do the will
of his father, so it is theirs that are Christ's, if men will be pleased seeing
them in Gods business they rejoice but if they will not, they nevertheless
continue doing; There was a Gallant courage in Christ to glorify his Father, so
is there in Saints, they will honor God if they die in the action, Act. 5.19.
they if opposed durst bidt heir opposers judge whether it be better to obey
God or man, he acts right that bids his enemy be judge of his doings: if any
spy faults, enemies will. Saints are for pleasing God, that's their aim, they
are company for such whose journey is heavenward; Christ is gone before, they
follow after. He goes fastest to heaven that goes on most speedily in Gods
work, that, as it tends to Gods glory, so to the actors glory. A soul will
soon be glorified it self, that glorifies God; they that are for God, shall
be with God; heavenly work is recompensed with good ways; Christ did his work,
is entered into his joy, do yours and enter also, like doers shall have like
pay.

5. Christ is for fellowship and communion with his people, Mat. 18.20.
(where two or three are gathered together in his name, there he is, in the
midst of them) so Saints the friends of Christ desire fellowship with those
that are Christ's: christians, this Lesson has not been well learned of late,
outward appearances like our selves, (it is feared) have drawn us many times more
then Christ in Spirit dwelling in souls. That part of Arethmeticke division
has been in use too much, at least Numeration too little, we should be more
like Christ were we more for society, I mean with Saints. David's Spirit was
gracious and was much affected with such company, if like Christ sociable, but
it is with Saints.

6. Christ delights to see men holy, embracing truth, in this Saints are like
Christ. Saint John rejoiced greatly that he found the children of the Elect
Lady walking in truth, Epist. Ioh. 2.4
so this exercise was pleasing to Paul. Col. 1.3, 4.
We give thanks to God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, praying
always for you, since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of the love
which ye have to all the Saints. As he rejoiced to see this amongst the
Colossians, for it pleased him to see others followers of the Lord, 1 These. 1.6
and embracing that truth which the churches of God embraced, 1 These. 1.14.
to the exceeding growth of faith, and the abounding of charity each toward
others; 2 These. 1.3.
They that were holy amongst the Jews, rejoiced at the Gentiles conversion. And
at this day there is no greater joy to Saints then to hear of others turning to
the truth, and living holily. That which makes carnal men displeased, which is
newness of life, pleases those that have received of the same life.

Ezech. 33
7. Jesus Christ hates sin in every one, yet no man's person, he pitties their
persons, Why will you die O house of Israel? He loathed Jerusalems sin, yet he
wept over the city as pitying the people, sorrowing through foreseeing of the
misery that was coming toward them', and did afterward befall them; They that
are like Christ are thus qualified, they hate sin in all men, yet hate not the
persons of any, no, not of their deadly enemies, but with Stephen they can
desire eternal life, for those, that will not let them enjoy a temporal life, a
crown for their enemies, that hale them to the cross; There Is much of the
image of Christ in those that to the utmost do good to the men, whose sins they
hate; And though they seek the death of their sin, yet desire life, the life of
Christ for their souls. Christ showed man most mercy, when he showed sin
none; he killed sin, and quickn'd man; A man may be merciful to his neighbor,
yet strive to be a slaughter-man to his sin: They must needs be like Christ,
that from a gracious pity are helpful to others, and omit no means to do them
any kindness, furthering the salvation of their souls, and good of their
bodies, helping them in any thing, or way but what is sinful; It Is the calling
of Saints to do good, yea to all, you have none of a more free spirit then
they, they go up and down on this employment, it is the errand that Christ sends
them on; Like Master, like Servants, all good, and their actions like
themselves: The master cannot err, the servants may, but they shall be set
right again; These are no cheats that do good to all, as much as possible they
may, harm none, no not enemies; render to none evil for evil, but contrariwise
blessing.

8. Saints are very much like Christ in that they are courageous souls,
courageous in what is good, not bad, some men have too much courage in an evil
way, but to what is good they have no heart. It Is not so with the children of
God, they die rather then yield to any baseness, shall such a one as I fly? a
gallant speech of a noble soul, Neh. 6.11.
of one that believed God had given commandment to save him,; Psa. 71.3. Salvum
me facias ab inimicis meis.
Daniel would not omit his duty, though he knew the Lions den was to be his
punishment. God should have his honor whatsoever he suffered; The three
children feared not the wrath of the King, nor the fiery Furnace; God should
not be dishonored by them, they would die rather. Tyrants may kill Saints but
not conquer them. Christ was slain but not overcome, so it may be with those
are Christ's; That Is good metal will endure the fire; a good Ship that holds
sound and firm in all storms; good cloth that shrinks not in wetting;
welgrounded colors that fade not; brave souls that nothing can daunt,
discourage, or turn from the truth; one of these is better then a thousand,
that have great words, but when hardship comes to be undergone prove low and
weak; he is a friend that owns a man in need, and in a strait; he is a Saint
that from inward grace is made so courageous that nothing shall separate him as
from the love of Christ, 2 Timothy 1.7
so from the work of Christ. The Metal of a soldier is tried in the Battle,
the spirit of a Christian in times of opposition.

9. Christ is all for drawing souls to himself; Joh. 12.32
if he be lifted up from the earth he will draw men to him, he is not a
scatterer, but a gatherer, I mean of souls. His business is to seek and to
save, to find and preserve, he woes, and willing he is to marry souls, that
they might be his for ever, christians in this are spirited like Christ, they
endeavor to drive a trade for Christ's gain, they are for their masters profit,
they love Christ, and find exceeding benefit by him, and they think others
should love him also. Precious Christ is precious to them, and feign would they
have him so to others. They have an enlarged heart, and an open mouth crying to
souls, oh! love the Lord all ye people, turn in hither souls, come, buy wine,
and milk without noney, and without price, we have found Excellent
entertainment from Christ, come; he will show you kindness; good souls will
not conceal the bountiful mercy of the Lord, 2 Chro. 7.9.
if they neglect to publish his goodness, they will say as the Lepers, we do not
well to hold our peace; indeed they cannot but make mention of the name of the
Lord. Christians are not tongue-tied in setting out Christ's worth, they may be
in speaking of themselves; sound and Gracious. Souls are sparing in speaking
things tending to their own praise, but when occasion is offered to set out any
thing for the honor of their Savior, they want no words at least no will, to
enlarge themselves on such a theme. You people that would not be deceived in
owning those that are right, that are afraid of a Devil appearing as an Angel
of light, that feign would have a christian indeed your acquaintance, such
souls are very likely to fit you, that are industrious in enlarging Christ's
dominions, and are joyful when souls come in apace to Christ, for true Saints
would have all men savd and come to the knowledge of the truth.

Christians, whatsoever I have said of this use. I must yet wish you to beware.
Pickpockets will be amongst honest men, cheaters amongst just dealers, and if
the sons of men present themselves before God Satan is ready to be amongst
them. Is. 50.15.
there is some fire a Kindling. He that departs from iniquity makes himself a
pray, he is the but at which all the shooting is, all the hooting is at him. We
hear of Paul's persecuting, but not of being persecuted all the time he walked
according to the course of the world: but Christ being revealed in him, wrath
is revealed against him, he being for Christ; enemies of Christ set against
him in every place: Act. 20 23.
The more like Christ any is, and the more they own him and follow him, the
more is the trouble that rises against them: the sea-waves give the greatest
dash against what opposes them. The wind roareth most amongst those trees that
it is stiffly opposed, all wicked people rage against such that any may hinder
them in their wickedness. I dare challenge people in any city Country or
village, that if they will speak truth, that they that are most Godly amongst
them, are subject to most slanders, 2. Tim. 2.
reproaches, and wrongs. I know wicked men have pretenses for what they do
against Saints: So had the Jews against Christ. Jo. 18.30
They tell Pilate, if he were not a malefactor, they would not have delivered
him up unto him; Christ might have said to them as Themistocles to the
Athenians, are ye weary of receiving so many benefits by one man? Paul had many
grevious faults laid to his charge, as turning the world upside down, Act.
27.6.
setting all out of order, his enemies spoke as if all had been well, had it
not been for him and such as he were: This Paul was a pestilent fellow, a mover
of sedition all the world over, Act. 14.5.
high crimes to be accused of, and why was this? because Godly, that was the
main thing that troubled Satan's slaves. Stepnen is accused for blasphemy and
what was his blasphemy? Act. 6.14.
part is he should speak against the holy place and the law, and That Jesus of
Nazareth shall destroy this place and change the customs which Moses delivered
us. False witnesses, and men suborned laid this in against him; Knowing that it
would mightily incense the people to hear of losing their customs. These
carnal customs are so dear to carnal men that they are all in a rage if they
hear any thing of losing them. Let Gospel go and Gospel owners perish, they
care not, if they may keep their customs. It was a custom to have this and
that: I count it not worth the naming what many contend about and persecute the
Saints for. I could experimentally speak in this particular but I forbear;
Doubtless the spirit of men is in every age spit out against truth, and they
that now persecute Saints would persecute Christ as really as ever the Jews
did, were his appearance now in flesh as then. Suppose Christ would not observe
Christmas as the Popish generation calls it, suppose he would not read over a
Dead corpse, suppose he would not give the Lords. Supper to any but holy and
godly souls shutting out the covetous, ignorant, swearer, drunkard, reviler,
unclean person etc. What would the world say of him? I speak low to your
capacity, I might speak higher to men in higher place, and fully clear it, why
good men are so persecuted; But hear Christ himself, I have given them thy
word, Joh. 17.14.
the world has hated them, because they are not of the world, as I am not of
the world. See the cleaving to the word what it meets withal, it was not having
the word in their houses or hand made them hated, but in heart and life, and
walking contrary to the course of the world, for in body they were in the
world, but in conversation they were averse to the world: in a word they
through grace received did endeavor to glorify the God of all grace, this was
fault enough, for all that will live godly must suffer tribulation. Christ was
persecuted so shall they be that are Christ's, Cum ipso in angustia. Mat. 18.8. O
bone Jesu, qic ure, hic percute; ut parcas in futuro-
thorns and briers are in the way to heaven, and they will scratch. Be not
dismayed, Christ is gone through and he will help you, you were better go to
heaven in a torn skin then to hell in a whole; Every skar that a Christian
wears for Christ's sake, is heavens badge, be not ashamed of them, if you be
found in Christ's livery, you will be received into bliss. Erigat sese fidelis
anima and parata sibi consideret bona.
Think of this you souls of honor, if you suffer with Christ you shall reign
in glory with him; ponder of the glory when you are under the cross, it may
quicken your almost tired spirits; I wish you may hold out in the suffering,
and then I question not your glory; That you faint not nor be weary, the Lord
grant that your hearts frame may be changed from what it is by nature, and
turned into a Christ's frame what it should be by grace, your corrupt mind, into
a pure mind; passion, turned into patience, pride, into meekness, loftiness,
into lowliness, weakness, into strength, fearfulness, into courage; that so
you may undauntedly undergo sufferings. Souls, I wish you well, howsoever you
deal with me, I pray for you, and hope I shall; that God would count you worthy
to suffer for his sake, which you shall certainly undergo in some measure if
Godly. The Devils birders are abroad, it is the best birds they aim at, Quis
nori^ Daemonis astus?
his nets are laid, he cares not for catching dogs, it is heart, it is a precious
dish in hell; yet be of good cheer souls, if you are truly good, Satan shall
have none of you, you are reserved for the masters use, he has need of you and
will have you. Christians, the world is full of Blackmores, I mean black souls,
if any white soul, viz. a gracious Saint appear, he is wondered at. Let the
wicked wonder and hate, Deus moderator certantium and corona vincentium.
Christ observes and loves all that are his, and will preserve every hair, be
of good comfort keep this precious soul-promise in your hearts. Suffering
Saints, Christ brought it forth for you; Mat. 5.11, 12.
blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all
manner of evil against you falsely for my sake; (says Christ) rejoice and be
exceeding glad; for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the
Prophets, which were before you. So christians that suffer, you are not the
first, there are some sufferers before, follow on there is a crown in readiness
for you, and I would it were on your heads. I hope it will be, and then will
you appear more clearly like Christ, for a crowned Christ and crowned Saints
are very like each other.

desiring you to consider who you are like, Christiani nomen frustra ille
sortitur, qui Christum minime imitatur.
many go for Christ's people that are never a whit like him, neither fashioned
like him within nor without; neither in speech, nor shape like him; nor yet in
word nor conversation. Indeed they are more like Satan, and were it not for the
name of christians, you would not know them scarcely from Devils, I am sure not
from heathen. Their language speaks them not of the land of Canaan nor of
Christ's flock, but rather Goats and aliens from, if not enemies to Christ.
Earthly they are and not heavenly, he that is of the earth is earthly and
speaks of the earth. Joh. 3.13.
As ducklings have always their bills in the mud, swine their noses in the
mire, every thing tends to what likes him, so carnal men. Travail upon the way
and you shall find how familiar people of like dispositions are, gracious men
for gracious company and discourse, worldly and carnal men abhor such company
and communication, but if thry meet with such as are carnal, then they are
pleased. Homogeneal things easily close, water will run with water in the same
channel, dogs will play with dogs, and wolves with wolves, try men by their
company; you may find a sheep amongst wolves, it is rare, unless they prey, to
devour; Souls I will not judge you, you have a judge within you, bring the
question you would have decided before him, if you will hear he will speak to
the business, the sentence shall be impartial, it is conscience properly to
say the truth be it for a man or against him; Ask conscience, how like Christ?
ask conscience, whether such as you be are Saints? ask conscience, whether
heavens glory have such as you? ask conscience whether you are skilled in
Scripture, and whether you walk according to the word? whether you be company
for Christ? do not misunderstand conscience, neither hearken to something else
that is not conscience. Well dear friends, I must hasten; I will put but one
Interrogatory to you, and end this Use; here are many people in this parish,
some love the truth, others hate it, some are religious, some profane, some
zealous, some but moral; who of these do you most affect? whose houses do you
most frequent? whose sosciety is your delight? I know you can tell, I will
conclude nothing: I know what I might, what I could say, but I forbear. Lovers
see somewhat in the object that delights the affection, something that pleases
them, I can guess what the man is if I am sure what he loves, Qualis amor
tuus, talis ipse es.

Amans and res amata fiunt unum.

Si divina diligis efficieris divinus.


for the affection pitcheth upon somewhat suitable; he has a heavenly heart
that loves heavenly things, he may be said to be gracious that loves grace, and
he a christian that loves Christ as Christ deserves, even with his whole heart;
what company you now like you will have enough of hereafter, let it be good or
bad. Pray God make you like Christ, then will you love him, and he will take
you to himself; If that be not happiness judge you.

Reproves the most of the world and Godliness, how sad is the condition of
such? how blameworthy are they that regard not their souls? They take up so
much of Religion as will get them some countenance from Gods people, but for
God himself they care not. Psalm. 75.4.
I may say to such as the Psalmist to his fools, deal not foolishly. For what
will it advantage such to carry some esteem for a short time among men, and to
their shame, nay confusion (its feared) be discovered at last? It is no comfort
to a man in the end, that he was religious in show only. And as their end will
be comfortless that have only the shell of goodneess, so theirs that are open
profane, and also that are carelessly secure. You Will blame a child for loosing a
penny given to it, the very loosing is blamed (the manner not considered) what
may be said to such that loose their souls? as they may be blamed so pitied,
but neither recovers them, they being once gone; out of hell is no redemption.
Souls consider this; have you not a place for dust, and another for Gold? I
may say, so has God. He has a hell for filthy sinners, and a heaven for pure
Saints. God is upon his work of separation daily, you will all find what I say
true, he is ready to try you. Take heed in the day of sifting you be not chaff,
if you be, you will be burned in unquenchable fire. Like must to like, Christ
and the Devil will have what belongs to them. Souls I desire your change
speedily; for by nature you are all like Satan, you must be new cast, have
another form, if like Christ. I cannot mend any of you by reproving (mending
is Christ's work) yet I shall as enabled pray, that they that are not changed
into the Image of Christ may be, and where it is begun it may be perfected.

Quest. You it may be have a mind to ask me, why so few are like Christ,
seeing it is such an excellent state, and also honorable etc?

Ans. I may say because they have not received of the heavenly gift, and are
not by heavens hand polished. Besides, it is not the fashion of the world. To be
holy is exceedingly out of fashion in these times; to be holy is to be
singular, the last is to be wondered at, if not disdained; it sets all men a
wondering to behold the assemblies of Saints. Psalm. 38.5.
Sometimes besides wondering they are enraged against them; Reges terrae inito
inter se consilio congregati sunt contra hanc Dei civitatem, ejusque cives
pariter ad nos expugnandos convenerunt.
I shall spare any further discourse upon such that differ so much from Christ,
I am sure if they never be made like Christ, they will wish they had, if they
be changed into the like Image I need not bid them, their own graces will
quicken them to praise the Lord. The first Doctrine is left to your meditation,
I desire you may be as like Christ as the Doctrine is like truth; the next
thing to present to your souls is this. ^mor Dei est illud sigillum, quo Deus
electos and credentes obsignat.
taste his sweetness, smell his savor and where you find that is like, what you
find in Christ, conclude they are Saints. Men know their goods by the mark,
their leases by the seal, servants by their livery, so may Saints be known by
Christ. Study Christ well and thou will say such are Saints, let their
appearances be what they will, let them be by name Jew or Gentile, circumcised
or not circumcised, if Saints their graces will discover what they be.
Christians judge not according to the flesh and forms, but according to the
Spirit, a gracious soul is lovely to a gracious spirit, let it be of never so
different judgment in some low things that are subject to vanish.

They are children of one Father,

Their employment is a like. know the business of Christ? can you say this is
the work of Christ, and herein he is excercis'd? Consider who acts like him,
and then judge. Compare things together, the holy and heavenly work of Christ,
let that be the pattern, esteem and commend those souls whose workings are most
like the pattern. Children are commended that write most like the Copy, and so
is the Limner whose draught is most like the body, whose picture agrees best
with the life. Suffer a word of exhortation. Ephesians. 5.1.
Be ye therefore followers of God, as dear childien, and walk in love, as
Christ also has loved us, and has given himself for us, an offering, and a
sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor. Christ yeel'ds a sweet savor in
his love, and in his obedience: 2 Cor. 2.15.
so do Saints, they are unto God a sweet savor. Study Christ soundly, and when
you have done, see how men agree with Christ, and accordingly let them have the
repute of Saints. Be not partial in your judging, but judge righteous judgment.

Vuse.
You may now hint whence it is that Saints are no better known. I conceive it is
because Christ is not known. Ignorance of Christ effects an ignorance of
Saints. 1 Cor. 2.8
Christ was killed by such that knew him not, and so are Saints. How many
precious Jewels have been taken for dross, and so cast out? how many gracious
souls esteemed not worthy to live? and why? because like Christ, Act. 22.22
both Christ and they taken for evil doers, for disturbers of the places where
they come, yea sometime for blasphemers: you seldom see any reverence godly
souls that yield not reverence to the God of souls; Joh. 16.2, 3.
that respect Saints that honor not Christ. Men that are farthest from Christ,
are the lap-children of wicked men, if any have their respect they are such
that are like themselves, ungodly. Good men, you complain of your slightings,
wrongs, and diverse sufferings in the world; and complain you may: your sorrows
are ungodly men's music; they never rejoice more then when the Saints tears run
down fastest. This has and will be the worlds pastime, even good-mens
sufferings. Christ sufferings pleased the Jews heartily: so does the sufferings
of Christ's people, Jewish natures to this day. Men do they know not what, in
wronging the dear jewels of God, and pluck on themselves a most heavy wrath
from the God of Saints. The works of wicked men now are such as the wicked
generations that went before, 1 These. 2.15.
for they killed the Lord Jesus, and the prophets, and persecuted Saints, and
all was because they were blinded of Satan, and the glorious Spirit of holiness
shone not into their souls to give them the knowledge of Jesus Christ. How were
it possible that men should be enemies to Christ or to Saints the friends of
Christ, did they know what he has suffered and undergone for souls? Amor e
caelo ad terram eum traxit, ad columnam ligavit, cruciaffixit, sepulchro
clausit, ad inferos at^raxit.
how out of love and pity he came down from heaven, underwent many a gracious
suffering, and all to do poor wretched man good? but here is a sad sight, al is
slighted of many. Is it not strange to hear a groaning Christ, and sinners
mocking? a Christ wounded to the heart, and souls mad at heart against him? to
see the everlasting Father dying, and yet the children of that Father abused,
and that by such for whom the Father is suffering? It was an ungratful act of
Joash to slay the child of Johoiada that had holp him to the Kingdom, but as
the sufferer prayed, God acted and punished the wicked doer. God is just, wait
his time, and then see what he will do to Christ and christian wrongers. You
have need of patience you Christ-like souls, you are sufferers, you will be so
in this world, you are not known neither is your Savior, and indeed because
your glory is hid, is it that your sufferings are open; but be of good cheer,
God will help you, he knows Christ, and he knows you, he holp Christ, and will
help you. I shall say only this to such that say they know not who are Saints,
what these Saints mean they know not, etc. I fear you know not Christ, if it be
so it is sad with you, and your state is miserable, and were I able this day to
weep, I should willingly weep for such that know not the Lord Jesus Christ.

Let not a form of worship bear overmuch professors. The devil has taken great
advantage to nourish strife and discord amongst brethren by them, and he has
blasted charity abundantly, nay so much that some will not join in prayer with
any unless of their form, nor hear the word unless from one of their
judgment. Is this a knowing of Christ, and then Saints; or is it a knowing
appearances, and Saints by them? The Lord reconcile Jew and Gentile. The foot
may be loved though it be not an eye because it is of the body, so may a soul
though of a different outward appearance because it belongs to Jesus Christ. In
the body there are several members, yet are all useful in their places, wherein
the Lord has been pleased to place them: so it is in the several seize
and Administrations the Saints are under. All may be useful, and he that is in
the lowest Attainment (especially that may be of some so judged) may there
enjoy God, and be useful to the body, and though it see not with the eye, yet
may it be a foot to help carry on the body. I could wish that we could more
look after Christ, and where we find him esteem them Saints, whether they be
circumcised or uncircumcised, whether bond or free. I know not why any should
consider them that are in a low appearance and as it is judged in mean
attainment. Who knows but Christ may be with them? if so, that's enough; if
Christ ascend they shall ascend with him. Noah's Arc rose as the waters did: so
shall Saints as Christ pleases to bear them up, and at length all forms shall
die, and Christ to his appear all in all. For the resurrection and appearance
of the Lord is the death of man, and the death of forms, and the death of
flesh: for all these things are but shadows, and when Christ clearly appears
they shall be abolished. The Lord make out his appearance clearly, that so we
may know him, and by knowing him know those that are his, and from a right
knowing, love, and love increasing, our mutual joy may abound in the Lord.

Would you souls be taken for Saints? withal, To. 8.9.
you must have the same spirit within and you must be fashioned without like
Christ, Omnis vita nostra conformis illi reddatur, qui examore nostri totum sae
nobis conformavit.
your conversation must be holy and as becomes the Gospel. Two cannot walk
together except they agree says God; now what agreement can be between Christ
and Beliall? between the wolf and the lamb? what agreement was there between
Saints and Paul all that time he persecuted? could Saints take him for a Saint
then; No, he must be made a new creature, he must be changed, Christ must be
revealed in him. Some of you are angry because you are debarred from something
that is the privilege of Saints. Pray know this, Gods sheep are known by his
mark, show your mark, let appear that your spot is the spot of God, and such as
he puts on his flock. Every man may not sit in Parliament, is such that are
chosen, and sent, so not every one may fit in the assembly of the righteous,
but such that are called, and chosen, and faithful.

Obj. You will object it may be and say, what do I think you are not holy? do I
not take you for Christians? do I think th you have not a care to serve God and
live holily? do not we (you will say keep our church as much as any? do not we
pray and hear? We were formerly taken for good people, and there was no
exception, what must we, now be suspected? must our faith be now called in
question? scuh things Carnal people object.

Ans. Souls from this plea I cannot say you are Saints. I know many a Nominall
Christian goes to hell, many go to Church (as they style the house of public
worship) and are never the more reformed, Eccl. 8.10
they continue wicked and are unregenerated it may be for all this. To. 2.28.
I may use Paul's words; He is not a Jew which is one outwordly, neither is that
Circumcisition, which is outward in the flesh; Qui tantum professione externa
and nuncupatione est Judaeus, non coram Dei judicio consetur Judaeus sed is
solus, etc.

Non qui est in operto Christianus is Christianus est nec qui est in aperto
tantum baptismus, is baptismus est etc.


Now know this that the meaning is I conceive, He is not a true Jew or true
Israelite, viz. gracious, that can only plead his natural birth or the
cutting off the foreskin of his flesh, neither is he a true Christian, that is
so by name only, and borne in a Christian country, and that has received the
outward badge being sprinkled with water. Paul discovered how little such
outward things profited, when he renounced all fleshly Confidence; Phil. 3.4
Though he could plead as great fleshly privileges as any, yet he counted all
as nothing worth in comparison of Christ. When he had received Christ, Ephesians. 5.13
he saw clearly by that light, that manifests all things, that all natural
endowments and enjoyments without Christ were of no benefit to the soul. Now as
Paul, though comparing them with Christ counted them dung and dross, yet he
did not detract any thing from the endowments and enjoyments themselves. Haec
nihil detrahunt dignitati sacramentorum, etc.
No more would I from the name Christian, or from public meetings or, from
baptism, but wiling I am to give all their due; so that Christ be not robbed but
acknowledged all and in all. I must tell you souls, they are fools and unwise
that pride themselves in any thing that is not very Christ. Baptism is
nothing, if a soul has not Christ; a Sermon is nothing, preaching nothing, if
Christ be not preached; the name Christian nothing, if Christ be not in the
soul. The sum of the sum of all is Christ. It Is a common fault (God weed it out
of men's hearts) for men to vatut in some outward thing, and glad many are if
they can denominate themselves of this or that opinion or judgment, or of this
or that man as a hearer, follower or of his Congregation, or got into some
attainement that bears high amongst professors. I shall only say this, beware
you do not deceive your selves, Christ is all, and all you must have Christ, or
you will perish eternally. I might have added several Reasons why Saints are
so wary who they take into their fellowship, as that they will not take in such
that bear a name only, and in life and conversation are sensual carnal,
heathenish, devilish, nor such as barely believe only a Christ without: that
can speak of the letter of scripture and the history of Christ but, have not a
Christ manifested within, but I shall not stay here much; for Saints them
already; and for others, they (as Swine pearls) will tread them under their
foot; they will scorn them as that they savor of over much strictness and
novelty; it may they will say of Independencie and Anabaptisme. But a word of
them.

1. It is uncomfortable to Saints to take them into fellowship that have not a
Christ within. Is it not uncomfortable living for a living man to be yoked to a
dead body, and to have dead men for his Company What are men without Christ but
dead men, Ephesians. 2. 1. Joh. 1.22.
souls without life stinking, rotten loathsome souls that have no comeliness?

2. It is dangerous to Saints to join in any intimate fellowship with such, by
reason they are infectious persons; a body infected with the plague is not more
apt to infect men's bodies, then sinful vile souls are such that nourish
fellowship with them. ps. 18.29.
Men are very apt to fashion themselves like those with whom they converse and
live, to imitate their words and actions, and to be confederate in their
doings, and so allured or enticed from what is right and agreeable to the
perfect rule of the word.

3. It is scandalous, for if such be taken into fellowship and church society
that are vile or that have but a form of Godliness, and so adorn not the
profession of the Gospel, how does it give ungodly men occasion to speak evil,
and to open their mouths against the way of the Saints, and to stand out so
much the more stiffly by way of oppossition against truth, because of some bad
ones got into outward society that have not the inward enjoyment of truth.
Saints had need beware (upon this consideration) who they take into
church fellowship, that so it be not such that by falling off from holiness
give offense, but such that are held in by the power of truth to the credit of
truth, and truths professors with whom they are in communion.

Souls you that know Christ look about you; consider of men rightly; take a
serious consideration of them; Sanctam vitam cum ip so amant. Discite a me quia
mitis sum and humilis cord. Sivis esse adoptivus Dei filius, vide quomodo
conversetur filius ille unigenitus.
and take them for Saints that are like Christ, such that are like holy as
Christ is holy, pure as Christ is pure, precious as Christ is precious, sweet
and lovely, comely beautiful as Christ, gentle and lowly as Christ they that
are Christ's are like Christ. The adopted sons of God like the only begotten
son of God, the younger brothers like the Elder, Saints like their Savior,
Christ is humble, gentle, loving, merciful, full of bowels of kindness and
goodness, they that are Saints indeed are like him, he it is they strive to
imitate, he they look unto as their rule, Sancta Christi vita, est perfecta
vitae nostrae regula.
he is the pattern they have always before them. I guide you not to this or
that form, attainment, opinion, judgment, or the like, to find Saints; but I
point out to you Christ, and if you see any like him esteem them: if you find
any that have the same spirit as Christ, vbi spiritus vnus, ibi eadem voluntas;
ubi voluntas eadem; ibi etiam actiones eaedem.
that have the same will, the same actions look on them and love them, and for
Christ's sake esteem them; because they are like Christ the very image of
Christ. The main resolution of their souls, and actings of the body is to know
God, and promote his glory, to ascribe praises to him, to do good to Saints, to
put forward whatsoever is agreeable to his will with all their might. Si propter
Christum proprio honori, proprio amori, propriae voluntati. in hac vita
renuncias, Christus in futura, sui honoris, sui amoris compotem te faciet.
It Is not men's frowns, it is not allurements, it is not losses, it is not Crosses
can deter them from the work of God: they know if they deny themselves seeking
here not their own honor nor self advancings, but following the advice of
Christ, observing his will, doing his work, laying out themselves wholly for
him, he will reward them, by giving out unto them of his honor, of his love,
and the like in the world to come. I shall leave you now to the search and
finding out of Saints, by the wisdom of Christ owning and esteeming such for
Saints that are like Jesus Christ, they that know Christ may know Saints. And
so much shall suffice to be spoken of that second Doctrine. We shall as God
shall enable us by his spirit give out somewhat more from the Text that may be
of further use and comfort to souls, which is this.

Saints brought to heaven shall not have another being, only a perfecting of
what is begun on earth. They have a glory already in them, upon them, Joh.
17.22.23.
even the glory that was given to Christ, in heaven they shall have more
abundant glory. They have Somewhat for breeding, as heirs under age, not come
to their full inheritance, yet growing to a ripeness of years and so to a
possession of the inheritance, even a knowledge of the excellencies of God and
Christ fully and clearly, yea and of their own excellency by virtue of union
and communion with Father and son; For then shall that glory be manifest and
apparent above, which is not so manifest and apparent below. Christians have
some light now, though but small, they have part of what they shall enjoy in
perfection; they now see though but darkly, then face to face, clearly; They
enjoy visions of God though in a cloudy and dark manner. God and glory are
revealed but in part to Saints whilst here on earth, and all they see and know
is but dark and imperfect, to what they shall see and know: God communicates
and makes out of his fullness to those are his here on earth, but the
communication and making out of all fullness it self is only above in glory in
the highest heavens, when they shall be brought to dwell with Christ to behold
his glory, and inherit that mavelous Light, the brightness of which yet we
are not able to behold. Christians have had, and still have, as much of God
here, as such vessels could hold: here Saints are narrow-hearted, and
dim-sighted, and cannot entertain so much, nor see so clearly as they shall
when they arrive at heaven, where their hearts shall be enlarged, and their
sight made fit, as to receive much, so to behold much of the excellencies of
Glory.

Souls, Psalm. 63.1, 2.
My soul thirsts, and my flesh longs for thee, to see thy glory, so as I
have seen it in the sanctuary? has glimpse of beauty taken you? any thing of
Christ delighted you?

1. Pray try what is in your inward man? do you find any light of love shining
in? are you warmed with any of this heavenly heat? 1 John 4.12.
I cannot press this too much: does God dwell in you? you are not like him if
there be not indwellings of God himself. I do not so much regard what you are
without and in appearance. I would have you somewhat within. There is great
glory in heaven, there must be some glory in your souls here; yea and it must
be such glory as is in heaven, glory shines in Saints more clearly above, here
it shines though but dimly, and they that shine here a little as sparks shall
shine exceeding brightly as the Sun in the kingdom of their Father, Mat. 13.43.
here (if we are as we should be and such that shall increase in goodness, and
have an addition to our joy) we have some inward taste and feeling of the
blessed comforts of God. Beloved that which I speak to you of, concerns your
souls, take heed they be not empty, take heed they be not void of all goodness,
destitute of the love and sweet communion of God through Jesus Christ. You know
how it sped with the five foolish Virgins that had no oil in their lamps: let
what befell them make you beware. It Is a wisemans part to refrain from that way
which others have perished in; unclean birds may have gaudy outsides, the plain
feathered fowl may be wholsomest, beware that no man deceive you, Psalm. 51.6.
Psa. 51.10. Innova in interioribus meis spiritum rectum.
and also be cautious that you wrong not your selves, know this that God
desires truth in the inward parts; and a pure inside; a clear heart was one
thing David petitioned for, this you should ask, and this you must possess if
ever it be well with you. That soul is as it should be when it is the seat,
throne, and dwelling of God.

2. Are your souls raised ftom the dead? is there a power put forth in you, and
that an exceeding great power, whereby you are delivered from sin, Satan and
self, and unable to walk as Spiritually alive according to the will of God.
Souls in glory are free souls, raised souls, souls set on high, souls
exceedingly spiritualized, wholly spiritual, active, souls in glorifying and
praising God, it is their oontinual employment, they cease not, they are always
busied in what tends to Gods praise. Is there any likeness to this in you? are
you fetched out of darkness? set at liberty? made able for the work of God?
Freemen are first Apprentices, Apprentices are in the way to freedom, what are
Saints in heaven but freemen? such that have served out their time on earth:
consider christians are you bound to God? does he teach you? do you now serve
him? are you wholly his? do you not serve Satan, world, nor self, but God? it
will be but a few years but you shall be advanced higher, advanced into
sublime and transcendent glory, to sit with Saints, and there with your
fellow-brethren to sing Hallelujahs for evermore.

3. Is there a prizing of the things of glory? They that are like Christ,
esteem, love, prize, the things of Christ, and what Christ does esteem, love,
prize; they esteem creature things in their places as they ought; yet all
these are but dung and dross in comparison of the excellencies of grace and
glory. Soul-necessities are not satisfied with creature-things: they free not
from corruption, they reveal not the love of God, nor ease the soul of its
trouble; if troubled for want of the loving kindness of the Lord. Saints in
glory are delivered from all misery and enjoy fulness of consolation, they that
are going glory-ward shall be eased, shall have their full of joy: they eye the
pleasures and bliss of heaven, they have thoughts upon them, they are much
taken up with them in their meditations. Saints in heaven are pleased with the
visible glory they enjoy. Saints on earth are pleased, in that through faith
they believe there is a reward laid up for them, that they shall possess an
inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, 1 Pet. 1.4.
and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for them. Souls you know what you
prize, what is delightful to you, you can tell whether earthly, or heavenly,
carnal or spiritual things: surely if drawing toward heaven, they are heavenly
things delight you; they that are in glory rejoice in their glorious
enjoyments, they that are in grace going to glory, rejoice through faith in
believing what is laid up for them, and what they shall enjoy: they exspect the
accomplishing of promises; and their accomplishing, tends to gracious souls
advancing, and crowning in glory with an everlasting diadem. Consider of this I
pray, take much care in trying whether you be in the right way to perfect
peace: you would not willingly be cousoned in any earthly things, beware you be
not cheated in this that concerns your souls, and so lose your souls: if you
should, I need not say you are undone, you will to your sorrow find it; but I
hope you will be careful in this. I can but advise, it is God must make you
wise; I can but instruct, it is the Lord must make you to receive instruction.
Try all things, try earthly things, you will see them vanity, try Spiritual
things, God grant you knowledge to diserne, and wisdom to prize and hold fast
what is good.

Animorum summa puritas, stupenda corporum charita, etc.
There natures shall be spotless, and there actions blameless, an orient
splendor and matchless brightness of resplendent light shall cover the whole
man as a garment. Oh what an infinite, unconceiveable, and unparalled gladness
throughout the soul, spirit, and whloe man will this occasion? Saints here
desire much, and have somewhat of heavens excellency but their desires are not
fully satisfied, Quicquid desiderare poterunt electi, illic invenient: quia
coram a facie ad faciem intuentur eum qui est omnia.
and in heaven they shall have their full, insomuch that desires shall cease, not
longing after more, for God shall communicate himself fully and at once to
Saints there. Saints have now some beauty, some comlines, they are in part
sanctified, but in heaven they shall be fully sanctified, all glorious, this
corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality,
and then conceptions of evil shall not be in souls, there shall be no unsoundnes
of judgment, nor taints of error, no impuritie nor imbecility of affections in
glory. Saints love to Christ, shall not be cold, weak and feeble, but it shall
be hot, strong, perfect, they shall be without any imperfection. Nothing in
them, or what is done by them shall be blameworthy, Similes erimus ipsi Deo
benedicto in seculum.
they shall be like the blessed God for ever. Is not this a word of comfort now?
will it not be much more a precious soul-rejoycing to enjoy this purity, this
samctity, this holiness, of being made a excellent beautiful like Angels,
Angelis and sibi ipsi nos similes reddit.
yea like God himself? There shall be nothing amiss in the soul; it shall be all
glorious: no blindness, lamenesse, deafness, nor crookedness, nor infirmity
shall be on the body: the bodies of Saints in glory that be handsome, fair,
comely, beautiful; yea like unto the glorious body of Christ: Phil. 3.21.
yea, and which is more, they shall in the whole body be like unto his glorious
body.

Eadem corpora, quae hic cum Christo crucifixa sunt, una cum Christo in
caelesti beatitudine glorificantur.
These very bodies of Saints that suffer now with and for Christ, shall with
Christ in heavenly bliss be glorified with him; yea they shall have such glory
as he has. This Souls I shall leave to you to admire. I cannot sufficiently and
to the full in words discover it to you; It Is a wonder to think that they that
are gracious and so like Christ here, should be in heaven as handsome bodied as
Christ is, -- Gloria nulla lingua satis explicari potest.
and have as comely a person and feature as he himself has, whom the Father
loves dearly, that their bodies shall be in all places like to Christ's body.
Beloved, may not this encourage us in trouble, to venture life and limb for
God, rather then that God should lose his glory; seeing that he can make up all
again, and supply all wants, and will make every one perfect at last: and also
not to be troubled as concerning Death, with any discomfortable thoughts of
worms eating and destroying the flesh, with rottenness seizing upon the body,
and the like; knowing that Christ at last will restore all perfect.

2. Saints, you have now some wisdom and knowledge, you shall have more
abundant, you shall have more wisdom, Isa Dei sapientia seipsam eis ostendet,
etc.
you shall have clearer knowledge in the things of God and Christ, and of
heaven; surely knowledge is an exellent thing, especially Divine and Heavenly
knowledge, knowledge in the mystery of salvation. What is it that some would
not give for knowledge now in Arts and Tongues, and in Scripture-truths, yea to
know God rightly? In heaven Saints you shall have an exquisite and perfect
knowledge of God; ye shall see him not only mentally and contemplatively, but
also with the bodies eyes corporally; so Job, Job 19.25, 26.
I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon
the earth. And though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh
shall I see God: Whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and
not another; This Christians I conceive may make your longings to be eager
after heaven, and exceedingly rejoice to think you shall see God, to see God as
he is in himself, and as he Is in you; And all this in a spiritual manner, for
all knowledge in heaven shall be spiritual. I might enlarge my self more on
this, but I forbear according to what of God is given in to you, such is your
knowledge already, and as God shall be revealed, knowledge shall increase, and at
last you shall in glory know as you are known.

3. Saints shall in heaven have a full fruition of Christ, a full sight of their
sweet Savior, Chridum videre, superabit omniagaudia. Superabit omnia cordis
nostoi desideria.
such a sight that shall give in unspeakable joy, such enjoyment that shall bring
more joy then heart can wish; no tongue can express, no heart can conceive what
consolation they have that shall enjoy Christ and dwell with him for ever. To see
Christ to dwell and be with Christ, brings to souls wounderful happiness. This
makes souls cry out how long Lord Jesus is it ere thou will bring us to glory,
where we may have beauty presented to our sight, sweetness to our taste amongst
men, Pulchritudo erit visui, mel gustui, cithara auditui, balsanum olfactui,
flos actui.
music to our ear, what is odoriferous to our smelling, and delightful to be
touched and handled, the soul also filled with light, and comfort, every faculty
having what is pleasant to it given out freely and fully; O blessed condition!
O sweet life! O happy being! to be brought into the Court of the glorious God,
to the society of Saints, Jesu Christ, sponse animaemeae suavissime.
into the bosom of sweet and blessed Jesus, the loving, and ever-glorious
husband to blessed souls! Love is abundantly shown on earth by Christ to those
that are Christ's, in their affairs to direct them, in their troubles to help
them, in their dangers to deliver them; in bestowing diverse and excellent
benefits both of grace and nature, and of creature-things: likewise in
disappointing the dangerous devices of enemies, in frustrating the subtle and
crafty plottings of Satan, in beating down the power of corruption and the
like: here is much of mercy and goodness in all this, but the crown and
perfection of all, is the bringing, seating, crowning of souls in glory. How
beautiful are souls in that day! how glorious! how lifted up! how exalted! how
honored when they shall not alone see Christ, but they shall live with him! Not
alone, behold him in a Throne at the right hand of the majesty on high, but
they shall be seated in Thrones with him! Rejoice O souls in the meditation of
this, let the consideration hereof be sweet and pleasant to you, for you shall
be ever with Christ the Lord; Ibi summa and certa securitas, secura
tranquillitas, tranquilla jucunditas, jucunda felicitas, felix aeternitas,
aeterna beatitas. Gaudium erit sine tristitia, quod continet aeternam
laetitiam, salus erit sine dolor, vita sine labor lux sine tenebris, amor
nunquam tepescet; gaudium nunquam decrescet; gemitus non audietur, neque dolor
sentietur, triste nihil videbitur, l^^i^^a semper habebitur, etc.
with Christ the glorious; there shall you be safe, there shall you have delight,
there shall you have happiness and that eternal happiness and everlasting
blessedness, all good, all the excellent enjoyments of heaven shall be endless,
light endless, joy endless, pleasure endless, friendship endless: and as
endless, so pure without mixture; there shall in Christ's Arms, in Christ's
presents be joy without sorrow, health without grief, life without labor,
light without darkness, continual fresh and flourishing love, abounding joy,
mourning shall not be there, neither shall there be any grief, sorrow or sadness
or any such thing. I desire to speak more clearly of these things but I cannot
utter them as they deserve, you that have had any refreshing from Christ here,
can best judge and discern what it is to possess him wholly, and live with
him altogether.

4. Christians, in glory you shall have much happiness arise to you from the
sweet communion and blessed fellowship you shall have with Saints, you know some
Saints now and you take some delight in their company, you are glad when you
can meet with them to converse and talk with them, and to join in ordinances,
your joy in these things shall be much more abundant, for you shall know all the
blessed Saints in glory: they that were taken up thither before you, and they
that shall come thither after you, shall be known of you, and you known of them.
All Saints shall be known of every particular Saint, and every particular Saint
shall be known of all, in coelo nullus erit alienus, there shall be no stranger
in heaven, a Saint there shall have as much acquaintance as all the Saints in
glory may afford, and as many friends as there are Saints. You that now desire
communion with holy souls, shall have your fill of familarity; you that joy to
see and meet with Saints now, shall have your joy increased. Christians on earth
complain of the strangnes of other Christians, but in heaven there shall be no
cause of such complaints: as we shall be joined one to another, and all to the
Lord, Nemo ibi laediiur, irascitur nemo, invidet nemo, cupiditas nulla
exardescit etc.
so shall we love one another in the Lord. In glory none shall hurt other, none
shall envy other, none shall desire others good: for every one shall have enough,
even his fill of good; and shall rejoice to see one another happy: consider I
pray what love to Saints now; what delight in their company; what refreshment
to see the faces of Saints; and enjoy the fellowship of sanctified souls, if
it be right, if truly spiritual, and what it should be. It will heareafter
satisfy you to the full when you shall have the perfect knowledge of al Saints.
Let this comfort you against worldly men's slightings, yea and good men's
shiness; as for worldlings slightings care not, they are such that shall be shut
out from the presence of God and fellowship of Saints. And for any Saints
shiness be not grieved, it will not long continue: in heaven there is no such
thing there all Saints shall be kind each to other, shall know each other
perfectly, and love each other sincerely and truly. Happy are they that have
some beginings of sanctified love and communion with the holy and beloved ones
of Jesus Christ now; it shall increase and be more abundant, as they grow up in
Jesus. Rejoice in this Christians, you shall see, know, have fellowship, dwell
with for ever, all blessed Saints, such as, Abraham, Mat. 8.11
Jsaac, Jacob, Noah, David, Daniel, Paul, Sarah, Rebeccah, the Virgin Mary etc.
you shall know their persons, names, natures, Excellencies, delight in them, and
they in you. I shall speak no more of this Use.

Thirdly, Si in hac vita non gustes aeternae felicitatis initium, nunquam
plenum percipies complementum.
let me give out somewhat by way of reproof to such men, that think they shall
go to heaven, and hope they shall dwell in glory hereafter, yet despise nothing
more then what is heavenly, and what tends to help them thither; let such be
assured that they that have not some taste and relish of heavenly things now,
and delight in them will never have their full sotiety in glory. Do you think
to go to heaven that now hate holiness, and speak evil of the ways of the
Lord? That abhor Saints, as bad as the sight of Toads, what will you do in
heaven? you cannot abide praises and hallelujahs and the glorious exercises of
Saints, you cannot endure the fellowship of holy men and women, you abhor them
now, yet they are not so pure as they shall be; and then doubtless you will loath
them more. Do not some of you abhor being in places and amongst people where
Godliness is in exercise? do you not delight to be where you may drink and swel,
sing and roar, card and dice, hunt and hawk, mock and jeere, scoff and deride
goodness and good-men? nay if it were in your power, would you not kill and slay
the Saints? do you not defy their ways, courses, and behavior, yea and that
because holy, pure, sincere, upright and such as are becoming the Gospel of the
blessed God? Consider, I pray, your selves whether you are not such that God
himself reproves, Ps. 50.17.
for hating instruction and casting his holy and heavenly council behind your
backs, and for letting your mouth be open to speak evil, yea and that against
the righteous? Do you think that God will set such with himself in glory
hereafter, that now cast aside his council, that will not be instructed by him?
honor such with his Saints that now despise them? place such in the kingdom
of glory that now abhor the heirs of glory? No, no, he has a place for such
naughty wretches to put them by themselves, Psalm. 9.17 Aeternis addicti
suppliciis.
they shall be turned into hell; there the being of wicked men shall be; Think of
this you Saint-haters, you Sermon-despisers, you wicked mockers and scoffers at
goodness, you that are the wretches prophesied of, that should be brought
forth and come into the world in the latter days, that should appear unholy,
and that should be haters of such as are good; 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3.
What is it that some of you would do to the conscionable imbracers of
holiness, were they in your power? would you not imprison them, famish them,
slay them, show much cruelty to them? and would you not pluck down the pure
preaching of Jesus Christ, and obstruct the perfect and upright walking of
Saints? are not your hearts now against such men, and such doings? and do you
not wish your hands at liberty to act some enterprises against what is holy and
good? against that which you call Sects and Factions, and against such as you
say bring all out of order, that turn the world upside down? I know not your
thoughts within, you are privy to what dwells in your own breast. Paul was once
as violent against goodness and goodmen as any of you, and doubtless had he
been then asked, what Saul do thou think will become of thy soul? do thou
think thou shall go to heaven? that thou shall dwell with the ever-living God?
with holy Angels and blessed Saints? he would have said he hoped he should go
to heaven as soon any man living; but had the Lord let him go on in his way,
and not showed him mercy, what had he come of his soul? Let this be disgested
in your souls: and know that glory and eternal happiness is provided for such
that are washed, for such that are sanctified, for such that are justified in
the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God: and such must you be,
if ever brought to heaven. You are by nature vile, filthy and naked; Nuda erat
sponsa, nec poterat ad regale caelestis regni palatium ita nuda introduci; Ipse
induit eam vestimentis salutis and justitiae. Juimicum erat sponsae genus
caelesti patri sed ipse illud per acerbissimam passionem patri reconciliavit.
Cant. 5.21 Erit ibi praesentia omn^s mali and erit a^^ ^tia om^^boni.
you must be clothed as Saints, with the robes of righteousness and garments
of salvation if brought into the Palace of glory, the dweling of the great God
where he sits on his Throne and all his blessed Saints about him. I have this
comfort yet of such that are enemies to God and what is good, That it is in the
power of the Lord for to change them, he can instruct them to repentance, and
call them to holiness, and reconcile them to himself: but should not the Lord
thus work upon you that are revilers, slanderers, persecutors, and the like,
you shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, but you would be cast away into
utter darkness into unspeakable torments, to be tormented with the Devil and
his Angels, into such a place of suffering, where you should have no mercy, no
good, no comfort, no ease, no friend, no pity: Miserable, miserable, beyond
expression, miserable shall they be in torments for ever, that now torment the
holy ones of the Lord, and the blessed members of Christ by their evil
speakings and evil doings: such shall be punished with everlasting
destruction, 2 These. 1.9
and be deprived of all mercy and comfort; I speak not these things to trouble
you, but in pity to admonish you, and my prayer shall be tha^ the Lion may lie
down with the Lamb, that from Comings in of truth into your souls, you may be
overcome of truth, and so submit to it, that you may sweetly accord and
friendly agree with the children of truth, and all that in truth profess
truth; That you may speak and act the same things, and that there may be no
divisions amongst you: as you hope to dwell with the Prince of peace, and with
the Saints of peace, now live peaceably; follow after peace, and what may make
for quietness in the ways of God. Seeing you are apt to say, you have hopes
to be saved; do like them that shall be saved: harm not, but help such that are
beloved of him that must save you if ever saved; Consider of what has been
said and the Lord give you aright understanding of al things, that may make you
holy, gentle, courteous, peaceable, in life; and also honorable, blessed,
happy and glorious for ever.

rare life, an excellent, holy, and heavenly being, a being that tends to the
glory, honor and praise of God, to the exalting of his great mercy and
goodness, and declaring his name and power: it is a life wherein men that are
holy, labor to improve themselves with all that is theirs in a way of duty to
be serviceable to the God of holiness; As they have beginnings of the life of
glory in the kingdom of grace, so according to what is begun and the gift
given do they act, here in grace suitable to what is done in glory. They are not
perfect here, they have their failings, yet by the comings in of God they
strive to be like God, and according to the gifts of the Spirit, are they
spiritual exercised; they are spiritual in their prayers; spiritual in their
preaching; spiritual in their hearing, spiritual in their conversation;
striving to walk after the Spirit, endeavoring to give up their all, to
Christ that is all and in all. All their wisdom, all their might, all their
strength, all their endowments, all their places, all of soul, all of body,
all of liberty, riches, honor, in a word, all. Christ has done so much for
them that they think, they can never do enough for him, they think, they can
never praise him enough, nor extol him as they ought, nor give the honor that
is due to him. They are always complaining of deadnes, and darkness, and
weakness, and inability to behold, to admire, to commend, to advance the
sweetness, goodness, mercy and comforts that Christ gives out to them: they are
longing for more abilities to serve the Lord Jesus. Feign would they do, as
they in glory do, and they wait daily, earneastly exspecting to be brought to
glory that they may enjoy that in fulness which here they have in part, and that
fulness being enjoyed, employ it to the honor and praise of the giver. Souls,
they are not common men that live the life of Saints, neither is their life a
common life. Saints are jewels, jewels are excellent things: there is that in a
jewel that is not in ordinary and common stones: jewels have an excellency in
them, so have Saints; and this excelency is useful, to Christ, and what Christ
advises. The Excellency in Saints is given into them from Christ, and as is
comes from Christ, it is altogether for returning to Christ. Christ in giving
out his Excellency to Saints, does open his heaet to Saints and does also open
Saints hearts. The one is opened for goodness to go forth, the other for
goodness to come in; and goodness being received in, will not lie still: it will set
such that have it upon employments suitable to the will of Christ, as by
receiving what is Christ's: it is in some measure changd into the likeness of
Christ: by receiving Christ's love, the hearts of such receivers are changed
into the nature of Christ's heart, and so become heavenly, heavenly within, and
being heavenly within, it will be heavenly without: The fruit like the seed,
Saints like Christ. Excellent things are spoken of Saints in glory, so of
Saints on earth. The behavior of Saints in glory is very commendable. They
enjoy perfection, and from that perfection act; The amiablenesse and
admirablenes of Gods presence, draws out all the abilities of Saints when in
heaven to act answerable unto the Laws nearenes, and dearnesse of such a
relation as is between God and them. So here on earth such that enjoy God
though they cannot do for God so immediately and fully, yet it is their desire
to close with God, and to give out themselves to God; and to carry themselves
in-offensively in the world, and as much as in them lies to do good to all;
Excellent things are spoken of the City of God, of the holy Jerusalem, of the
Lambs wife, of she that is a dressing, a making ready for to be joined to
Christ. She is beautiful now, but she shall appear more beautiful, she is
fair and pleasant, and now the delight of Christ, his love, his dove, his
undefiled; she shall be the same in heaven, only this more perfect. Christ's
spouse, his Sister, his dove, is but one, she that is his on earth, shall be
his in glory, she that is his fair one here, shall be his glorious one above,
that now is his bosom friend, shall be his Throne-companion. Throni sui compos.
The desires (I know) of all you that are Godly, that are some of Christ's holy
ones, (speak experience) is, that your sweet Savior would now raise all your
desires to him, fasten all your thoughts upon him, draw all the powers of your
souls up on high to him, free you from every weight that holds you down, knit
you to him with a knot of love, that so your joy in the enjoyment of him might
be abundant, your fellowship with Saints sweet, your daily walking heavenly,
giving occasions to all that are Godly to magnify God on your behalf; Look to
it Souls, you are in some measure glorious now, if you are such that shall
appear with Christ in glory hereafter: That glory is sparkl'd in now, which
shall shine in clearly and apparently: you have now some beams, shortly the full
light of the clear and glorious Sun himself. For the ever-blessed and glorious
God will let in such a light, such a clear light, such a great light, and withal
give such a great strength of light unto Saints, that they shall be wholly
light, and in them shall be no darkness at all. Beloved, I now commend you to
God, that can make you children of Light, and enable you as children of Light
to walk in Light, to the praise of his great name, and to the refreshing of the
bowels of Gods people, to the rejoicing of all that delight in goodness.
Christ's Saints are all rare pieces, God grant all these pieces may be set in
order, fitly united together, then will glory appear, exceeding glory,
transcendent glory, glory in the Church, glory on earth like that glory that is
amongst the Saints that are Triumphant in heaven. I shall say no more of that
Doctrine: I shall yet give out somewhat from the Text that may be further useful
to your souls, and it is this.

Joh. 17.24 1 John 5.19. Joh. 12.31. and 14.20.16.11. 2 Cor. 4.4. Isa. 5.14.
Mat 7.13. Jer. 3.14. Romans 11.5 Luke 12.32. Rev. 3.4. Col. 2.22. 1 John 5.5.
Joh. 1.13.
in this world wherein Satan bears such sway, who is the Prince of the world, a
chief one in it so far as it is a sinful world and inhabited with sinful men.
The Devil has many, nay the greatest part; yet God has some, a remnant, here
and there one, a little flock, a few that are undefiled and that are lovely
before him, that have kept their garments clean, that are unblameable, and
unreprovable before him, they have overcome the world, being borne, not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. Every
age (though it has brought forth never so many weeds, though it has abounded
in trash yet) has brough forth some precious flowers, some jewels have been
found amongst the rubbish. In the first degenerate age, there was an Abel,
after that a Seth and to him was borne Enos; at which time men began to call
upon the name of the Lord. Genesis 4.26
After that Enoch that walked with God, one that was the Phoenix of that age,
Genesis 5.24
one that was translated out of his own being, into a being in God, one that
lost nothing, by losing what was his own by noture and according to the flesh.
After this God left not himself without testimony; Though the wickedness of
man was great in the earth and the whole earth was corrupt before God, Genesis 6.9.
yet then appeared Noah a just man and perfect in his generations, Genesis 6.9.
and one that walked with God, on that gave up himself to God, to be at his
direction and at his service to do what was agreeable to the will of the Lord.
And as the world was replenished, and grew on, though there were many wicked
men and much wickedness in the world, yet some God had that were good, though
very obsure and hardly to be perceived in those dark times. At length appeared
Abraham, after him Jsaac and Jacob with other worthies, and when Elijah
complains of the worlds emptines in respect of good men, and that he alone was
left, yet God tells him he had seven thousand in Israel that had not bowed the
knee to Baall. I confess 'its a very few considering how many thousands were
in Israel, yet you see there were some though hid and concealed in those cloudy
days of Idolatry and superstition. 1 King. 19.18.
God may let men follow their own pernicious ways, and there may be a great
forsaking of goodness, yet some shall cleave to truth, though it may be but a
few, Isa. 6.13.
a tenth. There may be many weeds in a garden, yet some good herb may be found;
abundance of trees in a field, yet some corn; a world of earth, yet some vains
of precious oar; a great deal of clay, of dirt and stones, yet some pearls
and precious jewels are now and then found. God has excellent material, here
and there, he will bring them together, and of them make a famous structure;
build his Church, Isa. 54.12, 13.
whose foundations shall be laid with saphires, whose windows shall be made of
agates, and gates of carbuncles and al her borders of pleasant stones. This
points out the excellency of Saints, and also what a comely thing it is to see
them joined together in a right order, by the wisdom of God. God has a holy
City to build, which is admirably described Revelations, 21. My brethren I need
not tell you how Satan the world flesh, and many enemies, have labored to root
out in all ages those that clearly and readily appeared for God, yet God has
preserved some to shine as lights, and to hold out his name, and enemies could
never so prevail as to raze out all the Saints nor to take away truth wholly;
but still the Lord continued some precious ones, some holy and excellent souls
to shine out as lights in a dark place; a seed was left, though covered with
clods, that the Lord has nourished, and which through his blessings has
sprung up, and brought forth fruit, so that some peecious souls have still
appeared. We have seen bad times, and bad times are, and it is likly will be, yet
all you that have any knowledge in the things of Christ, cannot but say some
holy souls there were, in those bad times; some there are in these evil days;
and some precious ones shall be as long as the Sun and Moon endures as long as
there are any people in the world there shall be some good: you that live now
meet with some precious souls up and down, here and there: you or they that
shall live hereafter will find that God has a sprinkling some, a few: I shall
speak to what is present, to what is in hand, there are some precious souls in
the world.

but consider them as in Christ and Christ in them. Look upon Christ alone in
them; and boubtles Christ will in them be precious; Magna quidem in Ecclesia Dei
excellentia: sect ea non sunt omnibus obvia.
many see not this excellency in Saints because it is hidden. Christ in them is
hidden from many; but where Christ appears, the souls of such according to
what of Christ is seen, appear precious.

There are some that are loved as things and what is heavenly that makes one
precious. Tantus quisque est quantus est apud Deum.
As one says of the worth of a man, he is so much worth, as he is worth in
Gods account; so I may say he is so far precious as partaking in love, as
enjoying that which the world does not. A precious stone is a stone that has a
virtue and excellency which the common ordinary stones have not: so it is with
precious, rare, excellent souls, they have somewhat the men of the world have
not, and that is love, Rev. 2.17
the same love that is given out to Christ. The worth of this love none knows
but they that enjoy it.

There are some in whom the Lord dwells, some in this word that are his temple,
palace, throne: these are excellent ones. Gods dwelling place, the dwelling of
his glory is a precious place: they are precious souls, souls bravely
adorned, souls excellently trimmed that are the court of the great God. Princes
houses are richly furnished: so are the souls of Saints, Gods houses. There
are some that put out all their might, strength, power, abilities, advantages
for Christ's cause, for what concerns him, and what is his. These are precious
souls, Paul was a predious soul and it appeared in his appearing so much for
Christ, that he was not detered by labors, stripes, imprisonments; 2 Cor. 11
tedious Journes, perils of waters, perils of robbers, perils by his own
countrymen, perils by strangers, perils in the city, perils in the wilderness,
perils in the sea, perils amongst false brethren, weariness, painfulnesse,
much watchings, hunger, thirst, fasting, cold, nakednessed; Romans 8. Omnia
praesentia futura, terrena, caelestia, inferna and supercaelestia, omnia mihil
parva, and pro nihilo erant etc. buc, Act. 15.
all could not stop, this champion of truth; Let death life, Angels,
principalities, powers, height, depth, any thing oppose: he for Christ, in the
strength of Christ durst stand against all. So also the curch of Jerusalem,
giving answer to the people and church of Antioch concerning what had been
proposed unto them, tells them in their letters that they had sent it by men
that had hazarded their lives for the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. Such as
these are precious men, souls worthy the name of Christians: because valiant
for Christ. I have read of one Romanus that was nobly born, yet so resolute and
stout was he for Christ, that sufferings could not fright him, nor dismay him,
when his persecutors whipped him with a whip made of cords that had leads fastened
at the ends; so that with whipping his flesh was torn, yea and so much torn
that his very bowels were seen, yet he cried out to his tormentors; that he
desired not to be spared, neither did he wish his tormentors to give over,
Christum diligit, seipsum o^it.
he was wiling to suffer to the utmost in the cause and for the truth of
Christ. It is reported of one Sames a noble man, who had and maintained a
thousand servants of his own yet was deprived of al his estate by the King of
Persia, and was compelled to serve one of the most abject and base of his own
servants to whom the King of Persia gave the said noblemans wife, that by this
means he might cause him to deny the faith. But he not at all moved kept his
faith, See Buroughs in Moses self. denial, where you have many examples.
stuck close to Christ, willingly did he undergo all this wrong and indignity
for Christ. Many such precious souls have been in the world, many there are,
and if persecution should arise even to death, it would be seen that there are
Gallant-spirited men now that would suffer any torments rather then forsake the
Lord Jesus. They would not harken to what flesh and blood should say, Verus
Christi-discipulus propriae voluntati renunciat, et divinam voluntatem sequi
desiderat etc.
but to what the spirit should say, and they would strive against what is evil
in themselves, and search what the will of the Lord is and obey that. It Is the
part of a good steward that is entrusted with much of his masters substance, to
lay out al for his master when his master requires it: the best of us all are
but Stewards and what we have of life, parts, beauty, riches, honor,
liberty, any thing, it is lent us of God; if God call for it, we ought to give
it all up for his service and honor. You that have truth of grace will be ready
so to do, saying, Lord all I have I received from thee, it came of thee: Io
here I am ready to return all to thee. My dear friends, consider what you do
now for Christ, what heart you have to what is good now, what delight in
Christ's services now: you are likeliest to hold out in suffering; that are
diligent in the business of the Lord, and in the work of your God now. Some
men think they can suffer for Christ, yet now they have no heart to the
present service of Christ, which God calls unto, they are negligent and loose in
present duties; Suerely such souls who fail thus in present service and duty,
are not like to hold out in suffering times whatsoever they may say; He that in
summer and fair weather is a slothful, careless, idle servant; is not likely
to be a diligent laborious paines-taker in the cold, pinching, wet, stormy time
of winter. They that are bred up in labor are best able to endure it. 1 Timothy
4.7 Non ocio indulgendum, sed totis viribus eonnitendum.
Christians, exercise your selves unto Godliness; do what God now sets before
you; do it faithfuly, do it with your might; you will the better endure harder
business if your God call you to it. They are men endued with a precious
blessing, that use their al to the glory of God, that let not a hough be idle
or unserviceable.

Ps. 32.1.2
that have no wickedness imputed unto them: these are blessed souls; these are
precious souls; Christ paid a full price for their deliverance from sin, making
peace through the blood of the cross: they are by Christ brought home to
Christ, their life is hid with Christ in God, they are raised up with Christ,
and made to sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, even already.
Indeed in themselves there is a body of lust, corruption and sin; and there is
a law revealing sin, accusing and condemning; so as it believers live only by
sense, reason and experience of themselves, and as they live to men, they live
both under the power and feeling of sin and the Law; but if they live by faith
in Christ, believing in the life, righteousness, obedience, satisfaction and
glory of Christ, they live out of the power of all condemnation, and
unrighteousness. This is a precious life, and they are precious souls that
live this life of faith, that have all their assurance, confidence, comforts,
flowing into them through a channel of faith, believing themselves happy for
what another, even Christ, has done for them, and not what they have done or
can do for themselves. In brief they are precious, for take them as in Christ,
as justified, they are as pure in the sight of God as the righteousness of
Christ can make them, because God sees his only in Christ, not in themselves,
he loves them not in the glory and excellency of Christ; these appear glorious
to God and in his sight, because they have put on Christ that is glorious.
There are as many precious souls now, as there are souls clothed with the
righteousness of Christ: they that were precious formerly, and could say, As
he is, so are we in this world; they were such by having Christ, by being
perfect in his perfection, they were chosen in Christ, loved in Christ; they
that are in Christ are precious now, and may say, As he is, so are we in this
world. All believers are very like one another, and also like Christ.



It may be a word of comfort and consolation Baal, that had never bowed the
knee to him. The Lord has here and there some, that are precious souls: Be not
disheartened christians, be not dismayed, there are I acknowledge many briars
and thorns, yet there are some Lillies; many weeds, yet some (though but a
few) precious flowers; you may find none in great houses, there may be some in
cottages, none in silken garments, there may be some in rags, none on the high
places of the earth, yet there may be some in the valleys; It Is indeed a thing
to be bewailed, that there should be such multitudes of men and women, in the
world, and so few of them good, so few gracious. It Is sad to see a throng in
the way to hell, men pressing forwards to destruction and to everlasting
perdition, and to see but now and then one going toward glory, toward
everlasting salvation. Wickedness has many that own it, and wicked ways are
full of footsteps; but for goodness it is not looked upon, nor the ways of
goodness traveled in: holiness is become like a poor man, Cognatus pauperi
nullus. Diviti cognatus est quilibet.
none cares for being of his kindred or acquaintance; but wickedness like the
great men of the world have many followers. This is a trouble to Saints to
behold, yet as there may be by a Traveller some Englishmen found in a remote
country, though but a very few in comparison of the Natives: so some heavenly
souls, some newborn christians here in the world; though but a few in respect
of what are are earthly and born only after the flesh. As a man may rejoice
much in finding one piece of gold, or some one precious stone: so if you find
but some one that is Godly, yet be comforted in hopes that there are more,
though you for present know them not. And rest assured that there are precioos
Saints in this age in the world, as well as in former ages, and that you shall
meet them all in glory.

It may give you some hint who they

1. They are such that enjoy a Christ within, that have Christ himself dweling
in them, many dwell where Christ dwells, and so content themselves, never
considering whether Christ dwell in them, we have nothing nor are worth nothing
if Christ be not in us; all that a man has perish and fail, and come to
nothing if he has not Christ. It Is Christ that is the souls all, he is the
only good, and the only lasting good and such souls may be said to have some
thing that have him, yea al things; but they that enjoy him not, have nothing,
they have no oil in their lamps: and being so, will be shut out and not enter
with the bridegroom into joy. But now all are ready to say they have Christ in
them: have you so? examine your souls; are they delighted with Christ? is
Christ that which delights you? does Christ give peace? does Christ draw your
hearts heaven-wards? lovers whose hearts are delighted with one they love, how
are they drawn toward such places where they may enjoy their love. Love is a
loadstone drawing souls to Christ. We cannot forbear, we cannot abstain from
longing to be in more full enjoyments of Christ if so be that Christ be in us.
Christ is the great, the infinite good that is given out to men: they rejoice
infinitely that have this infinite good, their portion; they that have Christ
have him that is good beyond compare, and this is he that makes souls precious.
There are as many precious souls in this congregation as there be souls
enjoying Christ. And there are so many enjoyers of Christ, as there are lovers
of Christ, that love him as their own souls, as their own lives nay much
better then either. There are many that talk of loving Christ but their love
to Christ is but such as the hosts to his guest, he is bid welcome more for his
money sake, then for any desire of communion, and fellowship. If they may gain
by Christ, they will wait on him, if not they will be strange to him; you that
talk of loving Christ, what do you know of Christ? Ex aspectu nascitur amor.
love rises from knowledge, what have you seen of him? have you seen his
beauty, seen his glory, seen his comlines? He is altogether lovely; have you
seen this lovelines? have you tasted of his love? love is mighty in 'its
operation love, the love of Christ coming in, Socrates putat animam immersam
corpori, velut expergisci amoris stimulis, etc.
stirs the soul wonderfully, it rouseth it up, it sets it a work for Christ.
Love produces action, it sets men upon difficulties, and makes them go through
hardships: does Christ's love do so with you, try, you may know if you deal
faithfully in this thing; you know who dwells in your house, much more in your
hearts, you know why you do this and that; what is it of all you do, that you
do for Christ, and that from the life of Christ: Paul was precious in his
actings and precious in himself, and all was by Christ that lived in him; as
many of you, as have received Christ, are happy; Consider well of it, whatsoever
you are outwardly in appearance in form, in possessions, in friends, etc. I
speak not of, it is nothing; you are precious if you have Christ within,
precious children, precious souls, precious Saints, all of you precious, all of
you jewels that have Christ.

2. They that are precious are such whose iniquities are hid and whose sins are
done away, such in whom the Lord sees no guile, such that are holy, such that
are nourished and carried in the bosom of the mercy and goodness of God.

Obj. But is not every soul a sinner? do not all complain of their corruptions,
weaknesses, failings errors, etc?

Ans. A Christian man is both righteous and a sinner, holy and profane, an
enemy of God, and yet a child of God; for a christian man by the force of his
natural coruption may do such things as the word of God forbids, and as he
himself as spiritual abhorres. Paul himself did many things which were
repugnant to the law of God; therefore he had cause to say, he was not already
perfect. Phil. 3.12.
Scriptures are not altogether silent as concerning Abraham, Jacob, Rebeccah,
Sara, Moses, Job, David, Hezekiah. All good and godly souls take them as
Saints, and walking after the Spirit, yet take them as in the body; and
sometimes they did not alone do good things unperfectly, and leave some good
things undone, but also do some evil actions, See Romans 7, etc.
which were directly repugnant to the rule of Gods law, and to their own
renewed mind; thus may they be still sinners unholy in respect of their
failings, weaknesses, imperfect sanctification, or sanctification in part, but
take them as justified, believers and in Christ they are righteous, holy, just:
the sin which they slip into is not laid to their charge, but is done away for
Christ's sake in whom they believe, whose righteousness is their
righteousness, and their sin, Christ's sin; Vt Christus fuit peccator, ita nos
just^ sumus.
His by imputation, who is most just and innocent of himself, yet was the curse
and punishment imposed upon Christ, to whom sin was imputed, that all
believers may be reputed before God, by virtue of Christ's righteousness, holy
and perfect as righteousness it self. Thus you see how souls may be said to
be sinners; take them as in themselves and in the flesh, so sinners; take them
as reconciled to God, as having Christ's righteousness imputed to them, and
beheld of God in that, so without sin, without guile, no sinners, but holy
pure, undefiled, beloved of God, blessed Saints,

3. They are precious souls, precious in this filthy, ungodly, sinful, wicked
world, that from grace coming in act in ways of grace and holiness without,
that let the inhabitants of the world be wicked, follow their Prince the Devil,
yet they will walk in holiness, following the Lord Jesus Christ the Prince of
peace, and King of righteousness. God in all ages has some to witness to his
glorious truths, so in this age; some that are taught of the Spirit, led of the
Spirit, that mind the things of the Spirit, that have the Spirit of God
dwelling in them, and by the power of that Spirit in dwelling do mortify the
deeds of the body, and are raised up, and quickened by the Spirit of God within,
to walk in righteousness and true holiness, to serve God and own his cause,
though the world with them that dwell therein oppose; they are excellent souls
that appear for God in bad times, in the worst of times, yea when it is not
alone a hazarding their names to disgrace and shame, but their bodies to be
torn in pieces, to be burnt to ashes. You that, are acquainted with scripture
and history may see every age, every year bring forth some such gallant
spirits, that were ready to lay down their lives to undergo any cruel, vile,
shameful death for the name of Christ, and the testimony of Jesus.

4. They are precious, for they that are faithful and chosen, that are such as
Christ is, continue good, let all the world be bad. A precious soul is an
excellent Theophilus, and will appear so, let others be never so bad, let them
be enemies to God, fighters against God. Times are bad now, and like for a
while to be worse, yet there are precious Christans: so some there will be as
long as the world continues that shall shine out as lights in the world, Phil.
2.15
that will be without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverss nation, that
will run right on toward glory, let whose will run cross, that will keep their
garments white, though others be soyl'd. I commend such to you souls, for
precious Christians, for precious Saints, that abstain from all appearance of
evil, that in heart and soul and life, clear to and follow after what is good.

Bees settle where the Queen settles, so will you where God; upon what family or
soul the Lord hangs his love, you will hang yours; where God delights to be, you
will delight to be all so. Consider I pray who you love, what sort of people it
is you most affect, whether it be carnal, worldly, unregenerate men, or holy
heavenly, regenerate Saints.

Do you now desire to know Gods jewels, Paul persecuted the precious Saints of
Christ, and was a deadly foe and enemy to them, til such time as he was endued
with wisdom from on high, til God shone upon him, yea into him; and then
knowing Saints he associated himself with them, and was no longer hurtful but
helpful. Many a soul is a sore and grievous enemy to the people of God; I am
persuaded much of their enmity arises from this, because they know not Saints,
they are ignorant what glorious ones they are, in what a high esteem they are
with God, how God will punish them that wrong them. Ignorance of Saints makes
them slighted, reviled, defamed, accounted as the filth of the world, and the
off scouring of all things. It Is want of knowing the worth of a Jewel that makes
it not prized; so of a Saint, that is a member of Christ, a child of God. The
God of wisdom give you wisdom to know such that are holy, that are Princes of
the bloud-Royal of heaven, and to give them such respect that is due, and
reverence as belongs to them. This none can do but such as have the spirit,
this you will do if the Lord give out the spirit of truth to guide you in all
truth: if heavenly light shine into you, that light shining in, will discover
and manifest to you the children of light, and whosoever you can find walking
heavenward, you will be glad of their company. Ignorance had a hand in killing
Christ, and it has some hand in all the wrong is done to Saints; the Lord free
you all from it, least ye should through ignorance harm the darlings of God,
and bring swift damnation on your selves. God has grievous threatenings in
Scripture against Saint-wrongers, and there are recorded some heavy punishments
that have been inflicted on them that harm the righteous; God keep you from
the sin, and so from the suffering. I might ad how beneficial it is for you to
know who are Saints, and how much for your souls advantage to be acquainted
with them, but I omit it.

Happy are you that are of the number of these jewels of God, of these preciout
no excess, no presence of sin, no absence of grace. Oh precious souls! These
shall be preserved, Christ has been at much cost about such souls, at more cost
then about any thing, at more cost then about all the world besides: he made
the world and lost never a drop of blood, it caused him never a groan, but to
make souls (such as they ought to be) holy; it cost him many a sad suffering,
he spent his heart blood in the work; he took a great deal of pains to perfect
them, happy you that are the workmanship of Christ, his workmanship as a
Redeemer; that have your souls fashioned by him to be like himself, but are
made new creatures, holy souls, blessed Saints.

6. Christians, you that hear me, consider part of your duty as Christians, as
men of God, as Saints; you should labor for a Spirit of discerning, to be able
to judge between men and men, to know the holy and profane asunder, to know a
Saint and a Devil, a gracious soul and a carnal wretch, a jewel from a common
stone, a true Diamond from a counterfeit. God laid this as a necessary thing to
be acted by Jeremiah, Jer. 15.19.
to know, yea to separate the precious and the vile asunder; the not doing,
this was charged as a sin upon the Priests in Ezekiel. Ezekiel. 22.26.
Her Priests have violated my law, and have profaned mine holy things; they
have put no difference between the holy and profane, neither have they showed
difference between the unclean and the clean; this may be laid at the doors of
the ministers of the Gospel also, that put no difference between, sheep and
goats, lambs and wolves, Saints and sinners: are they parishioners, let them be
drunkards, swearers, gamesters, whoremasters, all are admitted to the
Sacrament, never considering whether the word warrants it and whether within
the list of Christ: it is enough their houses stand, within such a bundary of
ground. Look to it you that must give account to God, take heed what you do,
how you cast Pearls before swine, give the childrens bread to dogs, admit them
to your Masters table that are not of his family; it concerns you much all of
you that are Godly to know men rightly, that so you may not associate your
selves with the enemies of God, but with the Saints of God, not join your
selves with the assembly of mockers, but with such that praise God; not go in
company with such that are Traitors to the heavenly King, but with his obedient
subjects; not frequent the society of enemies of truth, but with the friends of
truth; skill is required in all work, especially in Gospel work. It Is needful
for men to know the mystery of their trade, to know what ware is good, what
bad; so is it needful to be such experienced Christians as to know what is for
the good of our souls, what for their hurt, to know their friends and foes
asunder. We strive to know good money and bad asunder, a true jewel from a
counterfeit, gold from dross; why then should we not strive to know precious
souls from sinful wretches, lillies from thorns, herbs from weeds; Christians
it is your duty to look to what may tend to the welfare of your souls; let it
appear in this that you are careful by having no fellowship with the workers
of iniquity, but as much as may be with the precious sons of Zion, with such
that are precious Saints. I might speak more of this Use, showing how you
ought to labor for a spirit able to discern between tares and wheat, between
the children of Christ and the children of Satan, between them that fear God,
and them that fear him not; and all this, In respect of God, In respect of
Good men, In respect of Wicked men, In respect of Your selves.


God guide you into all knowledge by that spirit that searches all things, and
is able to reveal all things.

I have now but one Doctrine more to present to you, and I have finished what I
shall at this time speak from the Text in hand, it is this,

Let the places and times be never so bad, jewel there, though covered with neis
ver so much filth; So may I say of a wherein Christian, a blessed Saint, one
that the Image of Christ: A little tablet Christ is drawn, if it be set on
high, it is a Saint there, if imprisoned a Saint, if cast out as the ofscouring
of al things, it is as virtuous then as at any time, Non abiicit aminum.
it is the same for virtue, for worth, for excellency when it is abas'd, as when
it was exalted, it loses nothing by evil times, by sufferings or disgraces,
or any thing befalls it. Non cedendum malis. Acts 14.
Glod will be gold in the fire, in dross, amongst counters. Paul is Paul, when
at Lystra they would have honored him as one of their Gods; he is the same
when in prison, the same in his bands and fetters as when free and at liberty,
the same before the Magistrates as with mean men; in every place gracious and
striving to magnify the Lord. Daniel is as holy, as excellent in the court as
in the Lions den, and in the Lions den, as in the court. Mordecay is not
altered within, though his habit be changed without; he had the same grace
within when he walked a foot and was clothed in sackcloth as when he rode upon
the Kings hor^ clothed with Royal apparel, and the Crown Royal on his head,
and had his enemy that wicked Haman his herald. The three children were the
same in the furnace as when they were over the affairs of Babylon: Moses in
the court, and Jethros sheapheard; when he was reverenced as Pharaobs
Grandchild, and when he was Jethros son in law, was faithful, though inwardly
changed, yet not outwardly; he was the same Saint in the field and in the
court. The time would fail me to bring out what might be shown unto you from
the word of truth in the Scriptures, and also from many unquestionable
Histories, concerning souls that have manifested their sincerity in all
conditions, both in exaltation and in abasement, in honor and dishonor, in
good report and bad report, when they have flourished in the world, and when
they have been at the place of execution, fire and faggot has not dismayed
them, the fire has consumed the dross, the flesh; not the pure part, the
soul: Christ was Christ in them, both in life and death. There are some trees
are green all the year, in summer and winter, in heat and cold in frost and
snow, Non timent fulgura and tempestates, in and cendia aquarum ^astiates,
tristes planetarum configurationes, and luminarium coelestium obscurationes,
quia super naturam evecti, Christo in recumbunt, in Christo vivunt.

Non abstrahitur blanditiis seculi, quia audit in suavio rem vocem. Christi.


so some souls always like Christ. Let the times be what they will, let the
face of the world alter yet they change not, let the world be turned upside
down yet they stand upon their legs, they are right let all the world be wrong,
they like Noah's arc float upon the waters let all be under water; Let there be
troubles below in the world, here on earth, they care not: Let there be
terrible apparations above and starry messingers portending sad events, they
are not afraid of such evil tidings, they have a resting place in Christ,
Christ is to them for safty, for preservation, every way a defense and a
comforter; they change not, they alter not. Let the ship turn which way it will
the needle of the compass will stand North, let the world turn about never so
much they stand directly toward Christ, and look heavenward: when other trees
are without leaves and fruit they have both; when others; cool, they continue
hot; when others sparks go out, their light shines. When the hypocrisy of
others to their shame is manifested, and they perish: The sincerity of the
Saints appears, and they flourish. Christ's people have a mark by which they
are known, let them be never so much disguised, and mis-nam'd by the world,
Christ was God when the world abused him, though the world knew it not; Saints
are like Christ, though under great sufferings, As he is, so are they in this
world.

Christ is unchangable, so are Saints, Let it be wheresoever Christ pleases,
it will be holy, holy in prosperity, holy in adversity, holy in a Palace, holy
in a Prison, holy every where, take it according to the spirit, and as it has
Christ within.



tribulations, Rev. 7.14
times of persecutions are to them but as purging times, clensing times,
washing times. The body may be purged, yet continue a body still, the man may
have an il humor removed, yet remain a man. A house may be clens'd yet be a
house, clothes may be washed, the filth taken away, and the clothes be clothes;
gold may be cast into the fire, the dross consumed; yet the gold be never the
worse, so Saints may be Saints, Aurum probat ignis: fidem, tentatio.
and like Christ, though they suffer many tribulations. Christ in troubles
apprares to them, and from that appearance that they have of him, they appear
his. Saints glory is hidden, it this follows not that therefore they have no
glory. We must not say, there is no Sun because the clouds hide it from our
sight. They that have Christ have glory, and they do and shall appear
glorious. Clouds, viz. afflictions, persecutions, and tribulations shall fly
away, and then shall their glory more clearly appear. Now there is much of
Christ appears in Saints in a low condition in the world, as long suffering,
patience, strength to undergo trials and the like. Times may a little change
somewhat of the outside of a Saint, but it cannot take away the substance of a
Saint.

Let what has been said be ground for reproof to such that are apt to blame
times and places for making them bad, etc. O say they we had not been so bad,
we had not run into this evil, nor into that, had we not lived in such a wicked
place, had we not been acquainted with such vile company, it was such and such
that were the occasions of our running into that bad course of life, of our
taking such headlong ways, and leaping into such a gulf of mischief. We will
not much question such complaints, whether just or unjust. I confess it is
dangerous living in bad places, and in being familiar with naughty people, much
mischief may they occasion to souls, yet it makes not people blameless to lay
the fault upon the times or places they have to do in, this frees not from Gods
displeasure. Adam laid the blame on his Wife, she on the Serpent, yet this
freed neither from suffering. A Thief that has stolen may plead his poverty,
and say he was in need, yet may he be punished and suffer what by law is to be
inflicted upon one guilty of such a crime: So an unclean person may say, had he
not been guilty of folly had he not been enticed and solicited. We might speak
in infinitum in this case, and after this manner, and yet will not the offender
be found innocent. It were more just for faulty persons to lay the blame on
their own corruptions, and evil hearts; for times and places would not make
them bad, were not they bad. Joseph had a fair bait cast before him, yet not
taken. Much grace may preserve men from evil in the worst times and places.
Cast gold into mud, yet will it keep its color and worth; so a jewel in a
coal-heap, yet will it retain its virtue. A Saint will be a Saint let him be
amongst Devils. Gods people ought to keep a daily watch over themselves,
especially when in bad company, and as much as possibly they may refrain from
their sosciety, because many a good soul has been spotted amongst such. I need
not bid wise men beware of houses infected with the plague, nor good men of
sinful places, they know as the one is dangerous to the body, so the other to
the soul. Remember, it acquits not sinners to say that Adam sinned, and had not
he fallen they had not been thus tainted, nor so prone to evil; grace is offered
by, Christ, and they that will be saved, must by faith lay hold on his
righteousness; if not, they will be inexcusable at the last day, and perish
Eternally.

1. It Is not enough for men to say that they are flesh, and that the flesh
lusts, and draws to evil, and over masters them. Now will that which the
Devil prompteth into men (help them when they must give up their account to
God) that it is with them as with Paul, it is no more we that do it, but sin
that dwells in us, or as it fell out of David or Lot, etc? first to Answer
that of Paul, consider who he was, and of what sins he spoke. Paul was a holy
and a Godly man, a chosen vessel of God, can you say you are so? can you say
Christ is reveald in you? that you encounter all temptations to the utmost of
your spiritual abilities? besides it is shameful to bring such a speech from
Scripture to patronize a course of wickedness, which is used by the Apostle
concerning some secret and privy infirmities. Do not deceive your selves; God
is not mocked. Take heed of using Scripture as a stumbling block, and let not
that which was left for the good of Saints hasten your damnation.

2. As to the sins of David and Lot, I shall not speak much now, you may by
them see how apt the best are to fall, and so to take heed: do not any of you
cast your selves into the Sea, because Jonah was not drowned. By them may
comfort be spoken to Saints, if God should let them be so far fooled by Satan
as to fall into such faults. Much more might be said as concerning them, but I
forbear; the Lord in mercy hold up our goings that our footsteps slip not.

2. It Is not safe turning our iniquities to the times, and to the places where
we live, and the wickedness of men with whom we converse, this will not make a
passage to glory. The worse the times and places are, the more careful ought we
to be; the more cheats are abroad, the more should we look to our purses. If
the air be generally infected, had we not need to be so much the more thisful
of using preservatives? But of care already.

3. There are some that accuse their callings for what they do amiss: they
cannot read and pray because of their callings, and their callings make them
break the Sabbath. Pray lay not the blame upon what deserves it not, your
callings, if honest, were never ordained for your souls hurt, but for their
good: such that complain of their callings, yet can find time from their
callings to eat and drink and sleep, visit friends, and follow recreations and
the like, that concerns their bodies.

4. Some accuse their poverty, saying, we have not time to serve God; all we
can do is to provide for our families, know this to be Godly helps toward thy
family provision: So they cannot show themselves charitable they have not
wherewithal. Can you not remember the widows two mites, and how accepted?
Besides these, some lay the faults upon their occasions, upon the objects they
meet withal, upon Satan, upon fortune, any where rather then on themselves to
be humbled; Let this reprove you; sin no more, least God consume you; for were
you good, nothing should draw you to wickedness; you would say to all
temptations, how should I do this or that and sin against my God?

Would you know Christ's people? they Oportet aut manentem vincere, aut interire.

Lacedae. monii hoc animo praelium inibant, ut aut victores redirent domum aut
victi occumborent,


but Champions of courage, that will not desert Christ's cause, but manfully
fight the good fight of faith, yea die in the battle rather then yield; for so
it becomes true Christians, to conquer or die, to go through in what they have
a warrant from Christ to undertake, or else for Christ's sake and cause to lay
down their lives. It Is reported of the Lacedaemonians, that when they went to
wage war, and joined battle with any, they did it with this resolution, that
they would go home conquerours, or die conquered. All true, and
gallant-spirited Christians are of such a spirit in whatsoever they undertake
for Christ, being called to it by Christ, Pons a tergo abruptus est.
they know there is no flying away without everlasting shame. To desert Christ's
cause, is an endangering of the soul to be deserted of Christ. Besides to fly
from Christ is to go from him that has al safety, from him that is strength,
from him that the Psalmist speaks highly of, Psalm. 144.
yet not as he deserves; the words are these, My goodness, and my fortress, my
high tower, and my deliverer, my shield, and he in whom I trust. Here are
expressions holding out Christ, according to what the soul could, and as we are
capable of hearing, and understanding. It Is to show that God is all in all to
Saints, he gives in comfort, he guards and protects from dangers: this is
enough to make any man valiant, to have divine power encouraging him, divine
power comforting, divine power guarding, divine power at all times and upon
occasions to help; how can such souls be conquered? It Is impossible; for he
that is so divinely accommodated is ready to venture all he has in the cause
of Christ. A Christian endued with divine power, is ready and able also to live
and die with an Almighty Savior; Christ to him is enough, Christ alone is all,
he looks still on Christ, and observes him, what Christ says, he says; what
Christ does, he does; let all the world take what course they please, do what
they will, neglect Christ, go contrary to Christ, persecute Christ, yet still the
Saint that has God for his strength, God for his shield, God for his
instructor, shrinks not, is not disheartened: but holds on his way for truth, in
despite of all that oppose truth, and though never so much slighted of truths
foes, it cares not, it is satisfaction and encouragment enough to him that truth
defends, favors him. Christ has all his affection, and he has from Christ
all power to do what Christ calls him to, and through Christ that strengthens
him he can do all things. By the power and strengh of Christ, he is carried up
on high, above sense, above reason, above the world: he is raised above fears,
above frowns, his soul like Jehosaphats is lifted up in the ways of God. 2
Chro. 17.6.
Christ puts in a holy magnanimity, insomuch that in Christ's cause it fears
neither fire nor sword, cross nor loss, breaking of bones, tearing of members,
men or Devils, so it may be one with Christ. In a word a soul that is truly
Christ's, borne of him, living to him is one, whom neither poverty nor death,
nor bonds, nor any outward Evils can terrify. Oh! souls you that this day
hear me, what will you do in bad days? what in persecuting days? in the days
that fiery trials come? will you then own truth? will love to Christ make you
cleave to Christ? suffer for Christ? die for Christ? if it does, then may it be
said, that you are Christ's, and that you are no changelings; but true bred
spirits, children of God in bad places and times like Christ. The Lord grant
that though friends fail, riches fail, times alter, peace should be removed,
yet your faith may not fail; but that you may be baptized with the baptism
wherewith Christ was baptized, though a bloody baptism, and so being like
Christ in life and death, you may be like him in glory.

care of such that are godly, of such that are like Christ, to deal well with
them, to preserve them, and make provision for them; for they shall be sure of
the help of them, whilst they stick to Christ, the Saints will stick to them. We
have seen a miserable defection by abundance of men, I will not say all, but
doubtless most have fallen off, because they were not like Christ, and did not
cleave to Christ. I shall forbear speaking in this place what I might, were the
auditory suitable; Good men are too much slighted many times, and bad men over
much favored, Equidem Jehova contempum effudit in Principes.
God has in a great measure cast them out with shame, that were not friends to
his precious Saints, but rather to the adversaries. I trust God will give the
Parliament a heart to cast their eyes upon, (and have respect of) such that are
the called, the faithful and chosen of Christ. Whosoever deserts ths
Parliament, the Saints will never, unless they forsake Christ, which God
forbid. If the Parliament should be in straits, Saints will go in with them, if
they should be opposed, Saints will help them, with body, soul, estate; their
purse, prayers, strength shall help; If they should meet with bad times the
Saints would stand with them in the storm. I fear, if the Parliament should
have the need of any hereafter, they will find few closing faithfully with
them, but what are the faithfully of Christ. Methinks I hear a secret muttering
amongst many, that are ready to say, if troubles come, the Parliament will have
but few to take their parts, few that will join with them; to such whisperings I
shall give a loud answer: if the Parliament follow Christ and take his part (as
I trust they will) they shall be sure of the Saints, all Christ's friends, and
have they these, I believe they need not care who is against them, or what
opposition they meet withal, no though all the people of the earth be gathered
together against them. Zach 12.3
Let the Parliament set up Christ and favor those are Christ's, and then if all
the Nations of the world were gathered together against them, they need not
fear; for Christ would help them and take part with them; and if he be of their
side they need not fear what man can do unto them: for Christ will make their
enemies fall before them. God will make our Parliament-worthies such to all
their enemies, Isti incredibili ardore atque successu gentes omes de bell
a^unt, and subjicient vel potius stirpitus cacindeut, Zach. 12.6.
as is spoken of the Governor of Judah, they shall be like a hearth of fire
among the wood, and like a torch of fire in a sheaf. And they shall devour all the people round about, on the right hand and on the left. All that oppose them
shall be but as a little wood laid on fire, or straw put upon fire coals,
which would soon be consumed. God grant the Saints may be favored and they
that are truly godly be respected and cared, for by the Parliament; and then I
doubt not of their flourishing, and having friends to side with them, for they
shall have all the faithful, and they are (through Gods blessing many. If this
come to any of those worthies sights I pray God it may be a means to advise
them, to have a care of Christ's people, and then let them be sure those people
of Christ will have a care of them; And though they must venture all, nay die;
they will stand with them. God grant our Parliament-worthies may consid, er that
though they have not the most with them, yet they have the best, though the
Saints be least for numebr, yet they are the strongest for might, and such that
can though but a few, subdue many, five shall chase an hundred, Lev. 26.8
and an hundred shall put ten thousand to flight. Great has been the
experience that this Kingdom has had of the Saints victories; of those that
went against their enemies, 1 Samuel 17.45.
as David against Goliath in the name of the Lord of hoasts. Keep close together
Saints, keep with the Parliament, Deus favet justis and piis consiliis.
and then I doubt not but all will be well, for God will bless the proceedings of
good-men in a good cause; and what better cause can be taken in hand, then what
is now in hand in England, the bringing Christ to his Throne?

Let me conclude all with a word of consolation to such that fear bad times,
and that have spirits troubled with the various tossings in the world, and
defections of men from truth, and other molestations that are all ready in the
world, and that they fear will come on to the further grief and suffering of
Saints. Indeed there are troubles, the days are evil; times bad, and it is
likely may be worse; yet be sure of this, they that are Christ's people will
continue his people, they that are gracious there will be some good still, in
sad times, in the worst times, some that in assured hope and confidence of Gods
mercy in all necessities and tribulations, cleave to the truth; knowing that
Gods power is Allmighty, his promises, most true; his mercies, infinite; and
that it is for their souls everlasting happiness to follow Christ, let what
sufferings soever come, yea though they loose their lives. There are a remnant
that are enlightened, and from that enlightening they know what is best to be
embraced, they know that whatsoever of troubles come now, yet to all that are in
Christ, that are like Christ, that love his appearing, there will berest, there
will be peace; there will be blessedness; there will be glory. Those that are
engrafted really into Christ, will by virtue received from Christ flourish. Bad
times make not them bad, they will be good in any times, in any company, in any
place. If exalted, good; if abased; good; if rich, good; if poor good; if in
distress, good; if in prosperity, good. Christ was a precious Christ in every
condition, and they precious Saints in every condition. I know not what the
times may be, but I know what they that are Christ's will be, they will be like
Christ. As some trees continue green in every season of the year, in winter and
summer, in heat and cold: so some men good in all times, they are no
changelings, they are steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of
the Lord. Immobiles sunt super solido fundamento Christo Dominum, in ipsum
sincera fide and perfecta recumbertes.
Let others totter, they stand; others shake, they are unmovable; others fall;
they rise, others be idle, they Labor; others be against God, they are for
him. Consider of this I pray, and let it cheer up your spirits. I know you are
apt to say times are so bad you know not whom to trust al ready, men are so
deceitful and wicked and if they should be worse you know not what to do, nor
what will become of you. Christ comfort you and encourage you, and let what will
happen in the world, and let whose will desert you; if he never leave you nor
forsake you, you will do well enough, you will be brought at the last to glory.
You may receive comfort in hopes of meeting with some friendly souls, some
Saints in the most naughty times; but suppose you be left alone, and there be
none to be found, yet in this be glad, in this rejoice, in this be comforted,
that you shall find Christ, and he will be to you instead of friends, and
helpers, and companions, he will be all to you. The Lord grant that none of you
be disheartened, nor fall back, nor ashamed of the Gospel of the Lord, but that
you may bear witness to the testimony of Jesus; and of this be confident your
labor will not be in vain, nor any suffering unrewarded that is undergone for
Christ and his truth. Christian friends, whatsoever may make for your comfort I
pray God give it you, let it be peace within, good company without, the benefit
of ordinances, any mercy, that so you may be Christ's, and continue like Christ,
let places, times, men, the world with what is therein be never so bad.

FINIS.

