THE INFANCY OF ELDERS.

A Short Treatise composed for Vindication of the Christian liberty of
Freeborn denizens of England.

OR A Refutation of the Tyrannical unlawful misgovernment of our Church by
Lay Elders.

Written by J.S. Minister of the Word in Lancashire.

Gal. 5.1. Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.

Printed in the Year, 1647.

The Infancy of Elders.
I Have long time exercised my patience in forbeareance to write something of
this Subject, tryfling away many days, in a tedious expectation, that some one
better able, would have prevented me, who more fully and accurately (then I
know my self able to perform) might have perfected this work: but seeing the
daily incroaching tyranny of our new moduled Church Officers, spreading like
Gangrenes over the whole body of the Kingdom, and none offering neither for
safety to himself, and his hereditary freedom, nor for prevention of evil to
his brethren, to calterize, or take up a vein in them, to obstruct this new
dangerous hot disease in our Ecclesiastical body; some though convinced in
judgment that they are pernicious mischiefs in a Kingdom, yet basely fearing
man more then God, forbear to write against them; others partly Classical,
partly Episcopal, but really nothing, hovering aloof, with the reare-Mouse to
see the battle betwixt birds and beasts, with resolution to join with the
stronger party, and now perceiving the Classes headily run on, forbearing to
stop their proud carreer, like bruit beasts, creep into some crib, and there
stop their mouths with meat, and think with dumbness to fatten themselves
without giving testimony to the world of their humane reason; and indeed
generally lulling themselves in a sottish silence, have made themselves guilty
thus far of betraying their own freedoms, to the irreverend censures of our
new stamped Elders. I thought it my duty to shoot this poor paper bullet at
them, which if it take no impression upon them, yet I hope at the rebound, it
may be taken up by some, who perceiving the softness of my Ammunition, will
prepare harder ware against these impetuous furies, however it will be some
evidence to future ages to procure a non-guilty upon my name, for traitorously
consenting to the subversion of the furdamentall Laws of this Kingdom, and
betraying that liberty and freedom which as a Freeborn child of God I ought
to enjoy, into the hands of ignorant Tyrants; and like wise serve to free me
from a brand of instability or wandering in my principles, suffering my self to
be tossed too and fro with every puff of wind: Know Reader, I am not of such
a Weathercock temper as to be moved from my well-grounded station, though the
North wind bluster high, let others, who lately were of my opinion, till the
magneticke force of earthly preferment withdrew them, turn Hyperborean
dotterells, and imitate the fashions prescribed them by holy Highlanders, whom
the unseasonablenesse of some late winters, forced Southward, more to succor
themselves in a warmer clime, then out of any good intended to us natives; let
such I say play the Apes after them, setting up their holy form of worship and
Church Government, and use the learned persuasions which a proud Presbyter
(lately reputed a good man, whilst ten pound per annum at a private Chapel
could satisfy him, but now having betroathed a Parliament man's sister, is by
the strong cordage of attractive Apron-strings drawn up a hill to a benefice
of five hundred pound) laboring to draw his Auditory to the subscription
hereof, told them (whose bare assertions with his rusticke Auditory pass for
Oracles,) it was a government used in the Jewish Church, and therefore to be
followed by us Christians; Oh rare Pulpit Rhethoricke!

It pities my heart to think how the poor Country people are misled by these
blind guides, who poor Simpletons, perceiving the current of the times, are
many of them troubled (having plumbeous head-peeces) to shape their Pulpit
stuff according to the humor thereof, in which they take more pains for
saving their benefices, then their peoples souls: you can scarcely go to
hear a Sermon but the subject thereof is obedience to this godly government;
and the Presbyterian fatlings will blatter out, and quote almost every verse in
the Bible that has but the word Elder in it, to prove its lawfulness thereby;
these silly quondam Sur-Johns, but now Presbyter or Prester John's Parochial
Princes, do more Lord it over Gods heritage, then ever Becket, Wolsey or Laud
did: instead of feeding, leading their flocks into captivity, forcing
submissions to their imperious rules, contrary to the doctrine and late
professions of most of them, and avouch Authority from the Parliament for to
justify their proceedings herein, and proclaim commission for each one to be
summus sacerdos sui Classis; and the Eldership to be Officers of the Church of
Jesus Christ by Authority of both Houses of Parliament; and who dare say
against it?

I am loath to set perine to paper to clash against any thing debated and
concluded in that High and Honorable Court, having hitherto labored to my
power, to propagate their cause, which Cause was protested to be and expressly
set down in the Covenant, that it was the defense of his Majestics person, the
Protestant Religion, the fundamental Laws and liberty of the Subject, and to
endeavor Reformation of Religion in the Church of England, according to the
holy word; but now they having set up a Government, not agreeable to Gods word,
nor consistant with the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom (as I shall show you
anon) I resolving with my self that it was better to obey God then man, did for
prevention of further misleading captive poor souls, for satisfaction of some
men wavering in opinion, for discharging of my own conscience, and for
instructing, not correcting the Honorable Parliament, in hopes to add some
good souls to the number of those honest Patriots, who were but by few
out-voted in the settling of this Antichristian government, and in hopes to
work hereby a peaceable and legal quashing of the same, adventure to publish
this paper, wherein I shall endeavor to anatomize this giddy government, and
show its illegality, which undertaking if I err through ignorance, I will upon
convincement from better judgment, grounded upon sound divinity and reason,
willingly recant my mistakes, and subscribe to, and allow of a warrantable
Eldership: In the mean time I crave pardon for a little freedom of language.

It may perchance be wondered at by some, that I being not of very grave years
my self, should dare to write any thing against the Grandees and Seniors of
our times; but we have a Proverb amongst us, That old men are twice children;
and truly such are many, of our Elders: they may perchance as babes desire the
sincere milk of the word; but I am sure many of them are not as yet grown
thereby, (sed nucibus relictis) I intend to have about with them armed to their
best advantage, admitting them their sage and politic capacities as Elders,
and yet will take them off their feet, and throw them upon their backs ere I
leave them. In prosecution whereof, though it be not my custom to play with
words; yet for method sake, I will first insist upon the definition of the word
Elders, Omnis enim qui de re aliqua instituitur sorme debes a definitione
proficisci, ut intelligatur quid fit de quo disputatur, and prove that our
Lay Elders are no ways to be understood the things signified by the word.

Secondly, of Civil Elders in general, and that here in England, our
Lay Elders are not within that notion.

Thirdly, of Spiritual Elders in general, and that they cannot be rightly
taken for such.

Fourthly, that Civil Elders are not to join with Spiritual in
Ecclesiastical affairs.

For the definition of the word Elder, Verstegan and diverse others affirm,
that it is an abreviation of a word which we borrow from the Saxons, called
Salden ealder, which word is used for grave, wise, and expert men; men which
for their deserving parts, excellent above others, were made choice of to be
Officers in the Commonwealth, or else for such their noble deservings, were
promoted to dignity and honor: And hence has that custom grown in England,
That out of the Nobility were selected the most discreet, and grave Barons, and
were made above the rank of Barons, Ealdermen. In the Danish tongue Eorles in
English Earls, a name we continue to this day: And indeed Earls and Elders are
both one in the literal sense.

So likewise we have in every ancient Burrow, a Court of Ealdermen, that is to
say Elders, men of most sufficiency and discretion, and these men were to be
honored of others for their worthy and Noble virtues; according to which Mr.
Purchase in his book called His Pilgrimage, fol. 125. faith, The Jews have an
affirmative precept (to wit) rise before thine Elder, the word Elder being
expounded in that place by Rabbi Jose, says, it signifies a wise man, though
young in years, and to him the people were to rise at four cubits distance,
and being past to sit down again: according to this interpretation, my Lord
Cook that grave and reverend Judge of the Law, in the first part of his
Institutes, fol. 168. says, Aldermani non ita dicuntur propter aetatem, sed
propter sapientiam, and dignitatem, adolescentes exim essent juris periti and
experti. But stay, I must not digress too far from my business; for what does
this concern our reverend Cobblers, Websters, Tailors, Skinners, etc? the
Ruling-Elders of this age, to whom I am sure the sense of this word is not
applicable, unless in reference to their Trades and Handicrafts; and yet these
filly upstart fellows now made Lay Elders, begin to puff and swell already
with pride, and conceit themselves by a wonderful providence to be exalted
above their former equals expecting submission from the people as unto Rulers:
for my part I shall acquit them of this crime, and give my voice that the poor
simple bumpkins are not to be blamed for it; it being according to their
education and tutoring; for since their Minister or High Priest tells them, that
their government was used amongst the Jews, well may they expect the
circumstance or concomitance of their office, to follow along with the office
it self (to wit) that according to the Jewish custom the people should rise
up before them.

But this is not all that causes this timpany of pride in them, they are
further instructed, that they shall reap profit by their places, the same or
more (their territories considered,) as Bishops formerly exacted from the
people.

Now this considered, me thinks, the people have very much betrayed their
liberty, who gave any consent to this government; for that whereas formerly the
greedy gripings of Bishops and their officers, were censured for high
encroachments, upon the peoples privileges and freedoms, and propriety in
their goods, they must needs now expect a huge multiplication of extortion,
from a numerous rabble of Lay Elders, poor and mean fellows put into Office,
who being called from their Trades and Handicrafts, which was their livelihood,
must now of necessity live upon the people. But I will proceed to a further
explanation of the word.

The word Elder is sometimes taken for aged and hoary headed men, as Levit. the
19. cap. the 32. ver. our English translation renders it thou shall rise before
up the hoary headed; And the 1 of Tim. 5.1. It is used for a word of Age, not
Office, and all translations of such places render it Senior not Presbiter,
rebuke not an Elder, translated by Beza, by Junius and Tremelius, seniore non
increpato, by Erasmus, seniorem ne savius objurges, but all seniorem, not
Presbiterem. Entreat him as a Father, the young men as Brethren. It is likewise
a word of age, the 1 of Pet. the 5.1. The Elders which are among you I exhort,
etc. and ver. 5. likewise ye younger submit your selves unto the elder, but in
this latter place, it is a word both of Office and Age. Peter bidding them feed
the flock, and therefore is the word there rendered Presbyteri, as it is
always where it signifies Church Officers (but not comprehensible of lay
Elders, of which anon) in all other places it is rendered seniores.

Reader what is in other Countries I cannot tell, but in this County of ours,
in which these Master-ships Country Lay Elders are leapt into Authority (upon a
private petition of some lordly Pastors, me^ never heard of by many thousands,
till the Ordinance came down) I know not any one particular man of them that
is comprised within the sense of the word, that is to be a hoary headed man,
but they are generally as non-sensically called Elders in this interpretation,
as they come short for challenging the name in the first, (to wit) grave, wise,
and expert.

Since God has set these fellows over us as a punishment for our sins, and a
mere reproach unto the Nation, that men should rule over us that are not
endowed with any thing to be honored in them, no not so much as with this,
which their Muse Dame nature, amongst the rest of their Arts, she has
quallified them with, might easily have bestowed upon them; but I will proceed
a little further in expression of the Word, and see if it will any wise
concern them.

The word Elder sometimes is a word of Ecclesiastical Office, and not of age,
and is as much as to say Priest or Bishop, and is scarce mentioned in the new
Testament in any other sense, unless Matthew the 26.3. Math. 16.21. Jo. 11.47.
where it is rendered Elders of the people, which all Translators render
seniores: in other places it is translated Presbyter (...) which in the Greek
signifies seniores aetate, Magis prisci qui Ecclesia presunt, the word being
derived of (...) Legatus mittor to be sent an Ambassador, and this exposition
I take to be most agreeable to the word of God, Paul telling us in the second
to the Corinthians 5.20. that the Ministers of the Gospel are Christ's
Ambassadors, praying us by the Gospel to be reconciled to God: and 6. Ephesians.
20. Paul though in Prison was Christ's Ambassador to speak the word boldly; so
that according to the sense of the word Presbyter, Lay Elders are not to be
understood thereby, only the Ministers of the Gospel, the Ambassadors of
Christ; sometime the word Elder is rendered (...) that is inspectores, overseers
of their flock, Acts the 20.28. and in that Chapter it is both rendered
Presbyter in the 17. ver. and Episcopus or Overseer in the 28. Sunt enim
Episcopi sacri gregis in spectores qui verbo and gubernationi preerunt quique
quasi speculatores in doctrinam and mores commissi gregis inquirebant. Nor are
out Lay Elders within the comprise or reach of this word, for they have no
flocks to feed, their high Priest takes that Office to himself. And I think
they will thank me for telling them so, for they would hate to be called
Bishops.

And here by the way I think it were not amiss should I a little explane the
meaning of that much wrested and abused Text of Scripture which our Novalists
so much insist upon, to ensnare the people to a subjection to their new
Eldership, 1 Timothy 5.17. The Elders which rule well account worthy of double
honor, especially those which labor in word and doctrine, by which Text they
would persuade the people, that there ought to be ruling Lay Elders as well as
teaching Elders in the Church.

The Elders in that place is by all Translators rendered Presbyteri, not
seniores, Lay Elders or Rulers of the people, but I say Presbyteri, that is
Ministers of the gospel, Ambassadors of Christ; so that it cannot be
understood of ruling Laity; but ruling or governing Clergy; nor is this
interpretation, either contrary to Gods word, as may be proved by other Texts
of Scripture, nor does it any wise gainsay the practice of the Primitive
Churches, for you may find it recorded in Posen. in vita Augusti, cap. 5. that
there may be as well ruling Ministers; as preaching Ministers, for some for
administration of the Sacraments, for their wisdom and judgment were not
unmeete to be Bishops and Pastors, and yet being not well versed in the languge
of the people over which they had the charge they wanted elocution to preach,
and yet governed their Church well, as Valerius was a Bishop amongst the
Romans, at that time Paul writ to Tymothy, and being a Grecian borne, and not
skilled to pronounce the Latin, did not preach, and yet was honored as a
reverend Father of the Church, and Minister of Jesus Christ; so I believe we
have some great Presbyters rule in Welsh Benefices, and know not how to teach
in that language, and yet will think to have double honor from their
Parishoners, and it is due unto them, but if they could teach too, then were
they more to be esteemed.

We may read in the first of the Cor. 12. chap. All men had not the same
gifts, to one was given the spirit of wisdom, to another the spirit of faith,
to another the spirit of healing, to another the spirit of miracles, to another
diverse kinds of tongues, and ver. 28 It is said in the Church God has set
some, first Apostles, secondly. Prophets, and thirdly Teachers; so that if we
must go the old way of expounding Scripture, to examine one place by another,
we may hence clearly perceive, that that Text of Tymothy is to be understood,
ruling Presbyters, and not ruling Lay Elders; ruling Presbyters ordained by God
and his Church, and all Translators that ever I did see render it Preebyter,
understanding that the Elders which rule well, and are to be accounted worthy
of double honor, mentioned in that Text, are spiritual men, (...) Ministers
of the Gospel, Christ's Ambassadors.

But admit the new Classical wresting of that Text, that it is to be
understood of ruling Laiety; yet there can be nothing gathered from that pace
to prove that such men are to meddle in Ecclesiastical affairs, (but of that
in his proper place) only that the Civil Elders, which governed the State
well, were to be accounted worthy of double honor; but especially the
spiritual Elders which governed the Church, and increased the flock of Christ
by their word and doctrine.

I have briefly done with the first part of this work, to wit, the diffinition
of the word Elder, and now I will proceed to the second branch touching Civil,
or Lay Elders in general, in the number of whom our Lay Elders are not to be
reckoned.

We read that Jewish State was governed by Elders, almost in every Author,
which writes any thing either of them, their State or Government; and more
particularly and fully Mr. Purchase in his Pilgrimage, folio 110. testifies of
them thus, That their government was under 70. Elders according to the number
of the persons which descended with Jacob into Egypt, and that the 70 assigned
after to Moses in the 11. chapter of Numbers, were but continued in their
former Office, with confirmation from on high, but not newly instituted, and
ruled in Egypt, notwithstanding Pharaohs cruelty, and were by Moses and Aron
assembled together, Exodus 4.29.

And thus it continued in Josuahs time, till they had conquered and inhabited
several Cities, then each City had its Sanhedrim or Council of Elders,
proportionable to the greatness thereof; as in Bethlem Boaz assembled 10
Elders about the matter of Ruth, Ruth 4.2. 1 Chronicles. 23.4. 2 Chronicles. 19.8. and
usually every Senate of Elders had a Levite or two to sit with them in
judgment, because the Elders were ignorant of the Talmud or Law which was much
altered, and enlarged by several Governors of the University of Jerusalem,
and was lastly completed by Rabbi Jochanan, Anno Christi, 500. and called the
Talmud, a rule in all causes Ecclesiastical and Civil to this very day,
amongst the Jews.

God commanded Moses in the 11 of Numbers, saying, Gather unto me 70. men of
the Elders of Israel, which thou know to be Elders of the people, and they
shall be are the burden of the people, with thee etc.

This is a place much insisted upon to warrant our newtaking of Elders into the
Church, to bear part of the Government; but I will make it manifest that this
part of Scripture is no warrant for us to do so here in England.

The Government thus settled, says Josephus in his book of Antiquities, libro
quarto, cap. 8. was mixed the Monarchy being in Moses, but qualified with an
aristocracy in the 70, and democracy (as it were) appeared in the often
Assemblies of the people: and this but continued, says he, till they desired a
King, and then it ceased; and whilst it continued, it was only for temporal
affairs, the Elders not being to meddle in any Ecclesiastical matter, for
Levites only sat with them, because they were learned in the Talmud; not that
of right it belonged unto them to sit there. Goodwin in his Jewish Antiquities
fol. 199. and 198. he says, how Jehosophat appointed in every walled City
secular Judges, which were their Elders to determine criminal offenses.

I wonder that our Presbyterians should be so far brazed with ignorance, as not
to blush to urge this portion of Scripture for a warrant for their Court of
Elders to be set up here in England, when as it fails in every particular, to
be any wise applicable to us: for,

First, the Jews were governed by 70 Elders before; so was never England.

Seconly, Moses was both King and Priest among them; he was their Priest, and
took great pains in his holy function with them, whereby he became less
fitted to manage their civil affairs; and we may likewise read, Deuteronomy. 33.5.
Moses was among the righteous as King.

I never knew that our Bishops or Presbyters ever exercised any Kingly Office
in England, nor has it ever been, unless in these four years last past,
whenas, Charles Stewart being gone from his Parliament, and being denudated of
his Kingly power, which power in conceit fell into the laps of our Assembly,
who thereupon Enthusiastically, by imaginary Revelation, publish, they must
take to themselves Elders of the people to bear part of the burden with them.

Thirdly, that was Gods own immediate Act, and he put his spirit upon them,
and they prophesied verse the 25; but this is a mere humane institution not
warranted by any means, unless by such imaginary Revelation, and strange
Oracles, which things since Christ himself came in the flesh have ceased, and
why should we now credit them?

I believe our Elders are not by their Office made wiser, or endowed with any
supernatural gifts at all, but continue still, though Mr. Elders; yet as
arrant blockheads as they were before; so that a man may say of them as one
said of an ignorant Judge, sitting in his robes upon the Bench, yonder Judge is
made fine by his place, his place not beautified him, nor for my part will I
believe any thing they can prophecy, unless they tell me they will be kicked
out of their Office.

Fourthly, that Government ceased, when Israel obtained a King, and now that
England has, and ever had a King, what shall we do with this inconsistant
Government? Unless to fit our selves to entertain the Eldership, we cast off
Monarchical Government, and introduce a Government by States; for my part I
wish that hand to wither that shall attempt to lop off the royal branches of
our Land, whose right to the Crown, and Kingly prerogative, are equally just
to any Subject his possessing what he has, nor is there any understanding
Christian, reproachfully called Independent of any other opinion; so he may
enjoy the liberty of his own conscience without Civil coercion in point of
Religion, he being to give an account to God of his own soul; and every one
being to bear his own burden, the Father not being to answer for the Son,
nor the Son for the Father. Gal. 6.5. Ezekiel. 18.20. but in civil and temporal
matters is ready to subject himself with the most submissive to Kingly
Authority, according to the Law of the Nation where he lives; And may those
cursed souls who contrive the obliterating of the glorious beings of our Kings
here, be suddenly snached hence by a hand unlooked for; and yet I wish King
Charles his returning to his Parliament, and hearkening to their wholesome
Counsels, for therein I conceive his flourishing and happiness will most
consist.

That there are, and has been Civil Elders here and elsewhere, no man needs
to doubt, it is obvious enough, and manifest to each capacity; our Judges at
Westminster are nothing else, but in this sense Elders and Judges to sit in
Counsel to determine and judge of criminal and other civil affairs, which
we continue still to this day: Therefore are our new Lay Elders in this sense
useless: and if we must for other ends erect Jewish Sanhedrins in England, I
have showed you it is not warrantable for us so to do, because Moses by Gods
special appointment assembled 70. Elders to bear part of the Government with
him, although it were urged with all the wit, zeal and fervency, it is possible
for a Country Presbyter to palliate his people from his Pulpit with, yet his
labor is all in vain, and he but endeavors to justify unwarrantable things,
when as the unskilful Sophister, cannot set a specious gloss on a good matter.

But perhaps he has learned his lesson so far by rote, as to tell the people
it was in Europe, first set up at Geneva by reverend Mr. Calvin, and since
embraced by the States of Holland, and several places of Germany, and
therefore why should not we have it in England?

I answer in the same way of reason that in Rome is and has been a long time
continued the Popish Religion, and professed, and maintained by the Emperor,
by the Kingdom of Spain, by the King of France, and some Princes of Germany,
and therefore why should not we profess that Religion too? But more
particularly to take off this cavil, I will make it appear that that argument
does no ways concern England.

The beginning of this Government at Geneva is well known, was by Mr. Calvin
framed; yet if we will believe Histories, not intended: for he perceiving the
abuses, and too predominating tyranny of Bishops contrary to Gods word, Lording
it over Gods Heritage, devised a way for freeing the people from that slavery,
and the enlarging of Gods people, to cast off the Hierarchicall yoke, and so
invented a new way, which he knew the giddy multitude (greedy of novelties)
would be easily facinated with, and that the rather because they groaned under
the heavy pressure of their former slavery; wherefore he buzzed into the ears
of the people that they should have none of these Lording Bishops, but they
should be ruled by every Pastor in his respective Parish, and to submit to his
censure, and because all should not hang on so slender a thread as the likeing
of an ignorant multitude, he bound the people by oath to give obedience to such
orders as he with two other Ministers (for more grace to the business) had set
down, and appointed every Church being to be governed by it self, and the
people sworn to obedience, and so every Church almost differing from other
began to accuse one another of disobedience to the will of Christ in those
things in which they differed, which occasioned much strife and contentions
among them: for these Presbyters being men of flesh as well as the Bishop was,
and subject to the like infirmities, began to flutter as much or more over the
people, as ever the Bishop did, and to exercise as much coercive power over
men's consciences; wherefore the people seeing themselves nothing bettered by
this new frame of government, but unadvisedly they had consented to a
multiplication of tyranny; and that whereas formerly they had but one Bishop,
which did something extort upon them, they now had a company of ignorant
Presbyters, which did much outvie the Bishop in domineering power over them,
they then began to champe upon the bit they had taken into their mouths, and
began to mutiny against Mr. Calvin, who together with his two associats, the
perswaders of the people to embrace, and the contrivers of this kind of
government, were in the heat of these discontents banished the Town.

Mr. Calvin was now put to his shifts to appease this tumult, and when he had
cast upon all assaies, he concluded none so probable, to take effect, as to
admit some of the Citizens to join in government with the Presbyters, and so
they might perhaps admit him with his new device of Presbyterian Ministry into
the City again, which fell out accordingly; for a few years after the
Citizens of Geneva had banished Calvin (says juditious Hooker) in his preface
to his book entitled, Ecclesiastical policy, such was the levity and
inconstancy of those people, some places being in the interim fallen void, and
in want of a Minister, that they were not so willing to be rid of Calvin
before, as they were now importunate to have him back again, and with
several letters and engagements did court him to return unto them; Calvin
considered with himself, that now was the time to make known unto them, he
would be no more tennant at will under them; but if they would have him to be
their Teacher again, they must be content to admit a complete form of
Discipline, which both they and their Pastors should be sworn to observe for
ever after, of which Discipline the maine and principal parts were these; a
standing Ecclesiastical Court to be established, perpetual Judges in that
Court to be their Ministers, others of the people anually chosen (twice so many
as they) to be Judges together with them in the same Court: And these two sorts
to have power over men's manners, to determine all kind of Ecclesiastical
causes, and to punish as far as with excommunication, all sorts of people.

This proposition of his did some what trouble them, for they considered that
this government was little better then Popish Tyranny, presented to them under
a new form; for though for every Minister there were two Laymen to fit and
give voice in the Ecclesiastical consistory; yet they feared that the filling
up of those seats was but to please the mind of the people, to think their
own sway something, when as things were to come to trial, their Pastors
learning would over persuade simple people, who knowing the time of their
Presidentship to be but short, would always stand in fear of their Ministers
perpetual authority; but notwithstanding these considerations, such were the
straits the Citizens had brought themselves into through their own giddiness,
that now they must of necessity embrace Calvin upon these or any other
conditions, unless to their endless disgrace, they would with ridiculous
lightness dismiss him whom they had with all earnestness, and after an
importunate, and most urgent manner desired to return unto them; wherefore
having driven themselves upon these exigents, they admit of Mr. Calvin, and his
compound consistory, Anno Domini 1541. And here was the beginning amongst
Christians of Lay Elders in their Church Government, which you may perceive
[Reader] through necessity by a inconstant people in a troubled State was
accepted of.

Now good morrow to your Infant worship, good Mr. Lay-Elder, or rather your
spurious brat of a Geneva brable; I must tell you, you may be a handsome
fellow, but you look ill favouredly in an English habit; but may you say unto
me, your Tailor or High Priest was too blame (for no strange thing now a days
for Tailor and Priest to meet in one person) to put you into the English mode:
Let me tell you in your own Country Phrase, you beseem your Office, as a Sow
beseemes a saddle, you look as strangely amongst us as an Owl at noone day;
you must not think to make us daire under you, we will rather like a flock of
little birds fright and chase you back again to your Arabian Desert; when we
come to Geneva, we will be governed by you, in the mean time we do not desire
you should govern us: nor indeed because you are so rightly entertained in
Geneva, and Holland, are you fit guests for us. For Geneva was a free City
governed by Elders, and Town Burgers before ever Mr. Calvin came there, who
admitted some of those Aldermen yearly into his Classis, and there were some
little more color for that government amongst us, if our Judges, Justices,
and Aldermen might be admitted into your respective Classes; but there is no
such matter in our new Eldership, but the most silly fellows generally are
pitched upon to make Lay Elders of; and truly this is the greatest piece of
policy I have observed from our Presbyter, or High Priests in our Country, for
by this means they themselves will rule the roast, the Lay Elders being mere
Jacks to be wound up and down at pleasure; and the better to compass this
their ends and design, some of them have wronged and abused the Parliament, in
nominating unto them, tryars for the sufficiency of the Elders, to be chosen in
their respective Classes, so insufficient and ignorant that cannot write their
own names, the best knowledge they have being to misreade a little English,
and this I am informed was done by the present Incombent at Standishe and some
others; nay more then so, when the Ordinance came down, and that such men were
by the Parliament appointed tryars to be Lay Elders themselves, which the
people not mindful to thwart any thing the Parliament by the mouth of their
Minister desired, voted it so, and so they were Judges themselves, and the
parties to be judged of themselves: Like as if a Justice were made a Jailer, or
a Marshall, should commit a Soldier: To commit a man to himself which is
against the rules of Law and reason; but no more of this, I conceive that this
government being set up at Geneva, is no president imitable for England, only I
think it were not amiss to follow their fashion a little before intangling of
our selves) in this; That seeing our fundamental Laws in Church subverted, and
our liberties betrayed into the hands of Lay Elders (for whose government there
is no warrant in Scripture, I mean their governing Ecclesiastical affairs)
We should rowse up a godly spirit in our selves, and do as the then free
Citizens did by the domineering Presbyters in Geneva, banishing them thence: I
say we should kick these Caterpillars out of our Kingdom, and sweeping this
rubbish from the doors of our Temples, and whipping these money changers
thence, beat the fellows into their old trades and handicrafts again.

It might I am confident procure some more warrantable and moderate government
then this, which I refer to the serious consideration of our wise Parliament,
in hopes their wisdoms will take due care to prevent the impending miseries of
our Nation, for very many thousands will rather have moderate Episcopacy up,
then this senseless government of Lay Elders, which are indeed no Rulers, but
mere stalking Horses or Asses, or a disguise wherein the Presbyters may
plunder the people of liberty of conscience, pretending it is not the Art of
Clergy only; pretty judgling; but no more of this, stultum est obsurdas
opiniones accuratius refellere, I will proceed to treat of that part or
division of this work lies next in order, to wit of spiritual Elders in
general, and that our Lay Elders may not rightly be taken for such.

Every Bishop, Presbyter, Pastor, or other grave and reverend Divine, is
rightly and truly called a spiritual Elder, and to prove this my assertion, I
need not wander far to fetch authority from rare Authors; the Apostles
themselves have saved me a labor, as Peter the 1.5.1. The Elders which are
among you I exhort who am also an Elder, etc. John in his 2. and 3. Epistles
styles himself and Elder; in the second thus, The Elder unto the elect Lady:
in the third The Elder unto the welbeloved Gains: and we may read Acts 6.6.
because the word of God should not be left, and the people, to serve tables,
wherefore the Apostles desired the people to look out among themselves 7 men
of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost, and of wisdom whom they admitted
into holy Orders by praying and laying on of hands, who were called Elders; so
Paul Acts 14.23. when he passed through several Countries upon his being
stoned at Lystra in Licaonia, ordained them Elders in every Church, Elders in
that place by all Translators being rendered Presbyters or Bishops, men of holy
Orders to succeed the Apostles, who being thereunto thus lawfully called, have
Gods promise to let his holy spirit rest upon them even unto the end of the
world, Math. 28.20. It being promised to such as teach his people to observe
all things, whatsoever I have commanded you, even to such who had Commission to
teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the holy Ghost. We may read likewise James 5.14. If any be sick among
you, let him send for the Elders of the Church, and let him pray over him,
anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord; the word Elder being there
translated Presbyter, which is of the same signification with us, as Sacerdos
was under the Law. There are many more places of Scripture to prove spiritual
Elders in the Church; But I will briefly shut up this point with the 20 of the
Acts, where it appears, how Paul at Melitum called the Elders from Ephesus,
verse the 27. and telling them that they must see his face no more, he charges
them verse the 28. that they should take heed unto themselves, and to all the
flock over which the holy Ghost had made them Bishops to feed the Church of
God; by all which, and other Texts of Scripture, it is evident that the word
Elder generally in the new Testament, signifies feeding and praying Ministers,
not loytering, lazy, Lay Elders, Officers no more requisite in a Church, then
a company of drones are useful in a hive of Bees; unnecessary evils, mere
horseleeches to suck the peoples blood, who have no need of Phlebotomy; but I
leave the Jewish Laiety, which I hope will no ways arrogate this Office unto
themselves, though their holy Fathers, their high Priests endued with great
store of impudence, and ignorance, tells them they are instated into holy
Orders by (...), when with hands lifted up at their elections they took the
Covenant, by which Covenant I would have them to understand, they are to
degrade themselves from their Office, for it being on foot in Scotland, is no
warrant for them to continue it here in England, the words of the Covenant
being, That we shall endeavor the reformation of Religion in the Church of
England, according to Gods holy word: and I cannot find one Text in Scripture
to warrant their calling in the Church, they being Laymen; nor will that
argument which some frame from the Levites, having several places of trust
about the Temple, serve to prove their Office and Government.

It is true that in Moses time, Gershon Cohath, and Merari, Levy his three
Sons, had the Office to pitch, to take down, and to bear up and down the
Tabernacle, and the vessels thereof: the Gershouites charge was to carry the
coverings and hangings of the Tabernacle: the Cohathites the chief things
within the Sanctuary: and the Merarites had charge of the wood-workes, and the
rest of the instruments of the Tabernacle; This was their Office during their
abode in the Wilderness, whilst they were on their Journey, but afterward
when they were settled in the promised Land, David changed their Office, some
being appointed to have charge of the Treasure of the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 26.20.
others to be Overseers and Judges, others to be Porters and Singers, 1 Chronicles.
23.4. The Singers were to be clad in linen robes, 2 Chronicles. 5.12. hence do
some argue that the government by Elders, is no more then what was in David's
time, when the Levites were.

The Levites were Judges and Overseers, to which objection I give this answer.

God by his divine and eternal decree had appointed the Tribe of Levi to serve
at his Alter, and minister unto the people; as we find it recorded in the 10
of Deuteronomy. verse 8. God separated the Tribe of Levi to bear the Arc of the
Covenant of the Lord, and to stand before the Lord to minister unto him, and to
bless in his name even to this day. And Deuteronomy. 11. and the 5. The Lord thy God
has chosen him out of all thy Tribes to stand and minister in the name of the
Lord, him and his sons for ever. And Moses in the 33 of Deuteronomy. verse 8. prays,
That the Vrim and Thummim of the Lord be with thine holy One, meaning in that
place one of the Tribe of Levi, who verse the 10, shall teach Jacob thy
Judgments, and Israel thy Law: they shall put insense before thy face, and
burnt offerings upon thine Altar.

It is manifest by those places of Scripture, that it was Gods holy will that
the Tribe of Levi should serve at his Altar, all of them being instated in holy
orders, by imposition of hand; and although amongst them there were certain
degrees according to which Paul writ in the 1 to Tim. 3.13. that they that have
ministered well, get themselves a good degree, as Godwyn in his Jewish
Antiquities fol. 22 observes, as when they had been a month initiated, they
were to be presented unto God, Numb. 3.15. and they were consecrated by
imposition of hands, at 25 years old, Number. 8.24. And they were to carry the
Tabernacle up and down from 30 to 50, and afterward they were to oversee and
instruct the younger Levites in the manner of Bishops; but they were from the
first to be instated in holy Orders, and then capable to be Overseers or
Bishops as they labored to get a good degree.

Now I presume none will be so silly as to follow our new Presbyterian
Doctrine, which persuade that our government in Church by Lay Elders, is no
more but this, which our highly beneficed Brethren cry aloud in their Pulpits:
For know, Reader, there is no Analogy betwixt the Levites and Lay Elders. For
first God appointed the one to serve at his Altar, but the other has no
calling thereunto: and whereas God appointed Moses to assemble 70 Elaers to
bear part of the Government with him, that was only in temporal affairs, not
in Church matters. Moses was overburthened with being both King and Priest, of
which I have showed you before.

Secondly, these which had any calling or Office to serve in the Temple, were
instated in holy Orders, being consecrated by the imposition of hands of the
first borne, or sons of Israel, the representative Church. But these Lay Elders
are not admitted into holy Orders, nor are their hands filled with any thing
save underhand bribes, which the people to prevent their utter ruin, are
forced to give them to purchase their favor and friendship, in this age of
persecuting tyrannical Presbyterian Government; so that it is evident to any
indifferent judgment, that the new created Elders of our days, have nothing
to do in our Church as spiritual Elders. I allow that there may be in
several States both civil and spiritual Elders; but the civil Elders are
not to meddle and join with spiritual in Church affairs, which is the next
thing in order I am to treat of.

There were in Israel says Mr. Godwine in his Jewish Antiquities fol., 197.
two Consistories or Courts of justice; the one chiefly for Church business,
the other for the affairs of the Commonwealth: The spiritual Consistory
termed (...), a Synagogue, the secular consistory termed (...), a Counsel, and
this civil Court consisted of 71, the odd one being to supply the room of
Moses over the first 70. Mr. Purchase in his Pilgrimage 112, and Galatinus
conjectures, that in the Counsel that condemned Christ, there were the whole
number of 71. And as these two Courts were several in their places, remote
each from other; so were the matters discussable before them, of several and
distinct natures and quallities; as we may read in the 2 of Chron. chapter
19. to the spiritual Court belonged matters spiritual or ceremonial; to the
secular Consistory matters civil or criminal; and so Jehoshaphat reforming
many abuses in Church and Commonwealth, first appointed throughout all the
fenced Cities of Judah secular Judges to determine criminal causes, and at
Jerusalem he appointed a spiritual Court consisting of Levites, Priests, and
the chief Fathers of Israel: Amazia the high Priest being chief in causes
spiritual for the Lord, and Zobediah in causes criminal for the King; and
this spiritual Court was, says Mr. Godwin, the representative Church, and had
the power of excommunication: hence is that saying in Matthew 18.16. dic
Ecclesiae. This form of distinct government in matters temporal and
spiritual, is in most States of Christendom, and was (till of late the
Presbyterian party contrived to bring all into a Chaos) imitated by us in
England, we having spiritual and temporal Courts. The one not being to
meddle in any matter which properly laid in the conusance of the other; for if
they did, from the temporal Court was a writ of prohibition issueable to stay
the proceedings of the spiritual: And if it appeared, the matter belonged to
the spiritual Court, a writ of consultation was directed forth to the
spiritual Court to proceed in the business; so that it is manifest they were
not to join together in judicature; for although before in this treatise, I
have showed you that the high Priest did amongst the Jews sit in the Sanhedrin
of Elders, it was because he was a man excellently learned in the Talmud; for
if we will believe Mr. Godwine he tells us that the high Priest sat there
necessarily, is an error, for he was not elected into that company, unless he
was a man of extraordinary wisdom, for he was Judge in the Synagogue, and was
not ex officio, to meddle in the Sanhedrin; and for my part I cannot find that
ever these consistories sat together in one Assembly, unless Math. 26.3. when
they assembled to conspire the death of Christ, verse 5. they consulted that
they might take Jesus by subtlety and kill him; and this was decreed by Gods
own will before, he having prophesied of his sufferings before them, Math.
16.21. That he should go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the elders,
and Chief Priests, and Scribes.

In Imitation whereof sure this new set up motley, medley, consistory, of ours
counter-company of Clergy, and Laiety are joined in one, to contrive a way to
crucify Christ's Spouse: For never were the Saints of God (Christ's
representative Church when assembled together) so scattered, broken, and
persecuted, as they are now (and like to be worse, should this senseless
tirany continue) under the hands of cruel ignorant Elders. Things purposely
called out of the meanest of the people, not capable of any shame, or sensible
of any unworthy act, and so the fitter to put in execution the unjust
directions of their imperious Pastor, and for the undoing of whom he please,
must vote to excommunication any one the Parson privately grudges, Oh rare
Rogues!

Reader pardon my expression, I believe I do not err in calling them so, for
they are wandering Jews and Vagabonds, they pretend they had a pass from
Geneva to Scotland, and so for England, with private directions to come by
Scotland first, not because they should not curse the old Proverb, Omne malum
ab Aquilone: But because coming from Scotland they would find the better
entertainment in England: It being at this day peopled with a Scottish
generation, which like so many larks dare under the Scotch Hobbies, and in a
cowardly fear shroud their carcases in rush-hilles, and there lie, suffering
the Hobby to ruff them of all their feathers, such as those would for fear
give them the better entertainment.

Others for a foolish doting upon their Brethren, for they know not what,
unless for betraying their Leidge Lord, and Sovereign, having promised him
Aid, which they declined for the tempting pieces of 400000. l. (for in such a
case though he was given up into the hands of his friends; yet it was treachery
in them) will give them the more hearty welcome, because they came from so good
a people.

Now would our grave, wise, and honorable Parliament take seriously into their
sage consideration the danger of these people remaining amongst us, who are
mere enemies to, and inconsistent Rulers in our State, pure Scotch
incendiaries, to kindlenew flames amongsts us, that the frozen Scot may have
another opportunity to warmehis fingers at an English fire, which is likely to
come to pass, if these malapart Officers be not quickly suppressed.

Nor can their wisdoms blame the Christians, who for defense of their just
freedoms, and liberty of conscience, without any sinister ends, shall cause
new stirs, and in defense of their liberties and Religion, endeavor to chase
this new tyrany forth of the Kingdom. And I am assured would their wisdoms
but duly examine their business, here they would plainly find, it is for no
other end. And withal would their grave judgments but seriously poize the
validity of their pass to come and settle here, they would find it altogether
insufficient, and no warrant either by Gods Law, or the Law of Nations for such
people, by people of other Nations directed hither to settle and make a
constant abode here: And I am confident their Honors upon due consideration
hereof, would either send them from Constable to Constable back into Scotland,
or else whip them quite home to Geneva; which that they may do.

The Lord who is Ruler of all men's hearts, dictate this to his servants in the
Parliament, that they may put their helping hands to this work, and then the
Lord prosper the work of their hands; Oh prosper thou, o Lord, their handy
work!

I will but add one reason more, why the Lay Elders are not to meddle in the
spiritual consistory; and that is, because they were never included within the
power of the keys given to the Apostles, and their Successors, which power
has from them devolved into our Church.

Some affirm the Gospel to have been preached here by Paul the Apostle; but I
cannot learn any certainety of that: But the Apostles being under the
persecution of Nero, I find that Philip and diverse of the godly fled into
France, who severed themselves asunder, the better to propogate the Gospel:
about the 64 year after Christ he sent over into Britain one Josephus,
together with one Simon Zelotes, to preach unto the Britains, and administer
the Sacraments according to the Rites of the Church of Greece, which Josephus,
says William Malmesbury in his book de Antiquitate Glasconici Monasterii, was
buried at Glassenbury; and John Bale following the Authority of Gyldas, and
other English Writers, says that it was Joseph of Arimathea, and about this
time did diverse of this Nation receive the Christian faith, and were baptized.

Not long after all Authors agree that Lucius King of this Isle, sent to
Eleutherius Bishop of Rome Anno Christi 177, not promising any subjection to
his See, (that not being desired, only obtruded upon King Henry the second in
Beckets business) but to say with such as were pricked in mind, Acts 2.37.
Men and Brethren what shall we do to be saved?

Eleutherius understanding the desires of King Lucius to be baptized, and to
profess and maintain the Christian Religion, and withal perceiving the able
parts and sufficiency of those two Britains, Lucius had for this purpose sent
over to him, did consecrate them Bishops, and sent them back into Britain:
And withal he taking into consideration that the converting of some, and
establishing of all of this Isle in the Christian Faith, was a task too great
for two to undergo: Though he had knowledge of their fair progress herein;
yet for their ease, help, and encouragement in so great a work, he sent over
more laborers after them into this Harvest; who for the better propogating of
the faith, and winning of souls unto Christ, and that all might be instructed,
they divided the Kingdom into Circuits amongst them. There being by Lucius and
his Nobles appointed three superintendents, or Archbishops (instead of three
Arch-Flamins which ruled before in time of Paganism) placed over the rest; one
at London, another at York, another at Carleon in Monmouth-shire. This
Bishopric of Carleon was after removed thence to St. David's in Wales, thence
into Normandy. York continues Metropolitan still, London was translated to
Canterbury by Austine the Monk. Lambert in his perambulation of Kent fol. 63.

And although the English Saxons had not received the Gospel till Ethelberts
time, in whose Reign Gregory the Pope upon occasion of seeing sweet faced
boys to be sold in the Market, and inquiring of them of what Nation and
Country they were, he was told they were Angli and of the Province of Deira,
their Kings name being Alla, to which Gregory replied, well may they be called
Angli a Dei ira liberandi, to sing Hallelujah unto the Lord; whereupon Austin
the Monk was sent over and preached in Ethelbert his Kingdom to the English
Saxons at Canterbury, Anno Christi 596.

Yet reverend Bid, and diverse others testify that the Britons, who by the
impetuous fury of the Saxons were beaten hence into Wales, embraced the
Christian faith many hundred years before Austins time, Lambert Perambulation
of Kent 19. Holinshead History of England 51, and had their Church government
by convocations and assemblies of the most learned and best Divines, (which in
some course and order, continued amongst us, till this new fashioned Presbyters
started up, but never had any Laymen to join with them, in that action, it
being conceived not to be warranted by Gods word.

Some perhaps will wonder at me that I should digress so far from my purpose
for vindication of Bishops, affirming them to be by Lucius our first Christian
King established in this Land, I might say they were ordained by the Apostles
themselves Act. 20.28. but this is no part of my purpose; only laid in the way
to prove our Church by the Apost^^s planted here, some say by Paul, but
certain by Philip, and by the Church of Rome in after times (which then was a
true Church) much p^^^ ^^^ted.

I say it is not my purpose to vindicate Episcopacy, I am too weak a prop to
uphold such a tottering and reeling Fabric: Yet armed inwardly with truth,
outwardly with argument: I will boldly tell you, Reader, (I care not who wonder
at me, let them be wondering still, and in their wonder snarle at me) I would
rather be subject to moderate Episcopacy, then our Classical Presbytery, such
Episcopacy as should not Lord it over Gods Heritage; for we know our Savior
rebuked James and John, Mar. 10.42. Luke 22.25. When the one desired to sit to
his right hand, the other on his left, in his Kingdom, saying, The Kings of
the Gentiles bear rule over them, and their great ones exercise Authority upon
them, but it shall not be so amongst you.

Such Episcopacy as should have no temporal honor or office to withdraw them
from their spiritual function, there being appointed in every County one
Superintendent or Bishop, who with his Assembly of Divines of that County
should govern the Church, and decree Ecclesiastical Causes; I say such
Episcopacy I would rather embrace, and submit unto it, then a company of
ignorant Elders; for better it were to be governed with prudence and knowledge,
then with pride and ignorance, two things incident to our Lay Elders, and this
were agreeable to the word of God, the power of the keys or of Ecclesiastical
Authority being given to the Apostles, and their Successors, Apostles, and
Ministers, not Lay Elders; I say the power of the keys being given to all the
Apostles in general, not to Peter only as is affirmed by Cajetan in his book
de primatu Romanae Ecclesiae cap. 5. and by Jerome in his first book against
Jovinianus, quod sine dubio emnes Apostoli a Christo, and non a Petro
susceperunt claves. And the Holy Ghost is plain in it, whatsoever ye shall
bind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven, Math. 18.18. and the 1 of the Corinth.
5.4. In the name of our Lord Jseus Christ when ye are gathered together, and
my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such an one unto
Satan, etc. And Joh. 20.23. Christ came and stood in the midst of his Disciples
after his resurrection, and said peace be unto you, receive ye the Holy Ghost,
whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them etc. All which
places of Scripture plainly show that the keys were given to all the Apostles
in general, though in the 16 of Matthew, they were given to Peter alone, that
is to be understood, says one, that Peter was to have power over the rest of
the Disciples, but as to others their power was all alike. And Christ in the 28
of Math. 19. dielegating this power unto the Apostles in general, bid them go
and teach all Nations, and verse the 20. Lo I am with you even unto the end of
the world, he promising his spirit to be with them, that is in their succession
to the worlds end; their Successors though ordained by men, having the same
power of jurisdiction the Apostles had, as Augustine in his first book de
Doctrina Christiana, cap 18. plainly affirms, Potestas data Apostolis and
successoribus, non data suit propter meos, sed propter Ecclesiaem, qua propter
perseverante Ecclesia potestas data Apostolis aebet perseverare.

I have been a little too tedious in this particular, but Reader your pardon,
it was only to show who have Ecclesiastical power, and are to meddle in the
Church, and it is plain they are the Apostles, and their Successors, men
lawfully ordained, and having a lawful calling thereunto, 1 Timothy 3.7.4.14. by
the laying on of hands of the presbytery of the first borne of Israel the
representative Church, Acts 6.6. Hebrews 12.23. not rashly, 1 Timothy 5.22. but
consultly instating such in holy Orders as are blameless, apt to teach, not
covetous, not a Novice, lest being lifted up with pride, he fall into the
condemnation of the Devil, 1 Timothy 3. he must upon examination likewise be
found to be one, which may be able by sound Doctrine both to exhort and
convince the gainsayers Titus 1.9. and such as these being admitted into holy
Orders, to teach and instruct others, have Apostolical power in their
Assemblies to bind and loose upon earth, and so dic Ecclesiae, expressed in
the 18 of Matthew the 16. is to be understood of men in holy Orders assembled
together to bind and loose upon earth, 1 Cor. 5.4. as I have already showed
you.

It does not follow that every Presbyter in his Parish with his Class of
Elders has this power, it were absurd to allege it, I have shown you that
this power was given to the Apostles in general, and their Successors, and the
spiritual Consistory must consist of such 1 Cor. 5.4.

Now Lay Elders can no ways be said Successors to the Apostles, they neither
being instated in holy Orders, nor within the rules prescribed by St. Paul, to
be admitted thereunto; unless we must in this topsiturvy time of ours, send
our grave, wise Doctors to the Scoole again to be taught by silly Lay Elders,
which scarce know their A. B. C. not fit to exhort, much less to convince
such, and so tread Antipodes to the practice of the Primitive Churches,
obtruding as Laiety no ways claming from Levi to be Rulers and Governors in
our Church, such a Laiety as I may justly say are mere Idols in our Church; so
that we have wrought a pri^y work, and brought about a fine Reformation;
instead of Pictures, and Crucifixes in stones and windows, which with much
zeal were demolished, we have placed in our Churches walking Images, things
that represent Elders, and which the people worship as Elders, but really and
truly are none, in the litterall sense they are not Elders, grave, wise, and
expert as I have showed you; and admit they were, yet they are Laymen, not
truly Church Officers, as spiritual Elders, and are not to join with
spiritual Elders in any Church affairs; so that for the people to worship
them as Elders, or to rise up before them, is to commit Idolatry; to prevent
the occasion of which, good King Hezekiah caused the brazen Serpent (which was
set up for a good end to heal the people that were bitten of Serpents, Numbers
21.) to be broken in pieces, 2 of Kings 18.4.

In imitation of which good Act, as also in commiseration of the free borne
people of England, groaning, under the Tyranny and slavery of this worse then
high Commission Court, I hope our happy Parliament who hitherto have shown
themselves ready and willing to redress grievances, will not in this time of
necessity crying loud unto them for help, forget their wonted practice of
goodness, to relieve distressed people, and take off the heavy pressures of
the Kingdom, but will rid the people of this one and only grievance in the
Kingdom; neither warranted by Gods Law, nor the Laws of this Kingdom (any
further then it is their pleasures to continue it.) And they will engage a
multitude of prayers for their prosperous proceedings in all their
undertakings; the which that they may speedily do the Almighty God of Heaven
who art a present remedy in all distresses, and a ready help at hand for them
that are in misery, the only wise God, the great Counselor, and ruler of all
men's hearts, dictate this to his servants in the Parliament, that we may be
freed from this intolerable slavery to Gods glory, the Parliaments honor, and
our own joy and comfort in the Lord Jesus, Amen.

Thus have I briefly couched together some collections, and short meditations
of mine own, which to the indifferent, and not forestalled judgment will give
some satisfaction in the business I have treated of, that these fine feathered
Buzzards, Lay Elders, decked with Ecclesiastical Plumes, are mere
counterfeits, Semiramis, Elephants which were but stuffed ox hides, which had
a gallant undaunted Army in suspense, counterfeit Diamonds, not such as Christ's
Spouse looked comely with, Cant. 1 9. Bolton half crowns, not lawfully stamped
with Caesar's Image, Scotch twenty-pences, the base coin of a copper Nation,
not current English, but such as every one may lawfully deny, and I am
confident the wise and judicious Reader seriously considering this will not
with the young Dotterell Birds be enticed with chafe to be caught in this net,
though never so privily laid, but will bear off and keep himself free, till
he see them fall in their own mischiefs, and themselves caught in the share
which they have privily laid for others, and if unadvisedly through ignorance
he has suffered himself to be drawn in to consent unto this government; yet
he will in time unintangle himself from the bondage thereof.

As for the perverse and obstinate Presbyter which has wedded the government,
together with some fat Benefice, and cannot divorce himself from the one
without leaving the other, having vowed perpetual incumbency to himself; I
know his heart is hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, and I cannot
diswade him from his Classical beneficial cure: Let him that is unclean be
unclean still, spoken to obstinate and wilful sinners; for my part, I do not
seek to wash Blackmoores, I Will give him leave at his Sunday dinners, and
spiritual pig-feasts, when none is by but his Lay Elders to rail against me,
and would extremely thank the pontifical Parson would he but write any
thing, subscribed with his own hand in contradiction to what I have here writ,
that I might have further occasion to anatomize the tyranny of him, and his
Elders.

In the mean time what I have here writ shall suffice, hoping shortly to
hear that this Government will be abolished, so that we shall neither need
to wrestle any longer against it in words, nor with Peter to draw the sword to
cut off the High Priest servants care Malcus, who had he lived till now would
have been, Crop the leader in this teame of Lay Elders, but I say I hope to
see these Hobby-Horses unyoked again before they run to wood with the Church
(for they must needs go whom the Devil drives;) And having loosed them out of
their Ecclesiastical Tresses, we will turn the Jades to their old Rustich
drudgeries again, which will be the better for them, the sooner it is; because
they will the more easily come to themselves again, and it cannot be worse for
us to see them reclaimed from their wincing conditions, and our selves freed
from the evil thereof: So that I conclude this work with an earnest desire,
that this may speedily come to pass, and Quo citius to Melius.

FINIS.

