POST-HASTE: A REPLY TO PETER (DOCTOR HEYLIN'S) APPENDIX; TO HIS TREATISE,
ENTITLED Respondet Petrus etc.

BY WILLIAM SANDERSON Esquire

LONDON, Printed for the use of the Author. 165^.

The Contents
PEtrus his Preface examined; A castigation of Doctor Heylin for his ill
Manners to the late Primate of all Ireland; And his scandalizing Doctor
Prideaux at Court in diverse false Informations; With a Copy of his Answer to
each; And the Protestation he was compelled unto to clear himself; The
Character given by Doctor Hackwell of Doctor Heylin; Three passages replied
unto and confirmed as before; With some seasonable good Counsel to the Doctor,
if he have the will to accept thereof.
POST-HASTE. A Reply to Peter (Doctor Heylin')
His Appendix to his Treatise, etc.
THere is a Treatise come forth the other day, Entitled Respondet Petrus; or
an answer of Peter Heylin to Doctor Bernard etc. And although it be very large
to small purpose, yet at the 109th. Page, he adds an Appendix in answer to
certain passages in Mr. Sandersons History of the late King Charles, relating
to the Lord Prymate, The Articles of Ireland, and The Earl of Strafford. And
(as if it were so memorable a business to be kept upon Record) he gives us
punctually the day, when he began to undertake this Task, and the time of his
finishing; In which I find little else true, but the confessing of his
infirmities, and his unfitness to enter into disputes etc. Instead of clearing
himself, he has added more spots to his former.

Indeed Petrus has made have; for notwithstanding the extremity of the season
(as he says) and his languishing quartanague, he hobled up his answers for the
middle of the Term following, with as much ease, as Hoggs eat Acornes, or
Pigeons pick Pease. Yet he was interrupted the publishing, by the undertakers
with him; a dead vacation not profitable for the vent thereof; And so it came
not forth until just the first day of this Midsomer Term; By it, he has both
thriftily gotten the advantage of sale, and enforces his adversaries to hunt
dryfoot after him a whole long Summers Vacation; contemptible Grasshoppers
compared with such a son of Anak as himself; Only Petrus considers wisely,
that although convicia spreta exolescunt etc. Short lived Pamphlets (with which
he has been often banged) pass away upon the breath of Rumor, but for him to
be enrolled upon record in the body of an History, what is it less, than for
him to live defamed, and dye detestable, a scorn to these times and an
ignominy to all ages following? But who can help it, if a Man will make himself
such? I wish he be not prophetic in it, which by this book he has put hard
for, Let him not blame me, it is the malefactor himself (not the judge who
pronounces justly) that is the Author of his own ruin.

And thus in brief we have the Preface to his large Treatise; which I shall
leave to such, whom it may concern, if they conceive it worthy of answering,
for I find some learned Men are for the Negative, as if he had been in it, his
self-revenger, and next door to a felo de se, rather to be pitied, than
opposed.

I shall only take notice of his Appendix, and show him to the Reader by that
light by which he longs to be seen (wherein Petrus falls upon me) not so much
answering as to show how little he deserves it. I have been a while
considering, which part to take of that double Counsel of Solomon in the like
case, Answer not etc. And yet answer etc. I concluded upon the latter in this
Post-Hast, that the Term might not want an interlude at the ending, as well as
it had by his Book, at the beginning of it.

And now let me meet my Petrus, who spends 17 whole Pages in the combat with
me, taking in his large Frontispeice* or the Contents of his Appendix, which
might have well stood for the whole. So have we seen a da^^ing coward practice
on the Stage to fence with his supposed foe, when all that while it was but
with his own hat and feather. How much time does Petrus spend, to hear himself
speak, imagining the Reader to be bound up to his sense and audience.

Indeed I had warning heretofore not to meddle with him, and was told, that
although he was blind, yet he with his helpers, could see as far into a
Millstone as any other Man: And that if he should be concerned in my History
(as how could he escape) he would reprint himself, and be thereby well paid for
his pains.

And truly I conceive it no discretion for me, to make it my business other
than to dry blow beat him, since he is not herein worthy of bleeding. For to
say much were but to give him further occasion to assume fresh credit of
copeing with the deceased, now at rest, whom he has endeavored to disturb,
even the most Reverend name and living fame, of that approved learned Prelate,
the late Archbishop of Armagh, Prymate of all Ireland.

But to be a little serious with him, it is no news for Doctor Heylin to be a
disturber of pious and eminent Men, while they were living, of which (now he is
not like to live long himself) it is time to think upon repenting, I shall upon
this occasion only instance in his demeanor toward Doctor Prideaux, at and
after the taking of his degree in Oxford Anno 1635. Who catching at some
particulars which fell from Doctor Prideaux in the discussing the questions
Doctor Heylins desturbance of Doctor Prideaux.
given by Doctor Heylin, scandalized him at Court to the late King being then
at Woodstock.

An Ecclesia authoritatem habeat Insor mat ex Articul: 20.

In fidei controversiis determinandis, affi^m

Interpretandis sacras scripturas,
Decernendi ritus et ceremonias.
Upon which the Doctor was compelled to make his defense; with a protestation
under his hand against those false Informations given in against him;
Pretending to have been cross to the Articles, and in special to the 20th, of
the Church of England, branched into positions viz.

1 That the Church is Mera Chimaera.

2 That it teaches and determines nothing,

3 That controversies might better be referred to the Universities than to the
Church.

4 That learned men in the Universities might determine of controversies
without the Bishops or acquainting them with them.

To these Doctor Prideaux was fain to make answer, which to satisfy the desire
of the Reader (not being heretofore published) I shall give him a transcript as
follows viz.

The answer of Doctor Prideaux to the Information given in against him by
Doctor Heylin.

These passages imperfectly catched at by the Informer were not positions of
mine, (for I detest them, as they are laid, for impious and ridiculous) but
oppositions according to my place proposed for the further clearing of the
truth; to which the Respondent was to give satisfaction. And this general
protestation I hope takes off all that can be laid against me, in the
particulars. Notwithstanding to touch on each of them as they are laid.

1 To the First, I never said that the Church was Mera Chimaera as it is, or,
has a being, and ought to be believed; but as the Respondent by his answers
made it: In which I conceived him to swerve from the Article, where his
questions were taken.

2 To the Second my argument was to this purpose, Omnis actio est suppositorum,
vel singularium.

Ergo Ecclesia in abstracto nihil docet, aut determinat, sed per hos aut illos
Episcopos, Pastores, Doctores, etc. homo non disputat sed Petrus et Johannes.

3. 4. The Third and Fourth may be well put together: my prosecution was, that
the Universities are eminent parts, and Seminaries of the Church, and had
better opportunity to discuss controversies, than diverse other assemblies; Not
by any means to determine them, but to prepare them for the determination of
Ecclesiastical assemblies, of Synods, Counsels, Bishops, that have superior
Authority, wherein they might do service to the Church, and those superiors
not perscribe any thing unto them; As the debating of a point by learned
Counsel, makes the easier passage for the Benches sentence: And this was urged
only as commended, not as necessary.

The Queens Al^^^oner was present. Informer.

I am told noe. Doctor Prideaux.
For he departed (as they say) that were in the same seat with him, being
tired, as it should seem, by the tedious preface of the * Respondent, Doctor
Heylin.
before the disputations began; but be it so, or otherwise, to what purpose
this is interposed, I know not?

Upon an occasion of mentioning the absolute decree, Informer.
he brake forth into a great and long discourse, that his mouth was shut by
Authority, else he would maintain that truth contra omnes, qui sunt in vivis
which fetched a great hum from the Country Ministers that were there.

This Argument I confess was unexpectedly cast in by another, Doctor Prideaux.
but bent (as I took) it against some what I have written in that behalf, which
the Respondent, not endeavoring to clear, I was put upon it to show, in what
sense I took absolutum decretum, which indeed I said, I was able to maintain
against any, as my predecessors in that place had done, This was not in a long
discourse, as it is suggested, but in as short a solution as is usually brought
in Schools, to a doubt on the by.

And from this I took off the opponents further proceeding in obedience to
Authority; whereupon if a hum succeeded, it was more then I use to take notice
of, it might be as well of dislike, as of Approbation, and of other Auditors as
soon as Country Minnisters. A Hiss I am sure was given before, when the
Respondent excluded King and Parliament from being parts of the Church; But I
remember whose practice it is to be (...) I had rather to bear and forbear, The
accuser of the (...) Rev. 12. 10.
and end with this Protestation.

Protestation.
THat as I believe the Catholic Church in my Creed, Doctor Prideaux
Protestation.
so I reverence this Church of England, wherein I had my Baptism, and whole
breeding, as a most eminent member of it. To the Doctrine, and discipline of
this Church, have I often hitherto subscribed, and by Gods grace constantly
adhered, And resolve by the same assistance, according to my ability under his
Majesty's protection faithfully to maintain against the Papists or any other
that shall oppose it. The prelacie of our Reverend Bishops I have ever defended
in my place, which I dare say has been more often, and with greater pains
taking than most of those have done, who have received greater encouragements
from their Lordships: I desire nothing but the continuance of my Vocation in a
peaceable course, that after all my pains taking in the place of his Majesty's
Professor, almost for this 18. years together, my Such proceeded (...) Doctor
Heylin (...) one.
sonns especially, be not countenanced in my declining age to vilify me, and
vex me; so that I end the remainder of my time, (which likely must be short,
and cannot be long) in hearty prayer for his Majesty my only Master and
Patron; for the Reverend Bishops, the State, and all his Majesty's Subjects and
his affairs; and continue my utmost endeavor to do all faithful service to
the Church wherein I live, to whose Authority I have ever, and do hereby
submit my self, and Studies, to be according to Gods word directed or converted.

Thus was this learned and eminent Professor of divinity traduced and
disturbed, let the application be the patience and disregard of the Reader,
when in this book he finds the like attempted by the same person, upon the late
Archbishop of Armagh.

And yet, what slender account is to be made of his language that way, Doctor
Hackwells Character of Doctor Heylin.
may appear by the Character, which a learned person, and one of note, George
Hackwell Archdeacon of Surrey and of Exeter College in Oxford, gives of him
which I have under his own hand in a letter of his to a friend; Where, speaking
of Mr. Heylin (since Doctor) whom he styles, the Patron of that pretended Saint
(St George,) has these words of him, viz.

In the second impression of his book where he has occasion to speak of the
Roman writers, especially the Legendaries, he magnifies them more, and when he
mentions our men he vilefies them more than he did in his first Edition, But
the matter is not much, what he says of one or the other, the condition of the
man, being such, as his word hardly passes, either for commendation, or a
slander.

By this you may see that my adversary had good cause to disguise his name, and
so would I too, were it under such an Ignominious character. This is the fourth
time he has done it, I expect in time he will make up the number of Labans
change of Jacobs wages. Here is a Proteus indeed (which he would have put upon
me) Annonymus, observator, observator Rescued, Rejoinder and now Petrus. It Is
well he hangs by his christian name; he has in this presumed, beyond any Pope,
who though they have assumed Paul, the fifth time, yet none has styled himself
Petrus. We have now the one half of him, we shall have the other the next,
either conjunctim, or divisim, it matters not.

He begins with his fancy of my being Doctor Bernards Reserve, in clearing the
whole proceedings of the Lord Prymate in the business of the Earl of Strafford;
and in the Examination and moderation of all passages, between Mr. l'Estrange
and him. I shall satisie the Reader upon what occasion I undertoke it.

So soon as that Anonymus of an observator on Mr. l'Estrange, The occasion why
I undertook his observations on Mr. l'eStrange.
came to the Prymates hands, he was pleased to show it to me; and finding the
Author so apt upon a slender occasion to bleamish him; (supposing him to be
some Romish Agent whom he disdaining to Answer,) desired me in the prosecution
of my History (as it lay in my way) to vindicate him, (though not long after I
was told by his Bookseller, that the Author was Doctor Heylin In order
thereunto he acquainted me with such passages as did concern that of the Earl
of Strafford; whose commands I presently effected; intending (then) to have set
it out by it self, least the Doctors Malice should Gangreen by neglect. But the
Lord Prymates decease immediately following, it was referred to my History with
some fresh Notions more proper, which in my absence was neglected by the Press;
and at my return, they being inserted have given cause of Intersections in the
Impression, between fol. 108 and 109. With which Petrus is so much troubled,
and spends his breath in a dispute with himself, whether it were mine or Doctor
Bernards? And why so jealous, good Petrus? Append: pa. 142
First (says he) because Mr. Sanderson before in his Preface makes Doctor
Heylin a person of some fame and great ability. That (possibly) might be my
mistake as the next in my speaking reprochfully, of him, is his: Indeed I
acknowledge that Doctor Heylin deserves Characters of several kinds, as most
men may discover, who consult his writings; and so Cato's, lesson learnt by him
long ago Convenient nulli etc. will better serve the turn to decipher him,
than me.

Secondly, (says he) Mr. Sanderson in his History fol. 200. informs us, that
in Anno. 1635. There was a Synod held in Ireland etc. But in his foysted
Argument he speaks the Contrary. Good Petrus consult some true friends, that
will read ^right to you, and you will find the several Folio's you mention,
not to be any thing contrary, which are too tedious to insert in this short
Castigation.

Three points there are in which Petrus fancies me, Three points of mine
quarrelled by Petrus.
to act for Doctor Bernard.

1 The acquitting the Lord Prymate from the distinction of a Political and a
personal conscience. And yet it is confessed by himself to have been done to
my hand by Mr. Howell's attestation of my history, (who was concerned in those
words.)

2 The proving that the Articles of Ireland were not abrogated and those of the
Church of England inserted in their stead. And yet he has prevented any
further confirmation of either, by his own confessing of his being too much
credulous in beleiving and inconsiderate in publishing such mistaken
intelligence. Which are his own words folio 87. And I could wish that in the
Errata of the next Edition of his History of the Sabbath (if the world be ever
troubled with it again) he would Record this Ingenuity of his (being such a
rarity in him) so as to retract it, and howsoever he is much offended at the
Primates expressions, viz. Nor shames he to affirm as being a Notorious untruth
etc. Truly with me it seems a gentle penance for so presumptuous an assertion,
and pertinaciously continuing in it these many years, till he was thus
convict; defaming not only a single person, but a whole Nation.

3 That the Lord Prymate boar no grudge to the Earl of Strafford, so as to
advise the King to pass the Bill of Attainder. This (whosoever he accounts the
Actor) has been sufficiently cleared also, and needs no repetition here.

For the term of Sophistry, (for which he is also much offended with the
Prymate) he has in the Judgment of diverse, made it good, throughout his book,
which are so many, that they would find as much work for an observator, as he
says my History will afford him: I shall only trouble the Reader with one
instance ( ex ungue Leonem* by this you may judge of the rest) which is in such
great Characters, that he who rides post, may read it without stopping.

It Is folio 63. where he repeating a Quotation of the Prymate in the conclusion
of his Letter to Doctor Twiss viz: That Gregory the great, esteemed it to be
the doctrine of the Preachers of Antichrist; who at his coming shall cause both
the Lords day, and the Sabbath, to be kept, or celebrated from doing any
work;) Petrus, in his pretended answer, has blindly mistaken the Copulative
and, for the disunctive or (though the Prymate in the next words, had given him
warning of that Stumble:) And so upon a false fent he runs away with the Hunt,
as if it must necessarily follow from thence That it is the doctrine of the
Preachers of Antichrist that no manner of work be done on the Saturday or the
Sunday: And from that surmise, he makes an application (of which, I leave it to
others to give the sense.) What will become (says he) of our English
Sabbatarians and their Abettors, who impose as many restraints of this kind,
upon Christian people, as ever were imposed on the Jews, by the Scribes and
Pharisees? And in Conclusion he attempts to put out our Eyes also, in
persuading us again; That it is all one to say, on the Saturday and the Sunday;
as on the Saturday, or the Sunday; As if unity and division; conjunction and
separation, were alike with him: And it seems by this, that his Nature is most
addicted to the latter.

As for that great offense taken by him in the mistake of weakness, Append: p.
195.
for incredulity, and Idleness* for Inconsideration in the printing of the
Prymates Letter: There is no such difference, either in quantity or quality;
but that if he can swallow the one, (as he has done even now) he may as easily
digest the other: And it being but a copy, it might as well happen as other
greater mistakes have been in my absence between the Margin and the body of
that letter.

Though it is possible for Petrus to show his guilt of Idleness, to make more
work for the Press to no purpose. Which petulant brain of his, may be excused
by the want of that sense, which might divert his thoughts, otherwise.

And for what else remains, Append: p. 147.
concerning the Bishops whether sent for, or sent to the King? Or whether the
Judges were willi^^ or unwilling to deliver their Iudgm^^^ against the votes of
the Parliament? I r(...) the Reader to what has been said in the History* too
tedious to recite.

As for the challengers threats with which he concludes, (hereafter) to commit
a public Riot on my whole History; and therein to be made immortal, by being
loud and troublesome. He that marches against the Ocean may no doubt take
abundance of Cockle shells Captive. I confess ingeniously, there may be
mistakes in the body of so large an History, which will be amended in the next
Impression, as it is suddenly intended; wherein, your oblique Information, or
any civil advertisement of others will direct me: Seeing (as Petrus says)
abilities not governed by Infallibility, cannot exempt a man from being
obnoxious to mistakes, with which his own Pamphlets are pestered. But spare
your Intelligence in the disquisition of one particular concerning the Children
of Mr. John Hambden of Buckingham Shire, which is confessed an Errata, and must
be thus corrected: That he died of his wounds, and left three Sons complete
Persons both of body and mind; what ere sinister Report then gave occasion of
the mistake.

And now ( Petrus) at parting: I could find in my heart to give you a little
good Counsel: Be not so wild an Ishmaelite, as to have your hand against
every man, and provoking every man's hand against you.

Take the advice given to your namesake: Peter, put up thy sword again into his
place. Leave off this cross^grain humor, studying the injury against such
Persons, as the late eminent Prymate, so far above you in learning and
reputation, that wise men look upon your language, like the barking at the
Moon; or a madman throwing up a sharp stone, which falls on his own pate.

This your last Book, having made you such a Bankrupt in point of reputation
with most men, that all the charitable collections of your numerous helpers,
will not easily recruite you.

I reverence your function, and mervail that many of your Books do so little
concern it, rather to the dishonor than otherwise, and I am not at all obliged
to respect your person. Your travail has been much earthy, at which you began,
had you continued that Journey, you might have amended your own Errors. What
is otherwise (as the observations of the Lords day, or of Persons of piety, who
were and are for it) you have been in a continual combat against both.

Your own friends conceive you unfortunate, to the disturbance of the Church in
each; For my part, so soon as I find you reformed, I shall contribute my
endeavors, that your credit, now out of joint, may be set right again. Your
own Pen that broke you must repair you, though as yet I am among the number of
those that therein despair. And as you have been a


