A VINDICATION OF KING CHARLES: OR, A LOYAL SUBJECTS DUTY.

MANIFESTED In Vindicating his Sovereign from those Aspersions cast upon Him
by certain persons, In a scandalous Libel, Entitled, The Kings Cabinet
Opened: And published (as they say) by Authority of Parliament.

Whereunto is added, A true Parallel betwixt the sufferings of our Savior and
our Sovereign, in diverse particulars, etc.

By EDW: SYMMONS, A Minister, not of the late confused New, but of the Ancient,
Orderly, and True Church of England.

Remember (Lord) the reproach of thy servant, how he bears in his bosom the
reproach of all the mighty (wicked) people. Wherewith thine enemies have
rep2roached (O Lord) wherewith they have reproached the footsteps of thine
Anointed. PSALM. 89. 50, 51. His Enemies will I clothe with shame, but upon
Himself shall his Crown flourish. PSALM. 132. 18. Even so, Amen. REV. 22. 20.
-- But thou, O Lord, how long? PSALM. 6. 3. Printed in the Year, 1648.



To all that truly fear God, into whose hands this Book shall come.
Christian Friends,
THis Book here tendered to your view, was (for the most part of it) made in
Cornwall, in the year 1645. I was quickened in my undertaking by a noble
Gentleman of great faithfulness and Loyalty; that County has many such.
Before it was quite concluded, the Enemy, like a flood, brake in thither:
Whereupon to preserve and finish it, I went to France, but by so doing, I had
almost lost it; for my Cloak-bag, which contained it, (and all I had beside)
passed (by accident) in one Ship, and my self went in another, and we landed an
hundred miles asunder: that was Plundered, and nothing therein returned unto me,
but only these Papers, and they by mere fortune some six weeks after. Which
special Providence in their particular preservation, spoke them to my heart,
Gods will to have them published, and to my hopes, his purpose to grant a
blessing: Hereupon I fitted them for the Press with all speed, and they were
ready in May* 1646. nor was the fault in my will, that they were not then
committed to the same. But perhaps God had a special Providence in this also,
peoples hearts were not then so capable to receive a Vindication of their
Sovereign from a fellow-Subject, as now they are even forced to be, by that
illustrious eminency of his graces which has beamed forth in his dark
condition, even to the conviction and admiration of all reasonable creatures.

Since the finishing hereof, I had occasion to see and observe the manners and
conditions of the French Nation, both those of the Romish, and of the Reformed
Religion; and my special care was, to understand what sense they had of the
present differences in our Church and Nation; which truly to remember, is but
to renew that grief I had in observing. In brief, they both conjoyntly
rejoiced at our follies, and (as appeared to me) desired our ruin: And this
did chiefly occasion the writing my Postscript, which was done the last
Spring, at my return into the hither parts of that Kingdom, where I
understood also of His Majesty's restrained condition at Holdenby.

About the time of his deliverance from that place, by Gods direction and
merciful protection, I came back safe into England; but fancying the season to
be then past, for publication of my Book, in regard of those great alterations
which had happened since its first composall: and withal, some hopeful
reasons offering themselves to my thoughts at my first arrival, made me
conceive it would not be so needful. Therefore I resolved to lay it aside. But
after some months expectance (those new hopes being likely to prove tympanous)
I was solicited by some friends from the farthest part of the Kingdom, to put
it to the Press: now I was in a place where the same might be done; who also
informed me that (in their apprehensions) vulgar hearts wanted satisfaction in
nothing concerning the Kings integrity, but only in the matter of those
Letters, which did still scruple many of them. Wherefore they conjured me, (if
I rendered His Majesty's Honor indeed) that I should give the world a speedy
view, of what I had writ to that particular.

These Arguments easily prevailed with a willing mind, which was encouraged
farther by that free liberty which I saw daily used by others, in writing and
speaking against those sins and sinners, which this Book reproves; though to
my grief withal I saw in many Papers wickedness rather scoffed at, then
pursued with such grave and home rebukes as the case requires: and sin thereby
I perceived was rather made a matter of laughter, then of sorrow, even to the
most guilty, (through that impudence which is in them: and yet I doubt not too
but ingenious lashes are sufficiently distasteful to galled spirits, because
there is truth as well as wit in them; they happily may be as rods to rotten
hearts, but Gods Word if closely applied, (as I hope in some measure it is in
this Book done) will prove unto them as a very Scorpion; if those make them
hiss and spit, this will make them even rage and roar; for the more Divinity
a proof carries with it or in it, the more tormentfull it is always unto the
wicked. Sic scriptum est may happily silence Satan, but it is not always so
powerful upon the spirits of proud men. The Pharisees were so far from being
quieted by Christ's doctrine, that they grew more enraged, and were incensed
thereby to seek his ruin, and had no rest till they had procured it, though
they got none by it. And let any one practice Christ, or follow him in his way
as close as he can, he shall (doubtless) meet with those that will practice
the Pharisees, and follow them a great deal closer.

It was in my thoughts (I confess) to have concealed my name, as you may see
in the following Preface, and for what reasons: but I have altered my
resolution concerning that particular, from these considerations.

First, if I had not owned my work, I had done that which I dislike, and
incurred the blame which I object to others; I had hazarded my Book to be
entitled a Libel, and exposed my self to be reckoned in the number of
night-birds that love darkness: yea, I had receded from my former self: for
when the King was in a condition visibly Potent, I prefixed my name to all I
writ; and if I should forbear to do so now, I should appear as fallen in my
zeal, and abated in my dutiful affections, by the increases of his
Afflictions. I read of Nicodemus, who affecting secrecy while Jesus was at
liberty, came to him by night; but when he was in restraint, he thought it his
duty to discover himself in his behalf, and so he did more then ever: All
Scripture is written for our learning.

Secondly, I held my self bound to attest my Keeping, as I had done my Taking
the Protestation, and that was, by writing my name. For this, my Book is
nothing else but the discharge of my Conscience and Duty in that respect:
Herein I have (according to the very Letter of it) with my power maintained and
defended, 1. The true Reformed Protestant Religion expressed in the Doctrine of
the Church of England against Popish Tenants, and Innovations: 2. His Majesty's
Royal Person, Honor and Estate, according to mine Allegiance: And 3. The Power
and Privileges of Parliament, together with the true Rights and Liberties of
the Subject: Yea, I have here endeavored with all faithfulness, to vindicate
the Dignity of that High and Supreme Court, from the scandal of Rebellion,
Oppression, Injustice and other evils, which to its great disgrace have been
practiced under its venerable Name, and thereby (so much as in me lies) I have
freed it from the merit of that Odium which is wrought in Peoples hearts
against it: For indeed the very name of Parliament is grown more hateful to
many of the vulgar (through their ignorance,) then ever that of Star Chamber,
or High Commission was: and they wish and pray (through their folly) that the
same may be quite abolished as those others are. I have also herein opposed and
endeavored to bring (by discovering their wickedness) to condign punishment
those evil workers, who by Force, Practice, Councels, Plots, Conspiracies, and
every other way have done things contrary to all those things in the said
Protestation contained: All which I promised and vowed to do, in a lawful way,
(which is that of my Calling) even with the hazard of my life as well as of
mine estate (which is lost already;) and this my Conscience says I shall not
fully do, unless I publicly own my doings by prefixing my name unto them.

Thirdly, I considered with my self, that by concealing my name, I should seem
(in a sort) to be ashamed of that Truth which I profess to maintain, and of
following my Master Christ, in his way of detecting Hypocrites, and wicked men:
He says of himself, that in secret he had spoke nothing, that is, He was no
back-biter, no whisperer against any in private corners. He spoke openly
against men's evil doings, and was never ashamed to acknowledge his own
Doctrines: And he has said too, that I cannot be his Disciple, that is,
approved indeed, unless I follow him, viz: in his very way, doing his work
after his very manner; though I meet with his Cross in the doing of it, which
also I must take up cheerfully after his example, be it with the loss of my
life it self; He lost his before me.

Fourthly, I considered that my Book is likely to prove more serviceable by
mine open acknowledgement of it; the writings of that courageous and learned
Judge, Master David Jenkins, are believed to have done the more good by the
setting his name unto them: nor did I think it comely that any man should
appear more resolute for the Law of the Land, then the Ministers of Christ are
for the Law of their God.

For mine own part I am sure I should show my self most strangely ungrateful
to the Almighty, and distrustful of him, (after so large an experience as I
have had of his mercy and goodness) if any fear of danger, should make me
upon this occasion obscure my self. My former Books (though plain) (by his
gracious blessing) were not unfruitful among many of my Countrymen, unto whom
my name (as of late I perceive) is not so distatefull, that I should think them
unwilling to see it in print again: and from any hurt by those that took
offense at them, my God has hitherto protected me; as he has often done
(praised be his Name) from the mischiefs (of being beaten and pistolled) often
threatened by some of the prophaner sort of our Cavalleers, for my free
preaching against their blasphemy and dissoluteness, their selfseeking,
lust-pleasing, and King-neglecting baseness. Now after David's way of arguing;
He that delivered me from the Lion and the Bear, can also, etc. He is the same
God still, if I can but believe, He can, yea and will preserve in the midst of
danger: wherefore though it was once in my mind ( viz. when I was at a great
distance) both to conceal my name, and also to keep out of their reach, (as
may appear by that passage page 275.) yet now being returned amongst them, I
have for these reasons altered my resolution in that particular.

And again, beside these Reasons, I had in my heart also these Reasonings: What
if I do suffer? is it not for a King, a gracious King, to whom I have sworn
Allegiance, and under whose Protection I have labored in Gods Vineyard? Is it
not for a Church, a Mother Church, that admitted me first Christ's Member, and
afterward Christ's Minister? is it not for keeping the Protestation, that
Protestation tendered to me by the Parliament, when it was a Parliament? is it
not for discharging my Conscience and Office? for telling people of their sins
(according to Gods Command?) for detecting Hypocrites after Christ's own
example? and shall I by suffering for the same do any other, then with Simon of
Cyrene help my Savior bear his Cross? Have I yet resisted unto blood as many
before me have done? Ought I not to be willing to lose life it self for my
Brethren, to redeem them from the ways of sin and error? May not happily this
their redemption be effected sooner by suffering, then by preaching? Is not my
exclusion and debarment from an appointed place to preach in, a kind of a call
or setting aside to sufferings? Could Saint Paul have wished himself even
separate from Christ, if on that condition he might have united his Countrymen
unto him, and should not I be willing to go to Christ for the gaining of mine?
Am I not Christ's own to be disposed of for his service? Did not he buy me for
that end? Did not he honor me with the dignity of being one of his Ministers
of purpose that I should bear witness of his Truth? is it any new thing to
suffer for the sake of that? Shall I (if thereunto called) be the first that
have attested the same unto the world? Beside, what advantage will the
Adversaries get to themselves by being cruel to me? Shall they not rather
confirm thereby to the world what I have written of their conditions? Nay,
shall not those whom I have detected only in the general, by their being
angry at me, expose themselves to be known particulatim and nominatim, and
shall hey any whit strengthen their Dominion by my ruin? Shall they not rather
hasten their own thereby? Was not the reign of the Popish Bishops here in
Queen Mary's days the sooner at its period (in the judgments of all men) for
their persecuting those Reverend Bishops and Ministers, who opposed their
sinful ways, and sealed wi^^ their blood that Doctrine and Lyturgie, which
is now a pulling down in this Kingdom? These and such like also were the
reasonings of my spirit, concerning this matter of prefixing my name, to this
Vindication.

But perhaps some of you will say, Ad quid perditio haec, what needs all this
waste of words? Times are not now as they have been. Many of the Presbyterian
faction, in whom the spirit of cruelty is most natural, and who ruled the Roast
when most of these villainies were acted, which your Book reproves, are either
run away, or turned the other way: for the Militia (now most in the others
hands) has proved a stronger Argument with their Consciences, then their
Covenant: and therefore there is no cause to fear persecution, for a discharge
of duty: And besides, these are times wherein every one may speak and practice
as himself pleases, nor can any be imagined so vile as to permit all that
will; to write against that King whom God has commanded to Honor, and that
Church which baptized and taught us all the knowledge of God we have, and be
offended only at those that write in their behalf: Shall we think that men
have leave in these Reforming times to be any thing but true Protestants, and
to do any thing but their duties? away, away with all Panick fears.

To this I Answer: 1. There is a Leaven of that proud and sower Faction yet
remaining. 2. There is a Generation of Apostate Priests, too much in favor
with men of Power: and these are mischievous men, who having themselves
betrayed the Truth, cannot abide that any should appear for it; they have
hitherto been the chief movers to persecution, for those Greater persons would
never (doubtless) have defiled themselves with such actions, as casting Gods
Ministers out of their Possessions, if some of these little Satan's had not
stood at their right hands to tempt them, and provoke them. Now these persons,
(specially those of mine old acquaintance) do cry nothing but hanging, hanging
against me, (for I believe, their sight of me puts them in mind of their own
Apostasy, from that way of Christ, wherein formerly they walked with me) they
have confidently said it, that the Parliament would hang me: And why? Because I
was one (among many others) that had proved this unnatural War to be
unlawful by Gods Word, and had Vindicated sacred Scripture from those false
and perverse glosses, which for ill purposes were put upon it: And these
Prophets (that in this particular at least themselves may appear true) will do
their best I believe with the Members of both Houses, to make good the word
which they have spoken; for those Lords and Gentlemen whom they relate unto (if
they can prevail with them) shall be all conditioned like Dionisius the Tirant
of Siracuse who sent Philoxenus to the gallows, because he would not flatter
him. But as the Prophet said, so say I; As for me, behold I am in their hands,
let them Jer. 26. 14, 15.
do with me as seems meet and good unto them, etc. It has been mine
endeavor this seven years day, and my usual Prayer, that I may be able to
conclude as M. Bradford the Martyr did concerning those that had power over
him: viz. If they shall imprison me, I Will thank them; If they shall burn me,
I Will thank them; If they shall banish me, I Will thank them; but if they shall
give me leave to preach the Gospel, I Will thank them more: and I promise them
withal by Gods grace, to be a daily Petitioner for their Conversion, and for
the pardon of their sins.

And for my kind Brethren, I will (in requital) remember them of their
destiny: they may read it themselves in Isay 9. 15. The Prophet that teaches
lies is the tail: So in Mal. 2. 8. 9. The Lord speaking to some of their stamp,
says, Because ye have departed out of the way, and caused my people to
stumble, therefore I Will make you the most vile, base and contemptible among
them. Yea, I doubt not e'relong but by most men they will be so reputed, (however
of late they have been honored:) and justly indeed do they merit to be the
tail of the people, for making themselves to be Rev. 12. 3.
the tail of the Dragon: which they have manifestly done by their casting down
the Stars from Heaven, the Orthodox Ministers out of Christ's Church: But when
this their day of contempt is come, and they are assaulted (as that Popish
Doctor Bourn was in Queen Mary's days) even in the Pulpit, from whence they
have vented their lies and blasphemies, (as to this it will come:) I hope (if I
live to see it) I shall have grace to approve my self to them, as Master
Bradford did to him; and help to conduct them away in safety from vulgar rage,
and persuade the people to rest quiet; (for thus it becomes the true Gospel:)
No disaffection have I now (as God knows) unto their persons, though I profess
my self a perfect enemy to their courses.

But now (good Readers) to leave them, there remains only two requests which I
make to you.

The first is this, That you would not think amiss of the most High and
Honorable Court of Parliament, for those evils that are done in these days
under its name; and if any suggest that such or such passages in this my Book
are against the same, believe them not, for I profess unto you, I neither do
nor dare think the supreme Court of Justice in this Kingdom to be all one with
sin, or that Oppression, Sacrilege, Rebellion, Popery, and those other
Evils, which I inveigh against, are the Actions of that, when God shall please
to restore unto us a true Parliament, you shall see all these things amended;
and the Authors of them severely punished: Have still therefore a Reverend
esteem of Parliaments.

Secondly, I desire that you would not conceive any bitterness in me or in my
Book, against the persons of those men that now are called the Parliament (as
perhaps some may fancy, because my usage has not been good) for I profess
here also unto you, that I do not apprehend my self, (in respect of my self) to
have any true cause of hate toward them: I thank God I can say to them as the
Apostle to his Galathians, You have not hurt me at all: Nay, rather I hope they
have been the means to make me (in some sort) a better Christian.

The Causes of my sufferings (as I learned at first from some of themselves)
were these four: I hinted them indeed to the world before in my A Book so
called, Printed, 1643.
Loyal Subjects Belief, and refer them now to your judgments, whether they
may not occasion comfort and rejoicing in me, yea and love too toward them,
rather then hatred or ill affections.

The first was (as I was then told) because I was an honest man; and thereby
did more hurt to their Cause (being opposite to it) in the Country where I was
known, then an hundred knaves: what greater Honor could they do me, then by
affording this Testimony of me? This reason I confess from their mouths was
apprehended by me as a timely intimation and call from God, to do their cause
from thence forth what hurt I could, which (by his power) I have since
endeavored, and (by his grace) shall continue so to do unto my lives end.)

The second was, Because I had preached the Truth, which (the Member said) was
not to be spoken at all times; no not by those entrusted with it of God, though
also a Divine Truth, and in danger to be lost. What an high Dignity also was
this to me, to be ranked thus among Christ's Disciples, and thought worthy to
suffer (as the Apostles did) for the Truth of God?

The third was, Because I was for the King: And what are my sufferings for this
Reason, but a public Proclamation in my behalf, that I am a good Subject, and
one of those few, among many, that have obtained mercy of God to be faithful.

The fourth was, Because I would not preach to promote the war. Now what
fuller manifestation could they make of my being Philopatris, a lover of my
Country; and a true Minister of Christ the Prince of Peaee; then by their
taking from me what I had; because I would not be tempted to do a thing
destructive to my Nation, and mis-becoming the Gospel? yea, and more then this,
themselves of late have punished diverse The stirrers up to a new War.
persons for not being (like me) of such conditions.

And thus (Christian Readers) having seen the Reasons of my sufferings, I
believe you will judge (as I do) that I have no particular cause of hatred
against these men, who have been (as I take it) but Gods Instruments to give a
good testimony of me unto the World: wheresore (I beseech you all) mistake me
not in your reading my Book: fancy not that, under a notion of bitterness,
which may be called Gratitude rather: my endeavors are, to bring them back out
of darkness into Light, from under the power of Satan unto God: My expressions
to this end (perhaps) sometimes are sharp and home: But I have been a
practitioner in the high Art of Soul-faving this twenty years, and by Gods
blessing have attained to so much skill therein, that I know all sinners are
not alike, nor must be dealt with in the same way; our Savior spoke to the
Scribes and Pharisees after another manner, then he was wont to do to the
Common people: Some must by violence be plucked out of the fire.

Last of all, I desire this of you that fear the Lord to afford me the
Protection of your Prayers: I might require you by the Protestation you have
taken, to maintain and defend me also other ways, (as thereby you are bound)
in whatsoever I have here said or done, it being only in pursuance of the said
Protestation, (which I have perfixt to the beginning of the Book, that with the
more case you may observe and compare mine aims and endeavors with the words
and scope therein.) But indeed your supplications to God, is that only which I
desire, for next to faith in God, I count the Prayers of the godly, the best
Militia under Heaven, for protection and preservation; and so the Lord of Life
and Spirit rest upon you, and dwell in you for ever.

October 25. 1647. Your Brother in Christ, and Servant for his sake, E. S.

A Preface to the Readers, specially to the Loyal Subjects of England,
Scotland, and Ireland.
Christian Friends,
ABout July, 1645. a certain scandalous Pamphlet, entitled, The Kings Cabinet
opened, etc. was published by certain unnatural Englishmen, and dispersed
through His Majesty's Dominions of Great Britain and Ireland, on purpose to
make Him distasteful to His own people: Yea many of the Copies were
transmitted to foreign parts, to render* Him a spectacle of offense to the
whole world: one of them (some months after the divulging) fortuned into my
hands, which when I had read, and with amazement considered, the reproachful
style, and mischievous scope of the Authors therein, finding it every way, (in
regard of the persons from and of whom it was) more vile then Senacherib's
Letter or Rabshekah's Tongue: I thought it my duty first to spread it before
the Lord, and then before the world, in opening the true nature of it, which I
have here done for these ends:

First, to vindicate my Sovereigns Name and Honor, to which as a Subject I am
bound by common Allegiance, Oath, and Protestation. 2. To warn you (my
Fellow Subjects) of the snare laid to catch you; (for your subversion as well
as the Kings defamation is aimed at) and to this I am engaged, as a Brother, as
a Christian. 3. To detect the virulent natures, and cursed dispositions of
wicked men, which I am obliged to perform, in respect of mine office and
calling, being one of those, whom God has honored to be a Seer, or Watchman
in his Israel, a Minister of his Church, whose employment is to lay open Satan's
devices, to discover Wolves, to uncase Hypocrites, according to Christ's own
example in the days of his flesh.) And to these I may add a fourth, viz. to
justify the Church of England, and true Protestant Religion, (whereof I am a
member and a Professor) from all allowment and approbation, of any such
unreverend, blasphemous, and reproachful language, against Sovereign Majesty,
as that malicious Pamphlet is stuffed withal.

Peradventure this work has been already done by others, of like relation with
my self, who have both confuted the Libell, and defended the King: but their
Piety is no discharge to my Duty. I must therefore answer my part unto it, I
must also declare my opinion of it; for indeed (as Elihu in Job said) I am full
of matter, and the spirit within Job 32. 18.
me does constrain me: I took the Protestation as well as any, to defend my
Sovereigns Name and Honor; yea and to oppose in my way, all such, as by any
means should endeavor to darken, and impeach the same.

And let not those persons who first authorized that Protestation, and
afterward this Libel, fancy to themselves, that all men will be induced by
this to break that, (though too many are:) or that God will so far neglect his
Anointed, as not to stir up some (though of the meanest quality,) who by laying
their actions to the rule of Gods Word, shall freely (notwithstanding their
stupendous greatness) discover to the world, the irregularity of their
doings, in their countenancing so vile a thing (as this is) against Him, whom
by all Laws of God and man they are bound to reverence and defend: whereas
disdain (at least) and vexation shall be increased in them; as was in those
Pharisees, whom Hosanna to the Son of David was ecchoed Mat. 21. 15.
from the mouths of children: nay as our Savior upon that occasion said,
should such hold their peace, the Luke 19. 40.
very stones would cry out in a case of this nature. As no Decree to the
contrary could make all men abstain from confessing Christ; so no threats or
fears shall restrain all persons from adhering to their Sovereign, and
standing up in his behalf against Calumny.

For a good man some will even dare to die, (says Romans 5. 7.
the Apostle) and for a good King shall not some always dare to speak? It Is
true, He is in a low condition at the present; but must our Allegiance
therefore be at so low an ebb, as to suffer Him with silence to be blasphemed?
He is in His Agony, ought we therefore to sleep? upon his Cross, should we
therefore leave him? True love always shareth with its Object, and appears
most in a storm; Joseph's of Aremathea did so: Christ showed his love to us,
when we had yet no strength, (so the Apostle.) Ought not we Romans 5. 6.
therefore to show ours to our King, when His strength is gone? How else shall
we approve our selves Christ's members? It was the speech of Orcham. or as some
say, Luther.
one to his Prince, at the dawning of the Gospels light from the mists of
Popery, Tu me gladio, and ego te calamo: and shall we that have seen the bright
day, be able to say no more? surely it becomes us rather to say in this manner,
Although You (Dear Sovereign) are not able with Your Sword to defend us, yet
we must and will with our pens, to the danger of our lives, defend You: we
should be ready to lay down our lives ^^ Joh. 3. 16.
for our Brethren, (as Saint John tells us) much more then to hazard them, for
the sake of our Public Father. Let this serve, to justify my self, in this
my performance of duty, against such as think (in regard of my meannesse) that
I take too much upon me; and also to Answer such Politic friends, as are apt
to dissuade loyal affections, from discovering themselves this way, till the
King be again in a rising condition.

Now if any in their reading this my Vindication, shall conceive me too sharp
sometimes and plain, in my speaking of those against whom I write: I desire
such before they censure to remember, That it is the dignity of the Highest and
most Sacred Person under Heaven that I defend: And is there not a cause to be
zealous against them, who have defamed and reviled him? Wherefore should such
dead 1 Samuel 16. 9.
dogs (dead in trespasses and sins) curse my Lord the King, and I, even
contemptible I, not be moved with the same? A Politician may happily speak from
his brain, about the Honor and Duty belonging to a King, without any touch,
or sense of heart: but I am a plain man, and cannot write coldly, or without
affection, about things I hold dear and precious.

Again, I desire such before they judge to consider also the condition of that
faction against whom I write: they are a generation of people that have done
more disgrace and wrong to Christ's Gospel, then ever was offered since Christ's
time: Never did any in so short a space ascend to that Zenith of villainy, as
they have done, or pretend more godliness, with the practice of so much
wickedness. The Papists in 3. or 400. years were never able to reach that
superlative pitch of dissimulation, hypocrisy, pride, and cruelty, as these
have done in 3. or 4. These are the men that were wont to brag, that Never any
Puritan was known to be in any Treason, but Bishops always: so Layton affirms
(if we will believe him) in his Sions Plea. But were it so, the Scene (we are
sure) is now quite altered by themselves; for the grandest Treason and
Rebellion that ever was, is now in action upon the Stage of the world, wherein
are acting all the Puritans, and no Bishops. He then, and the Smectymnists
since, and Prin after them, took great pains with much spleen to reckon up many
several actions in several Ages, wherein Prelates had been molestfull to the
Princes of our Land: and the world (supposing they did the same, in dislike and
hatred of Rebellion) did commend their zeal in so doing; but now it appears
(from what has followed upon the same) that they did it rather to another end;
namely, to set forth the better their own dexterity, in a thing of like
nature, to show that their own faction (when they set to it) could do more in
one Act and Age, then all those others had done in many. Wherefore if their
Gall then against Bishops was accounted Godliness, I desire that my tartness
now against themselves, for going deeper in the same condemned paths, may not
be accounted bitterness. God knows my soul is grieved at those very thoughts
which arise in me sometime against many of these men, (once my dear and
intimate acquaintance) and were I not forced in this manner, to disclose their
unchristian wares, from mere necessity, in defense of impugned truth; and to
warn the world, to avoid the contagion of seducement; I should not take that
course in describing them, which I confess is rather more excusable where it
cannot, then commonly where it can be spared.

Furthermore, if any shall conceive that my expressions are not so respective
(as they think is meet) toward those now above-board called the Parliament,
(who are the Heads of this disloyal Faction:) I desire such to observe me
well, that I speak not against any, as they are Parliament men, or as
Honorable in this world, but only as they are Rebels to the King, and Enemies
to Christ's Gospel: Nor do I apprehend (as appears upon grounds in my
discourse) that they who are guilty of these grand enormities, are any true
Members (however they reckon themselves) of that high Court, which I honor
with my truest affections, as the very Palladium of the Kingdom. But those
whom I vent my zeal against, I believe to be persons designed of God, for the
public abhorment, and scorn of all men, even because they have (by this
wicked Libel) exposed the Lords Anointed to be (as Christ was) Ludibrium
hominum and Psalm. 22. 6.
opprobrium populi: for whoever will do the Jews work, must look to be paid
with the Jews wages; and therefore I hold that without offense to God, I may,
yea and I ought, to speak and think of them as I do; nor must I be a respecter
of any, in my opposing sin, but if I look to dwell on Gods holy Hill, I must
despise the vile how great soever. Besides, the example of Christ is my warrant
in this case; for he (as a Preacher) did speak against such like conditioned
men, with as much severity of expression, as I have done. He called them
vipers, and children of the Devil, though they were Joh. 8. 44.
of great esteem, both with themselves and others. And it is well known what
manner of language Elias used to the worshippers of Baal; and in what method
and words, among other godly men, Lurther in Germany, Savanarola in Italy,
Philip Morney in France, Cyprian Valera in Spain, and John Fox in England did
tax and discover the corruptions of the Papacy: Yea (as in the Preface to the
Book of Martyrs is shown) God in all Ages has stirred up some to lay open
freely, to the abused world, the hypocrisy and villainy of those wolvish people
that bore sway in their several generations. Nor will God suffer them in these
days, to go long unmasked under false shows; He will stir up spirits, who in
love to his holy truth, and hatred of sin, shall describe them at large, in
their proper colors, yea and transmit their very names, as well as their acts,
unto Posterity, (as Fox has done the Persecutors in Q. Mary's time) to their
eternal infamy. For my self, I do not name any person (unless those that
have named themselves in Print already) nor do I speak so expressly of any
particular, as they in their Libel do of the King: although there is never a
villainy, cruel act, or blasphemous expression, quoted in this Discourse, but
the persons by whom spoke or done, and the places where, might have been set
down punctually: But my opposition is not against Men, but Sin, which I hate
in all, and in the best most. I pray for the persons of the worst, and I desire
all men to join with me in so doing, for these Reasons.

First, Christ commands us to pray for them that despightfully Luke 6. 28.
use us. 2. We are Christians, in whom as the sight of an enemies misery must
awaken pity, so of his sin must kindle Prayer. 3. They are our Countrymen, as
those Israelites were to S. Paul, that thirsted for his blood; therefore like
him we must endeavor their salvation. 4. They have deserved this duty at our
hands, (though unawares unto themselves) for by their ill usage of us, they
have thrust us farther under Gods wing, then we were before, and made us more
sensibly to feel the heat of his love, and to taste the comfort of his
Providence, to be better acquainted with God, and Christ, then ever perhaps we
should have been, had we always lived at Peace in our possessions. Many of us
had learned to abound before, though not to want, but these have taught us that
too: and to see the vanity and fickleness of earthly prosperity: they have
loosned our hearts much from the world, and made us think of heaven more
seriously; and does not all this deserve our prayers? Nay and farther, God
expects we should (as by this course we may) discover a better spirit to be in
us, then is in them, and that we serve a better Master. And again, his Gospel
being now under foot, he looks that we should raise up its honor from the dust
again, in praying for these very men, according to the tenor of it: we have
cause to suspect, they have sinned the sin against the holy Ghost, (at least
many of them:) but we are not certain thereof, and therefore we are bound to
pray for them: this is mine exhortation to all men, and the grounds of it, upon
which I build mine own practice; and let not any think (notwithstanding my
zeal against men's sins) that I dare be otherwise affected then thus, unto
their persons.

Last of all, if any shall think me worthy of blame, for not plainly expressing
mine own name, seeing that I find fault with the Authors of the Libel for
concealing theirs: Let such know, that it is not because I am ashamed of it, or
of my work; but my reason is this: I am an obscure and mean person, and my
name can no whit advance the credit of my labors; but perhaps, even debase it
rather, yea, amongst too many of our own side, (as they are accounted) who
having fleshed themselves with the moneys of the King, or the spoils of his
people, can wallow in luxury, while he is in misery; and deride at mean
persons for being affected for him. Besides, the subscribing my name, in regard
of my low condition, is likely to be more vexatious to the great men, whom I
seem to oppose, then perhaps my Book it self may be: for this (by Gods grace)
may be conceived (as it truly is) but a defiance against their ungodly courses:
whereas that may be taken as a contemptuous affront against their very persons,
nor would I willingly increase sin or rage in any.

If any desire to know what I am, let this satisfy: I am one of those weak and
despised things, which God sometimes 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28.
makes use of, to confound the Mighty. A Member I am, and a Minister of the
Ancient and true Church* of England: One that equally hates Idolatry and
Superstition in Gods Worship and Service, as I do Indecency and Profaneness.
I am one that can live under another Church Government, (in a State where it is
established by the Supreme Magistrate) with more quietness (I believe) then
they can or will do, that fight for an alteration in this Kingdom; although
in my judgment I do, and shall prefer Episcopal Government above any other in
the world, as being in my conscience most Scripturall, and Orthodoxall. I am
one that loves not to hear Calvin railed upon, by them that never read him, for
I judge him to have been a great instrument of Gods glory, though (I think him)
not infallible. I entitle not my self unto him, nor to any man else: I am a
Christian, and that is my glory. I have bid defiance (by Gods grace) to the
worlds malice, and to the Devils works: and have manifested the same against
one of them, in this my Vindication, which I here commend to the candid
acceptance of all you, my fellow subjects of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
for whom I pray, that you may be all such (excepting in sins and miseries) as
my self am,

A Lover of his King.
Phil'anax,
A Lover of his Country.
Philopatris.
May 30. 1646.
In regno nati sumus, Deo parere libertas est.
The Protestation, Ordered to be generally taken, Die Merc. 5. Maii. 1641.
I A. B. do in the presence of Almighty God, Promise, Vow, and Protest, to
maintain and defend, as far as lawfully I may, with my life, power, and estate,
the true Reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the doctrine of the Church
of England, against all Popery and Popish Innovations within this Realm,
contrary to the same Doctrine, and according to the duty of my Allegiance, His
Majesty's Royal Person, Honor, and Estate; As also the Power and Privileges
of Parliament; The lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subject; and every
person that makes this Protestation, in whatsoever he shall do in the lawful
pursuance of the same. And to my power, and as far as lawfully I may, I will
oppose, and by all good ways and means endeavor to bring to condign
punishment, all such as shall either by Force, Practice, Councels, Plots,
Conspiracies or otherwise, do any thing to the contrary of any thing in this
present Protestation contained. And further, that I shall in all just and
honorable ways endeavor to preserve the Union and Peace between the three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland; And neither for hope, fear, nor
other respect, shall relinquish this Promise, Vow, and Protestation.

A VINDICATION OF KING CHARLES: OR A Loyal Subjects duty, etc.
SECT. I.
1 Of the supposed Authors of the Libell. 2. Of the Authorizers thereof, and
their special Order: How fit the same should be recalled: A president
propounded to that purpose. 3. A serious expostulation with them about the
same, and of their maintaining a base fellow to deride and scoff at their
Sovereign in his affliction.

THe first thing observable in that disloyal pamphlet,. 1.
is, the plural manner of speaking used therein: Us, and We: Whence I gather,
that it was not opus unius, the work of one alone: nor indeed had it been
possible, so much venom and blasphemy, should be vomited up against Gods
Anointed, without the concurrence of a whole Legion.

It Is observable in the next place, that the Authors thereof. conceal their
names; but their modesty herein is not to be admired; for Satan himself would
have done as much in the same case: He acting the Calumniators part against his
Sovereign, appeared to our first Parents in a strange shape, and concealed
himself after these men's fashion; and surely had this Book come immediately
from him, as it does from them, he would have blushed to own it.

S. Paul, S. Peter, James, and Jude, sending abroad into the world Epistles
General to reclaim the seduced, prefixed their names at full length, (for
nothing fell from their pens, either for form, or matter, but what became the
Gospel of Jesus, and workmen that needed not to be ashamed.) But this Hidden
Crew putting forth a certain thing to a like purpose, (as they pretend) have
not set down so much as the first letters of their names, S. M. E. C. or the
like, that the seduced might, at least, have guessed, to whow they are
beholding.

Sed ex ungue Leonem, the devil is discerned by his Paw, and the Pulpit (
alas) helps us too far in our search after these men: thence we learn, who
bears the Bell in these days, for lying, slandering, and evil speaking. It Is
commonly observed that few can act Satan now so well, as some of those, who
formerly did best preach Christ: Corruption optimi est pessima; Time was, when
none might, or durst compare with them of Rome, for defaming Dignities, or
Sovereign Princes; witness those books of Parsons and Sanders, in the days
of Queen Elizabeth: but were those two now alive, they might go to School to
our men, in each of whom Parsons spirit is both doubled and trebled. And is
there not a reason? They say, These are times of more light and knowledge:
indeed they are, in the art, and science of evil speaking.

In those former days ( of darkness, as they are now accounted) when peace,
mercy, gentleness, and obedience, faith in Christ, and conformity to his
example, was the sole subject of these men's discourses to the people;
themselves were then but poor fellows, of an underly condition, called and
known by the contemptible name of Christ's Ministers: but since this new light
(so much talked on) has appeared, and discovered a more gainful and
advantageous way, they have altered their scene, turned tragic, and venting
slanders and reproaches, have provoked to rebellion, war and blood; whereby
they have purchased a new name unto themselves, (more suitable indeed to their
present, then to their former way) and are called, The ministers of the
Parliament.

And these men, or some of them, (from the method, style and matter of that
book) are conceived by many to be the Authors of it: which, if they be, I
require them by that name of Christian (which as yet they own) that they show
out of Christ's Gospel, some one precept, or allowed example (at least)
warranting any to deal thus, with their natural Liege-Lord, or with any
ordinary man, that is but a brother, as they do with their Sovereign.

Suppose the faults here charged upon him, were real and inherent, and not by
perversion only, and imputation: yet where is there any Scripture authorizing
this their publication? themselves (while they were Christ's ministers) were not
to allege that saying of Esaias, against the intruders of groundles inovations.
To the Law, Esaias 8. 20.
to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is because there
is no light in them: they must give us leave to conclude so too, and to say,
there is no light in their very selves now, if they allege neither Law nor
Testimony for this their undertaking.

But if these Ministers were not themselves the Authors of it, yet I wonder
there should not be one spark of ancient love still alive in some of their
breasts, toward Jesus Christ their old Master, moving them in his behalf, to
vindicate the Doctrine of his Gospel, and publicly to declare, how far the
same is, from allowing any to speak evilly, or defamingly of the Ruler of a
people. When they were on Christ's side, I have heard some of them tax Luther
very sharply for unrevernd speeches, (in a certain Pamphlet) against our Hen.
8. because he was a king, though not his own; for (said they) such Language did
not become the Gospel. Is not the Gospel still the same? yes surely; and had
these men but been the same still too, they could not have seen such a Libell
printed, and often reprinted at London, in the midst of them, without
expressing much of their zeal against it.

Beside, did not these Parliament Ministers (for that now is their beloved
title) take the Protestation to defend the Kings Honor? Nay, were not they the
men that tendered it unto others? did not they preach diverse Sermons at the
beginning of this Parliament, to persuade to the taking of it? (I knew one of
them that preached a whole week together to that very purpose) and did they
then only urge to vow, and not to pay? Did they then intend (by their example)
only to draw people into Perjurie? if not, it lies upon them, as they will
answer unto God, (before whom they did protest,) for those men's souls whom they
did persuade, to cry down this accursed Pamphlet, so contrary to the tenor of
that Protestation: and never to leave begging of them whose servants they now
be, till it is burnt by the hand of the common hangman.

But it is observable in the third place, that this book is said to. 2.
be published, by the Authority of those, who first set out the Protestation,
yea, and by their special Order too, Published by special Order of the
Parliament: therefore some may think, there is no likelihood, that they who are
too big to deny themselves, should be persuaded by their Beadsmen, to do any
thing against their own Order.

To which I answer, Were they well informed (by those whom they think well of)
that it would be as much for their credit (among Christians) to deny
themselves, as to contradict themselves, to recall their special Order, as to
suffer it to continue in affront to their general Ordinance, perhaps they
might be wrought upon; and then withal, if a President were alleged, for (as
they say) they work by Presidents, (though not by Rule,) peradventure they
might be prevailed with.

And for the things sake, I will remember them of one, and it shall be of one
that is extraordinary, (for I conceive an ordinary President will not serve the
men that bear sway in this Parliament;) it shall be a President of their own
making, (which speaks it excellent) such a President as the like was never
heard of before, and so the more fit for their further observance.

Let themselves call to mind, whether there was not an Act, (which is more
then a bare Order) both made and nulled, in the same Session, since the
Beginning of this Parliament, though perhaps not dashed by that full Authority
which did establish it; yet was it not set aside as needless and vain, or (at
least) as not sufficiently advised upon beforehand? The Act which I mean, was
that which concerned the Fleet, or Navy against the Turkish Pirates, to redeem
our Christian Countrymen from Bondage. For their better remembrance of which,
I shall beg leave of the Readers, to make a little digression, in the relation
of some few circumstances: and (if I rightly apprehend it) the matter in brief
was thus:

Our good King in his piety and pity to those poor Captives, had formerly,
(with that Ship Money so grudgingly paid) built and sent out diverse Ships to
the same purpose; and (God assisting a work so Religious, and becoming a
Christian Prince) he provailed therewith against the Pirates of Sally, and freed
many of his Subjects, from barbarous slavery in that place: whereupon he made
preparation also against those of Argyer, intending the like mercy for the
Christians there, but was prevented in his design by the Scottish
insurrection, which forced him Northward: And before his intentions could
return to motion, for that Southern Expedition, this unhappy Parliament (by his
authority) met at Westminster, where (that it might be conceived some others
had Bowels as well as He) a Bill was preferred, and disputed upon, concerning a
Fleet to the forementioned end; for the maintenance of which, though it might
easily have been concluded, by settling of Ship Money in a Parliamentary way,
with an Order for the manner of levying the same, to the Subjects liking,
(which had been a more safe and sensible kind of payment, then many
disbursments extorted since, and might have been a mean to continue Gods
national blessing upon the whole Kingdom, by interessing (in that sort) all
men's hearts and hands, in so charitable and Christian a work:) yet because it
was a path wherein the King had trod, and they had no purpose to deal either
with or for him, in any such friendly or Loyal way, as might shadow his
apprehended haltings from his peoples eyes, by making that clearly Legal,
which had formerly appeared somewhat warping. Besides, there wanted matter or
stuff, to fill up the belly of that monstrum horrendrum, or ungospel-like
Remonstrance, which was purposed to be made against his Government, by which
the people were to be taught to believe, that the King did never do any thing
well; therefore by all means Ship Money must be damned, and cried down for
ever, in perpetuam Regis ignominiam, if mouth can do it: And for the intended
Navy, another course was concluded upon, to advance moneys to maintain that,
viz. from the importation, and transportation of commodities.

But (by the way) while these things were in agitation amongst the wise; the
King (having had more sincere, and serious thoughts about that business then
other men, desiring and hoping to further and speed the design, with his
advice and Council) sent them his judgment concerning some particulars about
the matter, only to consider upon, and to follow if they so pleased; or
otherwise to proceed according to their own discretions: which advise of his,
had they taken in good part from their Prince and Master, they had shown no
more respect unto him, then Job was wont to show to his meanest servant: but
they (lest they might seem to need his help by a civil acceptance of his
Council) were so far from relishing of it, that they presently voted the same
to be an obstruction cast in on purpose to stop the business, nay a plain
refusal of the King, to confirm the Bill: Whereupon his Sacred Majesty (being
armed with meekness against affronts) leaving them wholly to their own devises,
did presently sign their Bill, and in that fashion as they would have him: so
discovering to all his people, (if they would see) that a Vote of Parliament
may be fallible. And now behold (to return to the matter) when this Act was
thus finished, according to their desires, and all Religious hearts raised to
an high expectation, of seeing their poor brethren quickly redeemed from
Turkish thraldom, whether from their dislike of the Kings readiness unto so
Christian a work, or because they had some other employment intended for the
Merchants money here at home, I cannot tell: but that Act was never (as I
heard) put in execution to this day, but even quite set aside; and as we may
say (so much as in them lay) quite nullified, cancelled, and repealed: and free
leave given to the Turks thereby, not only to take our Countrymen at sea, but
also to come into the very havens of our Kingdom, and to carry away our
Children, to the ruin of Christian souls for ever: insomuch, that whereas
there was but the number of some 2000. English in slavery, when this so adored
Parliament did begin, there is now, November, 1645. above 5000. in most
lamentable bondage, our King being robbed and despoyled by his loving Subjects,
( Who consult, (as they say) to advance Christ's Kingdom) of his Ships, and
Navy: wherewith he was wont to defend his Realm from such Pyracies.

This is that Act which I spoke of, and the reason of my remembering it at this
time, is, to help the Authorizers of this venomous Pamphlet with a president
for the recalling their special Order, whereby it is published. And now before
I return to my work in hand, let me assume the boldness to expostulate a
little with these men: I am one of Gods Ambassadors; Jesus Christ, who shall
be their Judge, is my Master; and in his Name, let me reason with them about
this matter: for I hope I may presume to speak unto them, (at a distance) as
they are like my self, but Dust and Ashes.

Let me ask you a question in the first place, ( O you superlative. 3.
men,) Suppose some of your Novices and underhand workers, (as alas you have
too many such, I fear even about the King,) should by this Pamphlet, which you
(whom they think infallible) have by special Order authorized, or by any other
of like nature, published under your Protection, be moved to act Jaques
Clements part, or Raviliacks part upon the Sacred person of their Sovereign,
can you imagine that the same will not be set on your score, as well as that of
those Regicides was laid to the charge of the Jesuits, whose custom it was,
(as your selves well know,) while the doctrine of King-killing was appropriate
to their order, to inspire men to the perpretation of that supreme villainy, by
sending forth such conditioned books (as this is which you have authorized;)
wherein with most reproachful language they would paint out the Prince
designed for slaughter, as if he were the greatest Tyrant, promise-breaker, and
oppressor of his people in the world, and a person in no sort fit to live: that
so it might be apprehended a most Heavenly work to rid the earth of him, and a
service most acceptable unto the Lord? when Raviliack was demanded by his
examiners, to declare the reason moving him to his attempt, he answered, That
the reasons why it was requisite to kill the King, they might understand by the
Sermons, and Pamphlets of the Preachers.

Well (Sirs) we all know the meaning both of you and of your Prophets, and
therefore as Elias from the Lord, did charge Ahab with the death of Naboth,
because the letters provoking to it were signed with his seal: so do I from the
same Lord, charge you with all those evil opinions and hard conceits, which are
already kindled in the minds of any against the King, by the means of this
Pamphlet; because it is published by your Authority: Yea, if any further
mischief shall befall his Sacred Majesty upon the same; at your hands will the
Judge of Heaven and Earth require it: and know you further, that the guilt of
all the blasphemies, reproaches, scorns, slanders, which are spit out against
the King, either in this book, or any other published by your leave and Order,
(without your deep repentance and humiliation,) shall be heaped upon your Souls
at the day of Reckoning, even as if your own selves had been the Authors of
them: for nil interest sceleri, an faveas aut facias: to favor and to do (in
this case) is all one: nay the Apostle speaks, as if those who appove of other
Romans 1. 32.
folks ill doings, were in a degree worse then the Actors themselves, and given
up in a further measure to a Reprobate sense: Qui non vetat peccare cum potest,
jubet: (says the wise Heathen) not to prevent a mischief when one may, is
directly to command it to be done.

Gentlemen, (for as your souls friend, I would fain have you recover again that
Title) I charge you before the living God, and Jesus Christ, who shall one day
sit in judgment upon you, to ask your Consciences in secret, whether it be not
a sin, and a wickedness to speak evil of the Ruler of the people? to act
Shimei's part against Gods Anointed? whether to write, or publish such
Pamphlets as this, be the way to Honor the King in the eyes of his people?
Whether you have thus learned Christ from the Church of England? Whether you
ever met in Gods word, with any saying or example to warrant you in this way of
proceeding? And I require you also, as you will answer it before the Lord, to
ask your own hearts, whether to Authorize such a work as this (to the Kings
defamation,) be a Christian work, Honorable and becoming the dignity of a
Parliament, whose actions ought al to be glorious and presidentiall? Nay is it
an Act prudentiall in you, thus publicly to own and countenance this prolem
populi, this abominable thing, which the very Parents, and Authors of, are
ashamed to father? What will you say, it is one of the Privileges of Parliament
you fight for, to Authorize things against the King, against your own
Allegiance end Protestation? surely ab initio non fuit sic: former Parliaments
disdained to own such a Privilege, to tread in such paths: Or will you say,
you are more Omnipotent, then those your Predecessors were, who never had
those brave advantages that you have? true, nor never did desire them. But can
your new Omnipotency make that which is evil in it self, turn good by your
Authorization? I pray where had you this large Commission? Who gave you this
Authority? Christ, in whose hand is all power, never did: let your Chaplains
prove it, if they can, or your Consciences affirm it, if they dare. Nor will
that Writ which called you together, and fixed you in your Sphere at
Westminster, tell you, that the King (the fountain of power under God) did
place you there in this sort to exercise your Activity against him: your Patent
therefore, by which you have Authorized this work of darkness, must needs come
ab Inferno: And can you expect that the Judge of quick and dead, will at the
great day pronounce well done good and faithful Servant unto you, for doing
Satan's work, for executing his Commission? O how much better will you find
then it had been, if you had wrapped up your Talents in a Napkin? and in the
mean time, how much more had it been to the dignity of that High Court of
Parliament, (which you pretend so much to stand for) if you had but left out
the name Parliament, and said, Published by special Order of the Rebellious
faction in the two Houses at Westminster?

But now I have begun to take upon me to speak unto you, (O you lofty men,) let
me ask you a question more to a like purpose: What reward or commendation can
you expect at Gods hand, for maintaining your Beadsman Britanicus, to libell
against his Sovereign, to teach and excite by his weekly books, the ignorant
and seduced vulgar, throughout the Kingdom, to join with him in reviling and
laughing to scorn their public Father, (now your selves have most unjustly
thrust him into affliction:) Dare you say, his expressions are not vile? O let
me beg pardon of my Sovereign, and of all modest men, if (to the shame of
these men's faces, and to the increase of indignation in all godly spirits
against their courses) I do with detestation repeat over here one of his
passages, published to the world on Monday the 4. of August. 1645.

Where is King Charles? What is become of him? Some say, when he saw the storm
coming after him, as far as Bridgewater, he came away to his dearly beloved in
Ireland: Yes, they say, he ran away out of the Kingdom very Majestically:
Others will have him erecting a new Monarchy in the Isle of Anglesey: A third
sort say, that he has hid himself, it were best send Hue and Cry after him.

If any man can bring any tale or tidings of a wilful King, which has gone
astray these four years from his Parliament, with a guilty Conscience, bloody
hands, and a heart full of broken vows and protestations; if these marks be
not sufficient, there is another in his mouth, for bid him speak, and you will
soon know him; then give notice to Britanicus, and you will be paid for your
pains: GOD SAVE THE PARLIAMENT.

O you Men of Westminster, is this your Beadsman that prays for you, that
works for you? that is maintained and cherished by you? then these are the
scorns of your hearts, the flouts of your Spirits, that are vomited up by his
mouth and pen; if not, why have you not hanged the villain, or rather torn him
in pieces with wild horses? Are not you they, that call your selves, the Kings
most Humble, most dutiful, and most Loyal Subjects? Are not you they that
would be accounted the Holy, just, most Christian, and unerring Parliament?
have you not talked much of reforming our Church and Government? and will you
countenance and favor such persons? Is this the Reformation you promised us?
the new Religion you will set up amongst us? Is this the way to Heaven, which
you will trace out to your Countrymen that adore you? Does your Discipline,
purchased with the effusion of so much Christian blood, allow of such
expressions, and persons, without correction? Indeed this is the way to work an
Alteration from what was before: the Devil had formerly but his Chapel, where
God had his Church, but from henceforth if you prevail, he is likely to have
his Church, where God shall scarce have a Chapel: Well, as an Holy Martyr said
to others, so say I to you; I thank God I am none of you: and my prayer is,
Never let my soul (O Lord) partake in their Counsels, nor my feet tread in
their paths: but give me (I beseech thee) thy grace to pray daily against their
wickedness; And let it not, O let it not (good Lord) be told in Gath, or
believed in Askelon, that these bitter fruits do spring from the tree of
Protestant Religion: Let it rather be acknowledged and apprehended that these
things are favored and done by the men of this Nation, as they are at this
present, (by Satan's working) in a deadly enmity and opposition against their
Sovereign, and not as they are either his sworn Subjects, or Children of the
English Church. And thus, (O my God) as thy messenger, Liberavi animam meam, I
have dicharged my Conscience toward them.

SECT. II.
1. Of the pretended end of publishing the Libell; the true end thereof hinted.
2. Their blasphemy against God noted. 3. How these Letters of the King might
have been made use of as Evidences of Truth and Loyalty. 4. Of what stock and
lineage the Authors of the Libell discover themselves to be. 5. Of their
subtilty, and of that spirit of meekness which they boast of. 6. How aptly for
themselves they allege the Example mentioned by S. Jude.

I Now come to the Book it self, whose publication they have. 1.
Authorized: and I observe that the persons for whose sake it is pretended to be
put forth, are some, whom the Authors call their Seduced Brethren, to reclaim
them: I conceive they are so accounted, because they will not concur, in
breaking their Protestation, and opposing their Sovereign: I apprehend my
self to be reckoned in the number: and therefore in the behalf of my self and
the rest, I desire these men, who are so careful to Reclaim us, that they would
deal plainly with us; and tell us in down right English, whether it be any
thing else, but our Loyalty, our love, and obedience to our Sovereign, which
they would Reclaim us from: let them in the first place declare unto us our
transgression, and prove out of Gods Word, that we are such as they call us,
and account of us: let them show who has Seduced us: we are of the Prophet
Jeremies mind; If we be deceived, Jer. 20. 7.
it is the Lord that has deceived us: it is his Word that has taught us to
Honor the King, and to adhere unto our Sovereign; that is the foundation we
stand upon, and so strong and stable it is, that we believe and hope these new
Teachers, shall never be able either to shake it, or us from it.

Nay we have an apprehension that these men are in a Seduced condition
themselves, because they are gone out from us: whereas 1 John 2. 16.
they were once of us, they took the Oath of Allegiance, and afterward the
Protestation as well as we, to defend the Kings Person, Honor and Estate,
against all opposers: And now being themselves out of the right way, we fear
they would draw us into the same danger: they tell us we are Seduced, only
that we might yield so to be. We remember that Satan Seduced our first Parents
from their duty toward God, by proceeding in the direct way and mothod of
these men: he pretended pity and respect unto them as to his Seduced Brethren:
and to the same purpose as these do, He standred, defamed, and reproached his
Sovereign: wherefore these men must pardon us, if but for this reason, we are
somewhat suspicious of them. Beside, the Scripture tells us of some men, who
call Light, Darkness, and Darkness Light; Good, Evil, and Evil, Good: and
what know we to the contrary, but these men may be of that number? Our Savior
informs us, that in the last days, many wolves should come in sheeps
clothing, who Mat. 24. 24.
(by fair pretenses) should deceive many: and should carry their designs so
cunningly, that (if possible) they should deceive the very Elect themselves:
Now as these are the last days, so these men have fair pretenses, are crafty
in their carriages, do deceive many; and therefore may peradventure be those
very wolves, forespoken of. Saint John advises us, not to believe every one,
but bids us try their spirits, whether they be of God or no: wherefore 1 John
4. 1.
having this warning, if we trust these men before we have tried them, we shall
show our selves as they entitle us, Seduced indeed: they must give us leave
therefore to examine of what spirit they are, who thus take upon them to
reclaim us: whether their doctrine be of God or no; we will go by Christ's own
rule, let them except against it if they can or dare, By their fruits (says
Mat. 7. 20.
he) you shall know them; and this their Book is their fruit: we will consider
whether their speech and language therein, does not bewray them. They begin
thus:

It were a great sin, against the mercies of God, to conceal Libell.
those Evidences of truth, which He so graciously (and almost miraculously) by
surprisall of these papers has put into our hands.

I confess they promise fair, like those Galathians whom Saint Paul writes
unto, they begin in the Spirit, with the mention of Sin and Mercy: they have
(like those Locusts Rev. 9.) the faces of men, but observe them well, we shall
find they have the teeth of Lions, and the tails of Scorpions: my endeavors
shall be on purpose to discover them, that men may avoid them, and not be hurt
by them; which that I may do, I beg of thee (O most mighty Jesus) who art the
Light of lights, and do enlighten every man that comes into the world, to
lighten the understanding of thy poor Minister, that he may be able by thy
light, to enlighten thy people, so as they may clearly discern this work of
darkness, which is cast forth by an Hidden Crew, to blemish and disgrace the
Doctrine of thy Gospel, professed in this Church; to obscure those beams of
Majesty, wherewith thou have decked thine own Anointed; and to seduce those
Souls, for which thou sheddest thy precious bold, into ways of perdition and
destruction: that by these my endeavors thy true Religion may be illustrated,
thy Servant the King Vindicated, and thy people preserved, to the Glory of thy
great Name, and to the inward comfort of me thy weak instrument, and that for
thine own Merit and Mercies sake, Amen, Amen.

It is evident, that the ends why these papers were divulged, after. 2.
their surprisal, together with that bitter Preface, and perverse Notes upon
them; was to weaken the Kings reputation among his people, to take from him the
affections of those that still remain constant and Loyal, and to stir up some
already poisoned to act Raviliacks part upon him; and yet these men would have
us believe, that it would have been a sin in them (forsooth) yea, a great sin,
a sin against the mercies of God, if they had concealed them: Nay further, they
would have us think, that God himself did graciously, and even miraculously put
them into their hands on purpose, yea on set purpose, that they might do with
them, as they have done.

We do confess, if God should so far have forgot himself, his holy Nature, his
Word, and all his former doings, as to put these Papers into their hands, to
that very end for which they publish them; he should have done very
miraculously indeed, and what he never did since the beginning of the world
before: But we the Seduced Brethren (as we are called) should prove our selves
Seduced indeed, if in this we should believe them; for we could never find
throughout the whole History of the Bible, that God did ever yet allow any man
to defame his Brother, his equal, his inferior; much less his Father, the
Father of his Country, and Supreamest Magistrate in the Kingdom; we find
there a strict precept to the contrary, Thou shall not speak evil of the Acts
23. 5.
Ruler of thy People: But that God should be partaker also with the
Calumniator, (as these men would have him;) that he should be chief in the
sin, and help the ill disposed with occasions on purpose, to render that
Person infamous, whom himself has commanded in special to be honored, and to
whom Allegiance has been sworn, and obedience protested: truly the Authors of
this Libell must not be angry with us (whom they call Seduced) if for this
their assertion, we think them guilty of most high Blasphemy; for we suppose
that Doeg might as lawfully have pretended 1 Samuel 22.
that Gods mercy gave him advantage by being at Nob, to exasperate Saul against
the Priests of the Lord: and Shimei 2 Samuel 16.
might as well have said, that Gods grace did adminster unto him the occasion
of David's passing by his house, on purpose that he might curse him, and rail
upon him.

The Papists have often taxed us, that we made God the Author of evil; and
now these men (as we conceive) would feign draw us into that Heresy with
themselves, to confirm that slander of the Adversary: but we would have all
the world to understand, that the true Protestant Professors in the English
Church, were never yet guilty of this Blasphemy, they are rather Scabbs, then
true Members of the same, from whence does issue this Corruption.

We remember when Rabshakeh, being fleshed with his masters success, railed
upon Hezekiah, he uttered himself after the fashion Esaias 36. 11.
of these men, as if God had sent him on purpose, to vilify and defame the
King: Am I come up (says he) without the Lord? and God observed it, and soon
after punished him for it. So we hope the Lord has both seen and heard the
Blasphemous words of these men, whom their masters, (the Authorizers of their
Libel) have set on work to defame the Lords Anointed, and to reproach the
living God: and will in his due time reprove the words which they have spoken:
we have a ground for our hopes in Psalm. 50. where God taxes some that were
great pretenders to Psalm. 50. 16, etc
Religion, though haters of his word in their practice; for they were malicious
Accusers and Slanderers of others, and (like these men to the full) they
entitled God to all their villanyes, saying, he was such a one as themselves:
But the Lord resolves in the following verses, that there should come a time,
that he would reprove them, and call them to a reckoning for all these things:
yea, (says he) I will tear you in pieces, and none shall deliver you: and so
doubtless he will deal with these men, like forgetters of God as they be,
unless by a timely repentance they consider of these their presumptions and
most ungodly doings; The Lord in mercy vouchsafe that grace unto them: We their
Seduced Brethren (as we are accounted,) do in the mean time conceive from this
their beginning, what we shall have in their following discourse: and we shall
wonder the less, when we meet with their unseemly Language of, and against
their Sovereign, now we have seen such their high boldness against the
Almighty himself.

But one thing is to be noted further, in those first lines, they call those
Papers which they Publish Evidences of truth; their meaning is, of what
themselves have reported against the King, which they (only) call truth, and
would have all men believe for truth: We know they have often wrested Gods
Scriptures, to make them appear as Evidences of such their truths, and
therefore it is no marvail if (together with their own perverse notes upon them)
they use the Kings letters to the same purpose.

Indeed I believe that these Papers might have been Evidences of truth and of
Loyalty too: had the Surprizers of them, been guilty of these virtues, and so
pleased; if after their surprizall, finding that by sinister construction, they
might prove blemishes to the Kings reputation, (should weak minds but chance
to see them,) they had presently locked them up in the Cabinet again, and sent
them secretly to the King: then indeed they might more properly have said, in a
private letter to their Sovereign, God has graciously, and in mercy to us,
put into our hands an occasion to Evidence our truth, our honest hearts, and
Loyal Affections to your Majesty.

I would have these men ask their own Consciences, whether they do not think,
that David would have done thus, had he met with such an advantage in the days
of Saul: surely they cannot conjecture, he would have done after their fashion:
for when he had as large an opportunity of doing his King a displeasure as this
was, and some did advise him to make use of it, to such a purpose, telling him
(in effect,) that it would be a great sin in 1 Samuel 24. 4.
him against the mercies of God, who so graciously and miraculously 1 Samuel 26.
8. etc.
had put the opportunity into his hand, if he should balk the same: But David
being a man after Gods own heart, knew Gods mind better then these men do; and
being as full of truth and Loyalty, as ever he had been in his professions of
the same, rebuked those who thus advised him, telling them plainly, that never
any could go in that way which they councelled him unto, but would prove guilty
of High Treason, and become liable to Gods curse; But (says he by his actions)
I Will make another use of this advantage, even to Evidence my truth and Loyalty,
to discover mine honest intentions unto the King, who has conceived an ill
opinion of me: I Will take away his spear, and the pot of water that stands at
his head, where he lies asleep, then I Will return them to him again, that he
may perceive that I had an advantage to have done him hurt, but not an heart or
Conscience disposed thereunto; and I Will rebuke Abner the General of his Host,
and the rest of his Captains, for guarding the Sacred person of their
Sovereign, and the things that concerned him so near no better. And indeed
even thus did David do, and we know what an happy success he had of his so
doing: The Kings heart hereupon melted toward him, and He yields him to be a
righteous man, a wronged person, and pronounces a blessing upon him: Blessed
art thou my Son David, thou shall do great things, and also shall 1 Samuel 26.
25.
still prevail.

We do conceive, that if the surprizers, and publishers of these Papers, had
gone in this way of David, it would have been more to their credits, more
becoming that Gospel which they pretend to profess, and the duty of Christian
subjects, then that course is which they have taken; and we also believe, that
if they had been as Honest men as David was, endued with as innocent and Loyal
hearts toward their King, as He, they would have done after his manner; and we
desire that they would ask their own Consciences, whether in this particular,
themselves be not directly of our opinion.

But seeing it is so apparent that these men are of a contrary spirit unto
David, (notwithstanding their great pretenses to Religion,) and seeing that God
has suffered them thus fully, and foulely, to discover their false hearts, by
their publication of these Papers: We for our parts may conclude more truly;
it would be a great sin in us, against the Mercies of God to conceal (and not
to take, yea, and to give public notice to the world of) this Evidence of the
truth of their inward malice and wickedness (against their Sovereign,) which
he so graciously hereby has permitted to us, that we might not be Seduced, or
misled by them. But they go on, and say,

Nor dare we smother that light under a Bushel, but freely hold it Libell.
out to our Seduced Brethren (for so in the spirit of meekness, laboring to
reclaim them we still speak,) that they may see their Error; and return into
the right way.

The Apprehension and hope of these men, is to discover unto. 4.
us (by this their light which they so freely hold out unto us) some nakedness
in their Father: It seems they are of the Generation of Cham; for he in like
sort, did freely hold out unto his Genesis 9. 22.
Brethren what he ought to have hidden and concealed.

But because they tell us they dare not do otherwise; we their Brethren,
before we yield up our selves to be led by them, desire to know, who it is that
keeps them in such great awe, that they dared not rather to have acted the
parts of Shem, and Japhet; Genesis 9. 23.
which we conceive had been more to their own credit and benefit, and more to
the comfort of their posterity: We do not remember any punishment denounced in
Scripture against those that conceal the imperfections of their Father: we are
plain men, and love to deal plainly, specially with those that offer themselves
thus freely to guide us, and therefore we must tell them, that we suspect them
from this word we dare not, to be under Satan's bondage, for he it is that rules
by fear; He it is that compels those that be in Captivity under him, to do
wickedly according to his lust and will; to transgress Gods Holy word, and to
run themselves upon his heavy curse; yea, He it is that forces his servants
so, that they dare do no otherwise: surely we believe these men cannot show a
better reason for their calling us Seduced, then this is for us to hold them
suspected: and therefore by this Title from henceforth we shall be bold to call
them our Suspected Brethren.

And the Light by which they would show us our Error, (as they call it) gives
us further to apprehend, how justly they deserve this Title; for who but men
whom the God of the world has blinded, would think that the Kings Errors,
(for such only in their imaginations is the light which they here so
liberally, and freely hold out unto us,) should be a glass sufficiently able
to discover to us our faults: Gods word and law, was wont to be the sole glass
and rule for such a purpose: By the Law comes the Romans 7. 7.
knowledge of Sin, (says the Apostle) therefore they must show us, either that
the Law is out of date in these times; grown faulty and unsufficient: or else
that the same does allow us, to withdraw our Duty and Obedience frow our
Sovereign, upon the sight of his supposed or real Errors: that God therein
commands us to adhere to him with this limitation, unless he be guilty of such
and such failings: except they can show us this, we are resolved not to forsake
our old light, to be guided by a new, thus devised and held out unto us by our
Suspected Brethren.

But, (by the way) why do they call us their Seduced Brethren?. 5.
we conceive because they judge us simple, in compare with themselves, and in
that regard very capable of seduction, they make themselves as sure of us, as
if they had already seduced us; and therefore they call us their Seduced
Brethren: we confess our inferiority unto them in this respect, for as the
Serpent was more Genesis 3. 1.
subtle then all the beasts of the field, so they in their generation are
wiser then we, and do deserve the Title of Subtle and crafty Brethren, as well
as of Suspected: But we must tell them ex magnis ingeniis magni errores, great
errors have not come but from great wit: they were Giants, and Lucifer that
highly rebelled against God; and S. Augustine advises, magis tibi metue cum in
intellectu habitat Diabolus, quam cum in affectionibus; for an erroneous Devil
in the understanding, will quickly prove a furious Devil in the affections, as
experience teaches: therefore we will be content to be esteemed simple still;
yea, to be numbered (if they please) among those whom Plutarch says, were
rudiores quam qui poterant decipi: for so we hope the Devil will have more to
do, to entrap us the Simple, then he has had to captivate, and inthrall them
the Subtle: for (as Esaias says) their wisdom and understanding Esaias 47. 10.
has perverted them, and caused them to rebel; and from their wisdom
(doubtless) their hopes do arise to reclaim, (as they call it) or rather to
pervert us by their Labors; for so they tell us, they labor to reclaim us:
viz. from the Errors of Loyalty and Christian Obedience.

But they tell us they labor in the spirit of meekness; that they Labor we
believe, their Predecessors have done so before them, who have travailed Sea
and Land to make others the Children Mat. 23. 15.
of Hell as well as themselves: but that they have any acquaintance at all with
the spirit of meekness, we can scarce discern by their writings; wherein we
see nothing wanting save modesty, truth, and sincerity; but these being the
natural fruits of the Spirit of meekness, we should have judged the Authors
of this Book quite Empty of that Spirit, had not themselves informed us
otherwise: And yet too by Christ's own warrant we may be suspicious of those
that bear testimony of themselves: A shadow of Joh. 5. 3.
meekness I grant they may have, but the Spirit is another thing.

When Satan loboured with our first Parents to the same end, as these do with
us, he had a shadow of meekness and love in his expressions; but not the
Spirit: so those Wolves that were prophesied Genesis 3.
to come in these last days, are foretold to have sheep clothing, that is,
shadows and pretenses of meekness, they should Mat. 24.
bleate so lamb-like, that the very Elect themselves, should scarce be able to
discern them; but yet they should be quite void of the spirit of meekness:
and verily we suspect these our subtle Brethren to be of that number: nay they
tell us, that in the spirit of meekness they Still speak.

This word Still makes us bethink our selves, how they have spoke already, and
to look back to their former language and dealings with us; and we find that we
have been reviled, railed upon, reproached both in Print and Pulpit, sub tecto,
and sub dio, by the names and titles of Malignants, Papists, Devils and Dogs;
we have been imprisoned, plundered, and violently divested of all we had, for
our Conscience and Allegiance fake; we have had our dear Wives, our tender
Infants, our gray-haired Parents, turned out of doors, and exposed to beggary
for our sakes; our selves being formerly banished and separated from them for
Gods sake; because we will not be reclaimed from the Gospel of Jesus Christ;
that Doctrine of Obedience which all our days has been taught us in the
Church of England: we have been hunted up and down the Kingdom, like wild
beasts by these meek men; and such as they have set upon us, to spill our
blood: we have had, (some of us) the trials of cruel mockings and scornings,
yea of scourgings; some of us have been roasted at the fire, have had our Hands
and Feet burnt off, in a far more cruel manner then Bishop Bonner served
Tomkins, or Edmond Tirrell, Rose Allen, (according as it is mentioned in the
book of Martyrs:) we have been tempted to take their cursed Oaths and
Covenants, and we have (thousands of us) been slain with the Sword; we have
been forced to wander up and down, through woods and mountains, shall I say in
sheepskins and goat skins? Nay, some of us without any clothes at all, being
stripped stark naked by these our modest Countrymen, as those of our Nation,
and Religion were in Ireland, by the Barbarous, and merciless Rebels there,
and constrained thus to shift for our lives, being destitute, afflicted,
tormented: Thus has that spirit of meekness, which rules in these our subtle
and suspected Brethren, discovered it self unto us; and say they In the Spirit
of meekness we still speak, but from this their spirit of meekness Good Lord
deliver us. They proceed and say,

For those that wilfully deviate, and make it their Profession to oppose Libell.
the truth, we think it below us to revile them with opprobrious Language,
remembering the Apostle Jude, and that example which he gives us in his Epistle.

The Apostle Jude in his Epistle speaks of certain persons, whom. 6.
Judge, ver. 8, 9.
he calls filthy dreamers, because (doubtless) they forsaking the rule of Gods
Word, talked and dreamed of new lights and Revelations (which also they
followed) these dreamers (he says) despised Dominions, and spoke evil of
Dignities, viz. of such persons to whom (in regard of their Authority and
Eminency) they owed their highest duty and Reverence; and the Example which the
Apostle gives (to whom he resembles these men) is of the Devil himself, who
disputing with Michael the Arch-Angell (a supreme Servant of God, maintaining
the truth against him) did assault him with railing accusations; now these our
subtle and suspected Brethren tell us, that they remember the Apostle Jude,
and the Example he gives them: indeed we perceive they do remember it very
well; they are full as good as their word in this particular; nor could any men
remember it better then they do, or show a more absolute conformity unto it;
for they dream of new Lights, they despise Dominions, they speak evil of
Dignities: their chief contestation is with the supreamest of Gods Servants in
this Kingdom, whom for his defending the truth they do assault, and revile
with most opprobrious language: and we do verily believe too, their spirits are
so high, that (according to their own saying) they think it below themselves,
to speak altogether so evilly of any, as of Dignities; to offer so much
despite to any, as to their betters, under whose Dominion they ought to
subject themselves: for they remember what the Apostle Jude says, and the
example which he gives them in his Epistle.

Besides, if they should rail with opprobrious language upon those who wilfully
deviate, and make it their profession to oppose the truth, they should revile
themselves, and give ill language one to another, for (if practice may speak
profession, and what men be) they are the most wilful deviatours from the
known truth, and the greatest opposers of it, that ever sprung from the
bottomless pit, in this last Age: and so they should show themselves not only
forgetful of the Apostle Jude, and the example which he gives them: but also
of themselves, and of that Oath and Covenant, which they have taken to hold one
with another, and to assist each other in this their wilful deviation against
the truth, and against their Sovereign: for though they have broken their Oath
of Allegiance (so often taken) to defend his life and Honor, who is the
defender of the truth, yet they are resolved, not to break that other, which
they have taken since, not to lay down Arms (of which their tongues and pens
are a special part,) till they have had their will of the King, and satisfied
their lusts upon him; perhaps indeed afterward, they may be at leisure to
break their Oath of Association too, and may come to be so humbled by one
another, that they may not think it so below themselves, (as it seems yet they
do,) to revile with opprobrious language, those that wilfully Deviate, and have
made it their profession to oppose the truth.

But truly we, (their simple Brethren) are of opinion, that if these
high-thoughted men, did not at this present think it below them, to shame
themselves; to upbraid their own hearts with their own ways; to charge their
own doings upon their own Consciences, but would suffer that sepulcher in their
own bosoms to open: that the steame thereof might ascend into their own
nostrils, to the loathing of themselves; they should do more becommingly, and
what in the end would be found more Comfortable.

But concerning the Scripture which these Dreamers have alleged out of S.
Jude; it being the sole, and only one produced for their own Justification, in
these their Commentaries upon the Kings letters; we must give them their due
praise, and yield it was very suitable for the purpose: They go on, and tell us
of something to be seen also, saying,

They may see here in these his private letters what Affection the Libell.
King bears to his people, what Language and Titles he bestows upon his great
Council.

SECT. III.
1. The Kings great and true affection to his people Evidenced. 2. How far
diverse of them that call themselves, His Great Council, are from proving
themselves his good Counselors. The ten Rules or Precepts whereby they have
proceeded. 3. Of the Language and Titles which they complain of, and how truly
the name Rebel belongs unto them. 4. The true cause of that great grief and
sorrow so often mentioned: An impudent Charge against the King propounded by
the Libellers.

THe unlearned (says S. Peter) do pervert many things in S.. 1.
Paul's Epistles, to their own destruction, through the ignorance 2 Pet. 3. 16.
that is in them: and if so, then much rather may the malicious make perverse
constructions upon the Kings Letters to the hurt of others, through the
bitterness that is in them. Truly we do imagine that our subtle and suspected
Brethren have even so done: and malum being sui diffusivum, they would fain
season us with the same liquor which infecteth them: to which end, they would
have us look with such Eyes as they do, and to judge with such hearts; for
thereby in time we may perhaps be brought to speak with such tongues, and to
act with such hands too; And (peradventure) if we cannot read with their
Spectacles, or relish their interpretations, they will conclude us to be stark
blind, and strongly Seduced: But if they do, we are of S. Paul's mind, and
pass 1 Cor. 4. 3.
not much to be judged by them, our Judge is Christ, whose Gospel has taught
us to interpret better.

These Letters (we acknowledge) have been read, and as proceeding from their
hands too, together with their corrupt gloss upon them: and we wish from our
souls, we had seen no more disloyalty in the one, then we do disaffection in
the other; no worse language in their notes against the best of Kings, then we
do in his letters against the worst of Subjects: we see his tender care to
preserve in being, his Protestant people in the Kingdom of Ireland; (he being
made unable at the present to restore them to their former wel-being) Pap. 16,
and 17. we see also how desirous he is to settle a peace among his unkind and
unnatural people of this Kingdom, (though with the diminution of his own
undoubted rights, and the lending away, to his own great loss and prejudice,
his most just Prerogative) Pap. 25. we see moreover, how his spirit is grieved
in him, at the Stubbornness and perverseness of the English Rebels, that they
hindered his hopes of an Accommodation by way of Treaty, Pap. 6. which (in the
judgment of all that love their Country) would be the best for the people of
this land, as the case now stands: we see in his Letters, what resolution he
has to adhere to his Clergy, the Messengers and Servants of the great God,
(who were wont to be reckoned among the better sort of his people, though now
with these new and vile Reformers, they are the most contemptible) Pap. 1.
Indeed his private directions for his Commissioners at Uxbridge, do alone
speak sufficiently his fatherly and Pious Affection to his people: His words
(as his very Enemies record them) are these, Paper 25.

I cannot yield to the change of the Government by Bishops: not only as I
fully concur, with the most General opinion of Christians in all Ages (as
being the best) But likewise I hold my self particularly bound by the Oath I
took at my Coronation, not to alter the Government of this Church, from what I
found it: And as for the Churches Patirmony; I cannot suffer any diminution, or
alienation of it, being (without peradventure) Sacrilege, and likewise
contrary to my Coronation Oath: But whatever shall be offered for rectifying of
abuses (if any have crept in,) or for the ease of tender Consciences, (so as it
endamage not the foundation) I am content to hear, and will be content to give
a gracious answer thereunto.

Had any of the Kings Predecessors, but offered thus much, half thus much, to
the strictest non-Conformists in former times, they would have cried it up, for
a token of the greatest affection that ever King did show unto his people: But
the men of our times, unless their Sovereign will commit perjury, and break
his Oath to God (as they have done theirs both to God and him,) to please their
Humors, unless he will commit Sacrilege (as they do;) destroy his own
Conscience, and damn his own soul, to satisfy their lusts, they are resolved
to rail upon him for one that bears no Affections to his people.

But in these his Instructions to the same Commissioners, we may and do observe
more of his Affection yet, (to his own damage and wrong) unto his people; his
words are these, (by the testimony also of his own deadly enemies.)

The Militia is certainly the fittest subject for a Kings quarrel, for without
it, the Kingly power is but a shadow, (who can deny this?) and therefore upon
no means to be acquitted, but maintained, according to the Ancient known laws
of the Land, (no otherwise does the King desire to have it defended and
upheld:) Yet because to attain to this so much wished peace by all good men, it
is in a manner necessary, (Scil. in regard of the guilty Consciences of the
Rebels,) that a sufficient, and real security be given (even to them to take
away (if possible) their suspicion,) for the performance of what shall be
agreed upon: I permit you either by leaving strong Towns, or other Military
forces in the Rebels possession, (until Articles be performed,) to give such
assurance for performance of conditions, as you shall judge necessary to
conclude a firm Peace. Provided always, that you take as great a care by
sufficient security, that Conditions be performed to me, (good reason,) and to
make sure that the peace once settled, all things shall return to their ancient
Channel.

Now behold and wonder, (O all ye Nations of the word,) and judge (I beseech
you) betwixt this King and his Accusers: Could any Christian deny himself more?
Did ever Prince deny himself so much? Can the desires of any man be more equal
and just then these are? Do you perceive in these his secret instructions,
that he covets any more power, or Prerogative then is allowed or approved by
the Ancient and known Laws of the Land? Can any innocent disposition upon the
earth, possibly give more satisfaction to a perverse, froward and guilty Enemy,
then is here offered to these men, by a most Gracious, and Honest King; only
to procure life and tranquillity to his poor people, who are most mercilesly
butchered, and abused by their fellow subjects? I am confident you will all
yield, that these expressions of the King, in these his private letters, do
discover sufficient affections to his people: and doubtless you will judge
too, that those who are not of the same opinion, are only they who desire to
denude him of that Kingly right, and dignity, which God alone has invested him
withal; Yea, and of his life it self i^^ possibly they can, Sed providebit
Deus: God we trust will still protect him.

And then further yet, in his directions to his said Commissioners concerning
Ireland: the King infers, that he is willing to consent to any thing, that
shall be desired or devised, may but a clear way be showed him, how his poor
Protestant Subjects there, may probably (at least) defend themselves, and that
himself shall have no more need to defend his Conscience, and Crown, from the
injuries of this English Rebellion. I do not doubt but all men of Religion and
Reason, will acknowledge in the Kings behalf, that these be ample Testimonies
of his true Affections; and yet these men speak, as if the King wanted
affections to his people.

I confess there be a Company got above-board in these times, who call
themselves His people, and Gods people, yea his only good Subjects, and Gods
only good Children; but in very deed their works speak them neither to belong
to God, nor Him: Loammi may their name and title properly be. The King may
happily show his dislike of them, and their ways, but this speaks no
disaffection in him to his own people, any more then our Saviors dislike of
the Pharisees, and their conditions did speak disaffection to his disciples;
those only are the Kings people, that yield him their obedience.

But they tell us also, that in his Letters, we shall see what Language. 2.
and Titles the King bestows upon his great Council: they mean the
prevailing faction at Westminster, whom they call Great, because they are so
strong at this present, and so powerful, for Rabsakeh upon this ground called
his master the Great King, and 2 King. 18. 28.
Nimrod also was called Great, from a like reason, he had by cruelty Genesis 10. 9.
and oppression (as these have done) got the upper hand of all his neighbors:
it is the nature of some to affect greatness, and to manifest the same, whereas
Gods delights are to show his goodness rather: Had that Great Council, (which
they speak of) been of Gods mind, and endeavored in Gods way, to have proved
themselves the Kings good Council, there would have been no exceptions about
Language or Titles.

Great we yield them, and wish with our souls, they were as good: But we
conceive not, how that Great Council, can be the Kings great Council, (as
these call it) unless only in that sense, as those Husbandmen in the Gospel
were their Lords servants, Mat. 21. 38.
when having already killed, and beaten many of their fellows, they had entered
into a Consultation to murder the Heir himself; and to seize on his
inheritance for themselves: when their Lord did first commit his vineyard to
their care to dress, and keep, while they labored for his benefit and
advantage, he might acknowledge them for his servants: but when once they
failed in their trust, sought their own ends only, and his damage, there was no
reason, he should esteem of them any longer.

Lucifer and his Companions were at their first Creation, Sons of the Morning,
all bright Angels, glorious Creatures, beloved of God; but when they
entertained aspiring thoughts, disdained their equals, separated from them,
and thought much that He who made them, should be above them; they fall from
their Honor, and no longer abode in their Primitive Condition; so when mutable
men, alter from what they were, they leave their former Names and Titles.

We (for our parts) cannot conceive, how the mere place, or bare walls in a
Council Chamber, can make or continue men to be of the Kings Council; nor can
we be persuaded, that the outward taking of an Oath or Protestation, to defend
the Kings life, Honor, and Estate, without a faithful discharge thereof, and
fulfilling the trust imposed, does speak men to be the Kings good Councillors.
Good Councillors (as we apprehend) are such as study sincerely, and are most
specially careful to maintain their Prince his Crown and Dignity, to prefer
his Honor fair and splendent, (as being the very life of His Majesty:) when
there is any miscarriage in Government, they will rather take the fault upon
themselves then suffer it in the least degree to have reflection upon their
Sovereign; they will (though to their own loss) endeavor to acquit him of
all blame, and to uphold his reputation in the hearts of his people: did ever
any Honest Politician propound such rules to be observed by a Kings Great
Council, or ever any Statesmen or Councillors, who were Christian and
Religious, order their practice according to such Precepts as these that follow?

1. Promise at your first meeting to make your King, the most Glorious prince
in Christendom, and take a Protestation to defend his life, Honor, and
Estate, that so he may give the more credence to you, and the Common people may
have the better opinion of your Love and Loyalty; and so be more apt to do any
thing that you will have them.

2. When you have done this, labor by all means to make a strong faction
amongst your selves against the King: and if any of your fellows be so
scrupulous in Conscience, that they will not join with you, be sure that by
all-meanes, you force them from the Councel-house: and if you cannot otherwise
effect it, set the Common people to threaten and assault them, as Enemies to
the State and Kingdom.

3. Pretend Jealousies, and Fears; and hereupon with all speed possess your
selves both of the Militia and Navy of the Kingdom, and see to it, that (in no
hand) you suffer the King to have any thing to do with either.

4. Seize upon all the Kings Rents, and Revenews, and starve Him if you can;
suffer Him not to have the common comforts of an ordinary man, to enjoy the
Society of the wife of His bosom, or any house of His own to Lodge in: if he
be a Christian, put Him into his Lords Condition; that he may say, the foxes
have holes, and the birds of the Air have nests, but I have not where to hide
my Head.

5. Lay all the Miscarriages that your selves, or any other inferior Officers
have committed, since the beginning of His Reign, to His Charge, in a large
Remonstrance; and do what ever else you can possibly devise to make Him odious
unto his people.

6. Study to Vex and Grieve his Spirit upon all occasions, by all means;
pervert and misconstrue on purpose, all His sayings, letters, and doings, and
yield not to His desires in any thing, be it never so just, and reasonable; but
tempt and urge Him, to perjure Himself, and to commit Sacrilege if possible.

7. Authorize all base Libells, all scandalous and lying Pamphlets that any one
has a mind to publish against Him; though they be such as not only the
Authors themselves, but the very Devil himself would blush to own.

8. Kill, Slay, and Destroy all that love Him, and think well of Him;
suppress, reproach, ruinate, banish, imprison, or murder, all those Ministers
of God, that shall dare to allege Gods Word, in their Kings behalf, and fail
not to show special favor and countenance, to all such Preachers, as have
mouth and forehead to belie Him, and to defame Him from the Pulpits, and that
will speak of Him, as if He were an Infidel, an Idolater, an Apostate.

9. When you have brought Him to a most low and desolate condition, be sure you
Flout lustily at Him; and hire fellows that are skillful in scorning, to write
weekly Pamphlets on purpose to expose Him to be Ludibrium Hominum, and
oppro^rium Populi: for this was the condition of Christ His Savior; to which
He, as well as others who are Godly, must be conformable.

10. Let all your Consultations be only to throw Him down from that Excellency
wherein God has set Him: although to bring the same to pass, you hazard the
destruction of all His Kingdoms; But be sure, you hold your own still, call
your selves His Great Council, and when ever you write unto Him, let it be in
this submissive form and style: We your Majesty's most Humble, and most Loyal
Subjects, considering with great grief and sorrow of Heart; etc.

Can any men, that have but the least spark of grace, or modesty in them,
affirm, that the Councillors who walk toward their King according to these or
such like rules, do deserve the name of the Kings Council? Truly we (who are
accounted Seduced) having been brought up in the plain, honest, Protestant
Christian Religion, dare not either think or say they do: we know there will
come a day, when all men shall be judged according to their works, and
therefore in the mean time our subtle Brethren must pardon us, if we so judge
of men for the present, as their works speak them; nor indeed dare we so much
disparage the most High, and most Honorable Court, (of Parliament) in England,
(to which alone the Title of the Kings Great Council belongs;) as to fasten
the same upon such a Disloyal, Hypocritical, unchristian, and bloody Faction
as this now above-board is, and which walks according to the forementioned
Rules.

But what are those Titles or Language, which in these his Letters. 3.
we may see the King bestows upon his Great Council, (as they call it?) we
find him therein Lamenting their pertinacy, complaining of their Stubborunesse,
and bewailing the perverseness of their spirits: as Christ could not look upon
such conditioned persons without Grief and Anger; so the King cannot speak of
Mat. 5. 3.
them without sorrow and indignation: for they were once his people, though now
they have plucked their necks from under his yoke: perhaps sometimes he calls
them by the name of Rebels, and is there not a cause? did not Christ call some
that walked in such ways as they go in, Vipers and Children of the Devil?
When the Jewish Nation, whom God had formerly owned for his people, did act the
part of an Impetious whorish woman; he called her Jer. 3. Ezekiel. 16.
Harlot: it is fit every thing should be called by its own name; and that the
name Rebel is proper to them whom the King entitles with it, we are able to
show by such strong Arguments, as these their Champions (for all their
Subtilty) can never answer; for what ever wickedness is or has been in any
Rebels of former Ages, is superlatively apparent in these men: Let themselves
but say what things do make and denominate a Rebel, and it shall be Evidenced
clearly that themselves have the same Conditions.

Are they Rebels that lift up a violent hand against the Supreme Magistrate?
or that open a foul mouth against Him? or that publish and Authorize base
Scandalous Pamphlets, to His defamation and dishonor? that violently break all
Laws, both Humane and Divine? If any one of these, or all these together, be
the properties of Rebels, then these men are completely qualified for the
Title. Or again, is it the custom of Rebels to slight the Kings Authority? to
deny Him to be Gods Anointed? to rob Him of His rents and revenues? to cheat
Him of His Arms, His Ships, His Castles, and Hearts of His people? to hunt Him
up and down his Kingdom, like a Partridge upon the mountains? If these be the
Actions, and works of Rebels, then these men above all men have fully merited
to be so called. In a word, if Absalom, and Achitophel; if Sheba the son of
Bichri; if Korah, Dathan, and Abiram were Rebels in their Generations, then so
are these in this; for these have done over all the same things, which every of
them did do, though with greater impudence and violence: Nay if Satan himself
in his seduction of our first Parents, did act the Rebel against the Almighty,
then also have these against their Sovereign; for they have directly proceeded
in his method and way; as might be showed in all the particulars: But these
Examples are all so Evident in Scripture to peoples eyes, that I shall leave
the matter wholly to their own observance, and listen to what these men say
further; having told us of Language and Titles which the King bestows upon his
Great Council, they add,

Which we return not again, but consider with Sorrow that it comes Libell.
from a Prince Seduced out of his proper sphere.

What the King bestows we have heard already; what they return. 4.
we shall see anon: only in the first place we cannot but observe their
Sorrowful Consideration, because it is a phrase in great fashion, even with
them also whom they call his Great Council; who have many a time and often, told
the King in their letters to him, of their own great griefs and sorrows: But
let their Consciences speak, what is the true ground of their sorrow, is it not
this? Because they that are able to do so much to the Kings damage, to raise
so many Armies against him of his own people, to corrupt so many of his
Officers and Commanders, for to betray the places committed to their trust,
should not yet by all their injurious and contumelious dealings, (which have
been more then was ever offered to a Christian Prince by Protestant people.) be
able to break his heart, and sink him to his grave; still they see he is
strengthened by the help of God to bear his burden: and they have heard
(happily) of that his pious expression, viz. Though God has pleased to lay on me
a greater Burden of Affliction, then upon other Princes my Predecessors: yet
withal he has in his goodness, enlarged unto me an answerable measure of
patience. Let their own Consciences speak whether (in very deed) their grief
does not spring from this Consideration: For if they should not Effect to vex
him to death, or some way or other to bring him to his grave, all their labor
would be in vain, and to little purpose; and how can they consider of this,
without great grief, and sorrow of heart? But these good men (our subtle
Brethren) do here pretend that their sorrow is, because their Prince is
Seduced out of his proper sphere: yet verily we on the other side do consider
of this with more true Sorrow (I dare say) then they do: for we confess never
was Prince so far seduced out of his proper sphere, as he was; when He took
them who now call themselves his great Counsel, to be Honest men: when He gave
so much credit to their promises and protestations, as to be persuaded by them,
to sign the Bill for the Continuation of that unhappy Parliament: then, O then
be was seduced indeed, from his proper sphere, wherein his Father set and left
him with this caution, Always to be suspicious of the Puritanicall faction,
and never to Basilic. Doron. Lib. 2.
trust them above all people in the world, as being for ingratitude, lies, and
perjuries, surpassing the High-land thieves and Borderers. His Seduction from
this Paternal advise, was the root and cause of all our Miseries, and therefore
with sorrow of heart, we his Loyal Subjects cannot but think upon it.

But to do these men right: they mention their sorrow here, for the Kings
Seduction, to another purpose, namely as a Preface to that which follows. M.
Dike in his book of the deceitfulness of man's heart, sets down, not for
imitation, (as these take it) but for discovery, the method of a cunning
Hypocrite in his venting a slander: First (says he) to gain Credit with the
hearers, he pretends great affection to the party against whom he is minded to
speak, professing that with great grief and sorrow of heart, he does think of
him, (hoping yet that he is only missed and seduced,) and so makes a long
Preamble to this purpose, as if the fault he intends to mention, were as
grievous to him, as a blow with a Cudgel; and then at last, out comes the
slander, which his viperous tongue lays on with as much spite as malice is
able, these (I remember) are M. Dikes words.

Now after this very manner, and in the same Method, do these our subtle
Brethren speak to us concerning their Sovereign, whom they are about to
slander and defame: First they tell us in some obscure and general terms, of
strange Titles, which the King bestows upon his great Council, which (say
they) we return not again; but consider with sorrow that it comes from a
Prince, (not so Naturally inclined, as we hope, for we would fain think better
of him, but) Seduced from his proper sphere, misled by ill Council: And so
much for the Preface. Now to the main business, and let all Christian people
observe it well, how these good Sorrowful men, that promised even now, to give
no opprobrious Language, will describe their Sovereign. He is, say they,

One that has left that seat in which he ought, and has bound himself Libell.
to fit, to sit (as the Psalmist says) in the Chair of the scornful, and to
the ruin almost of three Kingdoms, has walked in the Counsels of the
ungodly.

Now it is out: and it conteines in our apprehensions these 6 Articles against
the King.

1. That the King has not only neglected to perform his Office, but
voluntarily, and upon no occasion moving, has left and forsaken his proper
place and duty.

2. That in the room thereof, he has made choice of the Scorners Chair,
which is the highest seat or throne of wickedness.

3. That he has even bound himself Prentice, as it were by oath and Covenant,
to that trade of scorning.

4. That he has resolved to follow that profession so long as he lives; for he
has bound himself to sit, yea, to sit, scil. for ever, in the Chair of the
scornful.

5. That his aims and endeavors only are, and have been to ruin three whole
Kingdoms, which even almost he had effected.

6. That to this very end, and for no other reason (as must be supposed) he
has abandoned the Society of most Holy and good men, and linked himself by a
indissolvable tie, to the Society of the wicked, whose ungodly counsel he
always walks in.

These are the particulars in this their first charge against the King: but my
purpose being to uncase these Hypocritical and blasphemous men, I shall first
lay open to the world, the full meaning of their hearts, in a true Paraphrase
upon their words; and then I shall show how false and scandalous they be in
every respect against his Majesty, unto whom they naturally owe, and solemnly
have sworn obedience. But first let me beg pardon of my Lord and Sovereign,
and crave of all Loyal hearts that it be not imputed for an indecorum or want
of Reverence in me to Kingly Honor, if some of my words concerning His Sacred
person, do sound unseemly, and unbecomming; Let it be considered, that I speak
not my self, but other men, whose Hellish intentions toward their Prince, are
so black, that it is impossible to express them in a language meetly Reverend:
He that opens rotten sepulchers may (though unwillingly) be offensive.

Secondly, I desire of all men, that I may not be thought by my manner of
speaking, to intend the working of any contempt in peoples hearts against the
High Court of Parliament, which being called in the Kings name, by his Writ,
and acting under the obedience of just and regal power, are with all Honor
and Reverence to be thought upon, and spoken of: Yea, and God knows my heart
abhors to be an instrument of working disesteem against any persons of this
present Assembly, who have pious and loyal affections in them, (as I believe
there be diverse, even in this very Body, that do truly detest the present
proceedings of some of their fellow members.) I do here profess to all the
world, though I use the name of Parliament, and Great Council, in answer to
these Libellers, yet I mean only the present swaying and prevailing faction
in the two Houses, who are and have been the Countenancers of all these abuses
against their Sovereign, and the causers of all our sorrows: and who they in
particular are, I doubt not but in due time, God the Supreme Judge, will
Evidence to this whole Kingdom. This with all Humility premised and implored,
I proceed as follows.

SECT. IV.
1. The Nature of their Charge opened. 2. Their vilanous and bloody Scope
therein, clearly Evidenced, and proved. 3. How perfectly in their Tenants they
hold with the Jesuits in the points of King-killing and King-deposing, fully
declared.

THe Charge or Bill of Attainder against the King, together. 1.
with the Reason, why it is thus published to us, and to the people, by these
His most dutiful and loving Subjects, (who take upon them to be His Accusers)
according to their own full and clear meaning may be rendered more at large,
thus:

That the King, (or rather he who was once in that office) has voluntarily,
and freely, without being urged by any occasion in the world, forsaken his
place, wherein he ought to have remained, and which to His great content, He
might still have enjoyed, (had he so pleased) being not only obliged thereunto
by His Duty; but also importuned by the most Humble supplications and prostrate
entreaties of His Great Council: But He merely out of his own ill disposition,
is departed thence, and has taken up, not only a standing, but a Seat, yea,
has bound Himself by obligation, entered into a covenant with Hell, to sit, to
sit (we say) as the Psalmist speak, (for we would have all the Common people
know, that we have Scripture for what we say) in the Seat of the Scornful:
that is, (as our Prophets interpret) to remain for ever in the Highest Throne
and degree of wickedness, that man or Devil can reach unto: whereby it
appears that ( Ahab-like) he has sold himself to work all evil, even with
greediness; and is past all hope of recovery: Moreover, he has intentionally
and on set purpose, been already the ruin almost of three whole Kingdoms, and
had been so altogether ere this, had not His Great Council, (a company of most
Holy, Chaste, Innocent, Wise and infallible good men) sitting now at
Westminster, in their great pity, and commiseration of spirit, and out of
their abounding piety, and mere natural goodness interposed themselves,
whereby (thanks only to them) the three Kingdoms are yet kept in being; which
(before they put to their helping hands) were at the very brim of destruction.
And yet notwithstanding, this wilful King has left their most Sacred, sweet,
and peaceable society, out of a pure hatred to them, and to their v^rtues: and
has not only stepped unawares, but has even eat and drunk with Publicans and
Sinners: yea, and walked deliberately in the Councels of the wicked, and
ungodly: Insomuch that it is to be thought, the total ruin of the three
Kingdoms, will shortly be accomplished, do what the Great Council can to the
contray, unless some Noble Brutus, some Valiant Cassius, out of love to their
Countries Liberty, will take the pains to stab this Caesar: some devout
Raviliack in his zeal unto Religion, will do God the service, (or the kindness
rather) to free the world, and Church of this destructive Tyrant, for it is
better (as Scripture says) that one man should die, then that all the People
perish; then that three whole Kingdoms should be destroyed.

We refer the matter to their own Consciences, whether this be not the true
sense of their spirits, and whether they would not have the people thus to
understand their words, against the King: And to prevent scruples, which may
arise in the hearts of any about the Business, which they would have done,
they add to the former the words following, saying,

And though in our Tenants we annex no infallibility to the seat of Libell.
a King in Parliament, (as the Romanists do to the Papal Chair, since all men
are subject to Error,) yet we dare boldly say, that no English King did ever
from that place, speak destruction to His people, but safety and Honor, nor
any that abhorred that seat and Council, but did the contrary.

These words (I say) are added to their foregoing description of the King, not
only to further the Business aimed at; but also in way of prevention: for some
might make a scruple of Conscience, (as David did) to kill the King,
notwithstanding these suggestions, because He is the Lords Anointed: Wherefore
these circumspect m^n, being ad omnia parati, do signify further in these
words, that no man need be precise in that respect, for say they, in effect
thus,

We in our Tenants (which are all the truth, and the very truth, and the truth
indeed, and so to be apprehended by all men living) do make no more of a King,
then we do of another man, the seat of a King in Parliament it self, is no more
then the seat of Caesar in the Senate House, it may as well be empty as not,
were there but no King at all, (for it is not so much his Presence there, which
we desire and quarrel about, as his Nullity, that He might be no where:) we
hold there is no more virtue in the Seat of a King in Parliament, then in the
seat of an ordinary Burgesle, (no nor half so much neither:) we neither do nor
will in our Tenants annex infallibility to the Kings Seat; for should we make a
Pope of the King? No, no: He is but a man, subject to Errors, as others be,
and therefore liable to be punished for his faults, as well as others:
specially since the Sovereignty is transmitted into the hands of the
Parliament, which was done (as the Parliaments own self judges) when the Bil
of perpetu^ty was signed. It is granted indeed before that time, the Supreme
power was in Him, and we were all his Subjects: and then perhaps some might
Scruple to out his throat, for there were laws then in force against
Regicides, but now since his Resignation, (for so in our Tenants we hold this
Act to be,) there is no scruple to be made, those laws against King-killers
are suspended, and he is now become as Samson was without his strength, even
like another man, any of the well affected Philistines may fall upon him, mock
him, kill him, or use him as they please; if their new Lords (that is to say)
the worthy members of the Parliament do but give leave* for he is now but their
subject, their slave; they are able (by the infallibility of their Votes) to
make him a malefactor, and then to order him, (if they can catch him) as such a
one; for infallibly we grant is an Attendant on the Supreme power; we do not
indeed annex it to the Kings seat, because the supreme power is now removed
from thence; while this was in the King, the Parliament it self (as appears in
some of their Expresses,) did use to speak as the Law did, modestly of the
King, and to say he could not err; but now, the case is altered with him, the
Supreme power being transferred unto other persons, infallibility still attends
the same, and not the Kings person: And hence it was, that after the aforesaid
Act, there was a large Remonstrance made, which the Authors of, durst never
make before, whilst the power was in the Kings hand* (it may be called the
Parliaments Act of Gratitude, for the Kings Act forenamed) in which they
declare sufficiently, their judgment to be, that the King may now be imputed
fallible, and unfit to manage the Supreme power from thenceforth any longer:
And hence also it is, that a new Oath of Allegiance and Obedience to the
Parliament is tendered to the People of this Land, which plainly shows, that
the Supreme power is concluded to dwell in them; and that the old Oath is quite
void and out of date together with the King. And for the Protestation general,
(which was took at the beginning of the Parliament to defend the Kings life and
Honor) that is to be understood only so long as the Kingly and Supreme power
remained in him, but that being once removed, the Pretestation binds us no
longer to regard His Person and Honor; but the Persons and Honors of them
only, in whom the said Supremacy is now seated: And therefore all the world
knows, that the Parliament, or great Council, never raised War against the
King, never suffered any to take away His Name and Honor, or to seize upon His
revenews, so long as the Supreme power was in Him; for that had been rank
Rebellion in them indeed; but now since themselves were invested in the same;
they set to their business, (as lawfully they may) to establish the Kingdom
upon themselves and their successors: First by putting forth their
Remonstrance against the King, to loosen all the bands of ancient Loyalty, and
then by seizing upon the Militia of the Kingdom, the Forts, Castles, Ships and
Towns, as their proper Rights, and all the Kings Goods and Houses, as being
now (in regard of their Supremacy) solely at their disposing; and then too,
after all this, they thought fit in wisdom, to Vote the King to be one that
intends the ruin of three Kingdoms, that abhors His Great Council, which
speaks nothing but Safety and Honor to Him. Yea, (and in very deed) He does
Envy those worthies, that Honor, strength, rule and dignity, which now by Gods
Providence, is so happily cast upon them; even as Richard the Third did grutch
at those two innocent Princes, whose by right the Kingdom was, and thereupon
did murder them, to get the Scepter into His own Hands, and the Crown upon His
own Head: So this man aims at the destruction of the most blessed Parliament,
whose the Kingdom now by right is, and in whose Hand all Power and Authority
is lodged and fastened, and there like to remain, so long as a drop of blood is
left in the veins of Englishmen, who shall fight for them to maintain it:
therefore let all men remember Richard the Third what peace the Land had after
long Wars, when he was once killed, and let them expect the same now, if this
Man (who is worse then He) could be taken away. And no man need scruple to do
it, for the Supreme Authority now above-board does allow it; and that is able
to make sin no sin, when it lists; that has declared him to speak
destruction to the Kingdoms, to abhor the Parliament, and never any English
King did so, but he spoke Destruction to himself thereby; therefore let him
have it; we dare boldly say and assure, that safety and Honor is not his
portion, but destruction from the Lord is appointed to him, the Parliament so
judges, and blessed shall he be, that shall divide it out unto him. And thus
all scruples of Consciences are removed.

I have been the larger in opening the meanings of these men, that I might
withal express the ground of their uncouth opinions, and let no good people,
who have a Charitable conceit of them, think that I stretch their words beyond
their intentions, I would not force any man's faith beyond his judgment, much
less against the same: wherefore let these few following particulars be
considered upon, and I believe it will be evident, to every reasonable man,
that I have spoken nothing, but the real desires of their hearts and spirits.

1. Consider the Nature of the Crimes which most maliciously and falsely they
lay to the Kings Charge; that He has neglected His office, Forsaken His place,
that He Abhors the Parliament, Walks only in the Council of the ungodly,
that he seeks the Destruction of three Kingdoms, and is ascended to the
highest pitch and throne of wickedness, The seat of the scornful, and there
has Bound himself to sit and continue; what is all this in effect, but Away
with him from the Earth, it is not fitting he should live?

2. Consider of some of their Tenants, which to this purpose they have been a
buzzing a long while, and whispering into the minds of people, viz. That the
King is but only for the peoples good, He is but their Bailiff, their Servant,
and that the Parliament without him is above him, may wage war against him, may
depose him, and turn him out of his Office, if he be not for their turn; that
they can give Commission to any to apprehend, yea, to kill him, if He does
oppose them; that evil may be done to further the Publik good, and in respect
of the end aimed at it is not to be accounted evil; and many such like Tenants
they have, which let any man consider of, together with their accusations of
him, as also what they have done against him, and then say, whether all this
does not signify, that they would gladly be rid of him, if any would take upon
them but to kill him.

3. Consider what high Holiness, Wisdom, Justice, care of the Kingdom is
affirmed abroad, and taught to be in them, who take upon them the name of the
great Council, or Parliament at Westminster: How infallible they are preached
to be in their judgments, how unerring in their Votes and Censures, when in
Consultation together; though perhaps, (as particular men) they may chance to
Err sometimes, for it is confessed, all men are subject to Error; yet when
they are in Cathedris, in their seats as Parliament men, they are all as
infallible as the Pope; and have a power as well as he, to do what they please,
to make Evil, Good; and Good Evil: to make Rebellion and Treason, to be Duty
and Loyalty; and Duty and Loyalty, to be Rebellion and Treason; to Vote
Sacrilege, Murder, and Theft to be no sins; Killing, Slaying, and Destroying
to be acts of zeal and Christian Duty; Yea, what ever they shall authorize
with approbation, (as they have done this Libel) must be received without
scruple and haesitation, as pious and godly, though as full of Blasphemy as
this same is: Nay, what man living will not conceive, but they who have
Authorized this book against the King, will also warrant any man to kill him:
to prevent his Capacity of punishing them hereafter for it? and whosoever
believes it was no sin in them, to Authorize the one, will not think it a sin
in them to warrant the other.

4. Consider how since that Act of Continuation of the Parliament they have
plainly denied the Supreme power to be in the King, and affirm the same to be
in themselves; how they have suppressed the ancient Oath of Allegiance and
Supremacy, and disclaimed them both, and have in the place of them framed a new
Oath and Covenant, which they have put upon the Subjects of this Kingdom; to
swear adherence and allegiance to themselves: how they have made a New great
Seal, (as if the old one with the King were of no longer use:) How they have
seized upon all the Royalties of the Crown, and upon all the Kings Personal
Estate, to be disposed of as their own; How they have executed all Regal
Prerogatives; How they call all those that do adhere to the King, Rebels and
Traitors, and pursue them as such, with fire and sword? How they Hunt the King
up and down the Kingdom, (as if he were become an outlaw,) seeking to murder
and destroy him? How they (now of late) do all in the name of the Parliament
Only, though at first til the people were fully seduced by them, and engaged
with them, they did use the Kings Name together with it; does not at all this
speak plainly, that they thirst to drink the Kings blood, and desire to have it
shed or spilt?

5. Consider how in their Notes, (in this their accursed Libel page 44.) they
tax the King as faulty, for his Soliciting the King of Denmark, and other
Protestant Princes, (as they speak) to assist for the supporting of Monarchy;
does not this plainly infer that they have concluded against the Government
here in England, and so by Consequence against the Monarch himself? Does it not
evidently declare, that they account him King no longer? and that all the
Supremacy is now in themselves? Which being supposed, and withal, that he
(according to their Votes,) seeks the ruin of his people, whose safety above
all things must be regarded: It follows of necessity, that they desire the
Kings Destruction, and would have it apprehended, that they do but their duty
to the Kingdom in desiring it.

6. Consider how they do, (as in their Pamphlets and Sermons) compare the King
to Saul, Ahab, Nero, and the like; so in their malicious Notes upon his Letters
here ( page 48.) they compare him to Richard the third, (the most bloody and
unjust man that ever swayed the English Scepter,) which plainly speaks, that
they would have people take him to be such a one, and to have no more true
right to the Crown, then that Richard had; and that themselves would be as glad
of his death, as Hen. the 7. was of the death of that Tyrant.

If these particulars (amongst many others that might be propounded) be
considered on; I doubt not but all reasonable men will yield, that I have done
the Authors of this Libell right, in my interpretation of their intentions
expressed in those their words against the King.

But that I might not leave the least scruple in the hearts of any wel-meaning
people, that yet remain drunk with a good opinion of their Honesties; and do in
Charity think it impossible, that men pretending so fair, and having so great a
name in the world for Religion, should be so Diabolical, and have such Hellish
designs: I will further yet endeavor their satisfaction, (for I do publicly
profess, mine aims are, to do the work of Christ, in laying open men's
Hypocrisy,) that mine abused Countrymen, for whom Christ died, might not
longer be deceived: which work, (by Gods grace) I shall faithfully pursue,
though I meet in the end, with Christ's reward, at their bloody hands, for my
labor. Wherefore,

I will show, First, that there is no impossibility at all in the matter,
notwithstanding their specious pretenses which they make: and then it will
further Evidence the verity of what I have said, from their own Tenants.

My Argument for the first is this: Whatever has been already, may possibly be
again: (for, (says Solomon) The thing which Eccles. 1. 9, 10.
has been, is that which shall be, and that which is done, is that which shall
be done:) But such men there have been, who had a name to Rev. 3. 9.
be alive, when they were dead, in trespasses and sins; who said they were
Jews, (called themselves Gods people,) and were so accounted by others; when
(in very deed) they were of the Synagogue Rev. 2. 9. 3. 9.
of Satan: therefore it is not impossible, but such men may be also in these
days, which are the last days, and therefore the worst, the very dregs of
time.

For proof of the Assumption, let us remember the Scribes and Pharisees in the
Gospel, they had as great a name in the world then, as these persecutors of the
King have now, and were as well thought on by the vulgar, in whose opinions,
they were far enough from those villainies, which notwithstanding Christ did
sufficiently discover to be in them; Nay, the people (though themselves were
employed as under-instruments in the very business) were so bewitched with a
good conceit of their Pharisaical rulers, (whom they counted the Worthies of
their Nation,) that they would not at first believe, that they had any purpose
to kill Christ; for when he said, why go ye about to kill me? the people
replied, Thou have a Devil, Who goes about to kill thee? they John 7. 20.
(good folks) conceived that their Holy and wise Rulers, did only provide for
the safety of Church and Commonwealth, and endeavored Christ's Reformation,
whom they apprehended to be an irregular man, one that would not submit His
Judgment to the Great Council at Jerusalem; nor be ruled by their Votes and
Orders. Nay the very Pharisees themselves, (like these our men) would not own
their own malice against Christ; for when Pilate would have delivered him into
their hands, to have done with him as they pleased. O no, cry they, it is not
lawful for us to put any man to death: (they had rather some body else should
do it for them;) we are too holy to defile our selves with His blood; out of
pure love to piety, and to the peace of the Kingdom, we have proceeded thus
far against Him, and have been at great Charges with the Soldiers to apprehend
Him: and though you can find no fault in Him, yet you may be sure on it, if he
had not been a Malefactor, we would not have brought him before you: No, no, if
we could otherwise have reformed Him, we would not have troubled your Lordship
with Him. But will you please to hear His Conditions: Why? He would be a King,
and Rule over us, and if He be let alone, He will ruin the whole Kingdom, and
bring destruction upon the Temple too, and to spoil our Religion: He bestows
strange Language and Titles upon us the Great Council, the Worthies of the
Nation, (who are a company of Holy and unblameable men, witness all the
people) He calls us Hypocrites, Vipers, and Painted Sepulchers, and the like,
which we return not again, but consider with sorrow, that these expressions
come from a Jew Seduced out of his proper sphere: One that has left the
Society He ought to be withal, and keeps Company only with publicans and
Sinners, ungodly persons, whose counsels he follows, and has set himself in
the seat of the scornful: For we take all his Sermons against our Ordinances,
and doings to be but only invectives and scorns against us, whereby He
exposes us to be contemned of the people, as if (according to His saying) we
made the Law of God of none Effect by our Traditions. When indeed none can be
more zealous for it, then we are; and thus you see what a Person He is, and
what His Merits are. Believe it (Sir) unless some speedy course be taken with
Him, Caesar (in whom the Supreme power is now seated, and whose servants the
people now are) will be wronged; and the whole Church; and Kingdom wasted and
destroyed, and this we will boldly say: who ever does not join with us against
bim, is neither a friend to Caesar, nor to the Commonwealth, we are all for
the Public good, and to preserve that, we desire that this our King* or rather
this man that says he is our King, may be crucified.

To this purpose was the Pharisees accusation against our Savior: of this
disposition were their Spirits against the Son of God: (as Scripture teaches)
notwithstanding their Religious pretenses, and that opinion of holiness which
the world had of them: it need not therefore be thought an impossible thing,
that there should be men of a like spirit, and of a like esteem in these days;
and that they should endeavor a like mischief against their Sovereign.
Nothing but the Heart blood of Christ, would satisfy those his Enemies; and
can it be any thing but the very heart blood of the King which these men thirst
after? indeed they do not lay any worse things to the Kings charge, (for I will
do them no wrong) then those others did to the charge of Christ: And this for
the first: There is no impossibility in the matter.

2. The truth of my interpretation of their meaning, is Evident from the
Tenants which they mention as proper to themselves, at least as differing from
ours: We (say they) in our Tenants do annex no Infallibility to the seat of a
King in Parliament, as the Romanists do to the Papal Chair, since all men
are subject to errors.

These men desire, (as we learned by their Pulpit Doctrines of. 3.
us,) that people should believe, that those who are for the King, do think of
him as the Romanists do of the Pope, that he cannot Err, which opinion by
these their words they would have the world know, that they disclaim, and truly
so do we as much as they; for we never did, nor yet ever dare we, give the King
so undue an Attribute; nor would His Majesty suffer the same, were any of us so
sinfully disposed: For we boldly affirm, that never King was more Christian
then He, in yielding himself culpable, (even in some matters wherein others
could see no error,) that so if possible he might give his Enemies
satisfaction, and purchase peace unto his people. But whether it be so or no,
they conceive, and report that to be our Tenent: and we on the other side
apprehended theirs to be, that infallibility is rather in the Parliament
without a King, then in the Seat of a King in Parliament. And our Reason is,
there has been more Infallibility professed in Parliament, since the Kings
absence from Westminster; then ever was before, when either himself, or any of
His Predecessors have been there. And though the Parliament has been
erroneous and faulty herefore, by reason of the Kings faction mixed therein,
(for by that name are modest and Loyal Gentlemen now called) yet that being now
purged away, and driven from thence, Error also is vanished with it, and
Infallibility has taken up its dwelling there, ita praedicant, ita clamitant.
And yet by the way, we must tell the world, we believe the King has some
friends still within the walls at Westminster, even as Christ had at the Jews
Council Table, although (like Nicodemus, and Joseph of Arimathea) they are
over-powred* and reviled, when they speak truth and Conscience.

But to the matter: We must tell these men, that Scripture affords us better
Testimony for the Kings not Erring, then it does them for theirs; Solomon
says, The Kings Heart is in Gods Hand, Prove. 22. 1.
and a Divine sentence is in His Lips; His mouth transgresses not in Prove. 16.
10.
judgment. We find not the like expressions in behalf of an headless
Parliament: but because Solomon was a King himself, He spoke (they say) in his
own case, and therefore not much to be regarded: but we will not contest with
them at this time about his Authority, we rather yield (because all men are
subject to Error) that a King may Err: and we add further that a Parliament,
consisting of men, may err too; and this Combination of Conspirators, (which
to the high disgrace of the Supreamest Court, some call the Parliament) does
Err most abominably, both from Gods Law, and the Law of the Land: and this in
very deed is our Tenent.

And let them deal ingenuously with us, and say, whether they do not so hold of
the Parliament, (though not of the King) as the Romanists do of the Pope?
whether by their Tenants, the Parliament has not the same power over Kings,
and Kingdoms, as the Pope has by the Tenent of the Jesuits? The Jesuits hold
that the Pope may dispose of Princes and Crowns for the service of God, the
good of the Church, and salvation of Souls: And do not these hold that the
Parliament, may both order the King, and dispose of His Kingdom, as they shall
think meet, for the advancement of their Cause (which they call Gods) and pro
salute populi?

Romanas Episcopus Zacharias, Regem* Franciscorum non tam pro Canon Alius causa
15. de^^^t. quest. 6.
suis iniquitatibus, quam pro eo quod tantae potestati erat inutilis a regno
deposuit, etc. By virtue of which Canon (say the Jesuits) the Pope has power
to depose Kings, be they Heretical or Catholic, of vicious, or virtuous
lives, if in his judgment he finds them unfit, and some others more capable of
Government. And do not these men believe the Authority of Parliament, to be as
irresistible, as that of the Pope, and their Votes to be as full of virtue as
his Canons, and altogether as Authentic, even to the deposing of Kings, and
disposing of their Kingdoms? Eudaemon Johannes in his Apology for Henry
Garnet, teaches, that Subjects may be loosed from their Oath of Allegiance,
and then they cannot, (as Emanuel Sa affirms) be held guilty of Treason,
though they conspire the Kings death, because He against whom they conspire, is
not their Master or Lord, they being formerly absolved from his obedience. And
has not the same Doctrine been both taught and practiced by these our
opposers? Have not they loosened people from their Oath of Allegiance to the
King, and then put them in Arms, persuading them that it is no Rebellion to
fight against Him?

The Jesuits in their Chamber of Meditation taught, (as John Chastell who gave
Hen. the 4. of France, a stab in the mouth, confessed upon examination) that it
was lawful to kill that King, and that He was now member of the Church, nor
ought to be obeyed, or held for King, until he had received approbation from
the Pope. And one of them in his Apology for the said Chastell has these
words: vulnerando Henricum Burbonium, non voluerit laedere ant occidere Regem,
etiamsi se talem dicebat, and in quo praeter imaginem nihil Regis quam quod
genere Regio ortus erat. In striking Henry of Burbon his intention was not to
kill the King, howbeit he called himself King, sithence he had nothing left,
but the appearance of a King being of the blood Royal.

Our Anabaptisticall Crew have their Chambers of Meditation too, or their
Conventicles, where they meet with their disciples, to whom they suggest (as
also they do in their Pamphlets and Sermons) that the King is no true member of
the Church, (because he dissents from them) but a persecutor of it, and is no
longer to be obeyed or held for King, then the Parliament or representive Body
of the Kingdom, in whom the Supreme power is inherent shall allow him so to
be: and therefore being now deciared by them, to be an enemy to the Kingdom,
and one that seeks the peoples ruin; he is to be accounted but as another man,
and has but the bare Name or Title of a King, as being borne of that family
and stock, which formerly swayed the Scepter.

Now my Argument from all this stands thus; who ever maintains, that the Pope
or Parliament, may at pleasure alter Kingdoms, exempt people from their Oath
of Allegiance, and arm them against their Prince, do maintain, that people in
such a case may kill their King: But this (as appears by their doctrine and
practice*) is the Tenent of these men, as well as of the Jesuits, Ergo, these
men also by their Tenants, hold it lawful to kill the King.

The minor is proved already, and the major is evident to sense and reason: for
no man will doubt, but a King (from whom offer is made to take away his
Kingdom,) will take Arms to maintain his right, and will labor to reduce
them to Loyalty that stand armed against him; and in so doing, it is impossible
but he must run the hazard of his life, since in defending himself, he is
resolute (as in Conscience he is bound to be,) not to lose his Kingdom, (which
God has committed to his care,) without the loss of his life it self.

But perhaps some will say, that in some of their books and Sermons, Object.
they disclaim killing the King, yea though he were an Heretic or a Tyrant.

I answer, the Romish Jesuits (their Brethren) in some of Answer.
their books also, have condemned not only the murdering of Princes, but also
Rebellion against them, though Heretics, and Tyrants; but they mean sine
permissu superiorum, it is not lawful for a private man to do it (say they) of
his own head, until he be permitted by his superiors; but having leave and
countenance from them, if sentence and judgment be once passed, that the King
is a Tyrant or an Heretic, or not capable to govern; then obedience to the
said judgment is to be given, as to the voice of Christ: So these, when they
speak against King-killing, and Rebellion, are to be understood, until the King
be declared by Parliament, to be an Enemy to the Kingdom, and to seek the
ruin of it; but when this is done, then men may not only arm themselves
against him, but kill him, if possibly they can, and by so doing, they do but
the Command of God, and help the Lord against the mighty. These be the
nicetyes of Romish Jesuits, and English Pharisees, by which they inchant men;
they protest Solemnly, that they allow not the murdering of Kings; No, not
they: but herein lies the craft, they acknowledge none for Kings, but whom
themselves please to allow; and maintain that to kill a King whose Government
they cannot brook, is not to kill a King, but a man (as they say) masked under
a Regal Title.

But indeed some of their faction, have been more plain in their expressions,
and disclaiming this juggling distinction, have declared their Tenants in down
right English, even as Parry of old affirmed, that because Elizabeth stood
excommunicated by the Pope* he might lawfully kill her: And as Catesby stood to
it openly, that because the Pope had not allowed the Catholics to receive James
for King, the Powder Treason was a work of Piety. And as Raviliak affirmed,
that He had reason to kill Henry of Burbon, because he would make war against
the Pope, and so by consequent (says he) against God, for the Pope was God:
even so in this plain downright fashion, we have had some of our
Parliamentarians, express their judgments, and intentions, that because the
Parliament has declared against the King, it is no sin to kill him; yea, they
have professed that themselves would do it, if they could reach him, so long as
he is in this condition, not received or allowed on by the Parliament: yea (
Raviliack-like) they have affirmed that He wars against the Parliament, and so
by Consequent against God, and therefore it would be a work, not only lawful,
but also pious for to kill him; such expressions have often fallen from the
lips of many several persons among them, who might be named, if we did
Belligerare Hominibus magis quam vitiis.

And thus the people do now see, how those who pretend to keep them from
Popery, do lead them into the deepest ditch, and most Hellish puddle thereof:
themselves call the Jesuits the worst of Papists; and yet hold with them in
their worst of Tenants, only the difference is this: the Jesuits place power,
and infallibility in the Pope, and these place it in the Parliament, for though
these (our Subtle Brethren) will not like Romanists, make a Pope of the King,
yet they will make one of the Parliament, whose members are as perfect in their
Seats, as Pontifex is in Cathedra: But I remember a distinction which the
Secretary of Charles the 5. used to some English Ambassadors, who (upon his
complaint of Pope Julius the 3. his foul play with the Emperor,) demanded of
him, how he being a Papist could excuse this unkindnesse of the Pope toward
his Master? He answered, that the Pope was an honest man, but Julius the 3. was
an Arrant Knave: so saving the Honors of the Right worshipful, as they are
Members, peradventure as they are men, they may be subject to errors, and be
esteemed of according to their merits.

SECT. V.
1. The falsity and injustice of the said Charge against the King manifested in
all the particulars. 2. Who they are that sit in the Scorners Chair. 3. The
Enemies reasons and ends of Charging the King with their own Conditions.

BUt we having now seen the Nature of their Charge, we will consider also the
Verity of it, or the falsity rather, for we. 1.
apprehend it as false, as foul; as injurious, as High: were it all true, yet
according to Christian Religion, and the doctrine of the Bible, it were a great
sin in them thus to object it: For is it fit to Job 34. 18.
say to a King, thou art wicked, or to Princes, ye are ungodly? When Act. 23. 5.
Saint Paul understood Ananias to be the Ruler, he confessed he had done ill,
in calling him whited wall, (though indeed he was no better.) But seeing there
is no more truth at all in the matter, then can be infused thereinto by virtue
of a Vote: We are most confident that at the General Audit, (when all things
and men shall be judged, as they are and have been,) it will be found a most
malicious and transcendent wickedness, in these men thus to have slandred and
belyed the Lords Anointed, their own dread Sovereign. Themselves know well,
that the King did not leave his place or seat at Westminster, but was most
violently forced and driven away from thence, full sore against his will, (for
the safeguard of his life,) by the rude multitudes, who were set on work (to be
so irreverend toward him,) by them that took the Protestation to defend him.
And they know too, that if the King could by his requests and messages, have
obtained to have had a restraint of those so high affronts offered to him, he
had not withdrawn himself from thence: But because we have not (to this very
day,) heard of any person punished, or so much as checked, (for that
contemptuous, and rebellious behavior) by them, whom they call the Parliament,
and the Kings Great Council; we do believe that (when all Secrets shall be
opened) it will be found, that even they, who have now authorized this Libell,
and in it this impious Charge against the King, did then countenance those very
contempts against him, on purpose to force him from them: Wherefore though the
King must not be suffered to enjoy the Privilege of a King, or of a Man; yet
they might permit him, without blame or grudging, to have the Liberty of the
meanest Creature, in endeavoring to preserve his own life and being.

And (say they) He has not only left his place, but also (as they would have
it believed,) has rejected it for ever, has bound himself to come no more
there: Yea, And do all his proffers of pardon, all his endeavors for Treaties,
all his desires of Accommodation, speak only so much, and no more? Do his
private instructions to his Commissioners at Uxbridge (before mentioned)
evidence this, and nothing else? Do his intentions to make his Queen the Happy
instrument of renewing the meeting, (if he could have had but any
demonstration, that the Rebels would yield to Reason, Paper 2.) discover
nothing but this? Truly we do apprehend rather all these particulars to be
Arguments of the contrary: when God the wronged Party, does beseech the wicked
world to be reconciled to himself, we apprehend he is willing to 2 Cor. 5. 20.
pardon all offenses, and to be friends with his enemies, if they would believe
him: So when an abused Christian King, does imitate God in this particular, we
conceive it rather a sign, that He would be again at unity with His Rebellious
Subjects, then that His purpose is, still to keep himself at a distance.

We do find that such an Accusation or Slander as this is, was once laid to
the Charge of God himself by a most disloyal and Hypocritical people, who
having forced the Lord from them by their wickedness, and driven Him away by
their ill usage, and thereby made themselves most miserable, did
notwithstanding (as these do) very mannerly, lay all the fault upon Him, as if
themselves had been the most innocent, and wel-deserving people in the world:
and his departure had been altogether causless and on set purpose to bring upon
the Heads of his people, all those sorrows, which their own ungodly doings
alone had effected and procured. Sion said, the Lord has forsaken me, my God
has forgotten Esaias 49. 14.
me. Nay, (it seems) they had charged him (as these do their King) that he
had even quite divorced himself from them, bound himself to come no more at
them, nor to own them for his people; for God argues the case with them, upon
such their Charge, and that first in a mild way (as our King has often done
with His enemies) and tells them he had not forgotten them, what ever they said
of him; no, A mother could sooner forget the child of Verse. 15.
her womb, then he could forget them: though they deserved not to be so well
remembered by him. And then (in the beginning of the next Chapter) he comes more
home unto them, and challenges, and urges them, to bring their proof, to show
the Bill of Divorcement, whereby (they said) he had cast them off: So may our
Esaias 50. ^.
King call upon these his Accusers, to produce the Bonds they talk of, the
Obligations whereby he has tied himself to fit elsewhere: surely they that
read this their Libell, may easily believe, that if either the Authors, or
Authorizers of it, had any thing to this purpose, tending to the Kings further
disgrace or defamation, they would not fail to publish the same in Print, that
all the world might see it.

But as those Accusers of God, failing in their Evidence, had the blame
retorted upon themselves, Behold, for your iniquities have you sold your
selves: So may these Accusers of the King, thus Charging their own faults upon
Him, (without any injury) have the same returned upon their own Heads, the
miseries which are upon the Kingdom by reason of the Kings absence, they may
thank their own selves for: And as the Lord in that place does further convince
them of the wrong they did him, by declaring his continual readiness to help
them out of those miseries, whereinto they had brought themselves, if they
would but hear him, believe in him, and trust unto him; which he proves, by
minding them of what he had done formerly, what Acts of grace he had passed
already for their good, inferring thereby, that he was both able and willing to
do as much again, if they would but give him leave by taking his word. So may
the King, and so has the King, by the very same ways and means evidenced his
innocence and freedom from those their unjust accusations: what readiness
has he always showed in denying himself to satisfy them? What Acts of grace
has He already passed? never any King has done the like. Let the bitterest of
His Enemies deny it if they can; what could be desired by reasonable men, which
he has not offered and promised unto them, if they would but believe him, and
trust unto him? But this they will not be brought unto, for it is one of the
most difficult things in the world, for a Person that has been so highly
wronged, as He has been, and intends well, to gain credit from them, that have
abused him: their own guiltiness makes them incredulous, and without Faith
it is impossible that either God or the King, should be able to do any people
good; as it was said by our Savior, that himself could do Mat. 13. 58.
no mighty works in a certain place, because of the peoples unbelief. Mar. 6.
5, 6.
So may it be said of the King, he cannot do that good he would, unto his
people, because of their unbelief. As God is better then man can conceive him
to be, so the King is better then these men will believe him to be; yea (in
regard of their abuses of him) I may say, then they can believe him to be. It
was the saying of a good Subject, since these wars begun, O that the people of
England did but know their King, they would love him, they would believe him,
they would not abuse him. But we must not wonder to see a good King in Gods
condition.

We proceed therefore to their next particular, where they. 2.
Charge the King, to have settled himself in the seat of the Scornful, and we
will see their truth in that.

The Psalmist informs us, that those (only) that are at ease* Psa. 123. 4.
have leisure to take up a sitting in that place, and not those that are in an
afflicted condition: Did the King live the life of the men of Westminster, and
had all the wealth and pleasures of this Kingdom at his command; and were he
withal of their disposition, endued with their spirits, to act their parts,
there might be some probability of truth in this particular; but it being
clean contrary with them, there is no likelihood at all in it.

1. Had He been a Subject, and (by good fortune) chosen Burgess of some
Corporation, or Knight of some Shire, and sat in the House of Commons amongst
them at this present, and had concurred, first, in pretending to settle
Religion, to make a glorious Church, to advance Christ: and then afterward in
consulting, how to take away the Churches maintenance, to slight the places of
Gods Worship, that they might be of no more esteem then common Houses,
Alehouses, Barns and Stables: in persecuting, banishing, and imprisoning the
Fathers of the Church, and Ministers of Jesus; those in special who have been
the greatest opposers of Antichristianity and Popery; and in giving liberty to
all Sects and Religions, (save only to the true one, which commands Humility,
Loyalty, and Obedience) had he (I say) been such a man, and thus employed; then
he might justly indeed have been said to sit in the Chair of the scornful,
and to have exercised his scoffs and scorns against God himself.

Or 2. had he been one of those, that under pretense of advancing the Liberty
and Happiness of the Subject, should vote away the Subjects right to his own
goods, sometimes a twentieth part, sometime a fifth part, sometime all; under a
pretense of taking away Monopolies and Illegal payments, should bring in such
new toles and taxations as the Nation was never acquainted with; excize upon
bread, beer, butter, cheese, flesh, and all Commodities that are used for the
life of man: under pretense of being one of the good Patriots and preservers of
their country, should raise Wars, cause desolations, burn houses, hire strange
Nations with their Countries money, to come to kill their Countrymen: under
pretense of keeping tender Consciences from unnecessary matters, should force
upon them unlawful Oaths, ungodly Covenants, even to the taking up of Arms
against their Sovereign (to whom they have sworn Allegiance) to the damnation
of their souls for ever, without deep Humiliation and Repentance: Had the King
I say, been one of these men, and done thus, He might deservedly have been
said to have sat in the Scorners Chair, and to have laughed to scorn a whole
Nation.

Or 3. had He been one of that number, who talk of making the King a glorious
Monarchy; and yet take from Him all His Power and Authority, not suffer Him to
have so much as the choice of His own Servants, the Rule of His own Family, the
disposal of His own Children, the society of His own Wife: That promise to
make Him the richest Prince in Christendom, and yet rob Him of all His Goods
and Revenews, and not allow Him so much (if they can help it) as shall buy Him
bread to eat, or clothes to wear; that call themselves His most Humble and
obedient Subjects: yet obey Him in nothing, but study to vex, and cross Him in
every thing; hire fellows to hunt Him, to shoot at Him, and (if they can) to
kill Him: that avouch great love and affection to Him, and desires to advance
His Honor, and yet Authorize Libells and base Books, to defame, slander, and
reproach Him: If the King were one of this Generation, and should concur in
such Actions, He might be said to sit in the seat of the Scornful indeed, and
to bestow His Scorns before all the world upon His Sovereign.

Or lastly, were He one of them, that partly by fraud, partly by violence,
having stripped their Sovereign of all His Weapons, Castles, Ships and Towns,
and of the Hearts of many of His People, and scarce left Him a place to hide
His Head in, in three Kingdoms; should maintain a cursed villain to
proclaim up and down the world, that He is run away very Majestically to set
up a new Monarchy in the I Will of Anglesey: this indeed were to sit in, and to
fill up the Seat of the Scornful: for this is right Hail King of the Jews,
which was plain scorning in the Hall at Jerusalem, (according to Scripture)
and so doubtless, (if Scripture might be Judge) it is in the Hall at
Westminster. We do confess and believe, that were the King in this sort
qualified, conditioned, and exercised, then that imputation of theirs might be
laid upon him: But it being with him as it is, we see no reason above-board,
why they should entitle him to the scorners Chair, unless his Magnanimity,
and Christian Courage bearing his burden of affliction, be taken to be a
contemning and scorning at their malice.

But yet they have a reason doubtless, and ends too, for this their charging
the King, though they think it fit for to conceal them. I am one appointed of
God, to detect the devices of Satan, and to unkennell the thoughts of the
wicked; and I dare be bolder with them, then they for their own Credit sake,
dare be with themselves, and therefore I shall discover them.

First their Reason (I apprehead) is this; they know themselves worthy to be
both abhorred and scorned of all men; and do believe they are so in the Hearts
of all the wise, for their most abominable and gross hypocrisy; yea, they
know in their Consciences, that God scorns at them, (they being exercised as
those are whom Scripture affirms God holds in derision:) and therefore
Psalm. 2. 2, 3, 4.
they speak of the Kings scorn at them, from the guilt of their Psalm. 73. 11,
12
own merits and deservings. Prove. 3. 34.


Then their Ends (I conceive) are these, first, to make His Majesty appear
abominable unto the world, (which is the main scope of all their endeavors)
for it is said, the Scorner is an abomination Prove. 24. 9.
unto men. And secondly, that the blind and seduced vulgar, might not think
them to be guilty of that sin, which, with so much boldness, and bitterness
they do first of all charge upon the King. It is the known policy of a wicked
harlot, to call her honest neighbor whore first, and of a pick-purse pursued,
to cry stop the Thief, that himself might not be suspected to be the man: You
take too much upon you Moses and Aaron, cried Numb. 16.
those Grand Rebels, when themselves only did so: And one who had sold
himself to work wickedness, laid it to the charge of good Elias, that he
troubled Israel, because his guilty 1 Kings 18. 17.
Conscience told him, that the Prophet, and all other honest men beside, had
cause to accuse him for so doing; and this is the very case of these men, who
(as we see) have done nothing in this particular, without President and
example; though we confess in respect of the Circumstances, these men are more
bitterly scornful, then ever any were, that we read of in Scripture or
elsewhere.

It was bitterly done of the Philistimes, when they had weakened Sampson, and
brought him into an afflicted condition, to Jud. 16.
mock and scorn at him in his misery, yet they did not, in those their mocks
charge him with scorning them; And the Persecutors of our Savior did deal
bitterly with him, when in derision they Crowned him with Thorns, put a Reed
into his hand, in stead of a Scepter, called him King, bowed the knee to Him;
and then advanced him upon a Cross instead of a Throne; yet they did not at
that time in their scoffing and flouting expressions say, that His Cross was
the Chair of the Scornful: and that he being fastened to that, did sit in the
Scorners seat, and scorn at them: But these men are pleased even thus to deal
with their King and Sovereign, as all the world may see by their Language; so
that the King has cause to complain in the words of the Psalm, Our soul is
exceedingly filled with the scornings of them that be at Psalm. 123. 4.
ease, and with the contempt of the proud. And we his Subjects Psalm. 31. 20.
will pray in his behalf, as the Psalmist in another place, Let the lying lips
be put to silence (O Lord) which thus cruelly, thus disdainfully, and thus
despightfully speak against the Righteous. And we are confident (as the
Wiseman says) that the High and Holy God scorneth at these scorners, and has
prepared heavy judgments Prove. 3. 34. 19. 29.
for them.

SECT. VI.
First, of the Kings Error in following evil Councillors, and who they were:
His Majesty scorned at by the Libellers for his tenderness of Conscience, and
hopes in Gods Justice. 2. The folly and falsehood of the Libellers Charge
against Strafford and Canterbury. 3. The Enemies acquit the King of having a
voluntary hand in Straffords death. 4. They hint the right Reason of his
withdrawing from Westminster.

THe next particular which these (honest and good men, as they would be
accounted) do charge their King withal, is, that He has walked in the
Counsels of the ungodly to the ruin almost of three Kingdoms.

Indeed it cannot be denied, the King has been exceeding unhappy. 1*
in his Councillors, and himself does intimate that his walking after their
advise, has been a main cause of Gods judgment upon this Kingdom. His words
to this purpose are these ( Paper. 22.)

Nothing can be more Evident, then that Straffords Innocent blood, has been
one of the great causes of Gods Judgment upon this Nation, by a furious Civil
War, both sides being hitherto almost equally punished, as being in a manner
equally guilty * but now this last crying blood, being totally theirs, I
believe it is no presumption hereafter to hope, that his hand of Justice must
be heavier upon them, and lighter upon us, looking now upon our Cause, having
passed by our faults.

This Christian and pious ackowledgement of the King, these men scoff at, in
their Notes upon it, and deride at that remorse of Conscience, which his
Majesty discovers, for his permitting the shedding of Straffords blood. He left
him (say they) to the Block against Conscience, as is now alleged; and again,
Remorse Page 49.
of Conscience suggesteth to the King, etc. Yea, and they do seem to glory in
what themselves did do, to the spilling of it; and to rejoice, that none but
themselves had a hand in the death of Canterbury: Yea, and further how
slightfully, (if not scoffingly) do they speak of the Kings mentioning Gods
Hand of Justice in the business? Their words are these, Page 49.

The King in his Letter of Jan. 14. takes it as evident, that Straffords
Libell. p. 49.
innocent blood, has brought the Judgment of this Civil war equally upon
both sides, both being equally guilty thereof: His meaning is, that he and his
side, was as guilty in permitting, as the Parliament was in prosecuting: But
now for Canterburies blood, that being totally put upon the Parliaments score,
he doubts not but the Hand of Justice, will from henceforth totally lay the
weight of this guilt upon the Parliaments side.

( Yet the Kings words are, I believe it is no presumption hereafter, to hope
that his hand of Justice must be heavier upon them.)

Considering the time when this their scornful Comment, upon the Kings
expressions came forth, viz. immediately after their Victory at Nazeby field,
by their Victorious Yet should God incline the Heart of Sr Thomas Fairfax to
adhere unto his Lord and Sovereign, no doubt but some of them would as much
revile him in their language, as now they seem to honor him, with the title of
Victorious: Which indeed they have sufficiently done since the Kings
deliverance from Holmeby.
Sir Thomas Fairfax (for so they call him,) we understand their sense to be
this: The King talks of Gods Hand of Justice, and doubts not, but the same will
from the time of Canterburies death, lay the weight of the guilt of blood
totally upon our side: Victorious Sir Thomas Fairfax has answered him
sufficiently in that particular, and declared to the world, what his hopes in
Gods Justice are come to; well, let him please himself still in those fancies,
so long as we have the ^^nd of Victorius Sir Thomas Fairfax on our side, we
will give him leave, to flatter himself in that Hand of Justice he speaks of,
etc.

And yet let these scoffers of these last times, that say, Where is the promise
of his coming? for since the father fell a sleep, all things continue as
succesfull as they did before; let them (I say) know, that Gods Justice may
awaken soon enough, to their Confusion. Quod defertur non aufertur, the longer
the blow is in coming, the heavier will its fall be: Fortuna belli semper
ancipiti in loco est, the day of the Lord will come suddenly upon them, as a
thief in the night. Quos dies vidit veniens superbos, hos dies vidit fugiens
jacentes.

But they go on in that place, and inform us, who those ungodly ones were,
whose Council in this other place they say the King has followed, to the ruin
almost of three Kingdoms, Their words are these.

The truth is, Strafford and Canterbury were the chief firebrands Libell. page
49.
of this war, the two ill Councillors, that chiefly incensed the King against
the Scots, and endeavored to subject all the three Kingdoms to a new
Arbitrary Government, and are now justly executed for attempting the subversion
of that Law, which the King has perfected since.

Because dead folks cannot speak for themselves, and because. 2.
it is so Voted, therefore Strafford and Canterbury were the chief firebrarnds
of this war, and so for truth it must be taken; though one of them was quite
extinct, a year before this war begun, and the other kept, by his Accusers in
so close obscurity, that his sparks, (if he had any in him to this purpose)
could not possibly fly abroad. But let me ask a question, did not the wisemen
of the Kingdom, quench these firebrarnds to prevent the flame? how came it
then to break forth after they were extinguished? had they lived, been both at
liberty, and afforded their full concurrence, could possibly the flame have
been more great and detrimentall? Again, why was not the imputation proved,
(at least) against Canterbury, who lived almost three years after the war was
begun, when they wanted matter to put him to death? Surely the Law has so well
provided, in a case of this Nature, that if there had been any such matter, His
Enemies should not have needed to solicit, for the peoples Votes and Hands to
get him dispatched: But it was Canterburyes Honor, to drink of his Masters
cup, The voices of the people, and of the Priests prevailed. Luke 23. 23.
And indeed these quenched firebrarnds, were so far from kindling this fire,
that we apprehend rather, they were quenched to this end, lest they should have
hindered it, from being kindled: When Charles was King, and Strafford Deputy of
Ireland, and Canterbury Metropolitan of this Church, we had no wars in
England: Straffords blood we grant was a firebrand, which we, (with the King)
believe still burns upon us, his Prayers at his death, (to the contrary) could
not stop the cry of it, from pulling down of vengeance: And Canterburyes blood
(we fear) will cry louder yet, against the people of this Land; who by giving
their Votes, (where the Law gives none) to take away his life, have cried out
against themselves, His blood be upon us, and upon our Children.

But say these men, (who never slandred any but their betters) Mat. 27. 25.
Strafford and Canterbury were two evil Councillors, (and yet Strafford and
Canterbury dyed like two Christian Martyrs; and might the latter end of their
Accusers, be but like theirs, it would be their happiness in one kind, and
ours in another.) They chiefly incensed the King against the Scots: (but they
did not stir up the Scots against the King, in provoking them to an
insurrection; nor did they hinder the Kings Act of mercy and pardon toward
them afterward, much less did they after that Act of Pacification, with that
Nation send for those Scots into England, and hire them with English money, to
cut the throats of English men: Had they been Councillors in such matters,
they had been ill Councillors indeed.)

But say they, Strafford and Canterbury endeavored to submit all these three
Kingdoms to a new Arbritrary Government, and were duly executed, for
attempting that subversion of Law, which the King has perfected since.

It was well, they did but endeavor a new Arbritrary Government, not erect it;
they did but attempt a subversion of Law, not effect it; but some others since
their times, have gone further, and turned all Law into Vote, and all Justice
and Reason into Violence and Will: For if there be this day, in Europe, a more
Arbritrary, cruel, and butcherly Government, then has been exercised in
England by some since Strafford and Canterbury were set aside, from having to
do in the world, my reading fails me; if to take away lands, estates, goods,
good name, and lives from men, without any allegation of Law, or reason, but
only the Parliament judgeeth so; or, the People will have it so: if this be not
Arbritrary Government, I know not what is: therefore if Strafford and
Canterbury were justly executed, (as these say) for attempting; let all men
judge, how deservedly ought these others to be executed for accomplishing such
designs?

But these men tell us further, that the King has since perfected that
subversion of Law, which those his ill Councillors had formerly attempted.
It Is too well known, that the customary way of these men's Honoring the King,
is by casting on him, the scandal of their own doings: The Law we confess is
subverted, and overthrown, but the King can no more be said, to have done the
same, then David could be said to have killedd Abner, and Amasa, because he was
the Sovereign to those sons of Zeruiah, who did the deed, and were so subtle,
and strong, that he could neither restrain them from it, nor bring them to
condign punishment for it.

And let all modest and ingenuous men observe, how desperate, and bold these
men are, in their aspersions against the King: they affirm, He has subverted
Law, and walked in the Council of the ungodly, to the ruin almost of 3. whole
Kingdoms. They could have said no more, if when the Militia and Power were in
his sole hands; things, had been, as now they are: But we, and themselves too,
can all witness, that when the Parliament met, no drop of blood was yet spilt
in Ireland; no Commotions were stirring in Scotland, for the King by his Grace
and Goodness, had allayed all; nor was there any complaining of Soldiers, nor
plundering in the streets of England: all the three Kingdoms were in peace;
and to continue them therein, the King calls a Parliament, and gives power to
the Members thereof, and encouragement withal, to settle all things both in
Church and Commonwealth, for the Subjects benefit, even as firmly as
themselves (who were entrusted and chosen by their fellow Subjects for that
purpose) could possibly devise. He denies them nothing in pursuance thereof,
suffers them to call all suspected officers and persons to account, not
excepting Strafford or Canterbury; and further to assure His people of His
strong desires to continue their happiness, He settles a Trienniall
Parliament, as the most special mean to prevent ill Councillors in
aftertimes: yet these Accusers tax the King of perverting the Law; and speak
as if the three Kingdoms had been at the very brim of destruction, and quite
ruined ere this, if the power had not been taken out of His Hands, by those,
who (by their meekness, wisdom, and frugality) have put all the said
Kingdoms into a more hopeful condition of preservation, (as it must be
believed, though against all sense and experience) then they were in before.

Indeed had those undertakers done that work for which they were summoned, and
called together, the Kings good Subjects, in all His Kingdoms, might have had
cause of mentioning their names with perpetual Honor: but they (as it
seems) envying that happiness which their fellow Subjects were likely to
enjoy, by those new enacted Laws, and especially by the Trienniall Parliament;
fairly pretending other matters, did get the same Act presently made useless,
by another, for the continuation of this: which has created themselves, (as
they suppose and intend) perpetual dictators, and all their fellow Subjects
perpetual slaves. For let these perpetual great Councillors, approve
themselves never so evil, and detrimentall to-Church and State, yet the poor
Subject must be forced by the Militia (which they have got into their hands) to
believe them unerring; for He shall have no benefit by the Trienniall
Parliament, to examine their doings.

And hence also it is, that they have balked the trial of men by established
Law, and (conceiving themselves above it) have shunned to punish for those
faults which the Law condemns: and to show the Omnipotency of their power,
have passed sentence of death, where the Law condemns not, though Scripture
teaches, that where is no Law, there is no Transgression: the giving way to
which very thing, was, and is a trouble to the Kings Conscience, and the cause
of His first dislike of their Courses, witness their own words which are to
this purpose.

The King adjudged Strafford worthy of death, yet not for Treason Libell p. 49.
as it was Charged upon him, but not being able to save his life, without using
force, and finding force very dangerous, He left him to the block against
Conscience as is now alleged.

That the King adjudged Strafford worthy of death, for any thing,. 3.
is more then we heard before, nor have we any reason to believe the same now,
upon the bare report of these men; yet to do them a courtesy, we may suppose
it to be as they say, for the present; and then it follows, (as all may see)
that they do not Charge the King for desiring to save Straffords life
absolutely, (for they say the King himself judged him worthy of death:) but for
being against his suffering for Treason: So that (in brief) the Kings sin
only was, according to the Testimony of His most deadly Enemies) He would that
Strafford should have suffered death, only for his faults, and not for that,
whereof he was not guilty. As became a righteous Judge, the King would have had
His Great Council, to have done Justa, Just, Righteous things in a Righteous
manner; as conceiving that way of proceeding to be most acceptable unto God,
and most likely to continuate his blessings upon the Kingdom: but being not
able by fair means to persuade them to that; and considering that to use
force might be a remedy worse then the disease, the blood of many innocent
persons, might be spilt to save one; and yet perhaps (the power and the malice
of the Adversary being so High, that one not saved neither) He was constrained
against His Conscience to leave him to the block; and for His being so tender
Conscienced in this case, He is thought worthy of Scorn by these men, (His
most Religious, Obedient, and loving Subjects.) He left him to the Block
against Conscience (say they) as is now alleged.

But indeed, they have sufficiently by these their words acquitted the King to
the whole world, of having a voluntary hand in the spilling of Straffords
innocent Blood, (for so it may be called, because he was innocent of that for
which he suffered, though in some other respects, (if it were true as they
say,) he might be adjudged guilty:) and like them that cried, his blood be upon
us, and upon our Children, they take the matter wholly upon themselves; for
which we thank them, and for which we believe that God in his due time will
remember them.

By those their words they have also well hinted to our understandings, how
far, and in what sort the King has walked in the Counsels of the ungodly,
to the ruin (as they say) almost of three Kingdoms: To which purpose they
proceed further, (in the same place) and say.

Canterbury remains in the same case, and now remorse of Conscience, Libell.
p. 49.
(or rather the old Project of altering Law) Suggests to the King, that if no
restraint be used, Straffords President will cast Canterbury, and Canterburies
all the rest of the Conspiratours, and so the people will make good their
Ancient freedom still.

Had these men remembered where all the old Projectors and Monopolizers now sit,
and on which side they do Militare, or had they bethought themselves, how
unable they are to instance, in any one good Law, which the King did ever
alter; they would certainly have omitted their malicious Parenthesis: But by
their putting it in, they give us to see, that they will not forget their old
Project of casting their own faults upon the Innocent.

But what does the Old project of altering Law suggest to the King? Why (say
they) that Straffords President would cast Canterbury: But had not they
provided a remedy against that suggestion, by ordering that Straffords
President should be no President to cast others by, in after times? If there be
any virtue in their own Order, or rather Honesty in them that made it; we
cannot see how Straffords President could be any prejudice to Canterbury: For
who shall urge it against him, but only themselves, that made it incapable of
being urged? We cannot possibly suppose, that were the King such an alterer of
Law, (as they would have it believed) that he should desire an alteration of
that Ordinance to the damage of Canterbury: nor is there any other Law capable
of alteration, (as we conceive,) whereby Straffords President might hurt him:
But when that Ordinance was made, the Authors of it had respect only unto
themselves, for intending then to go in those ways, for which they had
condemned Strafford, they did wisely provide that his President should not be
in force in aftertimes against themselves: Nor (indeed) did they then know,
they should need to make any use of Straffords President against Canterb* or
against any other of the Conspirators, which they talk of: the men's heads were
full of business, they could not foresee, or fore-think of all things at
once: nor did they remember things past, when this particular passage was
written, and authorized to be published; but it makes for my purpose, and helps
me well, to evidence to the world, what good Hearts they bear unto their
Sovereign: And what strong Arguments they have to prove him to be an Alterer
of Law.

But the main thing we learn from those their words, is this,. 4.
(though Hatred will not let them speak it in modest terms:) when the King
perceived by their proceedings with Strafford, what the Course was which they
would take with Cauterbury, and the rest, (whom malice and faction would make
Delinquents,) and observed their design, to have him to concur with
themselves, in condemning the Righteous, which he found his Conscience would
never digest: for it (being of a more Divine and tender temper then theirs,)
was smitten with sad remorse, for what was already done, (though sore against
his will,) and fearing, if he walked any longer, (though by enforcement,) in
those their Counsels, Gods wrath might fall down more heavily yet upon him,
and his three Kingdoms: He therefore removed himself, from their Assembly:
this is the thing which they intimate unto us. And here let us with Reverence
and admiration observe the hand of the Almighty God, overruling the tongues
and pens of these men; they had formerly taxed the King for leaving and
abborring (as they were pleased to speak) his seat in Parliament, which they
suggested, he did on purpose, to speak destruction to his people: but here,
unawares (it seems) unto themselves, God makes them declare the true reason of
his departure thence, to be, that he might not speak destruction to his
people, but safety and Honor still if possible, that he might not imbrew his
hands in the blood of innocent and Loyal Subjects, against Law and Conscience:
yea surely, lest the rest of that guilt of blood which he saw was likely to be
spilt, should be charged upon the Head of him, and his posterity: He withdrew
himself from their society, and did for the present, even abhor to be
amongst them: When God pleases (we see) he can make men speak truth, whether
they will or no.

And truly let any man who has Conscience judge in the matter, whether the
King did not do prudently, and conscientiously in his forsaking them, when he
perceived their purpose and resolution was, to have him sit there amongst them,
only with a Reed or Pen in his Hand, to sign and own, as his Act and Deed,
whatever they alone should vouchsafe to do; that so they might cast the blame
and Odium of all their Injustice, afterward upon him; which is most apparent
they would have done, if he had stayed; for being by his departure, frustrate
of such their intentions, they seem to cast it all upon the people, by those
words, if no resistance be used, Straffords President, will cast Canterbury,
and Canterburies all the rest of the Conspiratours, and so the people will make
good their ancient freedom still: As if the people of their own accords,
without being requested thereunto, or solicited by others; for the upholding
and making good some Ancient Privilege, which they formerly had enjoyed, and
now (if the King were able to make resistance) were in danger to be deprived
of: Had desired that those men, (Strafford and Canterbury) should be put to
death, only by their Votes and not by Law.

Indeed I read that in Heathen Rome, the People had such a Custom, to voice
men to death; (and such men they should commonly be, as had done the
Commonwealth best service,) and from the Custom perhaps it was, that Pilat a
Roman Magistrate, did permit the people of the Jews, (against all Law and
right) to voice Christ to be crucified: But I never heard that the people of
England were wont to do so in any age, till this new Arbritrary Government was
set up: And we believe it will be easier for these Libellers, to make the
people, (as the world now goes with many of them) Pagans and Jews in such
desires, then to prove that any such Custom did ever yet hitherto belong unto
them; nor will it avail much to the peoples comforts at the great day, or to
their own securities in the mean while, if now they should purchase any such
Privilege.

But I leave the People to consider of this matter themselves, and return to
these King-accusers; who have themselves well answered their own accusation
against their Sovereign, and declared the true Reason of his leaving his Seat
at Westminster; to which they might have added another, viz. Gods calling him
from thence, both by his Word and Providence.

1. By his Word, which a King, as well as another man, is bound Prove. 1. 10.
to observe, and give heed unto: My Son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou
not: if they say, let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily for the
innocent without cause, etc. My son, walk not thou in the way with them,
refrain thy foot from their path, for their feet run to evil, and make haste
to shed blood.

2. By his Providence, in his permitting the tumultuous people to rise against
him, and to force him from thence, Consule providentiam Dei, cum verbo Dei,
(says one) and when with the Word, Providence concurs, there is doubtless a
special call from heaven.

But the King having these grounds of withdrawing himself, some may wonder why
in that former place, they so heavily charge him, to have walked to the ruin
of his three Kingdoms, by abhorring his Seat and Council: as if his leaving
that were the sole cause of all our woe.

I answer, in a word, Their reason, I conceive, is, because the King being of a
soft and tender conscience, is unwilling to bear the guilt, therefore he shall
(whether he will or no, if they can help him to it) bear all the blame; being
unchargeable of real evils, he shall be burdened with imaginary; the Devil
and his Members desire no greater advantage against those they hate, then to
see them meekly scrupulous; nor do they please themselves better in any thing,
then in loading with slanders, and tormenting the righteous, when they see them
to be in an afflicted condition. Shimei cursed his Sovereign, and falsely
called him A bloody man, and the destroyer of Saul's house, because ^e saw him
in a low condition: So these men fancy they may say any evil against their
King, because he is in an afflicted condition; they may speak to his farther
grief, because he is already grieved. But as David in that place says, so say
we, It may be the Lord will look upon the affliction of his Anointed, and will
requite good the sooner to him, even for these their accursed and false
scandals of him. And O our God, our eyes are toward thee, we will wait for
thy salvation.

And thus I hope, I have now made it apparent, that there is as little of
Verity, as there is of Piety, in that reproachful Charge, which these ill
disposed Libellers, these Martin Mar-kings have cast upon their Sovereign; now
we shall observe how they proceed. They address their speech to the Reader in
general, whom they suppose to be either a Friend or an Enemy to their cause,
and say,

If thou art well affected to the Cause of Liberty and Religion, which Libell.
the two Parliaments of England and Scotland now maintain, against a
Combination of all the Papists in Europe almost, especially the bloody Tigres
of Ireland, and some of the Prelaticall Court Faction in England, thou will be
abundantly satisfied with these Letters here Printed, and take notice how the
Court has been Cajold by the Papists, and we the more believing Protestants by
the Court.

SECT. VII.
1. What that Liberty is, which the pretended Parliament do maintain. 2. And
what that Religion may be, which they are about to set up: Reasons to show it
may happily be the Popish, or peradventure the Turkish. 3. Six Arguments to
prove, it cannot be the Christian Protestant.

THe Reader may be well affected to that Reformed Religion,. 1.
which Gods holy and pure Word teaches, which the Church of England this
fourscore years last past has pulikly professed; and to that Liberty which
Christianity allows, which the Subjects of this Land above any other in the
World, most happily have enjoyed under their Sovereign Princes; and which the
Parliaments of this Kingdom (before this) have concurred in the establishing
of; and yet no way affected to that cause of Liberty and Religion, which these
men speak of: Nay, if the Reader may judge of Liberty and Religion, by its
fruits, (according to Christ's Rule) He being a Christian, must needs loath
their Liberty, and being a Protestant, must needs hate their Religion.

For (first) what is that Liberty which they maintain? If the uncontrouled
practice of those that be obsequious to them; or if their own Acts and
Ordinances may speak; it is such a Liberty as Turks exercise over Christians;
or as Canniballs in the Western World exercise over their fellow-Heathens; or
as Beasts of prey do practice upon inferior Creatures. A Liberty which only
the strong can enjoy, but the weak and feeble are the worse for. A Liberty
which Lions, Wolves, and Kites may thrive upon, but Lambs, Kids, and Doves
will be undone by. A Liberty for them that have Might and Power, to take away
their neighbors goods by Sea and Land. A Liberty to Kill, Slay, and destroy
(Cain-like) their own Brethren, whom they hate; or that be not of their
opinion. A Liberty to do as See the looking-glass of Schism, by that Learned
Minister of Christ M. Peter Studley.
Enoch ap Evan did without danger of Hanging. A Liberty to Steal; a Liberty to
Lie; a Liberty to Slander and Rail upon their Betters. A Liberty which the
Devil likes above all things. A Liberty to break the Oath of Allegiance, and
all Gods Commandments, (so they observe the Ordinances of Parliament.) A
Liberty to be of any Religion, save only of the True. A Liberty for the Child
to Rebel against the Parent, the Servant against his Lord, and for the Base to
rise against the Honorable. A Liberty to shake off the Yoke of Subjection and
Obedience to their Sovereign. A Liberty to take from Him, what God has given
Him, Authority, Power, Wealth, and Honor. A Liberty to mock Him, to scorn at
Him in His Affliction, to write Libells against Him, to hunt Him up and down
His Kingdoms, like a Partridge upon the Mountains; to murder Him if they can.
A Liberty to Vote away men's Estates, and to voice away the lives of their
Fellow Subjects, when there is no Law to condemn them. In a word, a Liberty
for every man, to do what is right in his own eyes, or as himself lusts,
provided that He will take part with the Parliament, (as they call it) against
those whom they please to judge their Enemies; we do not say, that all
particulars that be on that side, do act all and every of these things, but
they may, if they have power, and a will thereto, for they have Liberty as well
as the rest of their faction, (who are already the Servants of Corruption) this
is that cause of Liberty which they maintain.

Now (in the second place) for their Religion, what is that?. 3.
Truly we cannot tell, unless we say of it, as was wont to be spoken of that
of the Papists in the Prayer, on the fifth of November, Their Religion is
Rebellion, their Faith Faction, and their Practice Murdering of Souls and
Bodies. For since they have pulled down, and discountenanced the Religion of
Jesus Christ established amongst us, (which was a Religion of Peace, Patience,
Obedience, Love) they have not given us a plat-forme of any, that we might know
what Faith they fight for; what Religion in particular it is which they
maintain; we confess we are yet to seek what it is they aim at: sometime we
see occasion to think it is the Popish Religion which they are setting up;
sometime, that it is the Turkish; we cannot imagine that it can be the Christian
Protestant Religion, for that is it which they only labor to destroy.

When we observe how they deny the Kings Supremacy, not only in Spiritualls,
but also in Temporalls; How they take upon them to absolve from the Oath of
Allegiance; to loosen Subjects from their Loyalty, to raise Rebellions; How
they allow of King-slandring, King-hunting, King-killing; How they make Gods
Commandments of none effect by their traditions and Ordinances, preferring
these before the precepts of Christ, in their inflicting greater penalties for
the not observing them: How they challenge infallibility unto themselves,
requiring Faith and Obedience to their dictates and judgments; the people must
believe as the Parliament Judges, they must hold the opinion of not Erring,
and of the necessary assistance of Gods Spirit in the Parliament Committees, as
the Romanists conceive to be in their Papal Consistories: They must fancy in
them a like unlimited Authority, to dispense with Gods Laws against theft,
murder, oppression, and the like, as some Papists do, to be in the Pope; and
as what is done by his Command, so what is done by theirs, must be believed to
be done by Gods. As he will be accounted Gods Lieutenant, so will they, by a
Commission of their own making; as what is done, for the advantage of his See,
so what is for the furthering of their designs, must be apprehended to be done
for the upholding of Christ; and as it is taught by some of the Popish Clergy,
that whoever is out of Papal Obedience must undoubtedly perish; so has it
been Preached by some of the Parliament Ministers, that whoever is not under
the Obedience of Parliament, is a Malignant, and in state of Damnation.

When I consider of these and such like particulars, and withal how bold they
are with the Scriptures of God, in corrupting with their false glosses and
interpretations a la mode de Rome, the pure text and Word of God, forcing it to
speak against it self, in furtherance of their cause. How Saint Paul himself
is in danger of an Index Expurgatorius from them also: how he has been
censured already, for his speaking so broadly against the sin of Rebellion;
to speak in those points or places, rather as a Politician, in respect of the
times wherein he lived, then as a Divine: Considering also, how they shun
disputes with us, whom they account their adversaries, (as the Papists were
wont to do:) How they inhibit the reading of our Books: How they command the
simple people, (who are their Disciples) not to join with us in our Prayers to
God, or in our praises of God, yea, taking an Oath of some of them to that
purpose: no, the Wife must not pray with her Husband, nor the Child with his
Parent; if the Husband or Parent do profess themselves for the King, and for
the ancient established Church of England, (as we are able to prove by
particular Examples.) In a word, considering how they pursue us with lies and
slanders; how they imprison us, and force upon our Consciences, ungodly
Covenants; How they persecute with fire and sword, all that be not of their
opinion, (as the Papists of old were wont to do.) How like to the proceedings
of the Popish Inquisition, these of their holy House are, in diverse
particulars, which might be instanced in; when we do consider of these, and
many such like matters, wherein they imitate those of Rome, we think it to be
the Roman Religion which they mean to maintain, and set up amongst us. Not
that we think they will admit of the Popes Authority, for they intend to be
Popes themselves: as Henry the 8. disclaimed the Popes Supreamacy, but retained
many Points of his Religion, so perhaps will they do: these be our thoughts
sometimes.

But then again, we fear it may be the Turkish Religion which they mean to
advance, when we consider what correspondency they have with the Turks in
diverse things, viz. How they have sold and made money of Christian men, which
none in Europe save only Turks are wont to do: How it has been propounded
among some of them, to send to Argier, and to sell for slaves the Messengers of
JESUS CHRIST, together with others of their Countrymen (of better Condition
then themselves) whom for their Religion and Conscience sake they have
imprisoned. How themselves are turned to be robbers and Pirates like those of
Argier, making all their own, which by rapine and violence they can get from
Christians: How they have suffered those thieves (their Brethren) to steal
away Christian Children, from these our Coasts, while themselves (possessing
our means of defense) have stood still looking on, or else were busy in the
interim, in taking away our goods: when we consider of these things; and also
how they have chosen for the Propagation and maintenance of their new Religion,
to walk rather in the way of Mahomet then of Christ, we conceive that they
intend rather to be his Servants. For Mahomet did set up his Religion by fraud
and force of Arms, by the sword and shedding of Blood, and so do these
endeavor to set up theirs. Mahomet laid to perpetuate and continue his
Religion, by introducing of ignorance, by deposition of Schools and
Universities, by banishing of Learning; which is the very method of these men:
whereas the way of Jesus Christ, (whom the Christians worship and obey) was
clean contrary: And the Turks have judged of their cause and Religion by their
military success, they think and plead it to be the best, because the most
prosperous: so these men conclude by the same rule, that their cause is the
better, because at the present, it is the most successful. These be our
thoughts, and the grounds of our fears at other times, concerning the Religion
which these new Religion makers do intend to set up and maintain.

But what ever Religion it be, which they shall chance upon,. 2.
we conceive it is resolved amongst them, it shall not be the Christian
Protestant Religion, what ever their outward pretenses be, for this is that,
which they labor only to destroy, as appears by many particulars.

1. By their persecuting and abusing the King, who is the chiefest Prince in
the World, that publicly professes himself the Defender of the Protestant
Faith: and who has maintained it in the greatest tranquillity and glory that
ever it enjoyed since Christ's time; to whose Bosom all Christian Protestants
in Europe have had recourse for relief and comfort, in days of darkness and
Affliction: This Prince, this Man of Gods right Hand, this Sun and Shield of
distressed Christians; have these men labored to obscure and darken, by lies,
slanders, and reproaches; to weaken, and disable, by taking away his Authority,
Wealth, and Power; to depose and murder, by hunting of him, shooting at him,
and Rebelling against him; to the end he might never more be a nurcing Father
to the persecuted Flock of Jesus: That the Sheep of the Lord, when worryed by
Wolves in other Nations, might fly no more unto him for refuge; that the
Lambs of Christ, which this Church under his Command has brought forth may no
longer enjoy pasture under so safe and so indulgent a Keeper.

2. By their discountenancing, Banishing, Imprisoning, and Murdering the
Fathers and Doctors of the Protestant Christian Church, those in special, who
have been the chiefest pillars and upholders of its glory; and strongest
Champions against Antichristianity in their Generations; whose Works and
labors are Famous through the Christian world; and whose Names after-Ages will
not mention without Admiration: of which number are the these most Reverend,
Grave and Learned Prelates and Doctors; Doctor Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Primate of England. Doctor Usher, Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of
Ireland. Doctor Davenaunt, Bishop of Salisbury. Doctor Morton, Bishop of
Durham. Doctor Westfeeld, Bishop of Bristoll. Doctor Hall, Bishop of Norwich.
Doctor Ward, Professor of Divinity at Cambridge, Dr. Featly, Dr. Holdsworth,
and many more of high worth and learning,) some of whom are already murdered,
and forced out of Gods vineyard into their Graves, by the Cruelties,
Oppressions, and unkindnesses of these men: Others of them are now in
persecution and banishment, and others in Bondage and Prison for the Gospel of
Jesus; all of them in such a low, and disgraceful Condition, that (unless by
their patience and example in sufferings,) they can do the Savior of the world
no more service.

3. By their exposing to contempt and beggary all that were in the Office of
the Ministry, (those only excepted who to satisfy their lusts, were willing
to make shipwreck of a good Conscience, and to Apostatize from the Faith
received; to renounce the meek and peaceable Doctrine of the Gospel, which
they had formerly taught; and to preach in the stead thereof, Sedition,
Rebellion, War and Blood; stirring up the members of Christ, to Kill, Slay, and
Destroy each other, according to the tenor of certain bloody and Antichristian
Ordinances:) but all that held fast to the Testimony of Jesus, they have
disgraced, defamed, silenced, banished, and beggered; Yea, one of the first
things they set about, at the beginning of their meeting, was to make Gods
Prophets, the scorn of the World, vile and contemptible in peoples eyes, that
what ever they should preach, might not be believed; which they endeavored,
and in part effected, by giving public liberty, to all that would, to bring in
what accusations they pleased against them; which were received and believed,
without proof, though the informer were the most stinking drunkard, and vilest
blasphemer, in the Country; and the Ministers, some of the most painful and
conscientious, yea, were it never so evident, that malice alone, set the
Accuser on work, to revenge himself, upon the Minister, for his endeavoring to
reclaim him from some sin; yet should the said Accuser be openly countenanced
and encouraged, by some of the shameless members; and the Messenger of God
scorned, set at naught, his living sequestered, his person imprisoned, his wife
and children turned out of doors, and all that he had taken from him; and the
Honester the man, the worse used always, for by his known honesty, he would
do Christ the more service (if let alone,) and their cause the more damage:
and this sufficiently speaks their malice against Christian Religion. But

4. It appears further by the endeavors of some of them, to take away all
certain and settled maintenance from the Ministers of Christ for time to come,
that they might not have hereafter, any outward encouragement to set up his
Religion again: Judge Cook in the Bishop of Winchesters case out of
Ecclesiastical story observes well, (and these men it seems have also noted
the same) that this was the course which Julian the Apostate took in his days:
He having a purpose (as these have) to ruin the profession of Christianity:
Used not the sword as Dioclesian did, (though these indeed, to make the work
more speedy, do act Dioclesian too) but he took away the means of the Clergies
subsistence, knowing full well, that if maintenance once failed, the number of
Preachers would not long continue: The said Julian also, would tell the Bishops
and Pastors, when he stripped them of all they had, that in so doing, He had a
special care of their souls health, because the Gospel commended Poverty
unto them. Such like flowts at the Doctrine of Christ, does often fall from
lips of the Apostates of these days.

5. By their pulling down all Christian order and forms of public Worship
and Service, tending to decency and edification; by casting down, defiling, and
defaming the Houses of God, turning many of them into Stables,
Slaughter-houses, Prisons and Jakes; they have made close-stooles of Fonts and
Pulpits, and done as bad to Communion Tables; they have rent the holy Bible in
pieces, scorned at the Sacraments, Baptized Horses, robbed Churches of
Sacramental Utensils, as Plate, Linen; calling it Idolatrous and
Superstitious, because it had been only used in Christ's service: nay, the poor
innocent Bells, because they have been the means of calling people together to
Worship God, and to adore the Savior of the World; must be pulled down and
turned into Guns, that they may be another while Instruments of destruction to
the Members of Jesus; (this indeed (as I read) was the manner of the Turks
when they took Constantinople, they melted the Bells into Ordnances:) In a
word, what ever evil or impiety the Enemies were wont to slander our Church
withal; these men have acted, or suffered to be done, by those whom they
maintain: insomuch that now the Priests of Rome shall not speak only lies as
heretofore, when they tell the people, Sands, Europae Speculum, page 119.
That in England, they abolish Church Sacraments, the means of Salvation, they
either raze or rob Churches wheresoever they come, and make Stables of them;
that they will neither have Temples nor form of Religion, nor do they serve
God any way; yea, the English Nation is grown so barbarous, that they are very
Canniballs, and devour one another. God knows, my Soul abhorres to think,
much more to name those things that are acted and done amongst as, nor should
my pen be fouled with the mention of them, were they not visible to so many
eyes, and did not necessity of defending impugned Truth, and an abused Church
restrain me. But I would have all the Papists understand, (for to that end, do
I thus speak) that we, who are of the true Protestant Christian Religion, do
abhor and loath these practices as much as any, and are persecuted to death by
them, that do them, for our dislike of them.

6. By their suppression and demolition of all Monuments of Christianity, that
there might be seen no more tokens of it in the Kingdom; as if they intended,
that no man should be able hereafter to say, this Land was once Christian: The
very festival times, when the Birth, Death, Resurrection and Ascension of our
Savior is commemorated, and which (next to the Preaching of Gods Word, and
Administration of the Sacraments) have been the most special means to confirm
men's faith in the History of Christ; these they have inhibited and forbidden,
as if they hated his very remembrance; Gods wisdom appointed the Feast of
Passover, to be kept as an Ordinance for ever among the Jews, to mind them
of their deliverance from Egypt, and to be a mean to assure their Children in
after-Ages, of the truth of that great mercy: And the Church conceiving that
our deliverance from sin and Satan, by the Birth, Death, Resurrection, and
Ascension of Exodus 12. 24. 25, 26.
Christ, to be as a great a deliverance as that other, and to deserve as well
to be remembered, did also apprehend that way or mean to be the best, to convey
the notice of it to Posterity, which Gods own Wisdom devised; and that was by
celebrating Annual Festivalls in memorial thereof: but these men (it seems)
have resolved to the contrary, for they will not have the same kept any longer
in remembrance.

Nay, that miraculous Thorn at Glassenbury, which was wont to celebrate the
Festival of Christ's Nativity, by putting forth its leaves and flowers, was cut
in pieces by these Militia men, that it might no longer Preach unto men, the
Birth day of their Savior.

But what do I speak of days, and times, and teaching Trees? the very
Doctrine it self, which Christ himself taught and practiced, viz. the
Doctrine of Peace, Patience, and passive obedience unto Princes, is reckoned
obsolete and useless by these men: it was publicly maintained by a certain
worthless Member at a great Committee in the Checquer Chamber, that such
Doctrines were out of date in these days, and had been only proper to former
times, when the Church was in a low Condition, and under the Persecution of
Heathen Emperors.

Nay, these men would not, that any true Christian Protestant should have leave
to live, to relate unto posterity the Doctrine of his Savior, as seems by
their doings; their thirst for Protestant Blood, appears to be such, as if
they desired that all of that Profession in the world, had but one Head, that
so they might cut it off at one blow, for they have shed already more of it,
within these four years, then ever was shed in Great Britain since the
world began; and that for no other cause, that we yet know (for they never
durst come to dispute it with us) then for holding to the Doctrine of Christ's
Gospel: because we will not contrary to that, lift up our hands with them
against our Sovereign. By these particulars, and many others which I might
allege, it is evident (what ever they pretend to the contrary) that their
endeavors are to destroy the Christian Protestant Religion. Our Savior does
warrant us to judge of men by their fruits; wherefore it is no marvel if the
Reader (being a true Protestant Christian) be not well affected to that cause
of Liberty and Religion, which the two Parliaments of England and Scotland do
seem to maintain.

SECT. VIII.
1. Of the feigned Combination against the Parliament. 2. Our judgment of the
Papists, and of their assisting the King. 3. Our abhorment of the Cruelties of
the Irish, and how they are out-gone by the English Rebels. 4. Our Opinion of
the Court Faction, of what flock we are. 5. How the Libellers call themselves
the more believing sort of people.

BUt the Reason insinuated (by our Subtle Brethren) why. 1.
men should be affected to that their cause, is taken from the Consideration of
the Persons against whom (as they say) it is maintained, viz. against a
combination of all the Papists of Europe ( almost) especially the bloody Tigres
of Ireland, and some of the Prelaticall and Court Faction in England.

That there is any such Combination, (opposed by the two Parliaments, of
England and Scotland) as these men mention, is more (perhaps) then the Readers
have heard of before, or then they do yet believe upon the bare affirmation of
these Relaters, who are but men, ( and all men are Subject to Error.) Indeed we
have heard of a most ungodly and unlawful Association, betwixt those whom they
call the two Parliaments, and certain other people in England and Scotland:
The tenor of which is, (if I rightly apprehend) never to lay down Arms, nor
to admit of Peace, till they have accomplished their own ends upon the King
and his Friends, and satisfied their Lusts upon them. And to defend and assist
with their lives and fortunes, all those (whoever they be without exception)
that shall join with them against the King and his Party. So that, be they
Papists, Turks, Jews, Heathens, Atheists, Arrians, Irish Tigres, Devils of
Hell, if they do but join with them against their King, and those that Honor
him as Gods Anointed; for this very cause and reason, they have bound
themselves by Oath, they have vowed and protested to defend and maintain them,
with their lives and fortunes, even till death, and never to forsake them.

If there be a more general illegal, and irreligious Combination then that
is, (which any others have entered into) these relaters should have done well,
to have given the Reader a Copy of the same; who otherwise must apprehend them
in these their words, to be only at their old vomit again: Because they cannot
possibly devise more evil, and mischief to Charge upon others, then
themselves do practice against others, therefore they still impute unto others,
their own iniquities, or else their guilty Consciences makes them fancy, that
they see their own pictures in other men's faces.

But we will not omit to observe the ingenuity of these men, (though it be but
a little) intimated in those their two words Almost and Some; they do not say
all the Papists in Europe absolutely, and all the prelaticall Court faction
without any limitation, have entered into this fancyed Combination; But all the
Papists in Europe almost, and some of the Prelaticall and Court faction; the
word almost, does exclude all the Papists that either are, or may be under the
Parliament Pay and Service; and the word Some, may excuse those of the
Prelaticall or Court Faction that hold intelligence with those at Westminster;
and are men of like complexion with them, dissemblers, disobedient,
unthankful, treacherous, heady, and high-minded, however they carry themselves
to outward appearance: And truly we believe that if these tale-tellers, would
but speak out, when the fit of ingenuity is upon them, they would confess and
acknowledge, that if any Papists in the world, any of the Bloody Tigers of
Ireland, will but join with those, whom they call the two Parliaments against
the King; and that little flock, which for Conscience sake remain Loyal to
him; they shall be accepted and absolved presently, from what is past, they
shall be reckoned Papists no more, Bloody Tigers of Ireland no more, but all
good men, and true in a moment; and have free leave, yea, and money too, to act
over again their bloody Tragedies here in England. Or if any of the Court
Faction, of what Religion or conversation soever, will but vouchsafe to be more
vile and wicked then ever they have been, and be hired (as Judas was) to betray
their Master, or to render up to his Enemies, those places of Defense committed
to their Trust, and so come off from the King to their Parliament side; they
shall be welcome and Voted good, all upon the sudden: Truly we never heard of
any yet, that had the Conscience to act the part of a Traitor, or of a
villain against God, his Prince, and Country, but has been accepted by them:
and (as was said) we believe if our subtle and suspected Brethren would but
speak out, when the mood of ingenuity is upon them, they would confess as
much.

But the Reason (as we conceive) why they yoke Papists, Irish Tigers, and the
Court Faction thus together, and affirm them to be entered into a Combination,
is this: Because they would, that the common people should have an equal
odious esteem, of each of these three sorts; whom they would also should be
apprehended, to be the only persons that maintain and uphold the King, and
whom the King does only respect and adhere unto; and therefore they would that
we (unto whom they direct their speech) should decline him and his Cause, and
join with themselves and their faction, against Him, that, and them.

In Answer to which I shall only declare in a word, what. 2.
our judgments and opinions are, of each of these three sorts of people.

1. Concerning Papists, we (the Persecuted and Loyal Protestants of this
Kingdom) do more abjure their Religion then these men do, that speak so
bitterly against them; though we do not think it lawful to enter into a
Combination, to root them out of the Earth by shedding of their Blood; (no
though they should enter into such a one to destroy us) for we have no warrant
in the Gospel so to do. It Is the Word of God that is ordained to suppress
false Religions, and not the Sword of Man; Fire, Sword, and Pistolls are the
Weapons of Antichrist, and not of Christ.

And (because of their Religion) we are heartily sorry, that there are any
Papists in the Kings Armies, for that scandal which ignorant people take by
them, (through the perverse suggestions of the crafty Adversary) who from
hence, take occasion to keep their affections enstranged from their Sovereign.
Not that hereby any scandal is justly given by His Majesty, for we hold it not
only Lawful for him to make use of those of that Religion, but also necessary,
yea, it would be a sin against God, if being assaulted by Thieves and
Rebels, he should not use the means for his own Preservation, and employ for
his own defense, all those whom God has submitted under his Government for
that purpose; there is no man, if he should be assaulted by Robbers and
Murderers, but would make use of the aid of a Turk to save his life. Yea,
these very men themselves (we see) can hire Papists from other Countries, to
help them to destroy their Sovereign; and is it not meet and reasonable that
the King should permit Papists, his own Subjects, to help to preserve him from
such their violence? Indeed we are ashamed and blush, that Papists should
out-goe any that bear the name of Protestants in duty and obedience to their
King; that any whom this Church has bred, should so desert their Sovereign in
his danger (who has protected them in theirs) as that he should need the help
of Papists: Sorry we are at the heart, that this occasion is given, to have any
of another Religion to defend the Defender of our Faith, against the baseness
and violence of those persons, whom he has defended in the profession thereof:
but more of this hereafter.

2. Concerning the Bloody Tigres of Ireland, we do abhor. 3.
their Cruelties, and believe that their damnation sleeps not, but shall in
Gods due time over-take and over-whelme them: But we must add farther, that
the Tigres of England (even many of those whom they call the Parliament side)
have been full as Bloody; nay, more Bloody and base then those of Ireland, who
have persecuted with fire and sword, from among them, those only that were of a
differing Religion and Nation, unto themselves; but these here, have handled
them of their own Country and Religion, after the same manner; never any Tygres
so thirsted after the Blood of their nearest kindred and best friends as these
in England have done; nor can any villainy be named, that was acted by them in
that Kingdom, which has not been done and outdone by those in this; these
also have raised a Rebellion against their Sovereign, and in pursuance
thereof, have killed, slain, and destroyed, men, women, and children in some
places where they have come; these also have stripped people of both Sexes
naked, and then shut them up in Churches together, or other places, and
afterward have come, and in a barbarous and beastly manner, have whipped and
scourged them; these also have roasted Christians at the fire, and burnt them by
piece-meales, their toes from their feet, and their fingers from their hands,
striking up half a dozen Drums in the mean time, that the shreeks and cries
of the tormented, might not be heard, to move pity in any toward them; (which
was the custom of them in old time that Sacrificed Children unto Moloske) was
it ever heard, that the Tigres of Ireland, or the Spaniards in the Indies did
ever act any such Cruelties, upon them of their own Faith and Nation? Indeed
modesty restraines from expressing all their doings: and did I delight to make
men odious, as well as sin; I could name the Persons, by whose Command and
Authority, some of these things have been Acted, and the places where they have
been done. And confident I am, if Master Fox were now alive, to search into all
the places where these Parliament Tigres have come, and to write their doings;
the volume would be three times as big as his former, and repleat with as
Savage Actions, as ever yet were recorded by the Pen of Man: Only this I must
say further, I have not heard that the Tigres of Ireland, have shown so much
immediate spite against God and Christ, in demolishing all marks of
Christianity, in destroying, polluting, and defiling the Temples of Gods
Worship, as these of England have done: it is true, we hear that since they have
got our Churches into their possessions, they have in their superstitious way,
consecrated them anew: And truly, had our Tigres of England been there, and
used the Churches of that Kingdom, as they have done them in this; there had
been great need of a new Consecration. Wherefore (concluding this particular) I
will only speak to these men, (who have thus mentioned the Tigres of Ireland)
as our Savior in the Gospel did to some of like Conditions. You Hypocrites,
can you see Tigrely doings in your Brethren of Ireland? And can you not discern
these more Tigrely and bloody Actions which are committed by your selves? Amend
first for shame your own doings, and then you may speak with more credit
against the Evils of others.

3. Concerning the third sort, viz. those some of the Prelaticall. 4.
and Court Faction in England, which these men cry out also upon, to be of the
Combination, we do confess, there has been, and perhaps still are some about
the Court, or that have too near a relation to it, whom we do dislike as much,
and more too, then these men do, and we have reason for it, they are such as
neither serve God nor the King, so faithfully as they ought to do, but are
either secret pensioners unto his enemies, pursuing their ends,
(notwithstanding their pretendings and engagements to His Majesty) or else they
are slaves to their own proper lusts, making provisions only, for their own
Flesh and Belly; (notwithstanding Gods wrath upon the Kingdom:) and from these
is the special cause that the Kings affairs go on so badly as they do:
these be the men, who by their Power and Authority have countenanced and
advanced the vile, even to abuse, spoil, and dishearten the good: lest the
Luster of inferiors merits, should discover the worthlesnesse of those that
are in place above them; and give too happy a progress to His Majesty's
business. Of which sort are they, who when by their Treacheries,
Indiscretions, Negligences, or ill Governed behaviors, Towns and Countries are
lost, good undertakings nulled or made frustrate, can very unreverendly, and
undutifully lay the fault upon the Kings ill fortune; yea, and tax His Majesty
of this or that; so making his Candor the Napkin (as it were) to wipe the
filth from their own Noses. These men (we would that all the world should know)
we do dislike, and perfectly abhor, for such their works sake, even as we
do the Irish Tigres, or the Men of Westminster themselves.

But we do believe, and know, that (besides these) the King has a Company
belonging to him, both of the Nobility, of the Gentry, and of the Clergy, (our
subtle Brethren may call them a faction if they will, or even what else they
please) that are both truly Religious, and truly Loyal, that have sacrificed
their fortunes, and are every one ready to sacrifice their lives too, in
defense of their holy Protestant Religion, and of their King and Country, that
do truly mourn for the miseries of this Church and State; yea, many of them
stand like Mary and John, (as being able perhaps to do little else) looking
with watery eyes upon their innocent and righteous Sovereign; whom they behold
in their Saviors Condition, Crucified between Thieves on both sides. And of
this flock we do profess our selves to be, and to it we resolve (by Gods
Grace) to adhere for ever, although we should see every of them, to be in the
Kings very case and Condition, wronged every way, and abused by both their
parties even as he; no, we will not leave to be on their side in this cause,
though we believe them to be the men, whom (together with the King) the Heads
of the Association made at London, have vowed to destroy: We know that the Lord
whom we serve is able to deliver us from their cruel hands, but if not, let
all the People know, that we will never fall down before that many-Headed Idol
which they have set up, or rather which has advanced it self to be adored by
the People: And this is our* Answer to these subtle men, who by a tale of
strange Combination, did think (as it seems) to persuade us to forsake the
King, and to adhere to his Enemies. But they tell the Reader further.

Thou (say they) wilt be abundantly satisfied with these Letters Libell.
here Printed, and take notice therefrom, how the Court has been Cajold
(that is the Authentic word now among our Cabalisticall adversaries) by the
Papists, and we the more believing sort of Protestants by the Court.

The Reader may be abundantly satisfied by these Letters of His Majesty's
longing desires to see Peace restored to His poor Subjects throughout His three
Kingdoms: And he may also be abundantly satisfied by their printing of these
Letters, of that abundance of bitterness, spite, and malice which is in the
hearts of the Publishers of them against their Sovereign; but for satisfaction
in any other matters, the Reader if he be rightly affected and looks only
with his own eye, he must seek it some where else, for here it is not to be
found.

What they intend by Cajold, and whom by Cabalisticall Adversaries, I stand not
to argue, for the words are shelly, Nec de verbis est disputandum; only I
cannot but observe the Title which these Wisemen give themselves, and their
own Faction: We (say they) the more believing sort of Protestants. Faith it
seems they have, and in their own opinion great Plenty, more then others;
like them, John 9. they say they see, and like him, Luke 18. they think
themselves better then other men, they are not like us Publicans, who confess
our selves to be weak and sinful, and to have need to cry daily unto the Lord
for mercy and increase of Faith; they are past their Creed already, and can tell
God, Lord we believe, whereas we are yet but at our Pater noster, help our
unbelief. But in whom, or in what is it, that they do believe? Surely in
themselves, and their own fictions, because they have renounced the Truth of
God, which they have been taught, and are turned persecutors of it, God has
given them up, first to These. 2. 10, 11.
make, and then to believe lies, in which respect they are indeed the best
believers, and in that sense they speak not amiss in calling themselves the
most believing sort of Protestants, though in another sense they are the most
unbelieving, for they will not believe the King in any thing, let him promise,
profess, and protest never so often and solemnly unto them; their Tongues, Pens,
and actions proclaim publicly their unbelief; yea, they glory in their not
believing, and do all they can, that others might be Infidels also in the same
respect, as well as they; their malicious notes, upon his Letters are to this
very purpose, let them deny it if they can.

And as for God, they believe him as little as they do the King, for they dare
not trust him for protection, they have more confidence in the Militia a great
deal, and stand more upon it. Beside, if they did believe God, they would also
fear him, ( Faith and Fear go together) they would regard his word more, and
not so oppose it in all their ways; or endeavor to make it of none effect, by
their sinful Ordinances and traditions: Besides, faith in God discovers it
self, by doing the works of God, and they are not Hatred, Strife, Sedition,
Rebellion, Murder, Lying, Slandring, and speaking evil of dignities, which
these men traffic solely in. S. James tells us of Nudifidians, who say they
have Faith, and boast James 2. 18.
that they have more then others, sure these are the very men, for they call
themselves the more believing sort of Protestants: the bare believing sort of
Protestants perhaps they are, they account good works but marks of Popery: We
confess our selves no such Protestants, for we are of the Apostles mind, As the
body without the Verse 26.
Spirit is dead, so Faith without good works is dead also. But they tell the
Reader further, and say,

If thou art an Enemy to Parliaments and Reformation, and made Libell.
wilful in thine enmity above the help of miracles, or such Revelations as
these are, then it is to be expected, that thou will either deny these Papers to
have been written by the Kings own Hand, or else that we make just
constructions and inferences out of them: or lastly, thou will deny, that
though they be the Kings own, and bear such a sense, as we understand them
in, yet that they are blameable, or unjustifiable against such Rebels as we
are.

SECT. IX.
1. The slander laid upon us to be Enemies to Parliaments and Reformation
Confuted. 2. Of pretended Miracles, Revelations, and new Lights, the taking the
Kings Cabinet in Battle no Miracle. 3. The Libellers weak Argument to prove an
impossibility of forgery in their Parliament.

IT seems it is voted and decreed, that if a man be not well affected. 1.
to that cause, which the men above board do maintain; He is then no less
then an enemy to all Parliaments and Reformation, yea, (past all hope of
recovery) wilful in enmity, beyond the help of miracles: For (it must be
understood that) all men being divided into two ranks, Elect and Reprobate, and
the Elect being all on the Parliament side, or well affected at least to their
cause, the rest must needs be all damned creatures; enemies to Parliaments, i.
e. to the Commonwealth and all good Laws; yea, and enemies to Reformation
too; that is, to God and all true Religion, and therefore away with such
fellows from the earth, it is not fitting they should live: they that cannot
err have so concluded.

Here (by the way) we may see a ground of all these bloody wars, (which many
hitherto are ignorant of;) a reason of all these cruel declarations, and
injunctions to kill, slay, and destroy the forces raised by, or adhering to the
King; why they are all Reprobates, men hardened in Enmity against Parliaments
and Reformation, past all hope, of recovery, and therefore to be sent to Hell,
in all haste, as to their proper place; that so the earth the sole inheritance
of Gods Elect ones, may be wholly left to the free possession of its proper
owners; and fully cleared from those Enemies of God and Parliaments.

Well, what we are, Heaven knows, for their Censures we pass not, any more
then Saint Paul did to be censured by the Corinthians; we say with him, He that
Judges us is the Lord, and whom 1 Cor. 4. 4.
the Lord condemns shall be the only condemned men at the great day; and our
Savior tells us, that then the first may be last, Mat. 19. 30.
and the last first, the first in men's esteem, the last in Gods and so e contra.

But let us a little reason the particular, with them that thus fiercely charge
upon us: Must we of necessity be enemies to Parliaments and Reformation,
because we are not affected to their cause? Does this Parliament contain in it,
all other Parliaments, that ever have been, and (as they hope) ever shall be?
May not a man possibly dislike the proceedings of this, and yet approve of the
being of another? May not a man wish the dissoultion of this, and yet withal
desire the convention of another? May not the same man obhorre evil, and love
good, hate vice, and embrace virtue? May not a man affirm this no Parliament
at all in the truest and best sense, because they do not do the works of a
Parliament? Those Jews in the Gospel were not Abraham's Children, in Christ's
sense, (which was the truest and John 8. 39.
the best) because they did not do Abraham's Works; they called themselves
indeed his Children, in respect of the flesh, or walls, (as I may say, that did
enclose them) which they had from Abraham: But Christ calls them, A Generation
of Vipers, and Children of the Devil, for all that: because they went Verse. 40.
about to kill and destroy Him* their King and Sovereign; which thing, (says
he) did not Abraham, may not we esteem of this Parliament as our Savior did of
those Jews, since there is such a similitude betwixt them both in words and
manners? we know that Christ did well enough approve of those Children of
Abraham, who did Abraham's Works, notwithstanding his dislike of those in
particular, whom he speaks against: so may we, notwithstanding our dislike of
this Parliament, highly esteem of another, which shall do Parliamentary
actions. Now the Works or actions of a Christian Parliament, are to Heal and
not to make breaches in a Church or State; to settle Religion and peace, not to
destroy either; to make and confirm good Laws, not to null them; to suppress
all sects and false opinions, not to give free liberty unto them; to consult
for the Kings Honor and dignity, not to countenance and Authorize base
Libells to his defamation; to advise for the wealth and flourishing condition
of the Subjects, not to impoverish, or to ruin them: these, and such like have
been, and properly still are, the works of Parliaments; and to such conditioned
Parliaments we are no enemies: we account a true Parliament our Palladium, the
strength of the Kingdom; we have the same opinion of it, as the Trojans had of
their Palladium, they held their City invincible, so long as they kept their
Palladium inviolate; so might our Nation have been reckoned, (under Gods
protection) invincible, if these unhappy men, had not perverted the power and
privileges of that most High and Honorable Court: But (alas!) never was Noble
Nation so abused, and destroyed as this is, and has been, per Catulos istos
Catilinarios, (I may truly call them,) who have been the instruments of
infection to this so much desired meeting; who if the God of Heaven do not
oppose and subdue, we are never like to have any more Parliaments, which is one
of our greatest fears; if these men prevail, they will assuredly never have
any above them, that shall call them to a reckoning, be they never so
lascivious in evil, never so mischievous or destructive of good: Now must
every one that disrelisheth the courses of this Parliament, be judged an Enemy
to all Parliaments? Truly it is too unreasonable, too harsh a censure, but it is
our Burden and we must bear it.

And yet this is not all, for we are sentenced to be Enemies of Reformation
too, an Enemy to Parliaments and Reformation: But do these two go always
together? May not a man possibly be a friend to the one, and no wel-wisher to
the other? We have heard of some that have been well affcted to Parliaments,
and yet not to Reformation: But this we apprehend is only added, to exasperate
the peoples rage against us, that with the more violence and speed they may
dispatch us, as being Enemies to all that good is. Indeed if Parliaments and
Reformation were (as they ought to be,) unseparable Companions, then He or
they, who were friends to the one, were also friends to both, of necessity: But
these very men will confess and say that in Queen Mary's days, there was
Parliament and Deformation: and so woeful experience tells us there is now, Yea
and Depopulation too, of Houses, families and men; and Devastation of true
Religion and Law; The Reformation (if they so call it,) by this Parliament, is
such a one, as Nebuzaradan, Steward to Nebuchadnezzar made at Jerusalem, when
he threw down the walls both of the City and Temple, we confess to all the
world, we are enemies to this kind of Reformation, and so hope shall ever be:
But to that which is of sin, and evil, whether in Church or State, we are most
affectionate friends, and do humbly beg of God, (to this end) that he would
please to settle the King in his Throne, and give him such a Parliament, as may
have grace truly, and intentionally, (not in pretense only,) to go about it,
sed de his satis, only we do observe from hence before hand, how our Bill of
indictment shall run, if these men lay hands on us: what those Crimes are,
which the people shall be made believe, we are put to death for: Because we are
enemies to Parliaments, and Reformation, to God, and all good men, yea, and
wilful on our Enmity too, we would not be reclaimed by any means, no not by
the help of Miracles, or such Revelations as these are.

But what is this we hear, Miracles, and Revelations pleaded in. 2.
these days, and by these men? Are not these of that number who were wont
heretofore, to cry out against the Papists, because wanting the written word to
justify their way, they alleged Miracles and Revelations? See the strength
of Resolution in these stout Champions, rather then submit to Scripture, to
their Sovereign, to the Truth, to Reason, they will join hands in this also,
with the Papists, whom they have formerly so much condemned; and being brought
to a like strait, will make use of like Arguments to warrant their own
proceedings. I confess Astonishment did much possess my spirit, for a great
while, at their courses, so directly contrary to Gods plain word; till at last
I met with a certain Sermon preached by one William Bridge, and ordered to be
Printed, by a Committee of the House of Commons, subscribed by John White:
wherein the Preacher (speaking of Reformation, now so much talked on) teaches
the people, that it is a sin in them, to look that it should be effected in Gods
ordinary way, or to expect that Gods assistance should come, as in former
times, to the furtherance of it: for (says he) now God is working
extraordinarily, and to tie him to ordinary ways and means in such times as
these, is to tempt and to limit God: this he repeats over three or four times,
for peoples better observance, and then concludes positively, that ' it is the
second great sin that has made a stoppage in Englands mercies, this tempting
of God by expecting reformation in an ordinary way (though it was wont to be
accounted a tempting of God to expect his help in ways extraordinary.) His full
sense I suppose in those his expressions is, as if he had spoken more fully out
thus: My beloved Brethren, Gods word was indeed heretofore, the rule and square
to order your course by, and because therein you find no warrant to rebel
against your King, to kill, slay, and destroy your Brethren, to go in such ways
as the Parliament has voted you shall go in, therefore some of you I see, are
scrupulously fearful to lift up your hand against the King, or to cut the
throats of all your Brethren that be not of your Opinion, and to work a
newfound Reformation by the Sword: but hereupon it is, that we have such a
stoppage made in Englands mercies, the Elect of God are still kept out of their
possessions, and the Land is yet full of wicked men, and herein you show your
selves most weak and simple, that you do not consider, that God is weary of his
ordinary manner of working, he sees it is impossible that his Children should
have their hearts desires in this life, by going in that old beaten path,
himself is not able to satisfy their lusts that way, and therefore he has now
at length better bethought himself, and left his old wont, is resolved to go an
extraordinary way to work, which he never went in before, and has stirred up
many extraordinary men, worthy members to that purpose; yea, and now he will
have his people cast his Word behind their backs, as a thing out of date to
walk by, and look only unto extraordinary Lights and Revelations, that we their
Teachers shall tell them of, and go only by them: and believe it, now God has
altered his mind, and course of working, it is plainly to tempt him, if you
expect his blessing in his old way, or ^hal observe the guide of his word any
longer; they that will not now depend upon Miracles and Revelations, are
obstructers of Englands mercies, yea, and worthy to be voted Enemies to Gods
Reformation, such as are wilful in their enmity too, and past all hope of
recovery. This is the sense and Doctrine of William Bridge, one of the
Parliament Ministers delivered in the year 1642. at Margarets on Fish-street
hill London, and ordered to serve for the whole Miridian of Great Britain, by
the Committee of the House of Commons in Parliament, concerning Printing,
witness John White.

But leaving William Bridge to his extraordinary illuminations and Revelations,
we turn again to these good fellows, and desire to know of them, what these
particular Miracles and Revelations be, which they here speak of, we conceive
they mean these Letters which they say were taken in the Kings Cabinet at
Nazeby field by victorious Sir Thomas Fairfax: But truly we do not see, how
things written by way of Letters, from one person to another, can properly be
called Revelations, nor how it can merit the name of a Miracle, for Enemies in
War or Battle, to seize upon a Cabinet of Papers: At the Battle of Edg^-hil,
His Majesty's Soldiers took certain Letters, wherein by divine providence was
discovered, how one Blake was hired by them, that call themselves the Kings
most loving and obedient Subjects, to signify by some token, the place where
His Majesty was in the field, that they might more directly level their Shot
thither, and speak forth their Loyalty by the mouth of their Ordnance: we
apprehended it indeed a special mercy of God to us, but we did not call it by
the name of a Miracle, or a Revelation.

Yea, but these men it seems, do co^nt such an accident, when it falls out on
their side, a Miracle and a Revelation, and a sufficient one too, to convert
all of us unto their opinion, if we be not beforehand wilful in our enmity
against Parliaments and Reformation: But if any be so obstinate, and will not be
wrought upon by these means, it is supposed that he will either deny these Papers
to be written by the Kings own hand, or else, that the constructions, ^^d
inferences made out of them are just, and true, or that these Papers are
blameable against such Rebels, as they are who have published them: for it
seems these are properties essential to one wilful in enmity: yet whether it be
out of our weakness of judgment or no, we leave it to reasonable men to
determine: we the simple Brethren do confess that we believe it is possible
that a man may suspect whether all these Papers, as they are here published by
his deadly enemies; were written by the Kings own hand or no* yea, and he may
also absolutely deny that the Constructions and inferences, which they make out
of them are just and right: and further he may declare and show, that nothing
in them is so blameable, as they would have the world believe, seeing they are
against such unparalleld Rebels as they are; and notwithstanding, be free from
any such enmity as they speak of. It seems their guilty consciences expected
some such matter, and therefore they endeavor so well as they can (poor men) to
answer for themselves, saying,

As to the first, know, that the Parliament was never yet guilty of Libell.
any such forgery, the King yet in all the Letters of his which have been
intercepted, never objected any such thing, and we dare appeal to his own
Conscience now, knowing that he cannot disavow either his own handwriting, or
the matters themselves here written, (All the Ciphers, Letters, all
circumstances of time and fact, and the very hand by which they are Signed, so
generally known, and now exposed to the view of all) will aver for us, that no
such forgery could be possible.

Their Argument, in these words unto the first, stands thus, If these Letters
were not written with the Kings own Hand, then the Parliament should be guilty
of forgery, but the Parliament was never guilty of such forgery. Ergo.

The Major in this Argument they take for true, but it is not current, unless
they will prove that none had to do with these Letters but the Parliament, and
that the publication of them was the Act of the whole Court; which we do not
believe, because the end thereof, being (as was shown before) only to defame
and endanger the Kings Person does speak it a work un-beseeming a Parliament
consisting of Christian men, unless we take only a part for the whole; perhaps
indeed it might be the Act of some amongst them, viz. of the prevailing
Faction: but crimen paucorum diffundere in omnes, is not our custom.

But their Minor only they prove, and that thus, If the Parliament were guilty
of any such forgery, then the King in some of his Letters, that have been
intercepted, would have objected the same. But the King never objected any such
thing, Ergo.

To this I answer: it would be as great a shame, if a whole Parliament should
be guilty of forgery, as if it should be guilty of the forementioned Act of
Authorizing this Libell: but yet some of the rotten Members thereof, (as they
are men) may possibly be as guilty of the one, as of the other, for all men
(say these) are subject to Error. Nor is it an impossible thing to show, that
some of them have not dealt so sincerely, as became honesty: when they were yet
in ways of entreaty, with their Associate Counties, for free benevolence,
before they came to their weekly Taxes and Contributions; some of them being
sent by the rest into the Country, to pick their neighbors purses; whilst
they have been persuading the poor Countryman to new Loanes and Charges, for
the maintenance of this unchristian and unnatural War; Providence (as must be
pretended) did usually at the very instant time, send some Letter or other,
wherein was related, (with thanks to the people for their former assistance)
what a great Victory (by the help of God and them) the Parliament had lately
obtained against the Kings Forces, with little or no loss to themselves: so
that now the work was in a manner quite done, one Contribution more would
finish the Business. These Letters were suspected, (even by the abused people
themselves) to be but mere forgeries, devised on purpose to cozen them of their
Moneys, when afterward they understood there had been no such Victories at that
time; verily those that dare belie Gods Providence, and forge Letters from
that, may be suspected, will be as bold with the King, in pursuance of their own
designs against him.

But (say they) if the Parliament were guilty of any such forgery, the King in
his Letters, which have been intercepted, would have objected the same.

The word intercepted, might have been omitted, for if in any of the Kings
Letters, which have by Accident come into their Hands, any such thing were
objected, yea, and sufficiently proved, yet we are confident of their wisdom
so far, that we dare say for them, they would never have divulged the same, nor
suffered the world to know of it, if they themselves could help: But for their
whole Argument it is only negative, and therefore weak and fallible. The King
has not accused them of forgery, Ergo, they are not guilty thereof, is no
necessary consequent: There is many a Malefactor in the Kingdom, that deserves
hanging* yet was never brought to his trial, is he therefore innocent? As it
does not follow, that they are most faulty, that are most ill spoken of; no
more does it on the contrary, that they are most free from blame that are least
taxed.

But if the King has not objected forgery unto them, the more is his goodness
and wisdom; he that desires peace with his Adversary, is sparing, even in his
just objections, that no obstruction be cast in by him, as a bar to union;
whereas they that love strife, though themselves have already offered most
wrong, yet are still most full of clamours; and when they can find no faults to
object, they will invent some to keep the fire burning: doubtless if the New great
Seal be remembered, it must be acknowledged by all men, that the King has had
more cause to accuse them of forgery, then ever they had yet to Accuse him of
Perjury; but by their own Confession we see, the King has been more careful of
their credit, then they have been of his Honor, or of their own Souls.

But being conscious of the weakness of their Argument, they hope to strengthen
it with a second, which is nihil ad nos, as the other was nihil ad rem; it is
their appeal to the Kings own Conscience, who (say they) cannot disavow his own
handwriting: this may indeed be aliquid ad regem, but what is it to the Reader?
Would they have every one in these Kingdoms, and beyond the Seas, (to whom they
have dispersed these Copies) make a journey to ask the King, whether these
Letters were of His own Handwriting?

And to this second they add a third, which is even like the former: they tell
the Reader, that all the Ciphers, Letters, all the Circumstances of time and
fact, and the very hand*by which they are Signed, so generally known, and now
exposed to the view of all, will aver for them, that no such forgery could ^e
possible. And yet the Reader all the while sees nothing, but only that which
comes from the hand of the Printer, or did he see the very Ciphers or original
Letters they speak of, were the hand wherewith they were Signed, exposed
generally to the view of all, could all men know it to be the Kings; or swear
it were nto forged? I suppose not, unless He had first submitted his faith and
judgment to believe only, as the Parliament Voteth. In a word, I conceive that
(not withstanding all they say to the contrary) they who forged the Kings Seal,
may possibly forge Letters under the Kings Name. I do not Accuse any to have so
done, only I speak thus, to show that their Arguments are not so convincing as
themselves think. Forgery in this case might be possible.

But they come to the second objection, which they believe may be made against
their Notes upon these Letters, and say,

As to our Comments and Annotations, if there be not perspicuity Libell.
and modesty in them, there is no common Justice, nor place for credit left
among mankind.

SECT. X.
1. Of that perspicuity and Modesty which the Libellers boast, to be in their
own Annotations. 2. Their pretty confident way of persuading all men to be of
their Opinions. 3. Their Reasons why they did not publish all they had against
the King.

IF any shall dislike these Comments and Annotations upon the. 1.
Kings Letters, He is confuted in these words very substantially; for the
Authors of them say, that they are all very good: and we know men can best
judge of their own works, they can give the fairest interpretation of their own
doings: the Crow can see beauty in her own bird, though none else can; so these
men can see perspicuity and modesty in their own Notes; yea, so confident they
are, that their sight is good, and their judgment true, that they dare boldly
conclude, there is no Common Justice or faith left amongst men, if all mankind
be not of their Opinion in this particular. Was not this stoutly spoken? Are
not these valiant men? We see they are resolved to hold their own, though all
mankind say to the contrary.

Truly upon this their commendation, their Notes have been read over again, and
again; and I profess, I can see no perspicuity at all in them, unless of spite
and malice; which indeed I find set forth with the Highest and most
transcendent impudency against Sovereign Majesty, as I believe ever Mankind
saw: Nay, I dare affirm it, that never any Protestant Christian Subjects did
discover the like, under Countenance of such an Authority as these pretend. And
I require these boasters to show but one word or expression, savouring of true
modesty, and Christian reverence to their King, in all their Annotations: and I
promise them it shall excuse with me a multitude of their other errors. Nay,
let their own Consciences speak, concerning this perspicuity which they talk
of; whether they did not on purpose transpose these Letters (in this their
publication of them) inverting the Order wherein they were written, setting
some that were first, last: and some that were last, first: that so their
dependence upon each other being broken, they might be less perspicuous to the
Reader: who might (had they all been placed in their right order) with facility
and clearness, have discerned the reasons of many expressions, which (without
regard to their reference) may be apprehended in a worse sense, then they do
naturally bear. They took all these Letters together by their own Confession,
why then must they place those writ in May, before them that were writ in
March; and those in March, before those in January? those of this Year, before
those of last, or of the Year before, but only for the Reason forementioned?
Had they studied to evidence that perspicuity they speak of, (if these Letters
must needs have been printed) they would at least have placed them in that
order, as they were sent from the King and Queen to each other. O but then,
they would not have appeared so offensive, as now they hope they have made them
to do, nor been so liable to sinister interpretations. Truly in this very
thing, there does appear to our apprehensions the perspicuity of their malice.

Which also is further manifested by their picking out here a Sentence, and
there an Expression, from out these Letters, which being disjoynted from that
which goes before, and that which follows in the same place, (and attended
with their spightful gloss upon it) does seem to be, what in its self it is not,
(when read entire by a Christian Eye with its full Coherence) wherein they
imitate that profane Atheist, who to prove his opinion, alleged that part of
the Psalm, non est Deus, but left out the preceding words, Dixit insipiens in
cord suo.

Yea, and the perspicuity of their malice is seen more abundantly yet, in their
perverting his Majesty's words to as bad a sense, as possible man or Devil
could wrest them; to the end that none (if they can bring it to pass) might
harbor a good thought of him: yea, they endeavor so much as in them lies, not
only to put all his Subjects, but even his own Child, into a way of
disobedience against him; by that which they wrest in their Notes from the
eleventh Paper. Yea, though they hate the Queen, with a most mortal, and
perfect Hatred, (as appears sufficiently by their dealings with her) yet how
does it irk them that she loves her Husband, and how fain (out of their
superlative malice against him) would they break that bond of Affection between
them, is evident by their publication of the 34. Paper, which concerns only a
private business between them, (as Man and Wife) written of some 20. years ago,
about the time of their first Marriage: were there nothing else to make the
superfluity of their malice abundantly perspicuous, the divulging* of that very
Paper alone, (to the end for which they do it) were fully sufficient.

Thus we see their perspicuity, now for their modesty, which all but their own
dear selves will go near to suspect to be shameful impudency. For

1. He whom they accuse and reproach is the Person, whom above all men in the
world, they are bound in duty, and have solemnly sworn to defend and honor;
and is this modesty? then Ziba was a modest man for accusing his Master; and
Absalom was a modest man for accusing the King his Father; and so was Shimei
too, in his reproaching and accusing David his Lord and Sovereign.

2. They seek occasions of accusing, they search for iniquity, yea they have
accomplished a diligent search in their reading his Letters, Psalm. 64. 6.
and in their sifting his Actions; and though they find no sufficient matter,
yet they accuse; they pervert his words, and invent matter, like them that
said, Come let us devise devices against him, and Jer. 11. 18.
smite him with the tongue, and is this modesty? then the Pharisees Luke 6. 7.
were modest men in their dealings with Christ, and so were Daniels Dan. 6. 4.
enemies in their accusations against him.

3. They accuse him for good, (wanting matter of evil to charge him withal)
as for loving his Wife, for tendering her health, for desiring her welfare, for
endeavoring his own defense, and the upholding of Monarchy, which God has
entrusted to him, and many such things of like nature, they heavily tax him
withal: and what they want in weight, they make up in number; hoping that the
blind and seduced world will suspect, (at least) somewhat amiss, when they
hear him charged with such a multitude of accusations. And is this Modesty?
then they in the 12. Psalm. that resolved With our Tongues we will prevail,
were modest creatures.

4. They Accuse him for that which (themselves know) is most contrary to his
nature and disposition; as of dissimulation, breach of Oath and promise, and
averseness to the good and welfare of his people: whereas

To the first, they cannot deny that his plain-dealing has afforded to them
their best advantage against him; what moved him to Sign that unhappy Bill for
continuing the Parliament, but the sincerity of his spirit, in his conceiving
them to be after his own Heart, Honest men? but (as one of the crafty Members
ingeniously acknowledged) I confess (says he) in that, we were too hard for
him.

To the 2. their own Consciences can witness for him, that his constancy in
keeping his Oath (made at his Coronation) to defend the Church of God in that
estate of weal wherein he found it, (which they would force and compel him to
break) has been a chief cause of this great persecution stirred up against him.

And for the 3. their own hearts will affirm, (if they would let them speak)
that never Prince did more hunger and thirst after his peoples good then He,
never did any further deny himself, then he has done, as appears Paper 25.
or offer more of his own undoubted rights to purchase their peace; never did
tender Father look with a more doleful eye, upon the miseries of his Child,
then he upon the calamities of his Subjects: Nay, never was any abused Prince
so unwilling to shed Rebellious blood as he; with what sadness did he hear of
those expressions of Joy, for his victory gotten at Stratton fight, Alas (says
he) but they were my Subjects. And with what passion of joy did he praise God,
at the beginning of these troubles, when after a long personal expectance of
an answer (after the limited time) of his Summons to Banbury: the Town at last,
was surrendered to him: Blessed be the God of Heaven (says he) that has given
me Victory this day without blood. And when His Majesty was upon the Hill
opposite to Foy in Cornwall, and was shot at by the enemies, (who then lay in
the town) and had a man killed close by him: though his Ordnance was ready
planted, and some with him would fain have shot, and beat down the town:
which might with ease from thence have been effected: His Majesty by no means
would permit the same. This has often been related to me (with tears of
affection to him) by diverse Inhabitants of that poor Loyal Town, who heard
the expression from His Majesty's Lips.
I understand (said he) that I have many good Subjects in that town, who are
inhabitants there, and I had rather spare the lives of an hundred Rebels, then
venture the hurting one of them; wherefore sure if it be medesty, to accuse the
Sun of darkness, or Piety it self of wickedness, then these Annotators are
wonderful modest men.

5. They accuse him most plentifully of those things whereof themselves are
most guilty, they lay their own faults to his Charge: as Corah and his
companions dealt with Moses, as Ahab dealt with Elias, and as Nero with the
Christians; so do these men with their Sovereign; was there ever in any Age,
read or heard of grander Hypocrites, greater deceivers, oppressors, scorners,
more cruel, Tyrannical, or treacherous Persons, greater Oath or Covenant
breakers, then these men are, who now oppose their King? and yet in their
superlative modesty, they are pleased to calumniate and burden him with these
conditions. Nay, that one Charge of theirs upon the King, Page 44. which they
call stirring Rumors about his Mother: may make all Englishmen stand amazed at
their impudency, for all that had ears to hear, and lived near London, can
witness how publicly base, and villainous they were in their scandalous
inventions and designs, against the Honor of that our disseised Queen; as
well as against Her that is now living: and because His Majesty complains of
this their transcendent villainy in a private Letter unto the Danish King, (who
was interessed with him in the wrong) these Diabolical wretches are so
impudent as to publish this private Letter, and then to tax him, as if he
thereby had raised that Rumor, which themselves, I say, first contrived, and
now have the 2. time divulged only to vex his Spirit: now if this be modesty,
then Potiphars Wife was a modest woman, for accusing Joseph of incontinency;
and Satan himself was a modest creature in his charging Job with blasphemy: Nor
need any wonder, that these Royal Ladies, should fall under the lash of these
men's defaming Tongues, for it is well known, that the Blessed Virgin Mary her
self (by diverse of their crew) has been used in the same manner: so that in
this, those two Queens are but fellow sufferers with Christ's Mother.

And thus we have seen a glimpse of that perspicuity and modesty which is
gloryed to be in these Annotations, we shall perceive more thereof anon: surely
had it been of any other sort or kind, then what it is, they could never have
been so confident as they are, that all mankind shall be injurious, and do
them wrong, if they fail to commend of them, such perspicuity, and such
modesty, is in very deed the foundation of such Confidence. But what do they
tell us in the next words?

Indeed (say they) most of all the main circumstances, want no illustration
Libell.
at all, to the most vulgar Capacities, and therefore we affirm nothing
necessary to be believed: but what the Printed Papers will themselves utter in
their own Language.

Could any men in the world speak more effectually, to persuade. 2.
us all to be of their opinion? Polus in the Spectrum of Erasmus did never act
his part better. He faigning that he saw a strange sight in the sky, did by
his expressions so well set it forth, and demonstrate it by his words and
fingers, unto the other spectatours, that every of them at last, one after
another, lest they should seem to be parum oculati dim-sighted, Adfirmarant se
quoque videre, said that they saw it too, and just as he had described it:
pudebat enim non videre quod tam esset perspicuum, (as the story goes) they
were ashamed not to be thought to see, what he said was so easy to be seen:
even so these men, having told us a pretty tale, of a certain Spectrum of
modesty and perspicuity in their own Annotations; they affirm it is so evident
to every Eye, that it needs no illustration: yea and what ever they say upon
the Kings papers, is so manifestly true, that the Papers themselves do speak
the same, even to the easiest capacityes. Wherefore they hope, unless people
will yield themselves, fools and blockheads, such as have no understanding to
perceive, what they read; they will all (out of hand) be of their opinion, and
speak just as they do: for it may be a great shame to any body, not to observe
that, which these say is so perspicuous: Nor indeed will it be safe, for any
that resolve to sleep in a whole skin, not to be persuaded of this matter, for
it is concluded, by those of that side, to kill, slay, and destroy, at least to
banish, and turn out naked, as men wilful in Enmity, beyond the help of
Miracles and Revelations, all such as are contrary minded unto themselves.

But suppose any body should be so impertinent, as to desire a further
Testimony, of what they would have believed of the King, then these Papers do
afford? Why these Publishers tell us, for our further satisfaction, (but we
must take their bare word) that they have, (in some by-corner sure) more
Papers, then yet they have made show of: their words to this purpose, are these
that follow.

And yet for that which is not so clearly warranted here, we have Libell.
other Papers for their warrant, were they not so Numerous and Vast, and too
much intermixed with other matters of no pertinence, for publication at this
time.

The reasons why they do not produce their full store, we perceive are two,

1. The overflowings of their own Modesty and Civility, they will not weary
their Readers, with things so Numerous and so Vast.

2. Their predence and discretion; there is too Great an intermixtion of other
matters, of no pertinence for publication at this time: for happily it is of such
matters, as would clearly evidence to the abused world, so much of the Kings
goodness, as could not possibly be clouded, and darkened with their spightfull
glosses, which would rather oppose then further their present purpose: For
(indeed) should the Kings gracious disposition be fully known unto His people,
they would be all more sensible of the wrong He suffers, and so perhaps the men
of Westminster, might be forced to yield up into His Hands again, His Sword and
Crown, and be made to return into the Order of their Predecessors, the
Parliament Men in former times, which to do as yet they have no intention.

The way to maintain their own Reputation, is to Defame the King; to keep
themselves up, is to keep Him down. In a troubled State all discontented
persons, (whereof the land is full) do naturally draw to the grieved party, even
as humors in the Body to a sore place; wherefore if all the people of this
Nation, (who have been wronged, peeled, and oppressed, by these men's means,
since power has been in their hands) were but well certified of the Kings
Candor, they would all with one accord, (in consideration of those
unexpressible abuses offered unto Him) unite themselves in His behalf, and join
with Him against them. Therefore it is great wisdom in these men, and their
Masters, to do as they do; and to conceal that which might hurt themselves if
known. It may easily be gathered, from what they have said and shown, that if
they had any thing else, which could have been wrested possibly against the
King, the world should have been made acquainted with that too: But because
what remains in their hands is intermixed with other matter of no pertinence
for publication at this time, therefore it is thought fit to conceal the same,
lest otherwise they should have played the fools, and done a prejudice unto
themselves.

And thus we have seen their Answer to the second objection, which they
conceive may be made against their Annotations; now we shall hear what they
say to the third, their words are these:

Touching the last objection: if thou art a perfect Malignant, and Libell.
do not stick to deny, that there is any thing in these Letters, unbeseeming
a Prince, who professes himself defender of the true Faith, a tender Father of
his Country, and has been so Sanctimoniously engaged with frequent special
vows of Affection, candor, sincerity, and constancy, to His particular
Protestant Subjects of England, and Scotland; then know that thou art sacarce
worthy of any reply, or satisfaction in this point.

SECT. XI.
1. Censuring superiors unlawful, why the Enemies must continue to slander the
King: How easy a thing it is to deprave the best writings. 2. Of the Kings
integrity and goodness, and of Englands happiness under Him. 3. The main
Particulars of Offense under His Government nominated; No just matter of blame
from them can now be Objected to His Majesty.

OUr Savior in the Gospel forbids us to Judge our equals, we Mat. 7. 1.
are confident: therefore he will never approve of us, if we take upon us to
sentence our superiors; yea the Highest of all, our Sovereign, who is Gods
immediate servant, and with whom none but He, whose Title is, The only Ruler
of Princes has to do: What have thou to do, to censure another man's servant?
(says the Romans 14. 4.
Apostle.) And Saint James assures us, if we be masterly in that Jam. 3. 1.
kind, we shall thereby increase only our own damnation. But these men we see,
teach us another lesson, for they tell us plainly in effect; that if we be so
nice, and scrupulous, as to give respect to Gods Word, in things of this
nature, if we will not censure our King, as themselves do, and condemn Him
too, (upon their bare Testimony) of doing unbeseemingly, we are perfect
Malignants (that is to say) as complete Devils, as any be in Hell: But truly
we had rather they should call us Malignants for obeying our Lord Christ, then
that Christ should call us Hypocrites, for our conforming to their example; as
he does some in the Gospel, who were of their Conditions; those that can see a
Mote at a distance, can worst of all see a Beam near at Hand; (as the Author
of truth and wisdom informs us.) And we observe in the Gospel, how they who
could find so much fault with the Son of God, for every thing he said or did,
could see nothing amiss in themselves; no not when it was evidently shown
them; it is possible there may be such men alive now, that can see a fault in
their Sovereign where it is not, and none in themselves, where are great
plenty: But for our parts, we affect not to be of their number, our work lies
most at home, and there we desire to be employed: our studies are, to know and
practice the Subjects Duty: the Prince his Actions, belong not to our
inquisition; we remember the Apostles precepts, Study to be quiet, 1 These. 4.
11.
and mind your own Business: (which if all men had done, we had had no
fighting.)

Nay did we see in the King, what they say, (which we believe is not to be
seen,) yet durst we not speak after their fashion, for we have not so learned
Christ. If we have a warrant in Scripture to Judge any, it is only those that
censure others, and not them neither, but by their fruits, and in matters of
our own Alloy, which concern our own Cognizance, and wherein it becomes us to
have skill and knowledge; and indeed upon this ground, we dare boldly say, what
ever they tell us of, to be unbeseeming the King in these his Letters; we are
certain in their Notes upon them, there is nothing to be found, but what is
most unbeseeming subjects, and men that profess themselves Protestant
Christians, (who have been so Sanctimoniously engaged, with frequent special
Vows of Allegiance, and Loyalty to their Sovereign, of affection, and duty to
his Person:) this we are confident that none (unless their own dear selves,)
will deny: For their Annotations themselves do full loudly utter the same, in
their own proper Language.

Nay, we are persuaded the very men of Westminster would not deny this, were it
not so much to the prejudice of their own Safety and Reputation to confess it;
both which (indeed) are supported for the present, among many people, by this
vilifying and slandering the King, insomuch that (doubtless) a kind of
desperate necessity lies upon them, to do, and to countenance such things, as
they have done. For (say their sinfully-resolved Consciences within themselves)

Woe would be unto us, if the people whom we have Cozened of their wealth and
peace, and got engaged with our selves in this black Rebellion, (under pretense
of Religion,) so contrary to Christ's Doctrine, should but at length, have a
right apprehension of the Kings good spirit and disposition, they would reckon
us the veriest Villains upon Gods earth: yea they would fall upon us, with one
accord, and cut our throats to expiate their own guilt, and to recover peace to
themselves and to the whole Nation, should they but know in truth, how we have
used their Sovervigne. Wherefore we must be wise in time and look to our
selves, Suprema tantum nos queant facere securos mala, our only safety
consists in acting the highest evils: We must slight Majesty, we must contemn
Gods Image, and bedaube his Anointed, with our bitterest inventions; we must
pervert his words, and put the foulest gloss, and construction, that Hell can
teach us to make, upon all that proceeds from him: and so we shall increase and
continue that blind and ungodly odium, which by our fine policy, we have
already wrought in men's hearts against him: Imperium iis artibus retinetur
quibus partum est, by lying and sland ring his footsteps, we be began our
matchless undertaking, and by the same means we must maintain it: the Common
sort having swallowed down our poison already, if they be kept strictly to
their diet, Mithridate-like, may live upon it, and adhere still unto us, until
we have quite destroyed him, whom we hate, with a perfect Hatred for those
unsatisfiable wrongs, which our selves have done him: yea, and the people will
think too, that they do God good service in their helping of us, specially if
we be but succesfull against him; and also by our following this course, we
shall uphold our own Dignity, and retain the repute of Holy, and good men;
all we do will be thought to be done out of zeal against sin, and out of pure
love to our Country; we shall be looked upon as impartial men, that will wink
at sin in no man; no not in the King himself: we will persecute and destroy
him, (though he be our Common Parent,) rather then suffer sin to abide, and
domineere in him: yea we shall be apprehended by the vulgar to be Gods special
favorites, elected, and appointed by him on purpose, to punish the King, and
to pull him from his Throne, that so Christ in us (the Saiuts) may be set up,
and rule in his stead; And what ever the King suffers at our hands, shall be
interpreted, (by the help of our Preachers, men fitted for our turns,) to be
Gods just judgment upon him, for those very crimes, which we lay to his
Charge, as Perfidiousnesse, and Breach of special Vows made to us, his
Protestant Subjects of England, and Scotland, for so we call our selves, and
under that guize we go covered. No doubt, (I say) but the Consciences of those
I mentioned, have spoken to this purpose within themselves, or else they would
confess together with us, that there is nothing in those Annotations upon the
Kings Letters, but what is most uncomly, and misbeseeming Christian subjects.

And truly it is no difficult matter for men resolved, and engaged by all they
care for, (bodily safety, and worldly reputation,) to deprave the most innocent
writing, and to pick out matter thence to defame the Author: Julian the
Apostate, (these men's elder Brother,) having a deep hatred against Christ, did
employ his maliciously-fine brain, against the Sacred Bible, and took great
pains to cull out thence, all shows of error, or places seemingly contrary to
each other, (which he would formalize to his own purpose;) all ambiguous
expressions, (which he would wrest and pervert to the most sinister
construction:) and all obscure places, (which by a further entangling he would
make more dark and cloudy:) and thus for a season, (with some men) he disgraced
Christ, and his Holy Religion. Now hence we gather, that if one man alone was
able (by the help of Satan,) to do thus against the Sacred writings of God
himself: It is no marvail if many of the same rank and spirit, laying their
heads together, shall with the like assistance do thus against the writings of
the King, who is but a man: for as we do not make our King infallible, like as
they do the Parliament, so we will not put His writings, into the same skale of
perfection, wherein they weigh their Votes: But this we will say, (and from
their Malice against him do firmly believe,) that he is a lesser sinner then
other men are: for the more like in degree their spightfulness against him, is
to that of the Pharisees against Christ, the more like unto Christ in innocence
and Holiness, is our Sovereign the object of it: That Hatred which is most
deep, and deadly (in such men as these are,) is always the most unjust.

And further too, this we affirm concerning our Sovereign, that of all the
Kings His Predecessors, (that swayed the English Scepter, as he has done,) we
believe him to be the least sinful; and we may conclude it, from the pride and
fatness of these his people, who Jessurun-like, have kicked up their Heels
against him; had he not been so good, so mild, so gentle toward them, they
had not been so malipert, so proud, so injurious toward him: had he been a
wanton Edward the fourth, and borrowed a pace the rich Citizens moneys, and
repayed them again, by lying with their wives; or had he been a boisterous
Henry the eighth, and chopped off his Subjects heads, in lust and anger;
doubtless he had found much better respect and fairness, both of Carriage, and
Language, from the men and women of this Nation: That free and famous City
cannot say that the King in all his time did ever imprison so much as one Lord
Major.
London had not shut up their Gates thus long against him; had he deserved less
love, they would have shown more fear and Reverence to him.

No man was ever so perfect, (Christ alone excepted,) but at some times have
been guilty of some obliquities; which should they all, that were committed
through his whole life, be mustered up, and presented in one view, and
continuation together, would make him appear most strangely sinful; whereas if
his life were displayed, in that tenor only as led, he would happily be an
object of admiration, for ^anctity and perfection. These men and their faction,
have set nothing of the King to the worlds view, since their unhappy meeting,
but his oversights and blemishes, which they have narrowly searched for,
throughout his whole life and reign; nay they have made use of the ^ins and
corruptions of those Monopolizing Lords and Gentlemen, (who are now right dear
unto themselves, and sit amongst them,) to make the King distastful to his
people, they have* bedawbed him, with others crimes, for want of somewhat more
proper; and what have they (to their utmost) done thereby, but purposed for an
object of scorn and abhorring Him, whom God by endowment with Principal and
choice graces, has marked out for a 'Pattern of Honor and imitation to all
Princes and men.

We dare challenge malice her self to open her mouth so wide as she can; and
for her better Advantage, let her borrow the tongues and pens of these men, to
vent her worst of all, and then let her speak out, and tell the world, what
personal Crimes she can Charge the King* withal: Nay must she not needs
confess, (if she say any thing,) that He has been an example of meekness,
Temperance, Charity, Patience, Mercy and Justice, to all his Nobles, and to all
his people? Had some of these great ones, now with them, been in these Virtues
conformable unto him, they had not happily been in that high esteem, wherein they
are, at this present amongst them.

Nay because the Libellers, in their height of impudency, do speak of the
King, as if he were not, (according to his profession,) a defender of the true
Faith, a tender Father of his Country, and sincerely affected to the good of
his Protestant Subjects in England and Scotland; we do appeal to all the
world, to Name an Age, since England was a Nation, wherein the Church and Faith
of Christ flourished in such high luster, and glory: wherein the Subjects of
this Kingdom, of all ranks and degrees, did more abound in wealth and riches;
and wherein those of the true Protestant Religion, (which is the Religion of
truth and peace, of Humility and obedience,) were more countenanced, and
favored, then they have been in his days: was there ever so much Splendor,
Bravery, The abundance has appeared by the many millions of treasure which
they have ^ent within these six years.
and Abundance in the City? So much Plate and Money in the Country; so many
Pleasant Houses, and Stately Buildings in all places, throughout the Land? Was
there ever so much Feasting and plenty of food among all sorts of people? so
many good Garments and clothes worn, by men and women of all degrees? so
large Portions and dowryes given with Children in marriage? were ever the
Protestant Subjects of the Kingdom more frequently taught, or better fed? did
they ever in any Nation under the Sun, enjoy more Peace and Happiness, then
they did all the time of His Reign, until this unhappy Parliament turned all
things up-side down, and so made us, of all Christians in the world, well-nigh
the most miserable and disconsolate? Certainly though the Parliament Ministers
Tho. Case in his Sermons of waiting on* God.
are pleased to cry out in their Rethorick, O the Affliction, the Misery, the
Wormwood and the Gall of those times! Yet Posterity in after Ages will
acknowledge, that the Nobility, Gentry, Clergy, Citizens, and Common People of
this Nation, in the General, did all arrive at the height of earthly happiness,
in King Charles his time, whilst he alone did sway the English Scepter.

It is true, there were Particular grievances from particular men, both in
Church and Commonwealth, (and can it be expected otherwise, while we live in
this world?) and some good men happily, did suffer some hard usage at the hands
of evil; but did the King ever stop His ears at any Petition? Did He ever
deny Justice to any that did require it? Or did He ever harden His Heart from
showing mercy, where ere it was needful? There was perhaps much whispering
abroad, and murmuring in Corners, but was there always a cause? Man's Nature is
apt some time to complain for nothing, even when there is more reason to be
thankful. I will name the main particulars of offense, and let the world
judge, what matter of blame, did truly arise from them unto the King.

1. The Bishops were cried out upon to be too Rigorous: but. 3.
has not the carriages of that faction, (which the Bishops did oppose) since
they have gotten Head, largely acquitted them of that imputation, in the
judgment of all wise men? surely they forefaw the mischief which we all now
feel, and did labor (as became them in their places) to prevent the same:
Perhaps every of them did not go the best way to work, nor did use such apt
Instruments as the case and time required, I justify no man in all
particulars; and perhaps too, some of us, (who are now imprisoned, banished,
and divested of all we have, by this Reforming Parliament) did in those days
suffer more molestation from some of their unworthy Officers, then many of
those did, who since that time have been most revengefull. Three factious
fellows had their ears clipped, by the sentence of the Lords in the Star Chamber,
and were set in the Pillory; and this was exclaimed upon for great cruelty in
the Bishops, (because they (having been abused by them) did not beg their
pardon;) but how truly their necks also deserved the H^lter, has well appeared
by the late temper of their spirits; and the little good use they have made of
that their too small, and gentle chastisement.

2. The Star Chamber and high Commission were two great Eye-sores: for many
great and heavy fines, were laid on men, (for their sins sake) in those Courts,
by the Kings Nobles, and Judges; (some of whom are now great men with His
greatest Enemies:) But how many of those fines did His Majesty in His
tenderness and goodness afterward remit, or cause to be mitigated? and since
the people would so have it, He has now given way, (even before the Act of
continuing the Parliament) that those Courts should be suppressed, and so be no
more offensive.

3. Many people of the Kingdom voluntarily departed hence to New England, and
this was pretended persecution, from some who differed in opinion from them
(whom they called their Antichristian Enemies:) but now it is plainly apparent,
(by that spirit which stayed behind in some of their fellows) that the true
cause of their departure was only pride. In themselves, Cesar-like they could
allow of no superior, either in Church or State, no Bishop, no King: (perhaps,
some of them might have tender Consciences through weakness or
misinformation; and some of the plainer sort might be honest men, and went for
company with the rest they knew not whither, in the simplicity of their
Spirits.) But it is well known, they had all the countenance of the King and
Council, to further them in the voyage and Plantation; they carried their
Wealth and Goods with them, and had supply of relief sent them, continually
from this Kingdom afterward, until this War caused the return of many of
them, to help forward the destruction of their native soil and Country. Indeed
some are of opinion, that they went to New England, only to learn and inure
themselves to shed man's blood, (we hear of few of the Heathens converted by
them, but of many masacred:) and by accustoming themselves to slaughter
Infidells, they have learned without scruple to murder Christians, and are
better proficients then the Spaniards themselves, in destroying those of their
own Nation and Religion. But (as was said) when they went first from hence,
they were suffered to carry their wealth with them; they were not used as they
and their faction use us, who now suffer at their hands, for our Conscience and
the Gospel sake: They take away all our goods, make us beggars, and then
afterward, if they do not murder us, or starve us in prison, they banish us
into strange and desolate places, with scarce clothes on our backs to seek our
fortunes.

4. Great Complaints also there was of monopolies; people paid an halfpenny
more for a thousand of Pins, then they were wont to do; and almost half a
farding more, for a pound of Soap and Starch then in former times, when money
was not so plentiful and such like heavy grievances did mightily oppress
them; and made them weary of the Kings Government, because He did permit of
such things. And yet the Excize upon bread and beer, and flesh and clothes,
and such like things as are sold in the market for man's use, or spent in
families, was not then set up: the Committeemen and S^questrators were not yet
known.
Monopolizers durst not be so detrimental to the poor Subjects of this Kingdom,
while the King had the sole power in His Hands: But since they got to be
Members and Favorites of the Parliament, they with their fellows, have (
Epimetheus-like) opened this Pandor^'s Box, and let loose amongst us all those
Dutch miseries; and (they say) the people are content to have it so; though
perhaps when they have been pilled or milked a few years longger, by these
new-State men, it will be confessed that the Old Government, (viz. that of the
King) was far the better and the more easy.

5. But the greatest complaint of all, was Ship Money, Ship-mony, O that was a
grievous burden indeed, not to be stood under, (for a twentieth Part, a fifth
Part, weekly Contributions, billetting of Soldiers, seizing on Rents,
plundring of houses, cutting of throats, ravishing of women, deflowring of
Virgins, and such like matters were not yet in fashion, nor yet felt or known
by the people of the Kingdom; and therefore Ship-mony that was the great
grievance.) But was not Ship-mony disputed and judged Legal before His Majesty
did require it? And when he had received it, did He spend it in Luxury upon
Himself, or unprofitably to the damage of His Subjects? Was it not employed for
the dignity and preservation of the Nation? Were not the Ships (built
therewith) the strength of the Kingdom? Were we not by means of them, become
formidable to all about us? Surely from hence it was, that our Merchants sailed
with more freedom at Sea; and their Factors did negociate with more success and
regard abroad; hence it was that the inhabitants by the Sea Coasts, slept more
securely in their beds, the worshipers of Mahomet durst not revell so near
them, nor venture to steal their Children from them, 26. Children taken at once
by the Turks from off the Coasts of Cornwall, July Anno 1645.
as alas, of late days they have done: In a word, by the means of those
ships, (had they still continued under the Kings Command) all our poor
Christian Brethren had been pulled ere this, out of Bondage and Slavery from
Turkish Dens, (through Gods assistance) as diverse of them before had been:
yea, and (as was noted before) all the people of this Kingdom had been
interested in that so Pious and Christian a work, by such their Contributions
of Ship Money: yet this was it they called their great grievance.

And thus I have shown in brief, the main things, for which the King was
clamoured against at large: Now let all the world speak, whether the Church and
State were unhappy under his Government, whether in the whole course of his
Reign, he has not approved himself a Defender of the true Faith, a tender
Father of his Country, and sincerely affected to his Protestant Subjects: And
whether these men be not highly ungrateful both to God and him, for their
suggesting the Contrary.

But (say they) in these Letters are things unbeseeming a Prince who professes
himself to be such a Defender, such a Father, and so affected, and a perfect
Malignant they pronounce him to be, that denies this or cannot see it.

SECT. XII.
1. The Adversaries industry to find somewhat unbeseeming the King in his
Letters. 2. Certain Christian Considerations propounded to the Readers
evidencing them to be free from any such matter. 3. Of the Adversaries
pertinacy in their Rebellious way; their endeavors that their Kings promises
might neither be believed nor performed.

TO which we Answer and say, That were the King but an. 1*
ordinary man, and did we observe such things in his Letters as they pretend;
yet remembering the benefits enjoyed by him, the personal virtues, shining in
him, throughout the time of his prosperity, we should think it disagreeing both
from Christianity and Humanity to publish such our observations against him, in
his adversity.

But considering him withal to be^our King, our Sovereign, we are confident,
(if we did see any thing unbeseeming) that we are not bound to say we saw it:
or to tell others of it; nor do we indeed hold it lawful, but rather to hide
it, or to make the best of it. Apelles was not bound openly to paint Alexanders
skar, it was allowable for him, to lay his finger on it: nor was that other
Painter obliged plainly to paint Alphonsus wry necked, it was lawful for him
to make it so, as if he were looking up to Heaven; for Alexander, and Alphonsus
were both Kings, and so is Charles, and by Gods grace shall still continue so
to be, in despite of all opposers.

But in our view of these his Letters, we find that which we conceived might
have made their hopes desperate of doing his Majesty hurt by their publication
of them: and surely (we think) had not their confidence been great in that
strong infection, which they suppose their own Notes upon them, do carry with
them; the world had never seen them: for whereas heretofore, their endeavors
were, to darken, and disparage the intellectual virtues of their Sovereign,
(and peradventure his Majesty's easiness at first, in believing them to be
Honest men, upon their Religious Pretenses and Protestations, gave too great a
furtherance to that design, David upon like grounds was so deceived in
Achitophel.) But now these his Letters have quite dampt that business, for they
discover in him such Strength of judgment, such Abilities of mind, and
Dexterity of parts, that we are confident in this their divulging of them, an
everlasting check is given to that malignant Accusation. And now his Moral
Virtues only are the Objects of their spleen, which by their tongues and
pens, they hope to blemish and defile, and from these his Letters, they hope
somewhat may be made use of to their assistance. But what that Somewhat is,
will be seen hereafter: In the mean time, I shall be bold to propose a word of
advice to the Readers of these Letters, to be observed by them in their
perusal of them: For as my Duty does constrain me to defend my Sovereign, so
my Conscience and Charity does persuade me to advise my Brethren, for their
good: though I know the Enemies think to scare me and all men else, with the
name of Malignants for performing either: these men in their impudent Notes
have one special passage, (amongst others,) to this purpose, ( Page 46.) Their
words are these,

The King will declare nothing in favor of his Parliament, so long Libell.
as he can find a party to maintain him in his opposition, nor perform any
thing, which he has declared, so long as he can find a sufficient party to
excuse him for it.

We guess to what purpose this is spoken, viz. To intimate that all such, who
(out of conscience or duty) shall endeavor to vindicate the King from their
unjust Caluminations, and to preserve people from their snares, shall be
accounted Maintainers of opposition, and excusers of sin; and as such persons
they intend either secretly, or publicly to murder and massacre them: But we
hope, (through Gods good grace) that neither their tongues nor their swords,
shall ever terrify us from discharging our Consciences: and we are confident
that our God, whom we serve, who is the God of Peace and Truth, will witness for
us, that we neither delight in maintaining strife, nor yet in excusing sin. And
for this advise which shall be propounded, let the Readers examine it, by the
Gospel, and if it be not agreeable unto that, let no man follow it, or regard
it: It is this,

If they meet in these Letters with any thing, which (in their. 2.
apprehensions) seems to speak a failing on his Majesty's part, in performing
what he had formerly promised, (which indeed is one main thing that these
King-accusers labor to fasten upon the Readers faith) before they imitate
these his Enemies, and pass a sentence peremptory, and condemnatory against
their Sovereign, let them but consider of these three particulars.

1. Whether the King was Able to keep his word, in those things wherein he is
apprehended to have failed? whether the cause of that failing, was not rather
Lack of power, then want of will? and whether his dis^oyal Subjects, (who are
most apt to accuse him) were not they that robbed him of his power, and on set
purpose, do still detain it from him? Our observation of them has been this,
They wanting matter to make their King odious to the world, (as they desire he
should be) did labor all they could to disable him, from doing as he had said
and purposed; that so they might (upon his failing) have some pretense, to tell
the people, he was perfidious, and a Promise-breaker.

2. Whether the Kings promises when first made, were not intended performable
only upon the Condition of their Faith and Obedience, who now tax him; and
whether they have performed their duties in those particulars: we conceive that
as Gods promises, so the Kings, are made upon such supposals. If ye be willing
Isa. 1. 19, 20.
and obedient, (says God) ye shall eat the good of the Land; but if ye refuse
and rebel, ye shall be devoured by the sword: and again, The Lord will be with
you, while you be with him, but if ye forsake him, and walk contrary unto him,
He will forsake you, and 2 Cor. 15. 2.
walk contrary unto you. If the Kings promises should be more absolute then
Gods, they might be sinful; and so a sin, to keep them, though he had power:
beside, faith and obedience does not only make people capable of the thing
promised, but does also enable the party promising to make his intended
goodness manifest. It is said that Christ could do no mighty works, (in a
certain Mat. 13. 58.
Mark 6. 5.
place) because of the peoples unbelief. Did men's unbelief weaken Christ's
hands, and can it strengthen those of the King? I conceive no man can justly
tax the King of any breaches in this kind, unless they can show, that his
promises were absolute, and notwithstanding their continuation in Rebellion and
opposition against him; or at least can name some one particular of them, (for
which they took his word and waited on him, in the way of obedience) which he
did not perform to the uttermost of his power.

3. Whether those men (who take such pains to have the King, accounted it in
the world a Promise-breaker) be themselves free from the same crime; whether
they have been precise, and punctual, in keeping all their Oaths, Promises, and
Protestations made unto the King: If not, it may be suspected that their
Policy, is greater then their Honesty; and that they hope to cloud their own
fault, by means of this dust which they raise against the King; as conceiving
that men will not be so uncivil, as to think them guilty of that which with so
much mouth, and fieriness of Spirit, they censure in the King. And yet (verily)
many are of opinion, that it cannot be shown, from any story, that there was
ever a like pack of perfidious wretches, under the cope of Heaven, professing
the Christian Protestant Religion, that have broken more Oaths of Allegiance,
Bonds of obedience, and Protestations of Loyalty then these have done.

Again, I do further advise the Readers, that if (from any 2.
passages in these Letters) they shall conceive, they see in the King some
failing, concerning his trust, and dependence on God; that he does not so
totally cast himself upon his strength and providence, as in their thoughts, it
be seems the Anointed of the Lord; and as at the beginning of his troubles he
resolved to do, but seems to look out for other helps, as of Forreiners, and
people of another Religion, which (in their apprehensions) is not so proper for
him (a Protestant Prince) to make use of: Yet before they pass a rigorous
censure against him, (after the manner of these men) Let them also consider of
these three particulars.

1. That the King is in the state of Mortality, and so has frailties in him as
well as others: Nor was it ever known, that Faith was at all times alike strong,
and lively in the best believers; sometime they have relied wholly upon God: but
sometimes again they have been full of doubtings, specially when afflictions have
bin hard upon them, and God seemed to stand afar off. David at some time
thought that God had quite cast him off, and Ps. 13. 1, 2. etc.
forgotten him; though sometime again, he could say, that God was his salvation;
and when Peter that great Apostle felt himself sinking, Mat. 14. 30.
his Faith failed him: Now considering how tedious, bitter, and heavy the Kings
afflictions have bin, we (who are more frail) should rather magnify and admire
the strength of Gods grace in him; that has supported him so far, and so long,
then condemn him for his weakness; the best of us, (perhaps) had despaired, and
bin distracted or dead long ere this, under the like continuance of a far less
burden.

2. That necessity is a Tyrant, and forces men beyond their wills, and purposed
inclinations, and therefore Seneca well, Magnum imbecillitatis nostrae
patrocinium necessitas, quae omnem legem frangit, it breaks all laws, and
resolutions, and thrusts a man with a kind of Authority into bypath: it did
David, when (notwithstanding Gods particular promise to settle him in the
Throne of the Kingdom, and after a large and frequent experience of Gods
delivering him from Saul's rage) he said, I shall one day 1 Samuel 21. 7.
perish by the hand of Saul; and thereupon used (that which is now counted an
indirect mean) for his preservation, the help of Forreiners, and men of another
Religion: He sought protection from Achish king of Gath; and indeed behaved
himself in his court (being there also put to his shifts) somewhat unseemly. And
Genesis 12. 12.
so Abraham notwithstanding God had promised him his special guard, whereupon he
had the more reason to be confident, and to Genesis 20. 2*
depend upon him, yet being in a strait, to save his life, used an undirect
mean two several times, and hazarded the loss of his Wives Honor.

Our King has had no such personal and special promises of Gods preservation,
as those holy men had, therefore if he had bin so weak in faith, (as some will
happily apprehend him) yet had he shown himself therein, but the son of David,
the son of Abraham. It would doubtless better become the best of us, to pray
with the Psalm. 125. 8.
Psalmist, Let not the rod of the wicked, lie always upon the back of the
Righteous, lest the righteous put forth his hand unto wickedness; then to
condemn or censure a righteous Prince, for his putting forth his hand for
foreign help, in a cause of this nature, when he is in danger to be deprived
both of life and Kingdom: but more of this hereafter.

3. Let it be remembered how highly guilty of hiring, and impolying foreign aid,
these his Accusers with their faction are, who oppose his Majesty:
notwithstanding that great strength of ships, arms, wealth and men, which are
at home under their Command, they have the aid of all men, whomsoever they can
get or hire, to help them in spoiling the King, they called in the Scottish
Nation to this purpose, and it is well known by diverse where In Cornwall when
Essex his Army was there defeated by his Majesty.
near thirty of their men being at once taken together Prisoners, were found
upon examination to be of six several Nations, and all Papists: wherefore then,
may not the King fight with his Enemies at their own weapons, and oppose
strangers to strangers, Papists to Papists? Is it so great a sin in him to use
such men, and are they no whit to be blamed for the same thing? may not he with
as much dependence upon God, do in his necessity, what they do in the midst of
plenty? may they employ foreign aid to thrust him out of his inheritance, and
may not he with as good leave make use of the like, to keep the possession of
what God has given him? surely upon this consideration, if the King for his
part, be worthy of censure, they also deserve a portion of the same
Condemnation: no honest man but is of this judgment.

This is that advice which I propound to the indifferent Readers; and which I
conceive to be most agreeable to Christ's Gospel: if they now please to follow
it, they may (through Gods blessing) not only be kept out of a sinful path, but
also have better satisfaction, in the matter discoursed upon, then they are
likely to receive from these Annotators, whom I write against; for these
High-boys say plainly, that all such who are not of their opinion, are perfect
Malignants, and not worthy of any reply or satisfaction, at all in this point,
viz. at their hands. And they further proceed, saying,

Our Cause is still the same, as it was when the King first took Arms, Libell.
and as it was when the King made most of these Oaths and Professions. Our
three Propositions concerning the Abolition of Episcopacy, the Settling the
Militia of the three Kingdoms in good hands, by the advice of Parliament, the
Vindication of the Irish Rebels being all our main demands at the Treaty in
February last, and no other then the Propositions sent in June 1642. before any
stroke struck will bear us witness, that we rather have straightened, then enlarged
our Complaints. But were our case altered, as it is not, or were we worse
Rebels then formerly, etc.

These words are added to evidence their former, And the Argument in them
stands thus,

If our Cause be still the same as at the Beginning, and our selves as bad
Rebels as we were at first, then the King is such a one as we do repute him, or
would have him believed to be, and those that think better of him are perfect
Malignants, and as unworthy of future satisfaction, as we judge them; But our
Cause is still the same, as it was at the first, and we are as bad Rebels as at
the beginning, Ergo.

The Minor in this syllogism we shall easily grant: But did we not understand
how unworthy we are in their account of any reply, we should be bold to deny
the Major: For we conceive not, how either the unalterableness of their Cause,
or their persistency in maintaining it, can prove the King (who opposes both
it and them) to be as they report him. Indeed if their reports of him were of a
clean contrary nature to what they are, the Argument might well stand, for the
longer he perseveres to resist Rebellion, and rebellious men, the more fully
does he approve himself according to his Title and Profession, The Defender of
the true Faith, and a tender Father of his Country; for the continuance of
their cause, and of them in their way, speaks a continuance, if not an increase
of their strength, and this must needs infer a decrease of the Kings Power,
because what they have is taken from him: and the Kings weakness affords an
opportunity of showing his own true worth. He being debarred of outward
assistance and supportments, is separated from that, which makes disfigured
Monsters look handsomely. Patience is a more substantial virtue then temperance,
and he that endures famishing without alteration, has more virtue, then he
that comes from a feast without a surfeit.

But I will not spend words to them that list not to reply, wherefore desiring
all men to observe the simpleness and insufficiency of their Argument, for the
proof of what they would have it; I shall show the reason why their Cause is
still the same as at the beginning, when the King first took up Arms in his own
defense. It is (in a word) because themselves are still the same. Trait^rs,
Heady, High-minded, lovers of themselves, (of their own lusts and wills) more
then of God, their King and Country; nor indeed, can men ever love, where they
have cause to fear: they must still mistrust, without all hope of reconciling
whom they have injured beyond all remedy of amends; Injuriam qui tulit
oblivisci potest, qui fecit nunquam; though the King in his goodness may
forgive, yet they in their guiltiness cannot believe: and therefore they are
still the same men, and their Cause is still the same.

Besides, they have entang^ed themselves in such a labyrinth of mischiefs, as
(in their own apprehensions) they have no place left of acknowledging their
error, without a total ruin, both of their Estates and Persons, therefore also
having learned the wisdom of Spes quisque sibi, and (...) they are still the
same men, and their cause is still the same.

And moreover too, should they deny themselves in the least particular, or
retract an hairs breadth from their first position, what a Jealousy might it
breed in peoples heads of their infallibility? how easily might those whom they
have led all this while on the blind side, suspect them also erroneous in other
matters? and so might they come to be despised in those minds, wherein hitherto
they have been enshrined with all devotions. Peoples love is commonly according
to their hope, it grows and fades with it; therefore should their hopes in these
new State-men begin to fail, their love toward them might fail too; yea, and
perhaps be turned into hatred of them; and so people returning to their former
Loyalty, might force those grand Imposters (that have seduced them) to yield up
the Militia to its right owner, and betake themselves to the due order of their
predecessors in former Parliaments, which to do, as yet they have no
intention, and therefore are still the same men, and their Cause is still the
same, as at the first, when they forced their Sovereign in his own defense, to
make use of those few Arms his friends brought him, even to maintain that
breath, which God had given him.

At which time to dissuade (if possible) from this un natural War, which he saw
they did intend, (and foresaw, would be destructive to his poor Subjects) the
King endeavored to heal their ulcered minds with all Princely favors, and true
shows of trust; to which purpose, he made many of those promises, which they
reckon up (in a reproachful way, as not performed by him) at the end of their
notes; and wanting other means to manifest further the reality of his heart, in
those his professions, (they having robbed him of all his power) he did for
their very sakes, (that they might have the more assured confidence) confirm
his promises with an Oath; but they being otherwise resolved (as now appears)
would themselves believe neither; nor would they (so much as in them lay)
suffer any others to credit any thing which the King did say or swear. How many
loyally disposed Ministers did they imprison, and take their livings from, only
for endeavoring to make their Sovereigns honest mind known unto his Subjects,
by publishing his Declarations (upon his Command) to that purpose? And how many
times also did themselves set forth perverse notes, and contradictory glosses,
upon the Kings Books, that so the people might learn from them, to misconstrue
his sincere and good intentions. Indeed because they were but new State-men,
many of us thought it rather an ignorance in them of wars miseries, then any
resolved purpose of acting Nero, in destroying their own Mother Church and
Nation, which caused them at first to take up Arms; for though an easy
Capacity might foresee that they could do nothing by such an enterprise, but
increase their own sins, and the sins of the Kingdom; yet we were willing to
lend what charity we could to the worst handed undertaking; but their
persistency in their savage course makes us now fear, that even Ahab-like they
struck at first of all, a Covenant with Hell it self, and sold themselves to
work wickedness. But (alas, alas!) besides their loss of Christ and God, what
will they purchase hereby to themselves? not the Titles of Fathers of their
Country, as they might have done, had they behaved themselves accordingly, and
believed their Sovereign: But Masters of a slaughtery will they be called,
because they delight so much in the slaughtery of mankind: Posterity will judge
them to have bin Satan's darlings in their generation: the fore-men of his shop,
whom he employed to act his most glorious Stratagems, his generosa scelera, his
choicest villainies; his divina mysteria iniquitatis, his divine mysteries of
iniquity: Indeed they have ( Manasseh-like) filled 2 King. 21. 16.
the Nation with innocent blood, and made the whole Land a 2 Cor. 23. 12.
very Acheldama or field thereof: And oh that it would please the Judge of all
the world to deal with them, as he did with that Manasseh, bring them into
Bonds and Chains, that so if possible they might be humbled, as he was, before
they go hence and be no more; but I return to them.

It is yielded (as they see) that 'twas the truth they spoke, when they said,
their Cause was still the same, as when the King first took Arms, and as when he
made most of his Oaths and professions. And so in like sort is our God the same
still, as when the King was first at Nottingham, and there set up his Standerd:
But they tell us further, to their former purpose, that their demands at the
Treaty in February, were no other then those sent in June, 1642. before any
stroke struck. Which Argument they repeat over the second time, in the 53. Page
of their notes, to the same end also; our demands (say they) at Uxbridge in
February 1644. were the very same as they were in June 1642. (indeed they are
as bold, as high, as unreasonable to the full: Ergo, (say they,) The King has
no reason to look upon us now, any otherwise then as he did then. All this is
very true; who denies it? these men (sure) love to dispute with their own
shadows: The King had cause to look upon them then, as he does now; though now
he has cause to express himself further against them, then he did then: It is
the course which God himself takes when people Rebel against him: He
endeauours at first to reduce them by promises, and allurements unto obedience;
but if they slight, and contemn these, and oppose him the more for his lenity
and goodness, he then uses to express himself with more wrath and severity
against them, and has reason for it, we do not apprehend that the King can
transgress, (whatever these wise men say,) so long as he walks in the way of
God; though he did not call them by their proper name at first, yet now he may.

But for this their Argument, which they seem (by their often use of it) to be
so proud of; had they any true touch or taste of Christianity in them, they
would blush to use it. The Propositions are the same now as they were two or
three years ago; scil^ful as high, full as unreasonable; and is this to their
commendation? Is it to their praise, that the shedding of so much Christian
blood, has wrought no Remorse at all in them? no obedience at all to Gods
word, (which commands, if possible, to live peaceably with all men?) no
submission to their King, who has so often wooed them with the tenders of
mercy, and pardon to be quiet? No Humanity, no Piety to their poor native
Country, that lies a bleeding to destruction? is this a matter to be gloryed
in now, that they are still as stiff as ever? as far from practicing the first
lesson in Christ's School, (the point of self-denial,) as if they had never
heard one word of Christianity? surely this their glory will one day be their
shame; and God grant it may so be, before the great day, that then (if
possible) they may find mercy.

Truly this their impenitency, and hardness of heart, may afford us great
matter of Admiration; that neither all the blood that is shed, nor Gods
protection of the Kings person among so many treasons and dangers; from their
malice, and against such multitudes of men, who both by secret treacheryes,
open Hostilityes, foul mouths, black pens, and bloody hands, have endeavored
his ruin: Nor yet those remarkable judgments, upon Brook, Hampden, and
Hotham, three of the first instruments of motion in this Rebellion; together
with many other Notable Accidents of Gods providence upon many other of their
Associates: And now of late they have been paid home in their own coin so many
ways (even as themselves have dealt with their Sovereign,) that they would
confess with that Heathen King, Jud. 1. 7. (had* they but as much sense of the
Deity as He) and say, As we have done, so God has rewarded us.
I say it may well be matter of amazement to us, that none of these things have
been able to work any touch of Conscience, or alteration unto good in them;
pray God (therefore) they be not given up to a Reprobate sense, and that the
seal of damnation be not set upon them.

Indeed (they say) they have rather straightened then enlarged their Complaint,
(of which this their libellous, and defamatory book is a sufficient witness)
their propositions also they have straightened from 19, to 3. but it is
proportione Arithmetica non Geometrica, for these three contain in them fully
as much as those 19, and more if possible. Well, but what be these 3.
Propositions which they now stick so close unto? themselves say, they are these
in their order.

The first concerns the Abolition of Episcopacy, (or pulling down of the
Church.)

The second concerns the settling the Militia of the Kingdom in good hands by
the advice of the Parliament, (or the pulling down of the Kingdom, or Kingly
state.)

The third concerns the Vindication of the Irish Rebels, (or the full
completion of a perfect Babell.) Indeed the method is rightly suited, for the
restoration of a Chaos. First down with a well governed Church, then with a
well- ordered State, and then a Butcherly confusion follows presently, not only
in one, but in all places. But I shall take the boldness to make a few queres
about the particulars.

SECT. XIII.
1. Of their Propositions at Uxbridge: Four Pretenses for their Abolition of
Episcopacy. 2. Four true Reasons of that their sinful request.

1. WHy the Abolition of Episcopacy? Was not their pretense and promise at
first to make the Church Glorious, and according to the Pattern of Primitive
times? and was not the Church then Governed by Bishops? Was not the Doctrine
and Discipline of this particular Church, settled here in King Edwards days by
Bishops, (who sealed the same afterward with their blood?) and has ever any
particular National Church so flourished, as this has here done under that
Government? did the first establishers of any other Ecclesiastical Discipline,
ever give so real and substanciall a Testimony of confirmation as these did,
to what they had in this kind done? Or was their work ever approved with a like
measure of Gods blessing? Has ever any one Church since the Ascension of our
Savior, brought forth in four-score years space, so many learned men,
defenders of verity, and oppugners of Antichristianity? So many able Preachers
and expounders of holy Writ? so many knowing Christians, and well gifted people
of all sorts, as the Church of England has done, under the Government of
Episcopacy? And must it now be abolished in all haste? For what causes I pray?
Pretenses they have, which we will first consider on; and their true reasons
afterward.

1. They say, because it is Impious, Unlawful and Antichristian: Were then those
Martyr Bishops, Cranmer, Ridly, Hooper, Latimer, Farrer, all Antichristian?
Were Jewel, Downam, Andrews, Abbot, King, and many others of that Order, (that
writ against Antichrist) all themselves Antichristian? Must Gods Wisdom now
receive a check for suffering his Church to flourish thus long under a
Government Antichristian? Will this new Generation undertake to teach the
Almighty also, to rule his Flock and Family, (better then He has hitherto
done) by their Abolition of Episcopacy? Indeed some of them have taught, that
Hierarchy it self was Antichrist, though Scripture speaking of Antichrist,
calls him a man of sin; not a sinful Order, (if Hierarchy were any such thing)
but no marvail that those who think they can teach God himself, do take upon
them to contradict the Scripture.

O but (say they) the Romish Religion is Antichristian, and the Government of
that Church is by Episcopacy: And yet this Government is more Ancient then that
Religion (as now professed) and therefore that Religion cannot make it
Antichristian: Nor is that Church Antichristian because of that Government; but
rather because the precepts of men there, (like our Ordinances of Parliament
here) are preferred before the Word of God. The Bishops there are called
Antichristian, because (like our men of Westminster) they are such abrogators
of, and such dispensers with Gods Laws, and such tyrannous exactors and
importuners of their own: Because (like them) they are (or have been at least
some of them) so treacherous in their pretenses, so barbarous in their
executions, so contrary in their doings, to the meek and mild Doctrine of
Christ's Gospel, breathing forth cruelty, fire and sword against those that are
not of their own opinion, though no otherwise offending them, then in their
desiring to amend them: Because they are in their conditions, so like unto
those that would from amongst us abolish Episcopacy, therefore are the Bishops
in the Romish Church called Antichristian, and for no other reason.

Their Second Argument or pretense why Episcopacy must be 2.
Abolished, is, because (say they) all other Reformed Churches have abolished
Bishops, and till we have abolished them too, Reformation will not be perfect
in this Nation. This Reason is false; Or were it true, yet the conclusion from
it, is most untrue: The Churches in Denmark, Swevia, and Poland do retain
Episcopacy, after the manner of the Greek and Russian Churches, and those of
Africa, and the Eastern Countries. And for those particular Churches that have
abolished that Government, it is first to be enquired, (before there be a
conformity to their practice) whether therein they have done well, or no, and
whether since that time, they have thrived better without it, then we have done
that have enjoyed it. If it be remembered, what is recorded to be said, at the
meeting at Dort to our English Divines, by some of them, that were sent thither
from those other reformed Churches, concerning their own unhappiness, in
respect of the want of such an Episcopal Government as ours was, and concerning
our Churches felicity in its enjoyment thereof; perhaps it would be concluded,
that this similitude aimed at with other Churches, is only in misery and
imperfections, and that those other so admired Churches come short of ours, in
perfection of Reformation, and not ours of them; and of this opinion
(doubtless) were those wise and learned Divines of the Religion (as they are
called) in France, who petitioned the Cardinal Richlieu (as I have heard
credibly reported) that they might be permitted to have Bishops over their
Congregations; But he answered, No, for then you would have at least the face
of a Church among you.

That learned Gentleman Sir Edwin Sands, tells us in his Europae Speculum, that
the Papists are more awed with the Reformation of Religion in England, then
with that in any other Country, and have bin (says he) more busy in their
attempts against our Church, as conceiving it to be most perfect of any other,
in regard of that peaceable and orderly alteration introduced therein, which
was not (says he) in a tumultuous headlong way, as was that in other Churches,
but by the general consent of the Prince and Realm, representatively assembled
in solemn Parliament, as also in regard of the continuation of the Government
by Bishops, and vocation of Ministers, which the inconsiderate weakness of
other Churches did not retain, or rather the violent wickedness of profane men,
(coveting the Churches possessions) would not suffer. Thus he.

But now we have (amongst our selves) some above-board, who (it seems) are
resolved, though with the destruction of Church and Kingdom, to free the
Papists from their Ancient dread; they will have all things here, as they are
and have been in other Churches: that former orderly Reformation, which did so
awe the Adversary, shall be over-done, and made perfect by an heady tumultuous
innovation; our Government by Bishops shall be quite abolished even root and
branch; and all the Churches Revenues shall be employed to profane uses; that
so we may be fully conformable to other Reformed Churches, this is the issue of
their second Argument.

Their 3. Pretense to the same purpose is this, Bishops must be 3.
abolished, because they have been (specially of late) such enemies unto, and
Persecutors of Gods People, viz. those of their Faction. For (as if they were
all Kings of China) they ingrosse to themselves the title of Filios Coeli, Gods
Children, Heirs of Heaven, with exclusion of all, that be not of their
opinions, I pray God they may prove so at last: but as yet (sure we are) their
actions proclaim them to be Filios inferni rather.

The Bishops, in regard of their office and place in the Church, were bound in
Conscience, as they would answer it to God and the King, to suppress Schism,
to keep down Faction and Rebellion, and to punish those that were Seditious;
and they apprehending (from some strange positions vented in Pulpits, and from
the refractorinesse which they found in some spirits, unto the Government
established) that some great mischief was in hatching, did endeavor to hinder
the sowing of that seed, which has brought forth these bitter fruits, which
now (alas!) this whole Nation feeds upon, and weeps under. Now because they
would not sleep, and suffer those envious ones to scatter their tares into
peoples Hearts, so quietly as some desired, therefore they open the mouth
against them, as against the Enemies and Persecutors of Gods People. Perhaps
(as was said before) every particular of the Bishops might not be so wary and
considerate, in the management of what they did, as had they known the event of
things they would have been: and perhaps too, they employed some persons of too
course or base an Alloy, to act in the business, who pulled up Wheat and Tares
together, or peradventure sometime, and in some places the Wheat alone, and not
the Tares at all; and so the Bishops good intendments became scandalous, by the
illness of their instruments: But I believe now, (experience has taught it to
all sober men) that it will be confessed, the Bishops were not such great
persecutors of Gods People, or Hunters of Christ's Flock as was so loudly
voyced, but rather good Shepherds that endeavored to keep under those
ravenous wolves, who now so much destroy it. Ask but the Country Farmer, and
even he will now tell you, that since the Abolition of Episcopacy, has been in
hand, Christ's Sheep and his, have had but unsafe and unquiet pasturage, in
compare with that, which they enjoyed formerly; and thus have we seen the
strength of their 3. Pretense or Argument.

A 4. follows and it is this, Episcopacy must be abolished, because 4.
it hinders the punishment of sin, in that brotherly way, which suits with
Christ's rule in the Gospel, which says, if thy brother Mat. 18.
offend, first, tell him of it in private between him and thee, if he do not
reform, then carry two or three with thee, and admonish him the second time; if
he will not yet hear, then Dic Ecclesiae, tell it to the Church, and make a
public manifestation of his wickedness. But by the abolition of Episcopacy,
this discipline of Christ shall be set up; men's reputation may be saved, and
their moneys too, (which is needlessly spent in Bishops Courts) and people may
be kept in good awe without charges.

So they say: And the War they have raised to punish Delinquents, does
sufficiently discover their brotherly way: but not to insist upon that; let us
consider how well they have begun to put their discipline in execution with
particulars. First, in the publication of their so much studied, and unmannerly
Remonstrance against the King, they begun their discipline at the wrong end,
even at Dic Ecclesiae, or at Dic Mundo rather, before they so much as touched
upon a first or second Admonition: Yea, and though His Majesty beforehand, by
his suppressing offensive Courts, and establishing a ^rienniall Parliament, had
largely testified His resolution of rectifying what was amiss, had the things
been true which they Charged upon him.

And 2. how Ecclesiastically have they dealt with him now also, in their
divulging these his Letters, whereby they have done their worst to make him
accounted an Heathen and a Publican, without ever so much as the least hint or
brotherly Admonition before hand. But perhaps they will say the King is a singular
person, and considering the state of opposition, wherein at this present he
stands with them, (or they with him;) he is not worthy or capable of any such
respect at their hands. Let us consider therefore, how fairly they have
proceeded with others, and how according unto Discipline.

And to this purpose let us but remember one particular which was before
mentioned, viz. how at their first meeting, when they took from the Bishops
power of punishing sin; they made a kind of a public, O yes, to the whole
Kingdom, and put the same in print, that none might plead ignorance of it, and
sent it into all parts and corners of the Land; whereby they invited all the
Raskality of the Nation, to bring up to Westminster all the complaints they
would or could against the Ministers of Jesus; which were there received with
all alacrity and cheerfulness, though never so false or so malicious: and in
their open Committees, the man in the Chair would give the Title of Sir, and
Master at every word to the basest beggerliest villain, that had but the
forehead to come before them, and act the Devils part against his Minister:
and sometimes also on the other side, he would rattle up and be- Sirrah the
Messenger of the Lord, before the rabble; and all this before any first or
second Admonition; yea perhaps, before they knew upon proof whether he were
guilty of any fault or no; only they saw somewhat written against him in a
paper.

And then further yet, lest the negligent world, should chance to forget in
after-Ages, this remarkable Act of Zeal and Discipline in them, concerning the
Reformation of the Clergy: One John White, (then a choice Member of the Lower
House, though now gone to his proper place) did make a Book, and Authorized it
his own self, wherein the said presentiments (though never proved) were
transmitted to posterity, and this was his Dic Ecclesiae. And to the end, that
foreign Nations also, as well as the Children yet unborne, might the more
fully note, and know, the Christianity of these Abolishers of Episcopacy, they
Authorized in like manner one William Prin, (a dear friend we may be sure of
the Bishops) to write an History in two volumes, (beside his Commentary upon
the Ar^^-Bishops Note-Booke) wherein all the obliquities of the Bishops that
were whispered, or could possibly be invented, were at large recorded, which
was a Dic Ecclesiae to the purpose.

If Prin had made good use of that great Reading, which he would the world
should think him guilty of, he might have remembered that the Ancient
Counsels, when they deprived any Bishop, never recorded the off^^ce, but
buried it in perpetual silence. Or had reason bore any sway in him, though
things ^lameworthy had been in the Bishops, yet to ascend from their persons,
unto their calling, and to draw that into question, he would have judged it
high Injustice; but for those his Books, I leave him to the torture of his own
Conscience: when he writ them, he was (surely) in that his Tartarean Ecstasy,
which his brother John Goodwin affirms him to be sometimes in, and then (says
he) he speaks the Dialect of Dragons. And (by the way) that the world may the
better know him, let but the Testimony be remembered, which the said learned
brother of his, gives publicly of him: Since the mountains (says he) Calumny
arraigned and cast: Or, answer to Prins rank passages, in his book entitled,
Truth Triumphing over Falsehood. Page 14. Page 13. ejusdem.
were brought forth and settled, it may probably be thought, that there was
never any son of Adam, whose pen made a broader digression, from that Christian
brotherly way, which himself speaks of, then his own; for look as low as the
earth is beneath the Heavens, so far is Mr. Prins way of dealing with his
friends beneath that which is Christian and brotherly: (and if so, we cannot
suppose him, to deal better with those, whom he accounts his enemies) He can
spy Bears and Tigres, Lions and Dragons, where other men can see nothing but
Doves and Sheep; and has eyes given him to condemn all the world beside of
blindness; this is the very Testimony which John Goodwin one of the Parliament
Ministers gives to the world of William Prin; and He professes Page 12.
solemnly withal, that himself can hardly refrain, from taking a solemn Vow,
and protestation, in the sight of God, Angels and men, to have no more to do
with him, either in word or deed, until He turns Christian: But (as I said
before) I leave him to the torture of his own Conscience, as well as to John
Goodwins censure, and return to my proper business.

I remember the forenamed Sir Edwin Sands in his forementioned discourse,
tells us, that when he writ the said book, (which is above 50. years ago,) the
Papists, (in their hatred against the Church of England) did give out, that
they had a Book in hand of the lives of the Ministers of England, viz. of
defamation against them: if that Book be not yet out, (as for ought I know it
is not, for want of matter perhaps to make up, or strength to bring forth:)
they may now spare themselves the labor, for John White and William Prin by
strong Authority, have done the work for them; and with as perfect spite and
vileness, as the worst of them could possibly have done it.

I wish with my soul that dissolute and corrupt Ministers, upon sufficient
testimony of their guilt, had in a d^e and orderly way, received exemplary
punishment, to expiate the scandal and reproach, which by their means has
been cast upon our Holy Office and function: but undoubtedly the course which
Prin and White have taken, and which these Abolishers of Bishops, have
countenanced them in, is most base and beggarly; and altogether unworthy
ingenuous and true Noble spirits: Sure, had their delights been, to have soared
on high, in the pure and candid paths of verity, they would have disdained in
that sort, to have raked in the puddles of obscenity: but in that to their
baseness of discoveryes, they have added Injustice too, and suffered Malice to
prefer, Spite to increase, and Slander to taint, all that was done in this
nature; they have deservedly purchased to themselves a place, with the grand
Calumniatour himself, whose title is, The ^^cuser of the Brethren.

And thus we have seen what their grand pretenses are, for their Abolition of
Episcopacy: now we shall note their true reasons which are these, some say,

1. Because Episcopal Government, confines people, (as Gods. 2.
word does) to the Bonds of Wedlock, and punishes those that vitiate
themselves in forbidden paths, by ordering them to stand in a White sheet, or
to pay a good sum of money for a Commutation: Yea some persons of place and
note in the world, (who think it no shame to commit folly, but to be reproved
for it) are liable to suffer rebuke, and so disgrace, (as they take it) for
their wantonness; if Bishops continue still Honorable and in esteem amongst
us, (for the outward dignity of the reprover adds much vigor to the reproof
with some men:) Wherefore that people might be free, and enjoy their Liberty
without check or Control, the Persons of Bishops must be vili^ied, their
Estates and revenews taken away from them, and their Jurisdiction from
henceforth quite abolished.

Indeed it makes all modest men blush to hear what Harlottry and filthiness is
voiced to be practiced and countenanced (even by them that would be esteemed
the Reformers of our Church and Nation,) since the Courts which punished that
sin have been suppressed, (notwithstanding Gods heavy judgments upon the
Nation ever since;) nor must men now speak their minds freely, for fear of
being accounted disaffected persons, Enemies to the State, and to the
Privileges of Parliament: But as Saint Paul said in his time to the
Corinthians, so I must say (for I am Gods Minister) to those above board in
these days, I hear there is such f^^nication committed, and such filthyness
suffered to go unpunished amongst you, as is not to be named among Saints,
much less to be connived at, by them that would be esteemed members of the High
and Supreme Court of Justice. It was not thus when Episcopacy was in force,
nor when Bishops had their place in Parliament: O might there but come forth an
Ordinance to warrant and encourage all men to bring in Complaints against
Bawds, Panders and Harlots, with their abetters and maintainers, (as there was
once to invite all that would, to bring in accusations against Gods Ministers,)
the world might happily see, or hear some new Centuryes of ill livers, yea, and
proofs too into the bargain: Yea perhaps they might hear how some unworthy
Members have attempted to ravish and defloure Ladies of Honor, and no
punishment inflicted for the same; How some others neglected their own wives,
have kept diverse lewd women, yea, and allow yearly pensions to filthy Bawds to
furnish them with such Commodities, for the satisfying their brutish lusts, and
base appetites: How some have defloured young Virgins whose Parents (in respect
of their abused Children) are unwilling to publish their dishonor to the
world: How some, having committed this vile wickedness with young Gentle-women,
have used, (or advised) to means to hinder conception, yea and to destroy the
fruit in the womb when conceived, (which I believe in the sight of God is no
less then rank murder.) How some (having undone Gentlemen of good quality, by
taking away their estates,) have taken advantage of the poverty of their
Children, and allured their daughters (personable and proper women) unto their
own baseness, to the loss of their Honors and precicious Souls for ever;
(and to continue in these courses without control is thought by many, to be
one of the chief designs which diverse of these new reformers aim at;) I say,
these and many such like things might happily be evinenced to some men's shame (if
they have any left in them,) might but as free leave and Countenance be granted
to impeach such persons, as was once to accuse Gods Ministers: Well, some men
imagine this to be one This reason I received lately from the judgment of
others and therefore thought fit to insert it in the first place with these
that follow.
reason of the Abolition of Episcopacy; that the Fathers of Gods Church might
not have power to punish and suppress such kind of offenders.

2. Because Episcopacy is the upholder of truth and order: this is evident
enough to be another reason: themselves cannot deny, that the same was first
ordained and established in the Church, for a Remedy against Heresies, Sects,
and Schisms, (which even in the Primitive times began to spring up among
Christians; the Smectymnists themselves confess this) and also for the
maintaining of Order and Decency in Gods worship and service: wherefore truth
and order, being the things which these men purpose to suppress and destroy,
(as appears by that inlet, which they have given to all false Doctrines and
Teachers, and by that confusion, which they have set up in all places;)
therefore a necessity lies upon it, Episcopacy must be Abolished, as being a
main obstruction to that their intendment or undertaking: This is the second.

3. Because Episcopacy is a great friend to Monarchy, a maine supporter of it.
King James upon experience and observation was wont to say, No Bishop, no King;
which saying, those that found most fault with it, do now endeavor to make
good unto the full, for they intend the utter destruction of Monarchy in this
Kingdom, (as will appear by their words anon) a form of Government indeed,
which their Faction have always maligned and labored to destroy: King James in
his Basilicon Doron, page 4. (which he made before he was King of England)
complains of the men of this faction, then in Scotland, how they did use to
calumniate him in their popular Sermons, not (says he) for any evil or vice
in me, but because I am a King, which they think the Highest evil: and again,
they informed (says he) the people that Kings and Princes, were natural
enemies to the Liberty of the Church, and could never patiently bear the yoke
of Christ, (which has been the very Doctrine of these times.) Wherefore that
wise King was most specially careful all his days, to countenance and
establish Episcopacy in all His Kingdoms; not only as the main preserver of
Religion, but also as the special upholder of Monarchy; and he lays it as a
charge upon his Son, to imitate him therein. And indeed these innovators know
full well, that they cannot bring their designs to effect against Monarchy,
without the Abolition of Episcopacy* for this keeps down those unruly fiery
spirits of the Ministry, which are used as chief incendiaries in all State-
Combustions; this restraines them from reproaching their betters, and Speaking
evil of Dignities; this maintains that Common form of Prayer in this Church
established; by the use whereof as by a daily Sermon of obedience, peoples
hearts are seasoned with Duty and Loyalty; in that they are taught continually
In the daily Collects or prayers for the King.
to acknowledge God to be the only Ruler of Princes, and the Kings Heart to be
in Gods Hand, who alone must be sought unto, to guide and dispose the same; in
that also we are all taught (as we are subjects) daily to consider, that it is
Gods Authority which the King has; and that we are faithfully to serve,
Honor, and humbly obey Him in God, and for God, Viz. because God has so
commanded, and because He is in Gods own stead by his appointment, and
ordination over the people. And by many other such like Divine and Godly
expressions, people are taught in their use of that book, to make profession of
their Duty and Loyalty unto their Prince, all which make directly against
these men, and their designs; therefore Episcopacy the upholder of this book
(as the main impediment to their Project) down, and the Common Prayer Book too,
without any reason Stet pro ratione voluntas.
at all alleged on their parts, that take upon them to be the Abolishers. In
a word, Episcopacy with her Common Prayer Book, will not admit Treason to stand
in the first rank of Christian virtues, (as these new-Reformers would have it)
nor be held the fairest, and shortest way to Heaven; Ergo, She and that too
must be both Abolished; to make way for the downfall of Monarchy, in this late
most flourishing and happy Kingdom: This is the third Reason.

The 4. is, because the King at His Coronation, did take a Solemn Oath to
maintain Episcopacy, it being the Government then established in the Church;
and the endeavors of these men are not only to destroy the Kings Honor, by
their Tongues and Pens; His Body and Estate by their violence and oppression:
but also His Soul (if they can possibly) by forcing upon Him, the guilt of
perjury; which if they could effect, beside that unappeaseable grief, (which in
so tender a Conscience as the Kings is) they know they should create, they
would also purchase to themselves, an Argument for confirmation of those their
slanders already cast out against him, to the same purpose, viz. that he is
regardlesse of keeping his Oath and Promise. And besides too, if they can make
him their Instrument, to ruin the Church of God, (which he loves so dearly)
and to destroy Monarchy and Kingly Government, whereby himself and his
posterity are supported: if they can make him their Agent to ruin himself, it
will speak them admirable gifted, and to have out-gone all the Machivillians
that ever were before them: most worthy therefore, and fit to enjoy the
Supremacy in the State, and to be feared of all people.

And then further yet, if they can get the King at their motion, to Abolish
Episcopacy, they shall occasion him to break the Charge which his Father laid
upon him to the contrary in his Basilicon Doron, which he calls his Testament:
The Charge and Caveat there given, is in these words: Take heed (my son) of
those Puritan^ Bas. Dor. p. 42.
which aim ^t a parity, who are the very pests in Church and Commonwealth,
whom no deserts can oblige, no Oaths or promises bind, they breathe nothing
but Calumny and Sedition, aspiring without measure, railing without reason, and
making their own imaginations (without warrant of the Word) the square of their
Conscience. I protest before the Great God, (and since I am here, as upon my
Testament, it is no place for me to lie in) that you shall never find with any
Hye land or Border-theeves, greater ingratitude, more lies, and viler
perjuries, then with these phanatick spirits: And suffer not the Principals of
them to brook your Land, if ye like to sit at rest, except you would keep them
for to try your Patience, as Socrates did an evil wife.

These were the words of the Kings Father, wherefore should His Majesty let
these men, with his good will and approbation be principal in the Church, and
yield for this purpose, to their desires in abolishing Episcopacy? God
(doubtless) would be much offended with him, for not minding the Commandment
of his Father: Yea, and peradventure too, these his tempters would go near
afterward, to suggest unto his Subjects, (for they have mouth and forehead
enough to do it) that the King like his Predecessor, Edward the second, had
neglected to observe his Fathers Testament, and therefore (as one under Gods
curse) ought meritoriously to be dealt withal, as Edward the second was first
deposed, and then put to death, and so would they make use of that Act of his,
in fortifying themselves another way, to do him a further mischief: but God we
trust will prevent them, and guide him.

And thus we have seen the true reasons of their first Proposition concerning
Abolition of Episcopacy: And we hope if His Majesty be forced as Henry the
third was, to subscribe to any thing against his will, he will do as some of
the Martyrs have don in a like strait; first of all require of them that urge
these unreasonable propositions upon him, (before he signs them) to imprecate
publicly, and in a solemn manner upon themselves and posterities, all the
demerit of guilt and sin, which shall be incurred at Gods Hand by such a
subscription. If their Consciences think there be no sin in the matter, they
will easily do it; but if they refuse, it will manifestly appear to the whole
world that they are most devillishly minded thus to press the King to things
unlawful.

In the next place they require the settling of the Militia of the three
Kingdoms in good hands by advise of Parliament.

SECT. XIIII.
1. Their unreasonablenesse in desiring the Militia to be in their sole
disposal: Four weak and dangerous pretenses for it. 2. Four true Grounds of
this their demand. 3. How sinful and dangerous a thing it would be to the
Church, People, and Kingdom if the King should grant it.

IT is to be noted, the Militia not of one, but of three Kingdoms;. 1.
they must have all or none; as Moses would not leave an H^ofe behind, with
King Pharaoh; so these will not leave a weapon with the King. They will have
the whole Militia of the 3. whole Kingdoms settled (say they) in good hands.
But what Hands are those? If gentle, peaceable, and Religious hands are such;
then was the Militia of the Kingdom in good hands before, until by the fraud
and violence of these demanders, it was wrested thence: But if by good Hands,
they mean such as have now griped the same into their possession, God forbid
that the King should ever willingly yield it should be settled there, or that
the people of the Kingdom should ever consent thereto, for so they might pull
the guilt of that Innocent blood, which has already, and is still likely to be
shed by it, (while so settled) upon their own heads.

It was always (till now) without scruple believed, for an undoubted truth,
that those hands were the best, which Gods Word and the Law of the Land so
judged, and committed the Militia into; and those were only the Kings, no law
Common or Statute can be showed, whereby it was ever settled elsewhere; And in
Gods Word, Kings though Heathens, are entitled Gods sword-bearers, Romans 13. 4.
in respect of their office, to execute punishment upon evil doers.

In the story of Isreal's Government, we read of King Saul's 1. Sam. 13. 2.
selected band, which himself alone made choice of: and of David's 2 Samuel 23.
Worthies, and of his appointing Captains over hundreds, and over thousands,
the Militia it seems, was in his sole hands then: Himself made Joab the
General of his Host, and displaced him 1 Chro. 11.
again at his own pleasure: Indeed we know, that the form of Government in the
Jewish Commonwealth, is much slighted and scorned at by our new State-mongers,
as weak, unperfect, and unfit for this Nation; the Government of Heathen Rome,
is in their Judgments the most absolute, and this is that (say they) which
they aspire after: But we are of opinion that God Almighties wisdom is better
then theirs is, or then that of the Heathens was: and we believe that those
State-Governments are the only best, and most fit for Christians that come
nearest unto that, which God himself contrived, and prescribed unto his own
people; and we well remember, when ours here held a near conformity unto that,
we best flourished: Nor can we conceive, why the same we had, should be more
unsuteable to the Nation now, all upon the sudden, then heretofore; but only
because these Innovators have at the present unfitted people for Gods Yoke, by
making them Rebellious: And for this reason (it seems) we must now forsake the
direction of Gods Word, and of Law established, to listen after a certain new
advise, from these few men, who call themselves the Parliament: who as if all
wisdom were lodged in them, must take upon them, to Nominate some New good
hands to settle the Militia of the Kingdoms in, for aftertimes. But we are
confident beforehand, they will (like him that chose himself Pope) determine
only for themselves; and judge their own hands the best of all others, though,
(alas!) the whole Kingdom has felt the Contrary, by smarting experience.

But may it not be imagined, that men so excessively wise, are full of reason?
what therefore may the grounds be of this unreasonable demand? the like to which
I never met with in any story: and doubtless should it be granted, the King (as
himself says well) should remain But the outside, but the picture, but the sign
of a King: For in the Militia of the Kingdom, consists the Kings power, his
Authority, and to yield to the settling of this in any hands but his own, were
to yield up his Crown it self: his very Kingdom. Now therefore by what right, or
reason, they should claim the Kings Crown, I cannot imagine; unless (perhaps)
they have bargained for that right, which the Pope had thereunto, by King John's
resignation: The story says, that the King received it back of the Pope to
hold from thenceforth in fee farm of Him, and his Successors for the yearly
rent of a 1000 Marks; Now (perhaps) upon the Kings non-payment of the said
rent, they have gotten the Popes right conveyed to them, and do bottom this
their demand upon it: and that strict intelligence which Lenthall the Speaker
brags that himself keeps with the Pap. 1.
Cardinal Mazarine, may peradventure be about the settling of the said
conveyance; but this is a secret, which the people must not know of, or will not
believe, (nor will I press it upon them) and therefore they have other pretenses,
and say, they demand it.

1. Because those good Hands which the Parliament will make choice of to settle
the Militia in, are sure hands, that is, hands that may be trusted, which will
never part again, with what they have once griped, or laid hold upon; never a
pack of Knaves in the world, shall be able to cheat them of their Magazines,
their Ships, their Towns, and Castles, if once the whole power of the Kingdom
be at their disposing; they will not take men's words, nor believe their Oaths,
nor credit their Honesties as the King has done: nor will they be so scrupulous
as he has bin, of giving occasions of suspicion, to his inferior Subjects.
Besides themselves being (as themselves say) Gods Children, have all power and
authority, and what ever else is good upon the earth, of right belonging unto
them, as their proper inheritance; though hitherto it has bin kept from them
by usurpers, (such as Kings and Princes are, and all others that be not of
their Faction) therefore, if now by any means, they can but be stated in their
own rights, it is very probable that* they will see the whole Kingdom destroyed
rather, then part with the same again, for the Israelites did never deliver
back the Egyptian Jewels, after they had once borrowed them; nor did they ever
resign to Og the King of Basan, his Kingdom any more, when once they had
gotten possession of it: Ergo, because these good hands are such sure hands,
such hold-fasting hands, they would have the Militia settled in them.

Indeed we do remember that for the space of two seven years before this
unhappy Parliament did begin, vulgar hearts were seasoned with this Doctrine;
that Gods people only have a right to the things of this life, and all others
(Kings and all) are but usurpers of what they do enjoy, and therefore may justly
be dispossessed of the same, by them who call themselves the people of the
Lord. But we do not believe this to be a true Doctrine, because Christ has
said, His Kingdom (or that which properly belongs to his people) is not of this
world; Therefore we conceive the Argument, and reason built upon the same* to be
neither substantial nor sufficient, but only a bare pretense, to gul the
ignorant, and to seduce the simple.

2. They desire (as they say) to have the disposal of the Militia, that so they
may go through-stitch with their Reformation, (as they call it.) For (say they)
it is an hard task we have undertaken, and like to he long in doing, for we
shall meet with many rubs, and therefore have need of Power to remove
obstructions. Indeed we grant that Rome was not built-in one day, it was many
years before she had gained her present height of wickedness; and before ^he
could reach the same, she did wrest the Militia, out of the Emperors hands,
whereby she was able to bring her Sovereigns neck under her Popes feet, by
making him glad to hold the stirrup: And now a like design being here on foot,
it must be pursued in a like method; the Militia must first be seized upon;
beside the doctrine of Christian obedience, has bin so long rivetted into
peoples hearts, that though it be shrewdly shaken already, by these
Militia-men, yet it is likely to settle and appear again, unless they have the
strength continued in their violent hands, to suppress and keep under the
growth thereof.

And then further too, that Public form and manner of worshipping God, wherein
people have bin bred and nourished in the Church, has bin so decent, and
Reverend; that this beastly and slovenly way, which these New Reformers (as
they call themselves) would introduce in the room thereof, is never like to be
well digested; and therefore as the Papists on the one side, have need of a
bloody Inquisition, to uphold their ridiculous fopperies, and superstitious
vanities in their worship of God: so these on the other side, have as much need
of the Militia to maintain, and force their unhandsome carriages, and proud
undecencies in their serving of him.

But these men pretending to reform a Christian Church, do they not make use of
a wrong instrument? Was the Militia of kingdoms ever appointed of God to such
an end? We have always believed that the Word was the ordained mean for such a
purpose: the Sword of Christ's mouth, and not of men's hands, must both cut sin
from Christ's members, and subdue his enemies. Had these men set up a faithful
teaching Ministry, in all parts of the Kingdom, we might have hoped for some
good by them; but as that Pope, who cast away his Keys, and betook himself to
his Sword; so do they betake them to their iron and steel, they desire the
Militia of the Kingdom, with which they persec^te, and destroy the faithful
Preachers, and this they call Reformation. Indeed Antichrist and Mahomet, went
this way to work, for the erection of their Religions; and our men coveting and
exercising a like power, to a like end, may be truly called their Disciples,
whom they imitate; we would fain have them declare unto us, how this course
which they take, and which it seems (by this their desire) they are resolved to
proceed in, can possibly consist with that Religion, whose root is truth, whose
branches are charity, and whose fruit is good deeds, both toward friends and
Micah 3. 9, 11.
enemies: we find in Micah the Lord complaining of some wicked Heads of the
people, and false Prophet, who juggling together Verse. 10.
did endeavor to build up Sion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity, (and
had got the Power and Militia into their hands to that purpose) and that the
silly people might think, that God was well pleased with that their way, they
would (says the Text) lean upon the Lord, and were so impudent as to say, the
Lord is among us, or on our side: But how did the Lord take this at their
hands? It follows in the next Verse, For your very sakes (says Verse. 12.
God to them) Sion shall be plowed like a field, and Jerusalem shall become
heaps, and by those unfit means, wherewith they pretended to build up the same,
was brought to pass its destruction. Wherefore doubtless this second Reason,
which is alleged, to get the Militia settled in their Hands, is not only weak,
but extremely wicked, and tends not to Reformation, but to the destruction
and ruin of Christian Religion, and of the Nation.

Thirdly, They pretend it would be for the Peoples greater preservation to have
the Militia of the Kingdom settled in their own good Hands: for (say they) we
stand for the People, we are the men whom the People have chosen, and therefore
it is most likely, that we shall employ the strength of the Kingdom best, to the
Peoples safety, which above all things is to be looked unto. Thus they speak,
and well have they evidenced their pretended care for us the People, since they
got the sword into their hands; for therewith the first thing they did, for our
preservation, was ( Mustapha, or Mahomet, or Amurath-like I am not certain
which of them it was: and I want Books to help my memory.
to cut off fair Irenes head, (with whom indeed the whole Nation had formerly
too much wantonized) and what have they done beside, but often strewed our
fields and highways, with heaps of mangled carcasses, and filled our Channels
with the spilt-out blood of our murdered Countrymen? O woe, woe and alas! they
have done that, quod nulla posteritas probet, quod nulla taceat; what true
English heart, without most bitter Lamentation, can think or speak of their
doings? What persecution? What banishment? What confiscation of goods? What
corporal bondage? Yea, What cruel tortures? What merciless burnings? What
secret murders? What public massacres, have they committed upon the people of
this Nation? only because they refused to renounce that truth and Loyalty which
themselves also once professed, and we still maintain: truly we have had such an
ample experience already of their goodness, in our preservation, that we
publicly profess to all the world, we daily find in England, what our poor
captive Brethren do feel at Argier, that there is no such cruel Turk as the
Renegado Christian.

When the sole power of the Sword or Militia was in the Kings Hand, the poor
Countrymen, as well as the rich and Noble, lived in peace, slept securely under
his own roof, and without any fear, did eat his bread with gladness: he could
say that what he had bought and paid for, was his own; and if any did injure
or oppress him, the Law was open to do him right. But since these new
Preservatours (as they call themselves) are risen up, those Golden days are
vanished, and Iron times are come upon us, Maerentia tecta Caesar h^bet,
vacuasque domos legesque silentes, clausoque justitio tristi foro.
Judgment is turned away backward; and Justice stands a far off: Truth is
fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter. Yea, truth fails, and he that
departs from evil, makes himself a prey, Esaias 59. 14. 15. Our Nobles and
Gentry are debased, our Richmen are beggered, and many thousands of all sorts
are killed or starved: the whole Commonalty of the Kingdom in the General, are
in the same Condition with the Asses of France, thought Lucanus.
fit for nothing but blows and burdens; no man can now command the use of his
proper goods, or the service of his own Children: we hear daily of rapes and
robberies, burning of houses, depopulation of Towns: violence and oppression
reigns in all places, and confusion is poured out in full measure among us;
insomuch, that our wel-ordered Commonwealth that was, is translated into a
very Conjuration of Tyrannies, by the means of these men, whose aims and
endeavors are only to keep us in perpetual slavery, Militari Jure, by the
Militia, which yet (forsooth) they desire may be settled in their good hands for
the peoples security and preservation.

It Is true, the people at first chose them, and now they feel them, and have
cause to know them: and to confess of them, that they are very Scorpions to
them, and that their little finger is ten times heavier then the Kings Loins.
The people chose them, to be Arbytratours on their side against their King, to
comprimize, as it were, on their behalf, some matter between the King and them,
(for under that notion do the people commonly choose their Parliament men) and
such shall only be carried on their shoulders, whom they apprehend will be most
stiff against their Sovereign, as if he were the only great Enemy to their
welfare and prosperity: But by this time the greatest part of them, (we
believe) are otherwise instructed, and (as some of them have confessed) their
apprehensions of the King and Parliament, (as they stand now in the terms
contradistinct and opposite) is like that, which the Heathens have of God and
the Devil: as those adore the Devil with gifts and sacrifices, for fear of
mischief from him, so do these the Parliament; but God (say the Heathens) is
good, and will do us no harm; so (say these) is the King, and therefore they
neglect to do him service: And (doubtless) might people have but liberty now to
speak their minds freely, they would utterly renounce the preservation of those
their Arbitratours, and desire again the Kings protection, after the manner of
former times: And whereas these new Governors desire to have the Militia of
three Kingdoms settled in their own hands, for our greater security, we must
needs apprehend from the proof they have given us, of what they promised us,
that this their pretense is but one of those bitter flouts, which in scorn at
our simplicities for thinking them to be honest men, they cast upon us: Sed
Deus vindex, God shall one day sit in judgment on them.

4. They have said, It would be to the Kings great glory, to let them have the
whole and perpetual managing of the Militia, for then they should be fully able
to make him the most glorious Prince in Christendom, (which thing they have a
long time promised, purposed, and endeavored, and all this fighting must be
bel^eved, to be to that very end) for had the King but tamely at first
delivered up into their hands, what God committed into his, trusted them for
ever, with that Power and Authority, wherewith God has trusted him: Had he but
for their sakes, denied God to be the only Ruler of Princes, and acknowledged
them his Governors and Guardians: Had he but resigned unto them, what King
John his Predecessor once did unto the Pope; they would have made the Pope
their President in this, as well as they do in many other things; and have
returned it back again to him, as he did to King John: and so the King holding
his Kingdom from thenceforth immediately of them; they would have done more for
him, (I that they would) then ever his old Landlord God Almighty, either did
or meant to do: For whereas God made him King but only of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, they would have given him moreover, all the Kingdoms of the World, and
the glory of them; so that, had not the King stood in his own light, they had
Conquered for him, long ere this, the Kingdoms of France and Spain, and the
Empire of Germany; yea, and the last year they had pulled out old Antichrist by
the ears, and burnt the whore Babylon with fire, together with all of her
Trinkets; and at this very instant, they had bin stepping over unto
Constantinople, for to ding down the great Turk; and in the next half year the
Mogull of Persia had bin taught to submit himself; and then also the King of
China had bin summoned to an account, for his usurping the Title of Filius
Coeli, (which is proper to no man living, but only to those of their faction)
and by that time, the Grand Chams of Tartary, would have learned so much wit,
as to forbear calling themselves Domini Dominantium, and to leave that style
wholly, unto these superlative Abamocchoes. And now who will not say, it had bin
a Glorious thing to the King, for the world to take notice, that so great a
brood, of such mighty Alexanders, should like that Cadmeyan Progeny start up on
the sudden at one time in his Kingdom. But it seems the King wanted faith, and
thought such great Acts might be sooner purposed then performed, or else was
jealous of these his Worthies, that in their subduing of these Kingdoms, they
would not have dealt with him, as Joab did with David at the taking of Rabbah,
and yielded to him the glory of the Conquest: Now whether the King were too
blame or no in so thinking, let wise men judge.

But let me reason a little with these men, about this their reason; Suppose
the King should settle (as they would have him) the Militia of the Kingdom in
their hands: and then they should chance to Vote Bonum est nobis esse hic, it is
better to stay at home, and play (...) (...), then to adventure abroad: How
would the King then appear so abundantly glorious? Do they imagine it could be
any thing to his glory, to have it reported in the Courts of foreign Princes,
that the Monarch of Great Britain, after twenty years managing his inheritance
left him by his predecessors, and weilding the Scepter of three Kingdoms, to
the great prosperity and wealth of his Subjects; has submitted himself to
Pupillage under the Command of a few ordinary Gentlemen, his own vassals, at
their requests, who think themselves wise enough, and therefore take upon them
(as his Tutors and Guardians) to Govern not only himself, and his Kingdom, but
also his very Family and Household? they appoint him what Servants shall wait
upon him, and have power to dispose of his Children in marriage, without his
consent: or (if they please) against his will. Can any man think that such a
report, would speak the King in a Glorious Condition? Would not Strangers
reply, and say, Is this the Honor of the English King, and his great
Privilege above other Princes? He may enjoy it sure without Emulation, no man
will ever envy him this glory.

But is this indeed the English men's kindness to their Common Father? their
gratitude for all their happiness and peace under him? Is this the upshot of
all their great promises to him? Is this that Royal Prerogative, that happy
freedom, which those who stand so much upon their own liberty, can in their
good nature, find in heart to afford unto their Sovereign? Would not the
meanest of them all disdain to be in that Condition? What? Neither have Command
over his Subjects, nor yet over his household servants? Neither have power to
choose a Wife for his Son, nor to bestow his Daughter in marriage? Must the
Right Worshipful his Tutors and Guardians, have the sole disposing of his
Children? No doubt but they will have a care to match them, into such Haggard
stocks, that the English Nation shall never more be blessed, with any Right-bred
Eagles.

Thus would Forreiners descant upon our Kings Condition, should he yield to the
desires of these men; and this they would have us believe would be to his great
glory.

Yea, and furthermore, they have bin teaching the People ever since the
Parliament began; that the Kings office properly, is but only to put in
Execution, what the Parliament shall Decree, to see offenders punished according
to the mind and pleasure of his great Council. From whence we learn, that
there is a preferment waiting for him, if he have but a care to please his
little- Great Masters well, and be dilligent to come when they call, to go, and
do as they bid; in lieu of his settling the Militia of the three Kingdoms in
their hands, they will bestow upon him, the grand Executionership of the
Kingdom, which He and His after him, shall hold of them, and their
successors, quam diu se been gesserint; which may be an Office not only of
profit, in such Tyrannical times, as we are like to have under their
Government; but also of pleasure, if the King will but put off his merciful
disposition, and learn of them to delight in slaughter, and shedding of blood.
And thus we see what great Dignity and Glory, upon his resignation of the
Militia, is like to be conferred upon Englands King.

But what man now not void of Reason, (considering withal the terms these
Demanders stand in, at the present with the King,) will not conclude this their
pretense of making the King Glorious, to be only one of their Flouts, which in
their pride and bitterness they are pleased to put upon their Sovereign? even
for his easiness and goodness, in giving credit at first so far, to their
Oaths and Honesties, as to suffer them already to overreach him: truly as a
plain scorn we apprehend it; for let them Answer us a question or too: Would
dutiful and loyal Subjects, (as they call themselves) desire any thing in
earnest of their Prince, and not first lay down their Harness? Do not these
their weapons speak, that by violence or dread, they intend to obtain their
purpose? Have not these very men, seized already by fraud and force upon that
very thing, without the Kings leave, which they require of him to grant them?
Do they not by calling themselves the Militia, declare Evidently, that they
account themselves the everlasting Masters of it? Do they intend, if the King
shall think meet to deny their request, to yield up presently that possession
which they have already of the same? We suppose not, for they claim in their
Tenants all earthly power and Authority to be theirs, by right, as they are
Gods Children. They are so bold as to say Gods Providence has cast into their
hands, that strength of the Militia, which by unjust means they have seized
upon; and they have entered into an Oath and Covenant, in effect, to keep the
same in despite of the King; and with it to suppress and destroy all them that
shall aid, and assist the King, to recover His own again.

And what is all this, but (as Micha speaks) to oppress a man, Mic. 2. 1, 2.
and his House* Yea, a King and his Heritage* and to resolve to continue in so
doing, even because they have gotten a power into their Hands?

But tell us, (O you pretenders to Piety,) where (in the Romans 13. 5.
mean time) is that Subjection to the King for Conscience sake, 1 Pet. 2. 23.
which S. Paul calls for? and that obedience for the Lords sake which Saint
Peter requires: will you all hold, (as some of your fellow members have
maintained,) that these Precepts were only in date, in the Primitive times,
when the People of God lived under Heathen Persecutors, and are of no
concernment in these days, now Gods people have got strength? Or do you think
the bare calling your selves His Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, a
sufficient observance of those injunctions? We believe neither of these excuses
will satisfy Christ Jesus at the reckoning day. But in the interim, does not
your desiring the King that the Militia may be settled in your hands plainly
infer, that in your own Consciences, you have done him wrong, in seizing
already upon it without his leave? Surely if the right of settling it be now in
him, the right of seizing upon it before was not in you: but you did a manifest
injury to His Majesty in meddling with it against his will, and a far greater
yet* you intend to do him, by your resolving still to keep it, by force, if you
may not have it confirmed by his Approbation; unless you will yield, that this
your demand proceeds from the scorners Chair; you must of necessity grant us
thus much.

But in very deed, these men have other reasons, for this their. 2.
unreasonable request, though they are ashamed to name them, I shall do it for
them, for mine aims are (like those of Christ my Master in his preaching,) to
discover Hypocrites, that men might beware of them: They are these.

1. If the King can be gotten, to settle the Militia in their hands, all the
Injustice and unlawfulness of the war on their side, will be thereby
cancelled, and whatsoever they have done against him, and his subjects will be
Authorized as found and good: their crafty seizing upon it, at first, and their
violent use thereof since, to the destruction of so many, will go for worthy
deeds, and the King will be judged, to have been much to blame, in making any
opposition against them, and for his calling them Rebels: His own Act, will be
the eating of those his own words, and speak them to have been His most
humble, dutiful, and obedient subjects, all the while they fought against him;
yea and all they did in that kind, to have been done out of pure love, to His
Good and Glory, and for the benefit of Church and Commonwealth: And then too,
if withal the King shall but confer some new Titles of Honor, upon their
Chieftaines, (as when time was he did upon Lesley,) for this they expect and
intend to demand too; then they shall appear, White all over, and who will
dare to say to the contrary, and full as good subjects almost, as their
Brethren the Scots? That is one Reason.

2. If they can get the King to settle in their Hands, that depositum of Power
and Authority, which God has entrusted in His; they shall bring him, (as they
desire) into their own condition: and make him such a one to God, as themselves
have been and are to him: whereby Gods displeasure may be so far kindled
against him, that he may permit them, (having all the power in their hands,) to
bring their endeavors fully to pass in destroying Him, and His posterity: and
then the world shall be taught to believe that Heaven has punished him, for
such His sin: and confirmed with its blessing, all their sayings and doings
against him: that God was of their mind all the while, as now by the success
is most apparent: Honesta quaedam scelera successus facit, (says Seneca:) the
highest Villainies, if succesfull, shall be accounted virtues, and these men
care not to obtain truths, but opinions warrant.

3. They desire the Militia may be settled in their hands, quia omnis in ferro
salus est, their whole safety consists therein, it is the Nurse of their
wealth, and the sole Anchor of their security: for O si pateant pectora virum,
quantos intus sublimis agit fortuna metus! what great fears, have these men's
High fortunes created in their Bosoms, could we but view their insides? They
dare neither trust the King, nor yet the Country that trusted them; for should
the strength be in any hands but their own, they might be called to an account
for all their doings, the Law might be in force again: and Justice suffered to
show her face; Treason should sit no longer in the seat of Religion, Truth
might appear above-board; and Peace be restored unto the Nation; and Order
might come again into fashion: Yea, had the King His power again, He might call
a Parliament, a true Parliament, a free Parliament, which is a thing that they
quake to think on; for then like a Company of poor Hope-losts, they should
stand below, and look up to that place of Honor, where erst they sat, and have
so much abused; and who in their condition, can endure this? Nemo Hercule nemo:
No mervail therefore, if they desire to hold fast the Militia in their own
hands.

4. Should they part with it, they should not only degrade 4.
themselves of their present Honor, and disarme themselves of safety, but of
their wealth and riches too, for all is now at their Command; the Lands,
Estates, the goods and Fortunes of all their Countrymen: which the Militia of
the Kingdom, has invested them with a right in: and possession must be
maintainted by the same means as obtained: But should the Militia return into
the Hands of the right owner; Honest men would enjoy their own as before, and
they who are now so Gay, would remain stark Naked, (like Jack-daw in the
fable, when every bird had reassumed her own feathers.) And then further too,
their pleasures would also cease, that sweetness they feel in shedding of
blood, would be no more: which very want would be as bad as death unto them;
their Natures are now so accustomed unto it. In a word, (as Amos speaks) they
have gotten them Horns by Amos 6. 17.
their own strength, or slight, and the Horns are the defense of the Head;
the Militia are these Horns, and should they part with that, they fear they
should not keep their Heads long after: and therefore great reason they have,
rather to desire the settlement of it, for ever in their own Hands.

But (with their favor) what reason has the King to trust. 3.
them, that will not trust Him? them with His weapons, upon that experience He
has had of their love and kindness: Who will not trust Him with His own? Can
it be imagined that they will employ them otherwise, then they have done,
(considering what their delights are?) Nay, may it not be expected, that they
will make Him the Author of all their Evil, which from thenceforth they shall
do, when by His consent the power is once settled in their goods Hands? Surely
they that used His name to the raising of so many men against Himself, to the
killing of so many of His Subjects, when He openly opposed them, will not
scruple to do all their mischief, under His Name and Authority, when they have
so fair a pretense for it. Nay should the King do in this, as they would have
Him, may not the Just and Holy God account Him a partaker with them in Evil?
His Majesty (by His own pious confession) has smarted under the Hand of God
for His consenting, though (doubtless) against His will, to the shedding of
Straffords innocent Blood: and should He again after His Humiliation for that,
by a new consent, make Himself guilty of many more Bloods; the continued Anger
of the Almighty, might be too heavy a burden for Him to bear: No doubt but
they are, and will be, the more importunate for His consent now; because they
see His heart has smot Him for His consent then; for how ever it was blattered
much at the beginning, by those of their faction, against forcing of tender
Consciences, yet verily, we believe there were never men that delighted more in
offering violence to the Souls and Consciences of the righteous, then
themselves do; wherefore should His Majesty yield to them in this particular,
it would be in singultum cordis, a corrasive to His Heart for ever; and therein
a glory unto them: and also it would argue too great a distrust in Gods defense
of Him; and be a mean to delay Gods punishment, from falling upon the heads of
these lofty Rebels. And besides all this: His Majesty hereby shall give way to
the settling of all those Sects and Heresies, to the destruction of Christian
Protestation Religion, which by their crafty and violent seizing upon the
Militia, were but only let in to the Church: May it please His Sacred Majesty,
and all His Loyal Subjects to remember, when the Pope of Rome, (these men's
Grandsire, for however in words they disclaim kindred with Him, yet are they
wholly like Him in Conditions, they tread in His steps, and observe His method,
and end, in all their undertakings:) when He (I say) after the fashion of these
His Nephews, had fraudulently and forceably seized upon the Militia of His
Sovereign the Emperor; then did all Corruption and false Doctrine make
entrance into that Church, the light grew dim: And when the Emperor afterward
gave his Consent that the said Pope and his conclave (formerly His Subjects)
should have that His power and Authority, (which at first indeed, he labored
to recover again unto himself) settled in their hands, then was all that
wickedness, (formerly but admitted) confirmed and established; and the
faithful Church, became from thenceforth a very Harlot. Let Story be observed,
and it will be found, that the fall of the Empire, the rise of the Pope-dome
above it, and the spring of Mahumatisme happened all about one time: and the
two last might be permitted of God, for a punishment of the first. For it is no
small sin, for the Supreme Magistrate to part with that depositum out of his
hands; which the Almighty has entrusted solely with him: Histories do
sufficiently testify what extreme molestations, the Emperor has been put
unto, and what base affronts have been put upon him by his proud Subjects of
Rome: Since he gave his consent, that the Militia of that City and Country
should be settled in their Hands: Himself is there now, but vox non
significativa: He has the Title of Roman Emperor, and no more: And such must
be the condition of our King, if he be not warned by the Emperors example: He
must be content to be only an unsignificant voice too, in his own Kingdom, yea,
and to be regulated in his expenses, if he have leave to live, yet he shall be
so ordered, that he do not live profusely, or have wherewithal to dare, to
practice ought to their prejudice. Yea, and he must learn to hold the Stirrup
too, to kiss the Toe, to bow the Knee to the Supremacy, or Popes of the Lower
House, if they shall at any time please to frown upon him; or to Vote him a
Delinquent. Well, let but these things be seriously, and with judgment thought
upon by moderate men, and then let reason speak, whether it be fit that the
King should yield to this (...) as they would have him: whether it be meet he
should suffer the Sword, to be carried before the Gran Concilii, rather then
still before himself; and should settle the Militia of the three Kingdoms in
their hands, which are good only by their own Testimony. But I have been
(perhaps) too tedious, in scanning the Reasons of this their second demand: we
come therefore to advise a little upon the third Proposition, which (say they)
concerns the Vindication of the Irish Rebels.

SECT. XV.
1. Of their Vindicating the Irish Rebels. How fully they have done it in one
sense. 2. And how glad should we be if themselves would go and do it in the
other: Their true intention in that demand opened.

TO Vindicate in the most vulgar acception, is to Justify and acquit from
blame; and if they take the word in that sense, they have Vindicated them too
sufficienly already, and much more then has become men of their Profession:
For as God by his Prophets tells Jerusalem, that she had multiplied her
abominations more then her sisters, Sodom, and Samaria, she had justified
Ezekiel. 16. 51.
them in all which they had done; in her going beyond them in wickedness: and
that she was a Comfort to them: so may it be Verse. 54.
said of these men, they have multiplied their transgressions more then their
Brethren, the Rebels of Ireland, they have Justified them, in what ere they
have done, they have been a Comfort to them: Surely the Irish doings, shall not
be remembered in the day, that the impieties of those of this Nation are
reckoned up: Did the Irish ^ob, kill, and roste Christians? So have these done:
did they burn Houses, strip Men and Women naked, scourge them, and expose them
to the wide world? These have not been behind in such doings: did the Irish
Rebel against their Sovereign? These have both overtaken, and also gone
beyond them in this sin: for though nothing should cause men to Rebel, yet to
say the truth, the Irish lived formerly under a more hard bondage, which might
provoke their corruptions: whereas these English, (Jesurun-like) rebelled out
of mere wantonness: Nor did those Irish execute their savage Cruelty, (as was
noted before,) on those of their own nation and Religion, as these English have
done; they did not defile their own Churches, nor kill and abuse their own
Priests; but these have delighted, to profane and destroy those places, where
themselves had formerly met to worship God; and have offered most special
despite to the Ministers of their own Religion, who baptized them, and
preached Gods truth unto them. Besides, the Religion which the Irish Rebels
profess, is not so directly opposite, to such barbarous Cruelties, which they
have committed, as is that which these of England pretend unto; nor have they
been so bold as those, to entitle God unto all their outrages, they think they
need a pardon, both from God and the King, for their inhumanityes, and
Rebellions: whereas these stand upon their Justification, and have often
despised the Kings mercy, when tendered to them: nor have they in Ireland
persecuted and pursued the Kings Sacred person; they have not reviled, nor
railed upon him, as these have done: Never any such reproachful Libell, (as
this which we oppose) do we read was sent abroad by the Rebels of Ireland,
against their Sovereign; nor yet did we hear that ever those Irish took so
solemn a Protestation, at the beginning of their Parliament, (as these English
did,) to maintain the Kings person, Honor, and Estate. In a word, Those Irish
are not so impudent, (as these hard-fore-headed English are,) as to call them
Rebels and Traitors, who according to their Oath of Allegiance and
Protestation do labor to maintain the Kings life, and right against them: but
they yield themselves to be, or to have been in a Rebellion. Wherefore who will
not say, that the English Rebels, have out gone the Irish, and by committing
evils, in a more abominable way, have even Justified those their Brethren; as
Jerusalem did her sisters Sodom, and Samaria: And yet as if all this were
nothing, these good men desire to be still Vindicating the Irish Rebels: and
would have the Militia of the three Kingdoms settled in their own good hands
to the same purpose.

But perhaps by Vindication these mean punishment, and revenge, which they
pretend Until the sword be restored into that hand where God did put it, and
he whom God has appointed, be the orderer and disposer of the affairs in
Ireland: we must never expect Gods continued blessing upon our Forces that are
sent thither, therefore in their desiring the sole management of the Irish
affairs, (with exclusion of the King,) they do but oppose God (whose
Vicegerent the King is,) and endeavor in vain to do a great work without
him: I desire the English Protestant Nation to think seriously of this.
they would inflict upon the Irish Rebels, for that Protestant blood shed by
them, would but the King give them leave so to do.

Truly if they would go themselves, and fight it out, with those Rebels in
Ireland, we dare affirm, they shall have not only free leave, but thanks too;
yea, and moreover they shall have, not only the usual boon of such Malefactors,
(as act the executioners part upon their fellows) viz. the grant of their own
lives: but (by our consent) they shall also be the very great Oes of Ireland,
and they shall hold this Dignity, by their dearly affected Irish Law of
Tanistry, which is, That he who is best able by force and violence to wrest
unto himself, the estates of others, shall be the Chief Commander among them: We
perceive by their doings, that they would set up that Law here in England, in
stead of all others, which they have put out of date or use: But we conceive it
is not so suitable for this Nation, where men have bin wont to enjoy their own,
and to leave their inheritance to their own Children: and therefore we suppose,
it will be an hard matter for them to introduce, and settle the same here. But
in Ireland it is a custom established to their hand. Yea, and further yet,
upon Condition, that they will go thither, and so we in this land may be rid of
their Companies; we will all supplicate the King for a further favor in their
behalf, viz. that every great O amongst them, may have the Honor, to give the
Earl of Tyrones own Arms, (which is a bloody Hand) for their own proper and
most deserved Cognizance; and that they may also be, all Barons of that Strong
Island, which Tyrone fortified, and called Fough-na-Gaul, the Hate of
Englishmen: For in very deed, no man living, did ever better merit that Title,
then they have done.

But (alas!) we have read that Ireland harbors no venomous Vipers; therefore we
are confident the great Oes of Westminster, will never adventure thither in
their own persons: But if they can get the Militia of the Kingdom, settled by
the King, wholly in their Hands, (that so they may fear no rising here against
themselves) they will therewith force, and press all the English people, (who will
not take their unlawful and ungodly Covenant) which is in effect to renounce
the Doctrine of Christ's Gospel, and their obedience to the King for ever; and
send them thither, where they will expose them to be starved, or slaughtered; as
many thousands have bin already: and therefore let all the Countries that have
stood out longest in their Loyalty, and at last accepted of these New Lords,
expect to be thus punished for their tardiness in Apostasy. And for those lusty
Club-men, in the Counties of Wilts, Somerset, and Devon, and the like; let them
look for this reward at the hands of their Militia-Masters, for taking part
with them, against the Kings men. Such fellows as will gather together, and make
head against those that wrong and abuse them; will be dangerous to live in a New
State. They that did thus against the Cavaliers, may do as much against the
Roundheads, when they are but a while as well acquainted with their Conditions:
They that will be forced from their Duty to their Sovereign and natural
Liege-Lord, by such wrongs and oppressions, as (in these troublesome times) are
offered to them by the unruly Soldiers; will be easily driven upon a like
sensible occasion, to make resistance against tyrannical usurpers; those Beasts
that will decline from their Allegiance to the Kingly Lion, will never long rest
contented under the obedience of Cat-a-Mountains; therefore a timely course must
be taken with such persons, they shall all be sent into Ireland (out of hand)
and be hampered there, for Ireland must be the continual Spain, or Carthage, to
our New Rome, to rid her of all such mutinous and tumultuous persons: and then
shall these Saints, these Bloody Butcherly Saints, have free Elbow-room to
inherit this land; and having neither truth nor King, nor Enemy left, for to
disease them; they shall be at leisure (if Pride and faction will give them
leave) to live at peace together. And thus have we seen the scope of the third
demand also, which concerns Ireland.

Now from what has been said concerning these matters, let any man judge,
whether these men have not reasons to pursue their desires without giving back
an hairs breadth from their first proposals; and whether the King has reason or
no, to consent unto them; Nay, whether the Subjects of England have cause to
wish the Kings compliance with them in all these things; for my part, I profess
sincerely in the sight of God, I apprehend their demands to be the most
unreasonable that were ever made; and therefore do hope that God will ere long
awaken in the Kings behalf, for such has bin his wont formerly, in cases of
like nature: When Nahash the Ammonite required of the men of Jabesh 1. Sam. 11.
2.
Gilead, (to purchase a quiet bondage under him) that he might pull out their
right Eyes; So when Benhadad required of the king of Israel, his Strength,
Treasures, Houses, Wives, Children, and what ever was dear and pleasing unto
him; when Senacherib required 2 King. 20.
of the people of Jerusalem, to forsake their own natural 2 King. 18. 29, 30.
King, and to submit their necks under his yoke, to yield up themselves into
his hands, to be carried from their own good Land, they knew not whither. We
find that God did continually awake in the behalf of each of these distressed:
and most severely punished, every of these unreasonable demanders: and
doubtless he did so for the very unreasonableness of those their requests. And
shall not we believe that he will awake now also, when all these unreasonable
demands proceed together at once, and from the same men; who first require the
Abolition of Episcopacy? there is Nahash request, to pluck out our right Eyes.
Secondly, they require the Militia of the three Kingdoms, that is Benhadads
request, for all that the King and his friends have. Thirdly, under the title
of Vindicating the Irish Rebels, they require that the people of this Kingdom,
should be at their disposal, to translate from their own Native Country, and
never to see it any more, there is Senacheribs request. Therefore Awake, Awake,
as in times of old, O Lord our strength, arise for our succor, at this
present, and redeem us, for thy mercies sake: Behold, O God (our shield) and
Look upon the face of thine Anointed, as thou art the Judge of all the Earth,
and helpest them to right that suffer wrong. Amen. Amen.

I now proceed to Answer these men, who in their Libell go on, and say:

But were our cause altered, (as it is not) or were we worse Rebels Libell.
then formerly, as none can affirm that takes notice of our late sufferings,
and our strange patience, even now after the discovery of these Papers, and our
late extraordinary success in the field: Yet still this clandestine proceedings
against us here, etc.

SECT. XVI.
1. Of the Enemies late sufferings. 2. Of their strange Patience. 3. Of their
extraordinary great success, and the true grounds of it. 4. Success no
Argument of a good cause. 5. The worst men have always made most use of it.

HEre is much remarkable stuff in these few words, which. 1.
I shall endeavor to discover. First, (say they) Were our cause altered, as it
is not, or we worse Rebels then formerly, as none can affirm, etc. We granted
them before that their cause is still the same in specie as it was at first, and
so are they themselves no whit altered from what they were, but only a malo in
pejus, from bad to worse, and the Moralists account this an Alteration. And let
any one that has the use of sense and reason judge whether Age does not make
some difference in sinful men, as well as it does in Satan himself; who in the
beginning of the world, was a Serpent, (as these at the beginning of the war
were Rebels) and it is true, he is but a Serpent still, but he is come to be now
an old Serpent, so called Rev. 12. and that is aliquid amplius. Antiquity in
evil, speaks both a further ability to evil, and a larger measure of iniquity;
and in this respect he may be called a worse Devil then at the first; and so
may they, worse Rebels. But I will not with Arguments either prevent, or assist
those proofs, too sufficiently given of themselves, by their own actions: I had
rather spend time to pray them better.

But they tell us of Notice to be taken of late sufferings, which they have
undergon, and of some strange Patience, which (it seems) as they say, has
manifested it self of late to be in them; Yea, even now since the discovery of
these Papers: Truly we must confess our error, we have not hitherto observed
any such thing, but we are resolved (upon this intimation) to make inquiry,
first after their late Sufferings, and then after their strange Patience.

These Sufferings of theirs we find upon Consideration, began about the year
1642. some certain months before the ^^rth of those 19. Propositions: about the
time of the Kings first removal Northward, which as we imagine and remember
was Lent time, (and therefore most accursed does that superstitious season
deserve to be, and for ever to be blotted out of John Bookers Almanac, as well
as Christmas day, because therein did begin, their late great Sufferings) Then,
O then most sadly they fell into the same Condition, that Richard the third was
in, when (alas!) full sore against his will, the whole care and burden of the
Kingdom, was cast upon his shoulders; then (alas!) and from thenceforth, (woe
and alas) they were forced (out of mere Necessity) to begin to seize upon the
Kings Magazines, His Forts, Towns, and Castles: His Navy of Ships, Houses, and
all he had, to their great discomfort and displeasure. And how has all their
very Senses, since that time, bin continually troubled, and molested? their
Ears (O lamentable) have bin laden with the most offensive acclamations, and
Honourings of the people: their Gust and Smell has bin tormented daily with the
perfumes and feastings of the City: their Eyes and Touch have bin most
vexatiously tortured with those so loathed heaps of Plate, and Moneys which
from all parts of the Kingdom have come trowling in unto them: While the King
(in the mean time) has bin in great prosperity, wandering up and down in Fields
and Mountains, Cold and Wet, Weak and Weary, Faint and Hungry, with few
friends, and little money: Yea, while he has had time and opportunity to get
himself a Stomach; they (good souls) have bin well nigh surfeited with good
cheer, and done to death with abundance: Yea, (poor creatures) they have bin
constrained to sit warm, and to lie soft, to be served in state, to drink Wine
in bowls, to be behonoured, be worshipped, to be crouched and kneeled unto,
and so forth: Wherefore if that Pope of Rome, when he lay beaking himself in the
midst of his Luxuries, had cause to cry out, Heu quantum patimur pro Christo!
then great reason have these Complainants, to cry out also of their late great
Sufferings.

Yea, and besides all these corporal calamities, their very* spirits, have bin
also distracted many times, with most frightful fears and Jelousies, as of
Plots, strange Plots under ground, Regiments, great Regiments of Subterranean
Horses lay in wait for them; Conspiracies, dangerous conspiracies, were
contrived against their corporal welfare; (as that honest Tailour that sat
close in Moorfields can abundantly witness) which doleful matters have ofttimes
put them into as pitiful a plight, as that good Alderman of London (their
friend) was in, when he thought himself to be shot in the breeches. Nor is here
all yet, these fears of theirs, have bin followed with increase of cares also,
to provide plenty of Prisons, and strong holds, to hamper and restrain the
Ministers of God, (those great enemies to their undertaking) to devise means
how to destroy both them and their doctrine; and all that (with them) adhere
fast to the testimony of Jesus; concerning obedience to God and Caesar. These
and such like have bin the late sufferings, and great troubles of these men;
And they are indeed (as we now confess) the more remarkable, because sufferings
of this kind, are seldom the portion of Gods children, (as these call
themselves) nor had we apprehended that this kind of life (which they have
lived) had bin a suffering; if themselves had not so called it, and put us in
mind so to account of it: Indeed some of the Brethren of the Independent
faction, (as M. Edwards that free-spoken Presbyterian in his Book detecting
their late manner of living in Holland, does inform the world) did call such a
kind of life, (themselves living it) a Persecution, and a suffering; otherwise
we have not heard that appellation given unto it before. But indeed these are
new times, and many other things have new names; Loyalty is called Treason, and
Treason Loyalty; Obedience Rebellion, and Rebellion Obedience; Truth Falsehood,
and Falsehood Truth: and why may not as well a pleasant life be called a life of
sufferings, and a suffering life, a life of pleasure, if it please the new
Omnipotency, now above-board, so to ordain and establish? No man must move the
lip, open the mouth, or so much as peep against it.

And thus at last (they may see) we have taken notice of their 2.
late sufferings, and confess them rare: Now we shall view their patience too,
which themselves call strange, specially that which they have shown even now,
after the discovery of these Papers: Indeed their publication of them, together
with their Preface, and Notes upon them, after their discovery, is testimony
sufficient of the strangeness of their patience. And yet we must tell them, that
we conceive by the effects of this their patience, that we have read of such a
like patience before now, in some others beside themselves: as for example, in
a certain Dragon, Rev. 12. 15. who when he had persecuted a woman there
mentioned, (whom some interpret to be the Church of Christ) and driven her into
a wilderness, i. e. into a low and desperate condition: his patience provoked
him, to cast out of his mouth after her, waters as a flood: which (as
Expositors say) were multitudes of slanders, reproachful speeches, scandalous
reports and lies, hoping thereby to drown her honor and reputation for ever;
(for they would be more easily believed of her, in her affliction) and to carry
her away so far, that she should never appear in any credible or comfortable
condition more: Nor did his patience end here, but the Text tells us, verse. 17.
that he went (farther in the heat thereof) to make war with the remnant of her
seed, that keep the Commandment of God, and have the testimony of Jesus. We are
sure this was such a patience, which these men are seasoned withal, and which
they have shown since their discovery of these Papers, and do still exercise
toward their Sovereign, and all that remain faithful and loyal to him.

Nay and farther too, we must tell these men, that this humor which they call
patience in themselves, though the name which they give it be something new; yet
for the nature of it, it is no whit strange or singular, for many men, before
these times, have bin infected with it: Cain was, when he killed his brother,
because Genesis 4.
his own works were evil, and his brothers good: and so was Nimrod, that mighty
Hunter before the Lord, and oppressor of his neighbors: Genesis 10.
1 Samuel 19. 2^
Saul in the Old Testament was full of this patience, when the Evil Spirit was
upon him, and made him throw his Javelin against David at one time, and against
Jonathan at another; and Act. 9. 1.
so was that Saul in the new Testament too, at such time as he went panting up
and down like a bloud-hound, and breathing forth 2 Samuel 16.
threatenings against the People of God: Shimei also was brim-ful to the very
mouth of it, when with his revilings and execrations he saluted David in the
depth of his affliction; and Achitophel did overflow therewith, when in all
haste he would have pursued his Sovereign, while he was faint and weary: This
Patience was in Haman too, when to be revenged for Mordecai's stifness, he
endeavored the ruin of the whole Jewish* Nation; it was in Nebuchadnez^ar
also, and made the form of his visage change against Sedrach, Mesach, and
Abednego, when in scruple of Conscience, they refused to submit to an Ordinance
of his, almost as damnable as the Parliament Covenant. And in the Scribes and
Pharisees it was most plentifully abounding, as appears by all their dealings
with Christ and his Apostles: Thus (I say) this condition, which these men
commend in themselves, for the matter of it, is not so new and strange; though
I confess the Name, (by which they call it) seems so to be; for it was wont to
be termed Rage, Cruelty, Wrath, and Fury, and not Patience: Yet I remember
Master Fox tells us that Bishop Bonner, and those of his bloody Consistory in
Queen Mary's days; who (having with as much rage and passion as can be
imagined, handled, and oppressed the Martyrs) when they came to read the
definitive sentence, and to give them up to the secular power to be put to
death; were wont to make proclamation, (as these men here do) to the whole
world, of their great meekness and strange Patience, which they had used
toward those obstinate Heretics, as they called them: So that we see this
Patience here mentioned, is not only by Bishop Bonners Authority a strange
Patience, but also such a Patience, as Master Fox himself does make mention of,
in the Book of Martyrs. But the poor Church of Christ has felt enough, and too
much of this their Patience, therefore at this time, I will speak no more of it,
only I conclude in the words of the Prophet Micha, The best of them is Mic. 7.
4.
as a Bryer, the most upright of them, is sharper then the thorn Hedge.

The next thing they mention (wherein they Triumph indeed. 3.
and glory) is their late extraordinary success in the field: some perhaps may
wonder, how these three can accord together, great sufferings, strange
Patience, and extraordinary good success, and all of late: but they must
remember, that their Sufferings and Patience, being of that kind, as was showed
before, may well stand with extraordinary good success, yea, in such men as they
are, such sufferings, and such patience, are the natural fruits and dependants
of prosperity, and Extraordinary good Success.

But by the way, take notice of their end, in yoaking these three together;
Prosperity and good success, which of old, went current only among the
Papists, for a Note of the true Church; is now admitted also by these men, to
be a special mark of the goodness of their cause; but in regard our Religion
has hitherto taught, that sufferings, and patience were rather the marks of
Christ's true flock, then extraordinary success in the world; therefore
Euphoniae gratia, for sound sake, the name of sufferings and patience, are
still retained, and joined together here, with extraordinary good success;
Alteratio non fit in instanti, if the Change from one extreme unto another,
should not be by degrees, it would be too gross, and palpable: but by that
time the three Propositions be granted to them, Extraordinary good success
will be able to stan alone, and to go current among all their Proselites, for
an unquestionable note of the true Church, or cause: it will not need the
countenance of these two names of Suffering and Patience, which shall from
thenceforth be rejected, and wholly disclaimed, as infallible marks of Loyalty
and Malignancy.

Indeed, success is the best Argument they have to win and hold people to
themselves, and to their Cause: wherefore it is requisite that for further
discovery, I show the invalidity, and weakness of this their Argument. But
first for our better progress therein, we shall consider what this
extraordinary success is, which they so brag and boast of, and what are the
true grounds and causes of it.

Their Success (I confess) to narrow Capacities, and low brains may seem
(as they call it) extraordinary: but to those that consider the causes of
things, together with the means and manner of their proceedings, it appears
nothing so.

It Is well known how by fraud and policy, they seized at unawares upon the Kings
Militia and Navy: How they engrossed into their hands, most of his Towns,
Castles, Rents, Revenues, and all he had; leaving him nothing of his own to
subsist on: How they rooked to themselves, all the Plate and Money of the
Kingdom: and how by the service of false Teachers, they poisoned the hearts of
his Subjects; drew them from their Allegiance and armed them against him: And
having done all this, they were able to get a Victory against him at
Nazeby-field; after they had taken away, what ere he had to defend himself,
they made a shift to beat him with his own Weapons; after four long years
pursuit of him: and what extraordinary matter is there in all this? Nay, some
say too, they had not prevailed then neither, but that they plowed with the
Kings Heifer: (as they also did, in their taking those Towns and Castles,
which since they entered upon:) Had not some, whom the King trusted, been
perfidious, these great Conquerours had not been so prosperous: Wherefore the
case being rightly stated, it was not altogether Victorious Sir Thomas Fairfax,
but partly also victorious treachery, and victorious money, which was the
procurer of such their late extraordinary great success: And yet (perhaps) Sir
Thomas Fairfax may be a right valiant man in his way, as many other Commanders
on that side are, worthy all to be And I hope through Gods mercy to them in
Gods time they may, to their own eternal comfort and honor; and the recovery
of the Kingdoms lost glory.
engaged in a more noble and righteous quarrel; and I wish, with my Soul, for
their Souls sake, and for the honor of the English Nation, that either the
cause which they strive to maintain were better, or that their industry
wherewith they maintain it, were not so good.

But that none may think that the extraordinary success, which these
perverters of Order, these underminers of Government, have had, and which these
troubles of Israel, these over-turners of Christianity do boast of, is to be
attributed to any goodness in their cause, or to any Celestial or Divine
benediction upon it. I shall desire them to consider of the true Grounds and
Reasons of it. I shall name only those that are most visible, amongst which I
might mention private divisions, between our Chieftaines, who Nemo parere
gnarus, nemo imperare.
to revenge themselves of one another, seemed not to care what advantage they
gave to the common foe, nor what detriment to the King: but this has been too
sufficiently, yea, too shamefully visible, without further notice.

I might mention also the Indiscretion, or inability of those, who have
undertaken to manage the Kings Affairs: The greatest talkers (says the
Proverb) are not always the wisest men. He Strenui lingua multi, ignavifere
omnes opera.
that can make a witty speech, is not always meetest to sway a Council; nor
are men of quickest gust or relish, always men of the best and sagest spirit;
it is one thing to give directions, for dressing of a good Dinner, and another
thing to give orders, for the governing of a great Army: Beside, the Genius of
some men, is neither public nor noble enough, either to gain, or keep the
Hearts of people, who by a certain instinct from above, are most regardfull
(in troublesome times) of those, whom they apprehend, to be most neglectfull of
themselves. Assuredly the King and his Cause both, have received the greatest
wounds from the hands of Friends.

I might also mention men's dishonesty, in falsifying the trust imposed in them,
when they have by their oppression and violence, Denique in duribus ipsis non
consilium non fides. Lips.
beggered the people committed to their care; by their excess and harshness,
weakened their hearts, and loosened the joints of Loyalty in them: and made the
places strong and fensible, (as if they had been there set, only to enrich
themselves, and to make preparation for the Enemy, and this being done, their
work were done) they have delivered up all into the adversaries hand, and so
departed. But to omit these and many more particulars, (which might be named)
which have occasioned that great success so gloried in; I shall mention only
three, viz. Remissness in the best of ours, Profaneness in the worst, and
Popular fury.

1. Remisness. The best on our side in general, being not armed or quickened,
with such stings of Hatred, as they on their side are, have been more heavy and
dull in their opposite desires, and inferior to them in their attempts and
practices, They by tumbling and tossing like heaps of snow rolled up and down,
have grown great and mighty: and we, by our frosty coldness, have given them
leave to harden: Whereby they are increased to that stupendous heap we see;
though it is possible yet that a thaw may come, for rota fortunae is in gyro,
notwithstanding their present bigness, they may be sensible of a diminution,
might but the glorious Sunshine of Gods Countenance, return again upon our
Sovereign.

And yet (perhaps) this Remisness (which I seem to tax in these of ours) has
been more from others restraint, then their own sluggishness; for (alas!) the
chiefest care of too many amongst us, has been to damp the endeavors of good
men, in such places where they might have been most serviceable: yea, to
prevent (if possible) their being trusted, or employed at all; for fear (I
think) the Kings Affairs should thrive too well; if such had had the managing
of them: many of the Kings friends (as they have been called) have been so
faithful to Him, that they would neither do their own duties, nor suffer
others to do theirs; having themselves deserved ill, they could not abide, that
others should deserve better; it has been one of the hardest things, for a
known honest man to obtain leave of them, (since the Kings troubles began) to
do His Majesty faithful service: yea, I have heard it often said, that the
surest and speediest way, for one to bring himself to ruin, among many of the
Kings men, was to be more active, and honest, then others, in doing the Kings
work. Nay, if a Minister of Christ has but labored earnestly and zealously
in his proper way, (according to his Office) in the behalf of God, his
Sovereign, and his Country; He has grown remarkable on the sudden, and
been noted by many (that should have encouraged him) for an unsufferable
fellow; fit for nothing but for slaughter, (unless presently silenced and
dismissed) for they have cried, He will spoil the Kings Cause if let alone,
and make all the Soldiers stark Puritanes, rank Roundheads, or else stir up
all the people against us: (and all this, but for his faithful and true
dislike of that which spoiled it.) Remissness therefore in good men, is
granted a mean to preserve their own safeties, but withal it is undoubtedly one
of the special things that has damnified the Kings Cause, and advanced that of
the Enemy.

2. As Remissness in some, so profaneness and high impiety in 2.
some others of our side has weakened us, and aided them: it is a true saying, A
divine blessing does always accompany good causes, where wickedness and
wilful witlessenesse does not bar against it; but when either of these oppose,
the blessing is obstructed: and (alas!) Hinc dolor, Hinc lacrymae, hence also
is the source of our sorrows, and of our enemies good success: Sir Edwin Sands
in his Europae speculum tells us, that the Jews in their speculations of the
causes of the strange success of worldly affairs, do assign the reason of
the Turks prevailing against the Christians to their Blasphemies, and horrid
Oaths, which do wound the ears of the very Heavens, and cry to the throne of
Justice for Divine vengeance: whereas the Turks hate profanation, and will
not suffer Christ to be ill spoken of: the same reason may be given for the
enemies prevailing of late against the Kings men. (Though I do not say that
all on the Enemies side, are free from this hellish sin, or so respectfull of
Christ and God, as the Turks are in this particular: for there are with them,
even with them also, most horrid swearers, and most execrable blasphemers: but
their evils hurt not us, as our own do, nor are so mis-becoming their Cause,
as ours are to that which we maintain.) And indeed never any good undertaking
had so many unworthy attendants: such horrid blasphemers, and wicked wretches
as ours has had: I quake to think, much more to speak, what mine ears have
heard, from some of their lips: but to discover them, is not my present
business; a day may come, when the world may see, that we who adhere to the
King for Conscience sake, (what ever is said of us to the contrary) have as
truly hated the profaneness and vileness of our own men, as we have done the
disloyalty and Rebellion of the Enemy: For indeed, the truth is, betwixt them
both (as betwixt two mil-stones) the King, his Cause, and our selves too, are
ground in pieces: and were the matter well opened, it would appear, that both
those and these, have had but one and the same end, even to satisfy their own
lusts, and enrich themselves, with the ruins of their King and Country. But
without all question, neglect of Religion, and want of Discipline, has weakened
and undone the Kings Armies: O had His Sacred Majesty's Commands, and Orders
for the exercise of both, been put in Execution, the Enemy had never been able
to have stood before us.

3. Popular Fury, (which is like the rushing of mighty waters) 3.
comes also in, to the making up of this Land-floud, which gives the Adversary
such occasion of glorying: the Addition of the many, though it can add no true
credit to their Cause, yet it makes the success appear extraordinary: The
People (says Jeremy) Jer. 5. 4.
are foolish, and know not Gods way: and our Savior says, the Multitude walk
in the broad way; they are led much by mouth and noise, and incline always to
the strongest: their delights are, to lift up those that are already up, and to
throw down lower, the already down: with them the winner has always praise,
let a man get power or prosperity how he can, he shall not want virtue in their
opinions. A notable Testimony of this we have in that prophetical vision, Rev.
13. (wherein is foreshewn Rev. 13.
what shall fall out in these latter times) we are there told of a certain
Beast with many Heads, whom all the world wonder after, in regard of his Power
and Authority, which (notwithstanding) was not lawful, or rightly come by, (as
the Text infers) For the Dragon or Devil did give it to him, and not God, yet
such was the blindness and fury of the People, that they did worship and adore
him for it.

And by the way, let us here note: that Satan is sometime said to give power
(by Gods permission) as well as God: and as that power which is gotten by
honest and lawful means, is Gods gift, of which kind was that of Pilat,
(though abused by him) John 19. 11.
it was conferred upon him, by the voluntary designement of Caesar, the Supreme
Magistrate: and therefore (our Savior says) it was of God, or from above: So
that strength and Authority (on the other side) which is obtained by unlawful
courses, is the gift of Satan; and such was that of the many-headed Monster
forementioned: He is said, to have received power from the Dragon, because by
fraud, violence, and unjust ways, he had gryped a great strength of the
Militia into his hands, whereby for a season he was succesefull in many
designs. Yea, says the spirit, verse. 7. He made War with the Saints, and
overcame them; He prevailed over men of all sorts, small and great, rich and
poor, free and bond; and compelled them to receive a Mark, or to take a
Covenant, and no man might live and trade, buy or sell in all his Quarters,
that scrupled at it. And in regard of this his great Power, and success
together; all that dwelt upon the earth, or in the Countries where he had to
do, (those only excepted (says the Text) whose names were written in the
book of Life) did worship the Beast wondered after him, and admired him:
saying, who is like unto the Beast? who is able to make War with him? And no
doubt but the Beast did admire himself too, for such his greatness and success
among the People, whose foolish and froward access (indeed) did make the same
so extraordinary.

These I conceive are the chief causes of that prosperity which the enemy so
much glories in; what invisible reasons there be in Gods secret Council for
his permitting this, I cannot tell; but sure I am, (though the Adversaries may
have received their power as that beast did, to do as they have done, yet)
Gods Hand it self, is in the Judgment, as it is a punishment. And indeed we
have sinned one with another, and therefore are justly punished one by another;
we had made this happy and rich Kingdom the stage of our wickedness, and
therefore it is become unto us an Acheldama, or field of blood; and should God
make it an Hell also, for ever to torment us in; it would be but our due merit,
and his true Justice: Let us give God his due glory, He is righteous in all his
doings.

The Judgment (indeed) has fallen hitherto, most heavy upon the Kings Family,
and Party; and this I believe is of Gods special permission too; but whether
because Judgment does usually 1 Pet. 4. 17.
begin at Gods own house, or because we on that side, are in the general so
sinful, and the best of us so little affected with these national miseries,
and so little humbled under our own, I cannot tell, Gods Counsels are a great
deep: But let this be confessed to our shame, (of which I wish we could take
more unto our selves, for this is a time and season to do it in) I think since
the world began, there was never so great a Judgment less laid to heart,
(wherein so many are concerned) then this is by us. Alas, Alas! Who amongst us
yet speaks aright? Who repents him of his wickedness? Who lamenteth for his
sin? Who smites himself, and says, What have I done? Every one (in a manner)
still Jer. 8. 6.
goes on ^in his old course, and runs desperately upon his own ruin, even as
the Horse that wants understanding, rusheth into the battle. We have those
that seem to hate Religion, as much as the Rebels do Loyalty; yea that make
Religion a mark of Rebellion, even as they on the other side do make Rebellion
a mark of Religion: Nay I would they did not hate both Loyalty and Religion
too; sure they use those worst that are to both these best affected; we must
needs think that God has an high indignation against such persons, and
disdaines sure, to make them succesfull instruments in his righteous Cause, and
perhaps till they be cut off, the enemies shall prosper: and then the wheel
shall be turned another way; and the truly Loyal and Religious, in quos victor
victusque furit, that suffer by both sides, may see bette^ times.

We find the Church in her complaint of such men, prophesying to this purpose,
O Lord, thy hand (scil. of Justice) is lifted up, and Isay 26. 11.
they will not see or acknowledge the same: but they shall see, (scil. before
God has done with them, and feel too) yea, and he ashamed for their envy (or
malice) at thy people, (viz. who make better use of the judgment then
themselves do) for the fire of thine enemies shall devour them, i. e. the fire
of rage, and power of doing hurt, shall be the longer permitted to Gods very
enemies, until these wicked, and ungodly wretches, are devoured, scattered or
destroyed: And till then (as is inferred also in that Chapter) even the
righteous people that keep the truth, and wait for God, in the way of his
judgments, must with patience submit themselves, and meekly bear the
indignation; remembering that God has always had his time to sift and try,
whom he has formerly taught and fed: and this to them is that season: this is
Gods threshing time, His fan is now in his hand; he is taking away his wheat,
and has carried much of it already out of sight, the chafe remains still in
great heaps upon the floor; and having received little or no diminution,
glories in its extraordinary great success, not thinking what must shortly be
done with it, how it is designed to the fire.

But because Success is so great a plea with these men, and so. 4.
prevalent with most people: I will first show, that it is the weakest Argument
that can be alleged to prove the goodness of a Cause; and then, that the
wickedest men have most used it. But of both these briefly.

Concerning the first, David in the 73. Psalm, describing the Psalm. 73.
outward estate of evil men, says, they were successful in their affairs;
insomuch that people thereupon came in apace unto them, yea so prosperous they
were in their way, that himself in a manner Jeremy 12.
was non-plussed at the matter. And Jeremy the Prophet argues with God about
the same thing, why it should so be, That they who dealt very treacherously,
should be so very happy: Whose conditions also in another place, he describes
more fully in these words. Among my people are found wicked men, who lie in
wait, Jer. 5. 26, 27.
and set traps and snares to catch their Brethren, their houses are full of
deceit and wrong, yea they do (in their injustice and cruelty) surpass the
deeds of ordinary wicked men: they take upon them to be Judges, and yet judge
not the cause, no not so much as the cause of the fatherless, or the right of
the needy, and yet they prosper, are become great, grow rich, waxen fat and
shine.

Here was prosperity we see, here was success, but no Honesty, no goodness.
So the Prophet Habakkuk complains of treacherous Hab. 1. 13. 15, 16.
dealers, and wicked persons, who devoured men more righteous then themselves:
They catched them in their nets, and gathered them in their drags, and
thereupon rejoiced in themselves, and offered sacrifice to their own nets,
burnt incense to their drags, because by them their portion was fat, and their
meat plenteous.

We read in Rev. 12. of the true Church, How she was driven by the Dragon into
the wilderness, i. e. into a desolate and obscure Condition, Delituit in
Cavernis, non eminuit in primariis sedibus, Rev. 12. 14.
(as one says) she was not visible, ^as formerly, nor had she power and
liberty to show her self in her family, or to govern her Children, as she was
wont to do; she was in the very same Condition, as our Mother Church of England
is now in; the devil had obtained great success against her, but shall we
conclude from thence, that He was in the right, and she in the wrong, or Him to
be the beloved of God, and she the hated? we have no sufficient reason for it.
So in the 7. ver. of the next Chap. where Rev. 13. 13, 7.
that Beast is said to make War with the Saints, to overcome them; does it
therefore follow, that his cause was better then theirs? I Dan. 11. 36. etc.
think not. In the 11. of Daniel a certain vile person (so entitled) is
prophesied of, who should do much mischief, against the Holy people, whom he
should kill and destroy, and against the Sanctuary, or place of Gods worship,
which he should pollute, taking away the daily Sacrifice, (or Common Prayer
unto God) and setting up the Abomination of Desolation in the room thereof;
Yea, he should exalt himself (above Him he ought to obey) and speak Blasphemous
things, against the God of gods; He should Honor only the God of forces, i.
e. He should trust only in his Militia, or strength of weapons for safety and
protection, (all these it seems are the conditions of a vile person) yet should
he prosper for an appointed time, until the indignation be accomplished, (says
the Text) which was determined to be done. We know that C^in prevailed against
Abel, yet Abel was the better man, and offered the better sacrifice: Nay, the
Pharisees (we know) prevailed against Christ himself, for a season, had their
wills of him, got him Crucified by the common vote and consent of the people,
even according to the desires of their own hearts. And from hence it was
believed by a great many, that Christ was even such a man as his Enemies
reported him: scil. a Deceiver, and a Malefactor: and that it was the just
judgment of God upon him, for his sins: He was despised, rejected of men,
(says the Prophet) Yea, we esteemed Esaias 53. 4.
him smitten of God, (scil. for his own sins) and afflicted. Nay, some of his
Disciples themselves were so staggered at the matter, that even they, made a
question, whether he were the man, whom they took him to be, because of that
success which his Enemies had against him: we trusted (say they) it had been
Luke 24.
he, that should have redeemed Israel, as if they now feared they were
deceived. Indeed it is the Humor of men, (though often warned to the contrary)
to pass sentence upon others from a view of their outward condition; if they
prosper, then they conclude them good, and beloved of God; if not, then wicked
presently: When the Viper was seen hanging ^n S. Paul's hand; He was Act. 28. 3,
4.
judged a Murderer immediately, and the worst man in all the company: so those
whom Pilate s^ew, (while they were at their devotions) and those ^n whom the
Tower of Siloe fell, were thought Lu^e 13. 2, 3.
greater sinners, then other men, because of their misfortunes, which opinion
our Savior himself conf^teth: Yea scripture throughout, and daily experience
both, does inform us, that the best men are usually the most afflicted, for
this world is the furnace wherein, and Affliction, is the fire wherewith, God
neals his people, and makes them fit for a better habitation: And thus we see
that to argue from success, is but a weak kind of Arguing; nay, these very men
that now use the same in their own behalf, were wont to say heretofore, (when
others have prevailed against their faction) The m^re Knave the better luck; I
know no reason but that Proverb is still as t^^e as ever.

^. But I shall now show in the next place, that the worst men. 5.
have always ^in wont to plead this Argument; Two or three examples amongst
many shall be alleged to this purpose: The Scripture tells of ^^bsakeh, when he
moved the people of Jerusalem, (as these men do us) to make a general revolt
from Hezekiah, he pretended that God had set him on work, and had Isai. 36. 10,
19.
said, Go up against this land, and destroy it, and his main Argument was, his
Masters extraordinary great success: to which purpose, he reckoned up (as our
enemies do) a great many Cities, Towns, and Castles, which he had taken; as
H^nah, and Ar^^^d, Sepharvaim, Henah, and Iva^. And so the Turk argue at this
day against the Christians, that their Religion excels ours, because they have
prospered better, and prevailed more then we have done. And in like sort the
Independent faction may urge the same thing, against the Presbyterians here
amongst ^s; for they have been the most succesful: and if the Argument be good,
then down must go the Presbytery (as well as Episcopacy.) r^^t and branch: and
the Parliament have erred in Voting for it, yea, and the Covenant taken to
conform the Government of this Church, to that of Scotland, becomes frustrate
and of none effect: But to proceed*

As Ra^s^akeh and the Turks, so the Popish Bishops in Qu. Mary's time, did
insist much upon this Argument, (as Master Fox Fox Marty^ed.
witnesses) they would urge upon the Martyrs their extraordinary success,
which they and their cause had, by King Edwards death, and Queen Mary's coming
to the Crown, (against such great endeavors to the contrary) these very men,
who now use the same Argument, in their own behalf, will not allow, that it was
sufficiently good then, in the behalf of the Papists. I ^il mention but one
example more, and that is of Pope Alexander the third, who (as story speaks
him) was none of the best men; when he had prevailed against the good Emperor
Frederick the second, his Liege-Lord (as these have done against their King) by
getting a great victory against him, wherein, most unfortunately his son was
taken prisoner: for redemption of whom, the Emperor was forced to prostrate
himself upon the ground, and yield his neck to be trodden on: and to acknowledge
Alexander to be rightful Pope, (which by reason of a schism was before denied)
and to restore what ever had been taken, during the war on his part: when (I
say) the Pope had brought him to all this (and to such like things would these
men now bring their S^veraig^, as is evident by the Doctrine of their
Preachers, who tell the people that God will bring the necks of Kings under the
feet of his Saints, that is, (as they interpret) under the feet of their
faction) then did He, (the said Pope) insult and glory, (as these already begin
to do) in his Extraordinary great success; and made it his Argument, to
persuade the foolish world, (after these men's fashion) that his cause was Gods,
and that God had favored his quarrel, as the most just and lawful. Henry ^ypr.
d^ Valor. in his Book, called, The lives of Popes.
King of England, and Lewis King of France, were both in the Seduction, in
token whereof, being both on foot, they held the Bridle of the Horse, on which
the Pope rode, the one with the right hand, and the other with the left. And
thus also we see that the worst men, have bin wont to use this kind of Arguing,
which our Adversaries now think to be so good, and do stand so much upon.

But from this consideration, we (for our parts) shall beware of being swayed by
it, or of judging Gods love or hatred from outward Accidents; fools only build
upon such foundations: Evil Stulius ab eventu sacta notanda p^^at.
is the touchstone of Good, and often gets the better of it, to try goodness
Constancy. The Arc was taken Prisoner by the Philistines; it does not follow
thereupon that God did hate the ^ Sam. 4.
same; no more does it now follow, that he hates the King, because he lets his
Enemies (for the present) prevail against him. For Isreal's sin, God suffered
the Arc of his glory to be obscured, (for a season) so for our sins it is that
our Sovereign is afflicted. And let not these Insulters persuade themselves,
that our Allegiance is so weakly knit, that it can be loo^ened with this
Argument, we are not of them that draw back; nor yet of them, that Heb. 10. 39.
blush not to affirm, that so long as the King is able to protect them, they
are bound to serve him, but no longer: these waters of affliction, that have so
plentifully showred down upon his Head, are not able in the least degree, to
quench the heat of our love, they are as oil rather, to enlarge the flames of
our affections: the Enemies success against him, and ill usage of him, does but
make him appear in our eyes, more like our Savior; and so locks our hearts the
faster to him. And let these King-Tormentors know, that God has an hook for
their Noses, and a Bridle for their lips, and the things that are coming upon
them make have: Nulla sors l^nga est, the weathercock may turn; alieno in l^co
haud stabile regnum est, there is no constant sitting in another seat, ima
permutat brevis Hora summis, who knows what a year, a month, or a day may bring
forth? quos foelices Cynt^ia vidit, vidit miseres abitura dies: Great and wise
Agamemnon professed, that he had learned by his victories (...), that great
things are overturned in a monent: Troya nos tumidos fecit, nimium and feroces,
(says he) Troyes Conquest has made us proud, and cruel, fierce and haughty:
Et Stamus nos Danai loco, unde illa cecidit, we the Conquerours are in the same
condition, from whence she fell: Hodie mihi, cras tibi, is the Motto of all
Mortals, our portion of sorrow we have to day, they shall have theirs to morrow;
the times may so alter, that Affliction may chance to stand again for a mark of
Gods Children, even in their Calender, res Deus nostras celeri citatas turbine
versat. And so I have done with this particular, and come to that which these
Libellers add in their next words: Having minded us of their late
extraordinary success in the field, they proceed and say,

Yet still this Clandestine proceedings against us here, condemning Libell.
all that are in any degree Protestants at Oxford, as also granting a
Tolleration of Idolatry to Papists, indemnity to the Murderous Irish, in a
close trading way, for mere particular advantage, cannot be defended by any,
but by the falsest of men, Papists; and by the falsest of Papists, Jesuits.

SECT. XVII.
1. Another Charge against the King Confuted: of Clandestine proceedings. 2.
The Kings condemning all that be Protestants at Oxford, a most impudent and
malicious slander. 3. His toleration of Idolatry another: The Occasion of the
Kings promising to take away the Penal Laws concerning Papists. 4. The
Reasonableness of that promise, at that time, and upon that occasion. 5. The
Objection of the Kings former resolution to the contrary answered: As also of
his promise not to Abolish the Laws against them.

HEre is a new Charge upon the King, consisting of many particulars.. 1.
1. Clandestine proceedings against them at Westminster. 2. Condemning all that
are in any degree Protestants at Oxford. 3. Granting a Toleration of Idolatry
to Papists. 4. Indemnity to the murderous Irish: And all these are aggravated
by three main Circumstances, one from the time inferred in the word yet still:
another from the manner of working, in a close truding way; and the third from
the end, for mere particular advantage: all which put together, make the King
(in their judgments) incapable of all defense, unless by the falsest of men
living, who (as they say) are in general Papists, in special Jesuits.

These men surely having read in the 9. of John, the Pharisees trick of
affrighting people from professing Christ; do here make an experiment of it,
hoping for a like effect, that as none durst speak in Christ's behalf, for fear
of exclusion from the Synagogue, and of being accounted as an Heathen or a
Publican: So none will dare to contradict what they have said, or to speak a
word in the Kings defense, for fear of exclusion from their approbation; and of
being reckoned the very worst of men, a Papist, nay, a Jesuit, and used
accordingly.

But (perhaps) here in they are not so wise as they would be taken, nitimur in
vetitum, we love in these days, to look narrowly into things forbidden: this
bridle they would put upon us, makes us believe, that they seek to smother
those beams of wisdom; and to suppress those sparks of truth, which if laid
to view in these Letters, would quickly f^ie into their faces, and give the Lie
to their observations. If they be able to Justify what they say; why should
they bar any man Liberty of opposing? truth fears no stirring; nor do honest
men fear sifting: we are commanded to prove all things, to the end we may hold
fast 1 These. 5. 21.
only that which is good. Wherefore notwithstanding the danger laid before me;
I shall obey God in doing my duty to the truth, and to my Sovereign. I will
examine the accusation as it lies, and begin with their yet still, or first
Circumstance.

Yet still must needs (according to Grammar) have reference to what precedes, as
well as to that which follows: that which precedes, is their late extraordinary
success in the field, scil. when these Papers were surprised: that which
follows, is the relation of diverse crimes, which (as must be supposed) they
have found in these Papers: now yet still is uttered as an aggravation of the
said crimes, as if after their extraordinary success (which must be believed,
spoke Gods approbation of their cause) the King had been guilty of that, which
they lay to his Charge out of the said Papers, and had written all that is
found amiss in them, after they were surprised. So that yet still imports thus
much: Notwithstanding Gods manifestation of himself against the King, by the
late extraordinary success in the field, which the holy and blessed Parliament
had against him: He (contrary to this conviction) has used clandestine
proceedings against them at Westminster, has condemned all that were in any
degree Protestants at Oxford, has granted a Toleration of Idolatry to Papists,
and indemnity to the Murderous Irish, and what ever beside is liable to blame
(according to their fenses) in these Letters.

But this pretty Aggravation of theirs, is but a bare circumstance, and
therefore I pass it over only with this little notice.

The Charge it self follows, which consists of an huge heap of heinous words,
resembling a man of straw, that at first blush, carries some proportion to our
seeming, but being felt and poized, is discovered to be a mere vanity, serving
only to fray Crows.

1. They cry out of Clandestine proceedings, scil. against them at Westminster,
for by us here, none else can be intended; these (it seems) they would have in
the first place to be marked with a Noli me tangere; and great reason for it,
many fields in England have bin watered with humane blood, to keep them from
being touched: they have deserved so abundantly well of their Country and
Nation, in keeping safe the Religion, Peace, and Wealth thereof, without any
the least Schism, breach or diminution; that it were a mortal sin, but to think
amiss of them. Wherefore the King must needs be much too blame, for using any
clandestine proceedings against them at Westminster: and the rather, because
they were never guilty of any clandestine proceedings against him. They went
openly to work in all that ever they did: told him at first, when he called
them together, what he should look for at their hands: yea, and when they sued
unto him, to sign their Bil for continuing the Parliament; they plainly
declared, how they would serve him: that they would seize first upon his
Magazines and Navy; and then raise a bloody War against him: that they would
separate his Wife from him, and hunt his Person up and down the Kingdom: rob
him of all his Wealth, and the Hearts of his people: they foretold him of all;
nor had they ever any private Conventicles before hand, to plot their
business, nor since their meeting, did they ever make use of a close
Committee: They never had any Clandestine packing with those of Scotland, nor
with any other, of any other Nation; but have done all things clearly, and in
the face of the Sun: If ought has befell the King to his dislike or distaste,
he may thank himself only for it: for he knew their minds before hand, they hid
nothing from him; and therefore it must needs be granted, that the King does
very ill, to use any Clandestine proceedings against such honest plain-dealing
men, as those be, that sit at Westminster.

But (by the way) what are these Clandestine proceedings trow ye? why we must
look into these his Letters for them, wherein we shall find him plotting with
his Queen, about bringing the Treaty at Uxbridge on foot again, and to make
her the Instrument thereof: (could there be but a pre-assurance, that the
Rebels would submit to reason) Thou (says he) art the fittest Person, to be
the means of so happy, and glorious a work, as is the peace of this Kingdom.
Pap. 2. (was not here Clandestine proceedings now, and a dangerous conspiracy
against them at Westminster, who are resolved to have no peace, till all be
destroyed?)

Again, he does advise his Queen, (being in France) to enquire whether
Lenthall the Speaker (according to his own brag) does keep a strict
intelligence with the Cardinal Mazarine, Though I will not swear (says he)
that Lenthall says true, yet I am sure it is fit for thee to know. Pap. 1. Here
was another Clandestine business.

And further he does consult with her about supplies of Men, Moneys and Powder,
for defense of his life against them of Westminster, Pap. 3. and gives her
direction for the conveyance of it in some other Papers: (a business
Clandestine and shrewd too:) And in Paper 6. he assures her in private, that
Hertogen, the Irish Agent was an arrant Knave, (a particular which might
concern the men of Westminster, and touch them more close, then perhaps every
body will yet believe) Besides, in most of these Letters, we shall find the
King, and his Queen comforting and supporting each other, under their heavy
burdens, with mutual intimation of perfect love, and patheticall expressions
of conjugall affection: All which, are notable proceedings indeed against them
at Westminster, and great obstructions to their endeavors, which are to break
the Hearts of both, and sink them to their graves presently: And thus we see
the nature and danger of the first particular in the Charge, concerning
Clandestine proceedings, which are so evident, that we can say nothing against
it.

The 2. follows, the proof whereof, is more and obscure: and that is
condemning all that are in any degree Protestants in Oxford; by which they
would have it believed, that the King is so great an Enemy to Protestant
Religion, that his very friends at Oxford, who have forsaken all they had for
his sake, are hated by him for their Religion sake, so many of them as are
Protestants in any degree: But how this is manifest in these his Papers, we are
to seek, for though these men have forehead enough to affirm it, yet their
fortune is not good enough to prove it. Indeed we find the King in his Letters
to Ormond, Paper 16. and in his Directions to his Commissioners at Uxbridge,
taking great care, and giving strict Charge, for the preservation of his
Protestant Subjects in Ireland; but in no place can we see so much as a
syllable tending to the condemnation of Protestant Religion.

But these men cannot leave their old trade of Taxing the King with their own
Conditions: Heaven and Earth can witness, that never was there in England,
greater enemies to Protestant Religion, then themselves have been; never was
there so much Protestant Blood spilt in this Nation, since the beginning of the
world, as has been by their means within these four years: Never was London
so full of Prisons; never the Prisons so full of Protestant Divines; Protestant
Nobles, Gentry, and Christians of all sorts, as they have been, since these
good men kept Court at Westminster. Besides, how they have Countenanced and
brought into the Church, all kind of Sects and Heresies to the ruin of
Protestantisme, which the King for the Honor and Health thereof, was always
careful to suppress and keep out? How have they maintained and preached
Doctrines of Devils, scil. of strife, murder of Brethren, Rebellion against
Princes, oppression of neighbors; and practiced the same; which are all
directly opposite to the Religion of the Protestants? How have they abolished
the Book of Common Prayer, established by Parliament, to be the Protestants
public form of Worshipping and serving God in this Kingdom? Had the King done
but any one of these things, or were he not himself a most constant and
zealous Professor of Protestant Religion in his daily practice, these men
might happily have had some Color, for this their confident Charge against
him: and so to have created suspicions of him. But seeing all things are so
clear contrary, we learn only thus much from this particular on their
charge, that they are men, whose hearts are not overspiced with honesty: They
pass not what they say, nor with what face, so they say no truth.

The third particular which they load their King withal, is. 3.
Tolleration of Idolatry to Papists: which they speak, as if Idolatry sub eo
nomine were already allowed, and set up by the Kings Authority, in contempt of
God and true Religion, and so (doubtless) they would have it apprehended.

Reasonable men will yield that there is a difference betwixt Idolatry, and the
Penalty thereof; the penalty may be suspended, altered, or taken away for the
time, and yet the sin it self not tolerated or allowed: These doubty
Champions will not yield that their Parlia. have granted a tolleration to
Adultery, though they have abrogated the penal Laws against that sin, and so
taken away the means to punish it: Nor can they prove that the King has
promised any more to Papists, then the Parliament has already granted to
fornicatours.

In their after-notes, (where they make repetition of this matter) they refer
the Reader to Paper the 8. for their ground of it: In which we find the King
relating to His Queen, how the English Rebels had transmitted the Commands of
Ireland, from the Crown of England to the Scots: an expression worthy (by the
way) to be observed by all Englishmen, that regard the honor of their Nation,
considering that the King Himself is a Scot, and that the men of Westminster
intend, if they cannot kill Him, to thrust Him and His Children, (as some of
their Hang-bies have whispered) to His Ancient Inheritance in Scotland; when
they have made use of His People of that Nation, to help to destroy His Kingly
Power here, not one Scot of them all, shall have any footing, or any more to
do in this Kingdom: I say, considering this, every true Englishman has cause
most highly to reverence the King for His Justice unto, and His care of the
dignity of the English Crown. But to proceed; the King tells His Queen, that,
by that Act, (that base and ignoble act) He found Reformation of the Church,
not to be (as they pretended) the end of this Rebellion: and concludes, it
would be no piety, but presumption rather in Himself, not to use all lawful
means to maintain His righteous Cause: And as one mean to that purpose, not
thought of before, He gives His Queen leave to promise in His Name, that all
penal Laws in England, against Roman Catholics shall be taken away: as soon
(says He) as God shall enable me to do it; upon this Conditiion, so as by
their means, I may have so powerful assistance, as may deserve so great a
favor, and enable me to do it. Now how truly from these words, that
accusation is collected, let the Readers Judge: Here they see, is no absolute
grant, or tolleration of Idolatry (as they pretend) but only a conditionary
promise of withdrawing the penal Statutes against the Papists His Subjects, if
by their means, He may be delivered from this bloody raging, and malicious
persecution of the Puritans, and settled in His power and throne again.

And well may the Papists expect as much favor from the King for such a
service, as Adulterers have had already from the Parliament gratis.

Nor perhaps will the King appear so abundantly culpable in this case (as
these men would have Him) if these 3. following particulars be well considered
upon.

1. The lawfulness of using the aid of Papists, specially being His own
Subjects, in case of life and extremity, of which I have spoaken somewhat
before Page 80.
to which I refer the Reader.

All that the Enemy can object is, the Kings Resolution to the contrary at the
beginning of this Rebellion: His words to this purpose, they fail not to
allege in the end of their observations, Page 55. where also they tell us,
that the King made a strict Proclamation for the punishing those of that
Religion, that should presume to list themselves under Him; and that a way by
Oath was prescribed for discrimination of them, and instructions granted to the
Commissioners of Array in all places to dis-arme them. All which does but speak
His Majesty's full purpose of keeping his Resolution, for the King doubtless
did verily believe, (till experience taught the contrary) that Protestant
Religion had such a power in the hearts of those that pretended so much unto
it, that they would never suffer Him (their Sovereign and protector) to stand
in need of the help of Papists to defend Him. And these men (in the same place)
confess, that at the battle of Edgehill, the Papists were taken into the
Kings Army of mere necessity: and they allege (in scorn) the excuse (as
they call it) which the King gave for the same, namely, that by law, they were
prohibited Arms in time of peace, and not in time of War: which distinction
(say these) bore date long after the War begun, but that was want of
invention only: perhaps so, for who could have believed that men of their
pretendings, should prove so highly vile, and base, as they have done in
driving their King to such exigents? or that the People of our Religion should
prove so ungrateful, as to leave their Sovereign, and protector so desolate,
as that contrary to His own Resolution, He must be forced in defense of His
life, to use those of another Religion, and be put to excuse Himself by that
distinction? This makes me remember, that in Seneca, when Hercules family was
abused: Ingrata tellus nemo ad Herculeae Domus auxilia venit, vidit hoc tantum
nefas defensus Orbis.

2. The time when this Letter unto the Queen was writ wherein this promise was
made, and the occasion moving thereunto. The time His accusers confess was
March 5. 1644. immediately after the breaking up of the Treaty at Uxbridge,
when all hopes of peace by way of an accommodation were frustrate, and
dissolved, when the Kings affairs were very low, and the enemy high, having
newly taken the Town of Shrewsbury, one of His Majesty's best Garrisons. And
the particular moving him at that time, to think of this mean of procuring
assistance from his Subjects of that Religion, was (as appears in the Letter)
His discovery that the English Rebels had (so much as in them lay) transmitted
the command of Ireland from him to the Scots: Which might easily persuade him,
that their purpose was to take that of England unto themselves; and so his
whole Authority in all his Dominions being totally rent from him, and divided
amongst them, he was like to be but a Sans terrae, or a Cipher signifying just
nothing in his three Kingdoms: which also spoke plainly to his Conscience,
that it was nothing less then Reformation of Religion, what ever was
pretended, that the Puritan Rebels aimed at; upon which considerations he
concluded with himself, (as the Letter infers). That it would be no Piety at
all, but plain Presumption in him, to neglect any lawful mean for defense of
himself, and that authority which God had entrusted him withal: or still to
stand upon scruples, (which word the malicious Observatours Page 45. would have
the people take special notice of) and truly what is it but a Scruple, a
needless Scruple, for any to question, whether a Protestant Prince, should use
the help of Papists in case of necessity, to defend himself in his natural
rights, and Royalties? it being not only lawful, but according to his Office
and duty, to preserve his Crown and Dignity, by the help of his Subjects of
what Religion soever: they being by the providence of God lotted under his
Government, as the proper means and Instruments for that very purpose.
Wherefore (now at length) though the King had not hitherto, (as himself says)
though of this mean, ( scil. with intent to use it) yet upon this occasion and
consideration, I give thee leave, (says he) to promise in my name that I will
take away, etc.

3. The thing promised, which is the taking away the penal Statutes against
the Papists, provided (that in this his necessity) they afford him that
powerful assistance, as shall enable him to do it. And truly if extraordinary
success, be such a full proof of a good cause, (as these Libellers would now
have it) and the King, by the assistance of his Popish Subjects, should obtain
the same against his Puritan Rebels; then their cause and Religion must for
another while, be concluded the best; and (this Argument being fore-swallowed,)
much wrong should they have, in the worlds deem; if (at least) He whom they
have enabled, should not suffer them to enjoy the free use of it under his
protection.

And (besides) if we do but consider, the Carriages of the Rebels themselves,
what allowance they have given, and what promises they have made, to men of all
Sects, and Religions, for to purchase their assistance, in taking from the King
his inheritance and Authority: What advantages they have made, of the Kings
forementioned purpose, and promise, not to use the aid of Papists: How they
have sued for that assistance, which he resolved against, and have entertained
many of that Religion into their Armies; and what proffers they have made, to
those whom they could not prevail with to help them, only to sit still, and
not help him. I say, if we consider of these things, this promise which the
King made, will not appear so unreasonable to men of understanding, as these
would have it.

But they Accuse the King (afterward) for offering this to the Queen, in behalf
of the Papists, without either her or their request. It may be easily believed,
that they have sued for it heretofore: Besides, if it be but considered, what
the fashion of the world is now come to be; since the Puritans pricked up their
ears: Namely, to Capitulate, and bargain with their King, for what they shall
have, and what he will grant, before any duty or service shall be afforded to
him: and then too, if it be remembered, what large and unreasonable demands, the
Kings worst deserving subjects, do require at His hands, only for the purchase
of life and peace to himself and his people: No man will wonder, if the King
do think, the Papists will look (at least) for Liberty of Conscience, and
Religion under him, when by their means the land is restored to tranquillity,
and the King to his Crown and dignity: For (doubtless) the Religion of the
Papists, is as dear to them, as the Religion of Miles Corbet, Edmund Prideaux,
and Zouch Tate, (the three chief examiners of the Kings Letters) is to them;
and may with as little detriment to any Church or State be tolerated.

And besides, the Penalty which the King promises to take away, is not as (I
conceive) to be levied upon the Papists, merely because such: for it may be
exacted upon others also though of another Religion, if they be guilty of these
particulars: Scil. if they shall refuse to take the Oath of Supremacy and
Allegiance to the King. 2. If they shall Raise disturbance in the Church or
State. 3. If they shall Seduce the Kings Subjects, from their Religion, and
Obedience. 4. If they shall Refuse to come to Church once in a month, (at
least) or to hear Divine service. 5. If they shall, (many of them together)
Keep private Conventicles, and meetings; in such cases only, (as I conceive)
the Laws are in force against Papists, and against all men else as equally, of
what Religion soever: Wherefore let any man of understanding and justice speak,
whether these fault-finders themselves, be not under the same Penalties, as
deeply as ever were the Papists: Have not they renounced the Oath of Supremacy
and Allegiance to the King, by making a new Oath, and placing the Supremacy in
the Heads of their faction? Have not they raised such distractions and
Rebellions in Church and State, as the like was never known? Have not they had
their private meetings in all places of the Kingdom, and seduced thousands of
the Kings Subjects from their duty and obedience? Do not they refuse to come to
Common Prayer? Nay, have they not Abolished the same out of Churches, that no
man at all might come unto it? May they, (doing these things, and endeavoring
the Kings destruction withal) be freed from the Penalty of these Laws? And may
not the Papists, remaining in their due obedience, and assisting their
Sovereign against his Enemies, according both to Law and duty, reasonably
enjoy the same freedom? though peradventure they come short of one of the
particulars; which perhaps too, is not so much out of Malice, (as in these
others) but out of ignorance and misinformation: and that is, not coming to
Common Prayer: to which neither can they come now, (if they had a mind) because
it is taken away by those very men; who would have the Statutes still in force
against the Papists, for not allowing of that which themselves with all
contempt and scorn have abolished.

But in the last Page of their Notes, they Object in this case also, the Kings
resolution, and promise, not to Abolish these Laws, but to join with his
Parliament in suppression of Popery.

In answer to which, let what has been said already, be well remembered; and
withal how they that call themselves His Parliamant have not suffered the King
to concur with them: but have opposed and persecuted him, ever since he
declared that his Resolution, to the end he might not be able to pursue the
same: Yea, How themselves have compelled him, (in the continuance of his
affliction,) to do that which they cry out upon him for; and have endeavored
all they could to force him further, had not a great measure of Divine grace
upholden him: He may justly complain of them, as David did of some in his
time, They have 1 Samuel 26. 19.
driven me out from abiding in the inheritance of the Lord; saying, go serve
other gods. They have done what they could to violence him from his Religion,
and to force him to be a Papist, according as they voiced him. Never Prince had
greater temptations and inforcements, yet never Prince was more constant in his
Religion, blessed be the Majesty of Heaven for him. A perpetual disgrace will
it (questionless) be to Protestant Religion, (in the eyes of all the world
beside) that any pretending to it, should show themselves so unworthy, as to
suffer so gracious a Prince to stand in need of Papists to defend him; much
more that they should by ill usage, force him with such promises to seek their
aid; but that they should accuse him also for doing the same, after they have
enforced him to it, we must needs cry out, O nullo scelus credibile in aevo,
quodque posteritas neget! the Height of their villainy is the only advantage
they have, that it will not be believed by posterity: Well (I say) let all those
particulars be thought upon, by all sober men of this Age, and if they be not
sufficient, (in their judgments) to plead the King Excusable in this case, then
let them remember (as they were advised before) that the King is a man, (as
others are) and in his extremity he declared himself, to be the Son of David,
and the Son of Abraham.

SECT. XVIII.
1. The Kings granting indemnity to the murderous Irish another Slander. The
necessity and Reasons of the Kings yiedling to a Peace at that time with the
Irish: And the Conditions upon which that Peace was to be granted: This Act not
contradictive to any of his former expressions against their detestable doings.
2. The Vanity of their Charge against the King for going in a close trading
way. Two sufficient Evidences of His Majesty's sincere and constant affection
to the Protestant Religion. 3. The whole Charge against the King most truly
retorted upon the Objectors.

WE come now to the fourth particular in their Charge, which is, (say they)
granting indemnity to the murderous Irish. This is collected (as they tell us
in their after-notes) from the Kings Letters to Ormund, Pap. 16. 17. 18. 19. in
all which, I assure the world, there is no such word or phrase to be found as I
will, or I do, grant indemnity to the murderous Irish: Indeed I find therein
his Majesty consenting to a peace with the Irish, and he sets down the reasons
necessitating him thereunto, which these honest Observatours have totally
omitted, to take notice of; lest there should have bin no appearance of blame
at all, in their accusation: in which they do altogether as wisely, as Satan
did when he spoke Scripture to our Savior, for he did omit but only so much of
the sentence, as would (if expressed) have made that part alleged nothing to
his purpose: And of this all men shall judge, for I will set down in the Kings
own words the grounds moving him to write to that purpose unto Ormund, Paper 16.

Ormund:
THe impossibility of preserving my Protestant Subjects in Ireland by a
continuation of the War, has moved me to give you these powers and directions,
(that is one ground. A 2. follows in these words) It being now manifest that
the English Rebels, have as far as in them lies given the Command of Ireland
to the Scots, that their aim is at a total subversion of Religion, and regal
power, and that nothing else will content them, or purchase Peace here, I think
my self bound in Conscience, not to let slip the means of settling that Kingdom,
(if it may be) fully under my Obedience.

Now if to preserve the lives of Protestant Subjects, (impossible otherwise to
be done) if to keep Religion and Regal Power from subversion, be not two
sufficient grounds to excuse (at least) a Christian Prince in a disabled
condition, for the Consenting to a present Peace, with the vilest Murderers in
the World; I know not what is. Yea and beside, if the Conditions be observed,
which the King (in his low estate) requires, to have this Peace granted upon,
perhaps they may speak the same very commendable.

1. It must be such a Peace as must not be against His Conscience and Honor.

2. The Penal laws against Appeals to Rome, and Praemunire must still stand, (The
Accusers themselves confess these two.)

3. It must be on this Condition, or so far forth, as the Irish remain in their
due Obedience to him, and lend him their faithful assistance against his
enemies, (as becomes Subjects) This is apparent Paper 19.

However these Calumniatours please to interpret, to me it seems, that this
Peace with the Irish, is like that which Solomon 1 King. 2.
made with Shimei. That wise King laid such an injunction upon him, for the
grant of his life, as he foresaw he was likely to break, and so would come
afterward to a due punishment of his former offenses: and even so has our King
done, in that his grant: for doubtless it is as hard a thing for the Irish to
abstain from appealing to Rome, or to continue long in their due obedience, as
it was for Shimei, to forbear going to Gath, when he heard his servant was run
thither: and by that time, the King (through Gods assistance) may be able to do
justice upon them, according to their merits.

Kings (what ever people think) have choice spirits, differing from those of
other men, are better guided, as being in a special sort in Gods hand, which
directs them in using a connivent lenity, where a sharp insight or notice, may
work a greater damage for the present. In matters of Government, (which every
one that can find fault with, skilleth not in) such accidents fall out sometime,
that the Prince must not stand to ask, what may be done by law; but must do
what is necessary to be done in that case. If a Choleric man, (as one says)
be about to strike, I must not go about to purge his Choler, but to break his
blow. So does the King in this case: He labors to break the blows of the
Murderous Irish that they may fall no longer so heavy upon his Protestant
Subjects. Time was when He would have gone in person, to have purged their
Choler, and to let them blood, and so have redeemed his poor afflicted people,
from their fury, in a more Kingly way; only his good Subjects here, that take
upon them to command him, would not give him leave so to do: wherefore he must
now do as he may, and not as he would. And surely if those Abbots of
Westminster, that sit there at ease, fatted with the wealth, and pleasures of
the Kingdom; sporting themselves with reports of blood and slaughter, had but
any sensible feeling of those miseries, which our poor Protestant Brethren in
Ireland do endure, by the continuation of that War, they would be glad of a
peace upon any condition; so it were but with the enjoyment of Conscience and
Religion. But they (as is conceived) were the first kindlers of the fire there,
thereby to gain advantage to themselves, of raising combustions here: and as
their phrase, so their fashion is, to go through with the work, Ergo, til there
be a total ruin, and desolation of all, they will admit of no peace in either
Kingdom; wherefore the King (as the case then stood) went the only right way,
at that present, by a pacification with the rebellious Irish, to enable himself
to suppress the rebellious English, (those roots of war, and seeds-men of
sedition) and so to recover a Capacity sufficient to correct all offenders, and
settle a firm tranquillity among all his Subjects.

But these Accusers at the end of their Notes Page 55. do object diverse of the
Kings expressions, against the doings of the Irish, which (as they apprehend)
this his consent to agree with them did contradict: His words (say they) once,
were these: We hope the lamentable Condition of Ireland, will invite us to a
fair intelligence, and unity, that we may with one heart intend the relieving
and recovering of that unhappy Kingdom, where those barbarous Rebels, practice
such inhumane, and unheard of outrages upon our miserable people, that no
Christian ear can hear without Horror, nor Story parallel. And at another
time (say they) thus the King speaks: We conjure all our Subjects, by the
bonds of Love, Duty, and Obedience, that are precious to good men, to join with
us, for the recovery of that Kingdom. Also in July (say they) at the Siege of
Hull, He conjures both Houses, as they will Answer the contrary to Almighty God,
to unite their force or recovery of Ireland. And in December the King answers
some Irish Protestants thus, Since the beginning of that monstrous Rebellion, I
have had no greater sorrow, then for the bleeding Condition of that Kingdom.
Truly their bare repetitions of these pathetical expressions, and desires of
their Sovereign, (with which themselves were no whit moved, to unite with him
in so pious and Charitable a work) does plainly discover them to be none of
that number of good men whom the King conjured, nor to have any fear in their
hearts of Almighty God. And doing the same to this end, viz. (as they hope) to
disgrace the King, who at the end of their relation, they blush not to tax for
his laying the blame of the Irish miseries upon the Parliament, (i. e. upon the
faction so called) which if he should not do, he would sin highly against God
and the Truth. I say to repeat those his expressions to this end, (as they do)
does witness them to be given up to Reprobate sense, and to remain in the most
hardened condition of impenitency: And thus have I done also with the fourth
particular.

There remains now only to observe the other Circumstances. 2.
annexed to this their Charge for aggravation; taken from the manner of
working, whereby these things are said to be effected in a close trading way:
and from the end; for mere particular advantage. I shall answer both these
together, in a word, thus;

The King writes Letters to his Wife, and his Wife to him again, wherein they
communicate their hearts and minds to each other: Now because they did not show
those their Letters to the faction at Westminster before they sent them, and
crave their approbation of what they had written; therefore they are here
accused to go in a close trading way, and to aim at their own particular
advantage, by certain men, who (as must be supposed) did never do any thing
covertly in their lives, nor seek themselves in any matter. But how close and
selfish they have (indeed) been, in their proceedings, I have hinted already,
and the world has too sharp a sense of it. Had the King from the beginning bin
more close and reserved; perhaps ere this, he had quite blown them up: at least
(as by a counter-mine) had given a check to their proceedings, and therein done
no other, then what became a politic General, whose wisdom it is to out-go his
Enemies in their own way, and to beat them at their own weapons: But the Kings
sincere and plain dealing has added much (through their wickedness) to his
own undoing: and yet now at length, writing but a few words in private to his
own Wife, about his own necessary preservation, because he did not acquaint
them with it beforehand, he is inveighed against, and cried out upon, for
trading in a close way, for mere particular advantage.

But the thing they intend chiefly by these words, is to persuade the world,
(which is also the main drift of their whole Libell) that the design which the
King drives at, is to advance Popery; and to this end he uses clandestine
proceedings, against them at Westminster, (the only supporters as must be
believed of Protestant Religion and condemns (as they say) all that be in any
degree Protestants at Oxford: grants tolleration of Idolatry to Papists, and
indemnity to the murderous Irish; which (in regard of his many Protestations to
the contrary) he being ashamed to own openly, is fain to betake himself to a
close trading way, to pursue and accomplish.

In Answer to which grand Calumny, I shall only set down the extract of a Letter
closely sent indeed, (that the world may most truly discern the Kings close
trading way) by his Majesty to the Commissioners in Ireland, immediately after
Nazeby Battle, when he was in Wales, and in a most low condition, written by
the hand of the Lord Digby, his Majesty's Secretary, I wish I had the full
Letter it self to set it down verbatim, for I confess this to be but the
abstract of it, which I received from a Gentleman of most approved truth and
Candor, as he did only bear the same in memory; which notwithstanding he is
confident is but little (if at all) differing from the Original.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
HIs Majesty has Commanded me to let you know, that according to your promise
and agreement with him, he long since expected your aid, and does much wonder
you should neglect him and your selves so much as to retard it; because
immediately after His, your ruin must necessarily follow: but He is informed,
that taking the advantage of His low Condition, you insist upon something in
Religion, more then formerly you were contented with. He has therefore
commanded me to let you know, that were his condition much lower then it is,
you shall never force him to any further concessions, to the prejudice of his
Conscience, and of the true Protestant Religion, in which He is resolved to
live, and for which He is ready to die, and that He will join with any
Protestant Prince; nay, with these Rebels themselves, how odio^s soever, rather
then yield the least to you in this particular.

I refer it to all men's Consciences, whether this be not a sufficient evidence
of his Majesty's sincerity and affection to the Protestant Religion,
considering the estate wherein his affairs stood when this Letter was written;
and also whether it does not fully confirm the truth of what I said in effect
before, viz. That what ever concessions were made to the Papists and Irish,
were rather by the inforcement of the Puritan Rebels, then by any inward
affection of His Majesty to their Religion.

But indeed it was needless to have alleged any other of his secret Letters
for this Evidence: For these which the Adversaries have here published, and
declared to be Evidences of truth, do manifestly speak to this purpose; we read
in the eighth Paper, how the King tells the Queen, that He differs from Her in
nothing but Religion. Are not these the Kings own Words which themselves have
published? Was not this Letter sent (as well as the rest) in a close trading
way, as they call it? Do they think the King ever intended it should come into
their hands? And when they laid aside many other Papers, as not fit for
publication at this time, was not this thought fit to be divulged by their own
wise selves? Is not this one of those Evidences of Truth (they speak of in the
beginning) which to have concealed, would have bin a great sin against the
mercies of God? Truly I dare boldly say, that neither the King for himself, nor
any of his friends in his behalf, could possibly have given a better evidence
to the abused Subjects of this Nation, that His Majesty is a true Protestant,
then this is which his Enemies have given by their publication of that Letter:
Surely the Finger of God was in it.

For peoples more clear understanding and notice of it, I will set down the
Kings Words as they stand in the Letter: Writing to his Queen, about that
business of Ireland forementioned, he speaks thus,

I need not tell thee, what secres^e this business requires, yet this I will
say, that this is the greatest point of confidence I can express to thee; for
it is no thanks to me, to trust thee in any thing else but in this which is the
only thing of difference betwixt us; and yet I know thou will make as good a
bargain for me, even in this; I trusting thee (though it concern Religion) as
if thou were a Protestant.

O what a discovery is here made of the Kings sincerity in his profession! When
for an obligation upon his Queen, to make a good bargain for him, he tells her
in his most bosom expressions, that he trusts her to do it for him a
Protestant, as if her self were one. The world may here see, though these
Observatours themselves (who have helped us) will not; that in the closest way
of trading (according to their own phrase) which the King uses, he tradeth as
a Protestant, and acknowledges in his most secret Letters to his Queen, that
there is a difference (though it be the only difference) between Him and Her in
matter of Religion.

And thus have I vindicated my Sovereigns Honor, against. 3.
this particular Charge also of his enemies; and do expect that I have hereby
procured to my self, (though not deserved) from these men and their Faction,
(whose baseness I have in part detected) the imputation and Title, of the
falsest of men, a Papist; yea, of the falsest of Papists, a Jesuit, for it was
voted and concluded before hand, that whosoever should do as I have done,
should be so accounted.

But notwithstanding all that I have said in the Kings behalf, yet this I
confess to these men, so much as concerns the position in general, I am wholly
of their opinion, viz. that whoever is guilty of those four things, scil. Of
Clandestine proceedings against the Honor and being of Parliament; Of
condemning all that be Protestants in any degree; Of granting a Tolleration to
Idolaters; And of indemnity to Murderers; or that goes in a close trading way
(to effect those things) for mere particular advantage, cannot be defended by
any, but such as deserve the imputation of the worst men. And therefore I am of
opinion that all those, who take upon them to defend the men now above-board,
who under the name of Parliament, have not only undermined the King their
Sovereign, but also the Parliament it self, in destroying its Privileges,
which they pretend to stand for: who have condemned all, to be Popishly
affected, that are in any degree Protestants at Oxford, calling them by the
odious names of Malignants, Papists, Devils, and Dogs; who have not only
granted a Tolleration of Idolatry, but set it up, and persecuted with fire and
sword, banishment and confiscation, all that will not commit the same:
(themselves whom they call the Parliament are the Idol, whom all the people of
the Kingdom must fall down unto and worship) who have also granted indemnity
to the murderous Irish. For I would have them but speak out and say, of what
Nation and Religion their Plunket is of; Nay, let them tell the world (if they
dare) what promises have been made from them, by their Instruments, ( in a
close trading way) unto that Plunket and Muskerry, (whom they Tax their King,
for showing countenance unto) upon condition they would but sit still, and not
help their Sovereign. Who also have further yet, in a close trading way,
cozened us their fellow Subjects of all we had, that was dear unto us, our
Religion, Liberty, Peace, Wealth, and Friends, for their own mere particular
advantage, that themselves might rule alone, and bear the sway over our
Sovereign, and our selves; over our Consciences and Estates; which they spoil
and sell away according to their pleasures: I say, I do verily believe that
whoever they be, that shall take upon them, to defend these men, under what
color and pretenses soever, are as bad as the worst of men, yea, falser then
the Papists, then the Jesuits. But we will listen now to what these men add
farther; they say,

Hitherto the English have had Commission to Chastize the Irish, Libell.
and the Irish have had the like to Chastize the English; both have spilt each
others blood by the Kings Warrant, yet as both has been in part owned, so both
has been in part disowned, and the King himself has not appeared with open
face in the Business.

SECT. XIX.
1. The Enemies malicious devises to Scandalize the King with favoring the
Irish Rebellion detected and confuted. 2. The Kings requiring secrecy of the
Queen and Ormond in the matters writ to them Justified. The Libellers Blasphemy
against Gods Providence, ^and in as king Gods Blessing upon their Libell noted.

THe English have had Commission to Chastize the Rebellious. 1.
Irish, and the Irish have had the like to Chastize the Rebellious English,
both have spilt each others blood, by the Kings warrant; and what harm is there
in all this? The King is the Minister of God, and bears the sword (says the
Apostle) to execute Romans 13. 4.
wrath upon them that do evil: and therefore so far forth, as the same has
been managed to the punishment of Rebellion, whether by English or by Irish,
under his command and Authority, the King has with open face owned it: But in
as much, as the same has been used by the one or other, against himself, His
Crown and Dignity, against the Law, against His Loyal Protestant subjects, to
the hurt or damage of them and their Religion; the King has both secretly and
publikly disowned ever, and still does: For why should he sin against God,
His own Conscience, and honor in taking upon himself the scandal of others
doings; as those that call themselves his great and wise Council desire he
should; who themselves commit the sin, and would have him bear all the Yea
all the blood that has been shed, by them and by* their means, in this
unnatural war (which themselves for no cause have raised not only against the
Kings will but also against his person and his friends) must, and is by them,
laid to the Kings Charge, their Militia and success persuade them to it.
blame, (for this is their way of Honoring their Sovereign in the eyes of His
people) And to this purpose, when at first by decolation of Strafford, the
Irish Governor, they had put that wild and unruly people into a fit Capacity,
and proximate potentia of Rebelling: and perhaps too in their close trading
way, (wherein for their own particular advantage, they are of all men living
most skillful) had helped to draw that power into Act; to the end the people of
this Kingdom, (whom they were to use to another purpose) might not so soon
suspect them guilty of so much evil; they published abroad that the Rebels in
Ireland had the Kings warrant for all their bloody doings; and to put some
color upon this devilish slander, they printed certain examinations, (as they
called them) of certain inferior men and women; who reported (as they tell) that
they heard some say, they heard from others, who received it (perhaps from 3.
or 4. persons) that some Commanders among the Irish Rebels had affirmed that
themselves had the Kings Commission for what they did: Which thing if any of
the Irish Rebels did say, or affirm, what wonder is it? do not all Rebels
use to pretend the best authority, for their own wicked doings? have not even
they of Westminster themselves, raised all their forces of men and moneys
against the Kings person, under the Kings own name? was not the King and
Parliament the only word in use with them at the first, though now the Kings
name is left out? for they apprehend the people to be so deeply locked with
themselves in guilt and blood, that they dare not leave them: I dare boldly
affirm it, that many thousands of our English, had never been ingulpfed in
those Rebellious ways wherein they are, had they at first but been acquainted
with the devises of Rebellious Heads; but now things are come to that height,
that they know not how to disingage themselves, without a present ruin from
them who have engaged them. But hence (I say) it plainly appears to be no
wonder, if the Irish Rebels did pretend the Kings Authority also, in the
beginning of their accursed undertaking, (though whether they did or no, I
cannot tell, for I did not hear them;) only this I am sure of, that they who
published and printed those reports in this Kingdom, did hope thereby to work
(as indeed they did) a disaffection in many people against their Sovereign,
that so themselves might be strengthened with their concurrence in their
intended project against him, and all his friends that sided with him; with
whom I may affirm they have even dealt as the Cyclops in Homer did with
Ulisses and his Associates; who findeing no reason to misuse them, yet having a
great desire to feed upon them, would needs persuade that they were Pirates: So
these not knowing any sufficient reason to quarrel with the King and his
friends, or to stir up the people against them; yet having a great hunger after
the Authority, places, Rights, and profits which they possessed, they would
needs persuade they were Popishly affected, and were approving and consenting
to the Irish Rebellion: And because the King would never be persuaded (as the
people were) to yield himself guilty of those evils and miseries which (as
themselves quote his words) He could never hear named but with a bleeding
heart; therefore they are pleased here to add and say, that the King himself
has not appeared with an open face in the business.

But (say they) now by Gods providence the tr^verse curtain is Libell.
drawn, and the King writing to Ormond and the Queen, what they must not
disclose is presented upon the stage.

Their meaning is, that now the King is made to show his face, whether he will
or no, and to appear (as they think) such a one, as they have reported him:
For those secrets which he would have to be kept close, (for fear they should
discover him) are here presented to publik view, by the direction and Authority
of his Great Council, who in their faithfulness and Loyalty to him, have
opened all unto the world, yea and set it forth with an additionall Advantage.

But (indeed) this act of theirs, speaks those men of that Great Council, to
have no great acquaintance with that Precept of Christ, Do to others, as ye
would have others do to you; For certainly themselves have sometimes writ to
their wives and friends such particulars, as they would not have all the world
to know of: For though perhaps they may not be hurtful rightly taken, yet
(they will say) ill constructions may be made of good meanings, or a good design
may be obstructed, if the means intended for accomplishment be divulged, and
therefore if they require secrecy of those entrusted, they believe they have
reason for it, and no man ought to cavil at it; But the King it seems (of all
men) must not be*allowed this Privilege; he is here exclaimed upon, to be as
culpable as they have voiced him, merely for his requiring silence in a case of
like nature. His experience had taught him too well, that they studied to
cross him in all he did, and to mistake him in all he said; yea, so they might
prejudice him in his Affairs, and in his peoples hearts, they cared not to go
in the way of perverseness, which (as the Apostle says) does lead unto their
own destruction: which to prevent if possible, He gives the Queen and Ormond
this Caveat, not to disclose some particulars mentioned to them in his Letters.
But (as the saying is) no man can avoid his proper destiny, for they being (as
it seems) ordained to stumble, and made to be destroyed (as S. Peter says
some be) shall not escape their means of ruin: these very Papers
(notwithstanding the Kings care) shall miscarry, and fall into their hands;
whereby is administered to them, an occasion of falling, and so of perishing in
their own Corruptions by their evil speaking; and perversely interpreting the
things they understand not. And themselves say, there was a Providence in this,
which notwithstanding they seem to blaspheme, by making it the Author of their
Evils: by Gods good providence (say they) the traverse Curtain is drawn, yea
but that, what ever the King would have Ormond and the Queen conceal, is
presented upon the Stage together with their own malicious conceits upon the
same; they entitle all to be the Act of Gods Providence (as if themselves had
not had so much as a finger in the business) but it is no marvail, that they, who
begun their reproachful Prologue, with an abusive mentioning of Gods Mercies;
should also conclude the same with a speaking evilly of Gods good Providence.

Indeed I confess there was a Providence, and a better Providence too, then
they will acknowledge in their surprizall and publication of these Papers, for
hereby it is come to pass, that they who before ( Lapwing-like) cried furthest
off from their own nest, are detected and discovered. They who formerly (
Janus-like) looked two ways, are made to have but one face. They who pretended
love and Loyalty to their Sovereign, are unmuffled, and have the traverse
Curtain so drawn from before them, that their malice and hypocrisy is
presented upon the Stage, and made transparent to every Eye: insomuch that
those people, who did before by their means, transire ab ignorantia ad
prejudicium, leap from ignorance to prejudicate opinion of their King; without
taking a good Judgment in the way; have now gained, such a full view of the
Hearts and true dispositions of their seducers, that they may conclude of them,
as Thomas Whittle Fox Martyr.
the Martyr, did of the Enemies of his days: That in them appears so lively,
the very image and shape of Satan, that a man (if it were no prejudice to Gods
Word) might well affirm them to be Devils incarnate: Which very thing also,
that little of theirs which follows, does seem further yet to evidence, it is
their Conclusion, and in these words.

God grant that the drawing of this Curtain may be so fatal to Popery, Libell.
and Antichristian Heresy here now, as the rending of the veil was to the
Jewish Ceremonies in Judea, at the Expiration of our Savior.

That which they here call Popery, and Antichristian Heresy, can be no other
then the true Protestant Christian Religion, for that only was it, which was
here established, which the King professes and maintains, and which
themselves were formerly of, (as they pretended) to the same now, under those
odious names of Popery and Antichristian Heresy, they wish such a final
conclusion, as the Jewish Ceremonies had, (which were never to endure but for a
season:) and according to their wish, has their endeavors been, even quite to
ruinate and destroy the same, which in a great measure they have already
effected, as to woeful experience is too manifest; and to bring this their
wicked work to a more speedy end, they have by these their scandalous notes
endeavored to blast the honor and dignity of that Prince, who has been, and
is, the chiefest defender of it under Heaven: and the Publication of them they
call the drawing of the Curtain, which they are bold to ask Gods blessing
upon, that the same (through his help) may be as fatal a forerunner of the
ruin of verity, (which themselves only call Antichristian Heresy) as the
rending of the veil was to the Jewish Ceremonies: they* would have this Act of
theirs as affectuall to the one, as that of our Saviors expiration was to the
other: and this time of their own breathing, to be of like account with that
of our Saviors expiring: now what may be thought (at the present) of these
men, let all that have reason and Conscience Judge. I Will conclude with a prayer
too; and it shall be this. God grant that this my drawing the Curtain from the
faces of these Libellers, may not only prove fatal to all Hypocrisy,
Rebellion, and Antichristian disloyalty: but also isntrumental to work such a
shame of themselves in the hearts of these very men, and of their Masters at
Westminster, that they may look with better eyes then ever yet they have done,
upon Charles their Sovereign, whose honor they have pierced; and may have
better breathings then ever they have had, after Christ their Savior, whose
Gospel they have scandalized.

Amen.
SECT. XX.
What good use might have been made of these Letters. Of the faults laid unto
the Queens Charge, specially in loving her Husband.

I Have done with their Prologue to the Kings Letters, and in a. 1.
manner with their Annotations upon them too, which (for the most part)
contain but the same over again, with the mixture of more malice, therefore
in examining the one, I have also in a sort dispatched the other. Nor do I
love any more then needs must, to busy my self in repetitions.

There are (I confess) a few particulars in these their Annotations, which (as
I remember) have not been touched upon, in the discussion of the former
General; these I shall cull out, and only show them (which will be enough) and
so leave them to the world to be judged of. They begin at the end of the Kings
Papers, their Observations thus.

Much use may be made of these Precedent Papers, and many Libell.
things therein will appear very worthy our notice.

In which they speak truth, and had not themselves been of too spiderous a
nature, they might have made much good use of them indeed; and have noted from
them, such dexterity of understanding; such undantednesse of resolution; such
fortitude of spirit in adversity; such conjugall faith and affections; such
paternall care and pity to his people, and such true Christian patience and
piety to be in their Sovereign; as cannot be altogether Paralelled at this
day, in any Prince of Christendom. In a word, these Papers speak our King to
be completely a Counselor, a Soldier, a Gentleman, and a Scholar, and had
he but trusted to himself more, and less to the advice of others, in the
management of his Affairs; thousands of his Subjects from these his Letters,
are most confident, that his enemies had not now been triumphant.

But the notice of such mattters, serves not the turns of these men, nor can
their colored eyes, see any thing of this nature in these Letters; faults and
errors, only are thought worthy their observance, of which they fancy, they
have espied great plenty, in the King and Queen both.

The Queens faults, though (for show sake) they have branched them out into
many particulars, may all be reduced to one, and that is Loving of her Husband.
Indeed they begin their Complaints against Her, with saying, She is implacable
to our Religion, Nation, Government, but they can instance neither in word or
action, to make the same appear conjecturall; only they tell us afterward, of
her great care, that our Bishops be provided for, (and the blessing of God be
upon her for it:) they hope that people do still believe, that Bishops were
enemies to all good, and therefore if the Queen does but manifest any respect
to them, in their present affliction and persecution, it does sufficiently
speak her implacablenesse to our Religion, Nation, Government. Well, I wish
with my soul, that the men of Westminster had proved themselves no worse
affected, to our Religion, Nation, and Government, then the Queen has done;
for then I am sure, they had all still been in a most flourishing and happy
Condition. But the Queen being the Kings Wife, must help to bear her Husbands
Burden of blame as well as Sorrow; even as it shall please these His vassalls
to cast it on Her.

Indeed they tell us also afterward, out of Paper 27. that the Queen desires
the disbanding of the Parliament: in which perhaps they would have her thought
an Enemy to our Religion, Nation, Government: But we shall first read Her
words, and then we may judge whether they import such an interpretation: the
Queen writing to the King from York says: I understand to day from London,
that they will have no cessation, and that they treat at the beginning of the
two first Articles, and afterward of the disbanding of the Army; certainly I
wish a peace more then any, and that with greater reason, but I would the
disbanding of the perpetual Parliament first; and, certainly the rest will be
easily afterward: I do not say this of mine own head alone, for generally
those that are for you, and against you in this Country wish an end of it.
These be the Queens words entirely. She desires a peace more then any, and in
order to that, she wishes a disbanding of the perpetual Parliament, because
otherwise, peace is never likely to be had; and this is not the judgment of
herself alone, but of all in general: that are both for and against the King,
in that Country: wherefore if this be an Argument of the Queens enmity against
our Religion, Nation, Government, then all those that are both for, and against
the King, in that County of Yorkshire are Enemies as well as she, because they
join with her in wishing an end to the War, and restoration of peace unto
the Kingdom.

But (by the way) I wonder why they should Tax the Queen with implacablenesse
to our Government? is not that of our nation Monarchiall, and that of our
Church Episcopal? and her Husband the Head and upholder of both? can the Queen
then be believed to be disaffected to either of these? the men (doubtless)
have lost their senses, together with their Loyalty.

This particular digression was inserted from my own observance of her
Majesty's goodness in France.
Concerning her Majesty's affection to our Religion and Nation, let me be bold
(though one of the meanest) upon this occasion, to give a Testimony unto my
Countrymen, from mine own experience: Those English Protestants who have been
in France, in these times of persecution, cannot but witness the same with me:
and say, That the Queen has been to the uttermost of her power, a most tender
careful nursing Mother, both to our Religion and Nation, in that her Native
Kingdom; for by her sole means and great industry, we had places allowed us,
to meet together to serve God in (even publicly) after the English manner, in
each of which, Gods Word was faithfully Preached on the Lords Day, and truly
read, together with Divine Service twice a day throughout the week; whereunto
she was careful that her own Servants of our Nation and Religion (whereof she
has many) should duly and constantly resort; which great privilege and favor
to us, was looked on with much regret and spleen by some Jesuited Papists, who
wickedly reproached Her Majesty for the same, exclaiming upon her for a
Lutheran, and a Protestant, even because she had manifested such love to our
Nation and Religion, in providing for us these Sinagogues: which rebukes and
reproaches she (good Princess) was content for our sakes, to bear with
meekness and patience; undoubtedly it may be easily believed from this
sweetness and goodness of her nature, (after her receipt of so many abuses
from some amongst us) that had our deportments toward her been such as our
Religion commands, she might ere this, in all probabilities have preferred
the same before her own; even as she has done our Nation; many have heard her
at a well furnished Table say, one of these Dishes in England, with my Husband
and Children (might I but enjoy it there in peace) would please me better, and
be sweeter to me, then all this plenty in this place. So great is her affection
to our Nation; (whose great ingratitude and unkindnesse to her, so unbecoming
the Gospel, the Lord pardon.)

Let the Reader pardon this digression: her Majesty's wronged Innocence, and
the truth did extort it from me: I return now to her Accusers: from whom I
learn,

That her Majesty's main and proper fault is Loving her Husband, and this (I
confess) they Evidence at large, from many quotatious out of her several
Letters, as first (they say) she performs the office of a Resident for him in
France, and is restless even to the neglect of her own health, to assist him
(against them his Enemies.) 2. She vows (they say) to die by famine, rather
then fail him, in her faithful endeavors. 3. She confines not her Agency to
France, but sollicites other Princes also for shipping in his aid. 4. She sends
Arms into Scotland to Mountrosse; and many such like particulars they allege,
which does abundantly evidence this her fault of loving her Husband: Nay, and
the most heinous matter of all is the Counsels which she gives him, namely, to
be suspicious in his Treaties with them (who have deceived him so much
already*) to take heed of his own safety amongst them; and not to think himself
safe any longer, then he defends his friends that have served him: for which
they quote, Pap. 31. these they call Counsels of very pernicious Consequence,
of which nature also, is that manifestation of her Judgment, that peace cannot
be safe to the King, without a Regiment for his Guard, (a la mode de France)
(say they) they might as well have said, a la mode du Parliament; and of all
this, they allege their punctual proofs out of these Letters: wherefore it is
very plain, that the Queen is guilty of a most dear and tender affection to the
King her Husband, and in order to him, she desires the welfare of all his
friends: and for this cause, is deemed by these men, a fit object of abuse and
hatred.

But truly, if I did not evidently see them to be given up to blindness of
mind, by reason of that malice which is in them; I should much admire, at their
folly in these their exceptions, against the Queen. I dare say, that Henry
Burtons Wife, or John Basticks Wife, might have done full as much for their
husbands, when time was, (had they bin in a like capacity) and bin no whit
blamed by these men for the same: Nay, they should have been commended rather
for such Testimonies of their faithfulness and affection. O but the Queens
fortune is to be the Kings Wife, and therefore she must not look to find such
grace and favor in the eyes of these jolly men; as to have that in her not
censured for a fault, which in mean women is entitled virtue.

Nay, I am further confident, that if this truly royal Mary, Wife to our
Sovereign Charles, had like that Queen Isabella, wife to our Edward the 2d.
joined issue with some of the Enemies against the King her Husband, she should
have bin in as high account with these, as that other was with the Rebels of
those days: her difference in Religion should have bred no dis-affection at all
in them toward her; for it is not so much an unity in that which they desire
and aim at, (as to all is plainly apparent, from that multiplicity of
Religions allowed amongst them) if there be but a facile community another way,
in things more sensible: it will abundantly serve the turn, to give satisfaction
to these blessed Reformers.

But because the Queen is Chara fidaque marito, dear and faithful to her Lord
and Husband: therefore must she be exclaimed upon, and hated; yea, hunted and
forced out of the Kingdom, by certain wise and wel-bred Gentlemen, (as they
would be accounted) that rule the roast at Westminster: who, if they could but
lay hands upon her, would also murder her, for with open mouth they have
charged her already with no less then Treason, (Treason against the New-state
forsooth) even for her affectionate adherence, unto the King her Husband, in
these times of his affliction. Observe it (I beseech you) and consider well of
it, O all ye Princes and Nobles of the world, and all you that are true
Gentlemen of what Nation and Kingdom soever, and say, whether you ever read or
heard of the like! Behold, here a most Royal Lady, of most noble and high
Virtues, and incomparable parts; Great Henry's Daughter, Sister to the late
French King, and Aunt unto the present, and Queen of England, who has been
defamed, sclandered, reviled, railed upon, shot at, persecuted, and driven to
banishment; brought upon the public Stage for a Traitor, condemned and
threatened with death, and forced to fly into other Countries, to preserve her
self in being, (like that woman in the Revelation, from the face of the
Dragon) and all this only for her faithfulness and loyal affections to her
Husband in his distress: consider of this thing I beseech you, and speak your
minds.

And you my Countrymen of England in general, examine your thoughts, and then
say, Hocci^e est Humanum factum aut inceptum? Is there any Generosity, nay, any
Humanity in such dealings? Can you imagine that such demeanours toward such a
personage, will be ever chronicled to our Nations praise, or read by posterity
with approbation? Was ever such harsh, and hellish usage offered by the hands
of English men before now, to a daughter of France? Duke Reiners Daughter,
(Wife to that good, though most unfortunate King Henry* the 6.) was used much
better by Richard the third, she had no such despights offered to her person,
because a woman, and though she brought much foreign aid into the Kingdom, yet
was she not (as I read) ever accused of Treason for the same; she was rather
interpreted to have done thereby, her proper duty to her Husband: no man (I am
sure) can say that our Protestant Religion allows of this behavior; or that
our holy Mother Church, did ever feed any of her Children with such
nourishment, as should cause them to break out into such exorbitancies; Her
milk was always seasoned with the Doctrines of Humility, Reverence, Civility,
Gentleness, Affability, and gratiousnesse of conversation to people of all
sorts, even to inferiors and to enemies. Much more to superiors and to
friends.

Surely if this our (once most generous and courteous) Nation, had not now (in
too great a measure) laid aside common Humanity, as well as grace: were there
but this one reason, which I shall name, it would be abundantly enough, to make
this Queen most dear and precious in all our apprehensions, scib. for that she
has been, tam partu potens, and ^tero toties enixa gravi pignora pacis, she
has so highly enriched this Kingdom from her fruitful and chaste womb, with so
many sweet and Royal pledges of future happiness, as few Queens before her
have done ever the like. But O my dear Country, thou art fallen, thou art
fallen from thine ancient glory; for thou have brought forth in this thine
unhappy Age, a generation of vipers, who have labored to destroy both Religion
and good manners in thee, and by whose operation Stigii profundi claustra and
obscuri specus laxantur, Hels own self is broak loose into thee: The Lord in
mercy yet once again vouchsafe a gracious look upon thee.

But (by the way) who can choose but admire the strength of malice? because
these men themselves do hate the King, they cannot abide that so much as his
Queen should love him: they have robbed him of the hearts of his People; the
Comforts of his Crown, and it grieves them they cannot alienate from him the
Affections of his Wife, the comforts of his bosom; they grutch him the
enjoyment of her love at a distance. How have they by their spightfull
promulgation of the 34 Paper, (which was written twenty years before, and no
whit concerns them at all) endeavored to work in her, an alienation from him:
and by that they say upon Pap. 11. to weaken the duty of his Son toward him:
but praised be the majesty of Heaven for it; those that are most nearly his
own, cannot be loosened from him: though of all Princes he is most unhappy, in
too ma^y of his people, yet is he most blessed of all men, in his Wife and
Progeny: never had Husband a more loving Spouse; never had Parent more sweet
conditioned and respectfull Children, then our Sovereign has of the Prince of
Wales, and This was written when the Duke of York was either in Oxford, or
supposed to be there.
Duke of York; and as our prayers, so our hopes are, that Gods grace will so
preserve and keep those other Princes, whom the Rebels have got into their
bondage, that not all the temptations they can use, shall ever make them
decline from duty.

But further, (as if there were no cause of fear at all on her part) they tax
the Queen for being jealous of her Husbands safety, if He should venture
himself to go amongst them: Truly considering the spirit they are of, if She
should, in her tenderness fear, they might entertain him, Thyestaeis dapibus,
seeing they have wherewithal to do it, I should not think Her worthy to be
blamed: which thing how horrid and incredible so ever, the hearsay of, may
seem to people, before it is done; yet should the same be acted by Order from
the Lower House, and Voted meet in that manner to torment the King: many of the
Vulgar are in such a Captivity of Judgment to them, that they would quickly
cry it up for a most remarkable and comely Act of Justice.

And let Reason speak in the Queens case; She has had ample experience of
their inveterate malice against her Husband; full Testimonies of their bloody
dispositions, both against him, and her self: besides her own Father was
Murdered by an Assassinate of theirs, who hold the Principle of King-killing,
as these men do: May not she therefore being a tender Lady, and full of
affections be excused by all men, if she fears the like may befall her Husband?
and for prevention thereof, desires he should have a Regiment for his Guard,
(which themselves only interpret should be, a la mode de France. Yea, It was
generally believed when this was inserted that the Kings trusting the Scots
with his Person could not possibly but make them ashamed to prove unfaithful,
but their late Act has given all men to understand, that though Judas (for the
love of money) may keep touch with the Pharisees, yet he is no fit or safe man,
to be of the Guard unto his Master.
and why may he not have a Regiment of Scots, for his Guard a la mode France?
(the Scots are his Countrymen) to defend him from them and their Assassinates,
who have Authorized this Pamphlet against him, for the ends aforesaid.

But to conclude this particular; let these virulent men speak their pleasure
against the Queen: I hope (by this time) the world has sufficient knowledge of
them to her Honor; she being the object of their Hate, cannot but be a Map of
goodness.

And most Noble Queen, (if one of the meanest, and most obscure of your
Majesty's subjects, may presume to speak to so great a Princess) let me assure
your Highness; however these English Catalines have censured your virtues* and
abused you for them: yet there be many thousands of true Protestant English
hearts, who (according as our Religion teaches) have you in the most high
esteem of all earthly women, for your tender Care, and constant fastness to
our Sovereign, in these times of trouble; your zealous endeavors to assist him,
has so increased the flame of our Loyal affections toward you, that we are
confident the whole flood of waters which the many-headed Dragon throws out of
his mouth, shall never be able to extinguish it in us: Yea, and by the strength
of that grace, which our holy Religion has wrought in us, we shall never cease
night and day, to make you the special subject of our prayers, until we see you
restored with honor to your Throne amongst us; or hear that you are advanced
with glory to your seat in Heaven: And let your excellent goodness (I beseech
you) pardon your Vassal this great boldness. SECT. XXI.
Of the Kings fault in loving his Wife: The manifest and malicious
falsifications and perversions of diverse of the Kings expressions to his Queen
noted.

THus have I examined the Queens faults; and (notwithstanding the ponderous
aggravations, which these enemies of Honor and virtuous Ladies, do set them
forth withal) have found them light and easy: I come now to see what they say
further against the King, whom they do accuse in the first place, for loving
his Wife again; as well (it should seem) as she loves him. It is manifest that
(notwithstanding their late extraordinary great success) these men's hearts are
not yet freed from jealousies and fears: they are suspicious still of
Conspiracies; yea, that the King and Queen have entered into a Covenant to love
each other, for to spite them, in giving them a good Example in cases of like
Nature.

They tell us, that He communicates his thoughts and affairs unto Her, and
though She be the weaker sex, yet he makes her privy to his secrets, and takes
advise and counsel from her; yea, and more then this they say, He professes to
prefer Her health before His worldly affairs, for which they bid us see Paper
14. which we have done, and the world shall hear what we have there seen. That
Letter was written by his Majesty to the Queen, January 8. 1645. immediately
after his taking of Leicester, wherein he has only (to this purpose) these
words,

I Must tell thee, that it is thy Letter by Fitz Williams assuring me of thy
perfect recovery, with thy wonted kindness, which makes me capable of taking
contentment in these good successes: for as diverse men, propose several
recompenses for themselves* for their pains and hazard in this Rebellion: So
thy company is the only reward I expect and wish for.

These two last lines were scraped by Miles Corbet the Examiner, for the
Printer to put into a different Character, that the Reader might the better
observe, the Kings fault in them: But fearing the dullness of men's Capacities,
(if let alone to themselves) these quick-scented Note-mongers have put too
their helping hand, and Collected from them, that the King professes to prefer
the Queens Health, before the Exigence, and importance of his own public
Affairs; and they hope that people will from hence believe, that he prefers
his private Affections to his Wife, before the care of the whole Commonwealth;
and therefore will judge it very fit, that he be not only put by his Office,
(for that he is already by his new Masters at Westminster) but also kept out
for ever, and never trusted more, with any Affairs of importancy.

And further they accuse him, for avowing Constancy to his Wife, and (as they
express it) to Her grounds and documents: which they would have the Reader
apprehend to be, to whatsoever the Queen had already, or hereafter should
propound unto him, concerning Religion, and the Government of the Commonwealth:
to which purpose also, they say; that His Counsels are wholly managed by the
Queen, though She be of the weaker Sex, born an Alien, bred up in a contrary
Religion; yet nothing, great or small (say they) is transacted without her
privity and Consent. And for this they quote Paper 38. by all which it is
apparent, they would have it believed, that as diverse men's Wives, (being of
Masterly dispositions) do take upon them, to command their Husbands, so the
Queen does take it upon her, to rule the King, and all his Affairs: and as
many men have submitted themselves to their Wives yoke, so has the King
yielded up himself to his Queens direction: and therefore they hope that people
have wit enough, to conclude from hence; that it is not fit the Government of
this Church and Kingdom, should remain in such hands as heretofore; but rather
in the hands of his Great and Wise Counsel, who are men, all of this Nation,
and bred up in the Protestant Religion, and so fitter in all respects, then the
Queen is, Who is one of the weaker sex, born an Alien, and bred up in a
contrary Religion.

This mischievous suggestion, (if swallowed for a truth) may be of dangerous
consequent: and therefore I hold it necessary, to show the falsity of it, which
I shall plainly do, both from these letters which these Calumniators have
published for their own pernicious purpose, and also from their own very words
and confessions in another place of these their Annotations.

1. The Queen is far from that disposition, to take upon Her to rule Her
Husband, wholly, and in all things, (as they would have it believed:) for the
direct Contrary is most apparent in Paper 29. where She submits Her self,
wholly to His direction, and desires Him to send Her His commands, concerning a
particular business, that She was requested to write about, affirming that She
neither would, nor durst, do any thing in it without His direction: Her words
are these.

I thought it to be a matter of so great engagement, that I dare not do it,
without your Commnad; therefore if it please you, that I should do so, send me
what you would have me write, that I may not do more then what you appoint.

Had She been of such an imperious spirit, toward Her Husband, as these Her
back-friends report Her, and would have Her supposed, surely, She had never
writ, so like an obedient Wife for His Commands, and particular directions:
Thus the Queen is cleared.

Secondly, Neither is the King, (as they suggest) of so subjective a Nature, as
to submit His affairs wholly to His Wives guidance, (were She, as She is not,
ambitious of the same) He is more a man, then to forget himself to be an
Husband; if the 34. Paper be observed, it will be clearly Evident, that the
King was never so weakly uxorious, no not the first year of His marriage, (when
in most men affection prevails over judgment) as to lose any whit of His
Husbandly Authority in matters of Household Government, He would not consent to
any thing, (though of private concernment) which was either unfit for Her as a
Wife to undertake, or for himself, as an Husband to permit: and is there any
liklyhood, He should now have submitted all His public Affairs, and Kingly
Counsels, wholly to Her managemeet, and disposal? no man of wisdom or reason
can believe it.

If that which is intimated in the said Letter concerning the Queens
disposition, when She was young, and yet unacquainted with Her Husbands
instructions, be compared with Her present dependence upon his Commands
(already proved) and that abundant readiness now in Her, to do Him service,
(which these men so tax and blame Her for:) there will appear to every Eye,
not only the Kings Pious discretion, and the Queens Godly obedience, but also
Gods gracious blessing, of his endeavors upon Her spirit: and doubtless this
inward benefit received from him, is a ground of Her more strong, and fervent
affection toward him: and makes Her resolve, rather to neglect her own health,
yea to die by Famine, then to be failing in Her Negotiations for Him.

A full compliance in all things, but rarely found, between man and wife at
their first meeting; nor is the same so perfectly effected afterward, in many
persons, as is evident to be in this Royal pair; for either the Husband wants
that Wisdom and care to work it, which the King had; or the Wife that
goodness of disposition to be wrought upon, as was in the Queen: I could name
some Lords and Gentlemen too, amongst the Kings enemies, who were never so
notable for wit or honesty, as to seek their Wives Conformity in this Christian
way, as their Prince has done: But I spare them now, and return to the thing
in hand.

It is probable (at least) by this time, that the Kings Councels, rule the
Queen, and not the Queens Him: (as these slanderers say) but to put the matter
quite out of doubt; let us listen to what these very men say themselves, to
this purpose, in the next Page, where among other railing expressions against
the King, (forgetting what they had said before) they affirm, that as He
surpasses the Queen in Acts of Hostility, so in the way of managing the same,
scil* with more close and deep secrecy: and a little after they tell us, that
He urges the Queen to make personal friendship, with the Queen of France,
(they do not like the word friendship) and (say they) He does furnish the
Queen, with dexterous polli^ies, and Arguments to work upon the Ministers of
State in France: All which, (as I apprehend)* puts the plain lie, upon that
their former Charge, which they had took such pains about to collect from the
fifth and 38. Papers, which now also, we will look into, for the further
manifestation of their Honesty.

The fifth Paper, (from whence they collect, that the King vows Constancy to
the Queens grounds and documents) was written Jan. 2. 1645. when there was a
way making for the Treaty at Uxbridge; And a Rumor of somewhat the King would
do, had beed presented to the Queen (as appears by the Letter) in the ugliest
form, which also Her love to Her Husband might make more affrightfull, (perhaps
it was that, He would trust his person among them.) But what ever it was, it
seems the Queen had writ thereof unto the King, in Her former Letter, and
receives his Answer in these words.

IF thou have not Patience to forbear judging harshly of my Actions, before
thou hear the reasons of them, from me, thou may be often subject to be
doubly vexed, first with slanders, then with having given too much ear unto
them: To conclude, esteem Me as thou find Me, constant to those grounds,
thou leftest Me withal.

Now from hence they gather, that The King vows Constancy to the Queens
grounds and documents: as if at Her going away, She had left certain Grounds
and Documents, as rules of direction, for the King to go by: whereas the words
are not, to the Grounds Thou leftst with Me, (as then they ought to have been;)
but to those Thou leftst Me withal, that is, which I had formerly resolved
upon, thou shall find me constant in my ways and purposes: I am still the same
I was, when thou leftst Me, and thou shall never find Me swarving from the
Grounds of Conscience, Justice, and Honor, which Thou know Me to be
balanced withal. Let the world now judge of the Honesty and truth of these
observatours, by this their manifest forgery; and of the Honor which the
Parliament have purchased to themselves, in publishing this Observation by
Special Order.

The 38. Paper, (from whence they conclude, that the Kings Councels are wholly
managed by the Queen, and nothing small or great is transact without her
privity and consent) begins thus.

Dear Heart,
I Never till now knew the good of Ignorance, for I did not know, the danger
thou were in by the Storm, before I had an assurance of Thy happy escape. -- I
think it not the least of my misfortunes, that for my sake Thou have run so
much Hazard, in which thou have expressed so much Love to Me, that I confess
it is impossible to repay by any thing, I can do, much less by words, but my
Heart being full of Affections to Thee, admiration of Thee, and impatient
passion of Gratitude to Thee, I could not but say something, leaving the rest
to be read by Thee out of thine own Noble Heart.

By which words (we see) that the Letter was writ to the Queen, after She had
lately been in a great danger by Sea, even to the hazard of Her life, for the
Kings sake* and had thereby, as also by Her discreet and faithful management
of affairs for Him beyond the Seas, given the largest testimonies of Her true
Affection, as in his judgment could possibly be given. Now (therefore) if in
his Passion of Gratitude, (to use his own phrase) he had professed to make Her
of His Council in all His Affairs; yea and that He would thenceforth, think
it a wrong to Her, to do any thing without Her: I believe it would have been,
(with men not disposed to quarrel) a very excusable error. Some more
expressions then ordinary, or Con^ugall indulgence are allowable to any wife,
after so great an affright, and danger, (as must needs be supposed the Queen
was in) to revive and lighten Her Spirit again: But to a Queen, to a Kings
daughter, to a Lady of such splendor and parts; that had run so great an
Hazard, as a greater could not be imagined, for the love of Her Husband: what
wel-bred Gentleman under the Sun, but will blush to say, that any expression of
esteem, can be too Honorable, or too High to be used unto Her?

But if we look further yet into the Paper, unto the words which they ground
their observation upon; we shall find them ^ttered upon another particular
occasion: for when His Majesty had testified his joy, in gratulating His
Queens deliv^^ance, He discourses to Her of another matter, scil. of His being
persecuted (it is his own word) for places with importunity of suitors, whereby
He was put to a kind of distress, for an evasion, that he might not (if
possible) offend any, by granting to some, what others also gaped after: (for,
alas, such has been the Condition of our good King, that He has been forced
to fear to offend: and such has been his infelicity, that too many of those
that served him, did more seek themselves then him, proposing, (as himself
says in another place) several recompenses to themselves, for their pains
and Hazard in this Rebellion, and if to one was granted, what others expected,
and sued for, these being frustrate of their expectations, conceiving
themselves slighted, have grown sullen upon it, and no more service would they
do; Nay peradventure dis-service rather, to revenge themselves upon him: and
happy had it been if all Suitors for places, had been discarded, at their first
appearance: For doubtless those of best desert, and most faithfulness, have
had more modesty and wisdom, then to persecute and torment the King with any
such selvish motions, in these times of distraction, as might any way tend to
his disadvantage: But the King tells the Queen in that his Letter of those his
straits, and how he delivered himself: I answered, (says he) that having
professed to have thy advise, it were a wrong to thee, to do any thing before I
had it. This is all; yet from hence these nimble-witted, spacious conceited
fellows, make shift to collect all this long matter, and that plainly too, (as
they think:) It is plain (say they) here, that the Kings Councels, are wholly
(or altogether) managed by the Queen, though She be of the weaker Sex, born an
Alien, bred up in a contrary Religion, yet nothing great or small is
trans-acted without Her privity, and consent, and for this see Paper 38. Truly
(I hope) all the world sees, that this adds but little more to the credit of
the Authorizers of this Pamphlet, then the former observation did. And thus
have I also discovered the vanity of their exceptions against the King, for his
loving the Queen.

SECT. XXII.
Of the Kings fault in laboring to uphold Monarchy. His soliciting the King of
Denmark to this purpose, no whit Contradictive, to his former resolutions of
not calling in foreign aid.

ANother Grand particular (beside this) they have against Him, and that is, His
employing Collon^ll Cockram, to solicit the King of Denmarkes assistance:
Whence they Conclude thus, He makes not only Papists our Enemies for Religion
sake, but all Princes (though Protestants) for Monarchy sake. From whence all
people must learn and believe three things.

1. That it is only Religion, and nothing but their Religion, which the King
does oppose these men for; yea, and for their pure Religion it is, that he
makes Papists their Enemies.

2. That it is an heinous crime, and sin in the King, to endeavor to maintain
Monarchy; or to solicit any Princes, though Protestants, and of his own
nearest blood and Alliance beside, to aid him therein.

3. That all Princes are contained, and included in the King of Denmark, for
in the Kings soliciting him, he solicites all them: Whence by the way, we may
also observe; how provident these times are, in providing for the credit of
their future Clergy: for it is (doubtless) for their sakes, that an Argument a
singularibus ad universalia, is here (amongst other like stuff) made pa^^able
and good, by Authority and special Order of Parliament.

Concerning the Religion of these men, it has been made apparent already, that
the fruits and effects of it, speak it to be such a one, as deserves the
hatred of all men, though it cannot under any proper name be the object of the
Kings opposition; for no man can directly say what it is; themselves are not
yet resolved upon it, nor what to call it; But whatever is the ground of the
Kings opposing them, it is evident that the Cause of their resisting him, (which
I hope all Christian Princes will take special notice of) is for Monarchy
sake, he would maintain Monarchy; He will not tamely admit the downfall of
Monarchy, in this noble Kingdom; which these men (as appears by their own
words) would feign effect, and therefore they thus persecute him, and exclaim
upon him: nor are they either ashamed or afraid to intimate the same to the
whole world; let all the Monarchs of the Earth, take it as an open defyance if
they please, they think themselves able to grapple with them all, yea, they
and their faction, (where ere they prevail) are resolved not to leave a
Monarch standing.

I desire of all you, His Majesty's Subjects of Great Britain and Ireland, who
have unfortunately been seduced by this faction, but to observe well this
discovery which themselves have made (by this passage) of their own intentions:
they have told you often, and perhaps may tell you again, by some impudent
speech or declaration, that they intend still to maintain true Religion, and
Monarchy in this Kingdom, to have a King over them, and that they be only ill
tongues and Enemies to Parliaments, that say otherwise, etc. But I beseech you,
believe not a word they say to this purpose, for God has here made their own
tongues and pens to betray their Hearts for your sakes, that you might speedily
withdraw your selves, from their seduction; and not be their Instruments to
embrew your hands in the blood of your Sovereign; and to take from him, his
Inheritance, who has always defended you in yours, with peace and plenty; till
by their fraud and violence, he was disabled, and how have you enjoyed your
selves, and comforts since, let your experience speak it to your own Hearts.
Be you assured (from what you have felt) that Monarchy is the Protection of
this Nation, and of you the good people in it: call but to mind the days
past, when a Monarch only had the Militia in his disposing, quam placide po^ens
dominusque vitae, how pleasingly powerful was he in the use of it? with what
innocent hands did he sway the Scepter? How unbloudy was his whole reign? How
tender and sparing of the lives of his Subjects? Populus iste non bella nor^t,
non tubae fermitu^ truces, non arma gentes cingeres assuerant suas muris nec
urbes, we knew not what Wars or Alarums meant, nor did we need weapons to
protect our selves, nor Walls to defend our Cities, pervium cunctis iter, every
man might travail safely, and communis usus omnium rerum fuit, there was a
common use of all Common blessings, yea, and every man beside without
disturbance, enjoyed the comfort of his own Labors.

But since Monarchiall Government has been obscured by these men's introduction
of themselves, upon the Stage of Action, what has been in practice amongst us,
but all kind of Oppression, Tyranny, Injustice and Villainy? whereof I heartily
wish that your Experience did need my further information; wherefore I pray
take special notice of this passage, it is published you see, to the world by
Authority of Parliament, yea, by their special Order, and therefore you have
reason to believe it, to be the true intent of their Hearts: and the rather,
because it is so agreeable to all their Actions; (yea, though the contrary
should be told you hereafter by the same Authority.)

Be it known (I say) unto you all, and remember it well, the end of all these
wars and fightings against the King, is to destroy Monarchy in this Kingdom,
and to keep you the freeborn Subjects of it, in this turbulent, slavish, and
underly condition whereunto a few of your Tyrannical Fellow Subjects have
already brought you: they tell you sometimes, that it is the Militia of the
Kingdom only* which they would have settled in good hands, and the King shall
be King still; but your experience have taught you, that no hands are so good
as his; neither can the Kings bare Title be able to defend you in your
possession. They tell you that they will defend you; but you have paid for so
much wit, as to judge of what you shall have, by what you have had already from
them: therefore as no man having tasted old wine, straightway desires new,
(viz. if he be also acquainted with the relish of the new) for he says the Old
is better; so you having had a sufficient taste of both Governments, the
Monarchical, and the other new one (which we cannot yet tell by what name to
call) have no reason by any means, to allow of this, since you are so sure
that the old is better. In a word, let this Conclusion be rooted in your
Hearts, which experience has in part confirmed unto your senses, that as the
Moon and Stars would fall infinitely short of that bright Luster, which now
they have, if the Sun were stripped of his abundant shining; so take from the
King, his Royal Prerogative, let him be as a King and no King, and all the
people great and small will quickly feel, that from his flourishing Condition
proceeded all their happiness.

I shall not here need to spend time in showing the Excellency of Monarchy
above all other Governments, and the fitness of it for this Nation; abler Pens
have done that abundantly, since the beginning of this unreasonable Rebellion;
only this I say, to introduce any other form into this Kingdom, is a new
thing never yet in being here, and therefore I apprehend such an Act to be a
perfect opposition unto Gods revealed will, whosoever be the Agents in it; for
as the saying is, Qui mala introducit, voluntatem Dei oppugnat revelatum in
verbo, qui nova introducit voluntatem Dei oppugnat revelatum in rebus, and
therefore I advise all Statesmen consulere providentiam Dei cum verbo Dei, to
take Council of Gods Providence, as well as of his Word, in cases of this
Nature. But I return again to these men.

Who would have us, by these their words, (of His Maj. soliciting the King of
Denmark, and in him all other Princes) to take notice that he calls in foreign
Aid: which fault they amplify over and over in other places, for though
themselves may, without offense or sin, call in another Nation, and hire them
(with I know not how many 1000. Pounds a month) to help them cut the throats
of their Countrymen; yea, and may make use of any forreiners in the world, of
what Nation, Religion, or Spirit soever they be to help them to destroy and
pull down Monarchy; yet the King may not without exclamation, desire the aid
of a Protestant Prince, no not of his nearest Kinsman, the King of Denmark to
uphold the same. But what is the reason that the King must be confined to this
restraint, and themselves walk so much at Liberty?

Why they tell us, at the end of their notes, that the King had made
resolutions and promises, that he would never bring in foreign forces. Which
themselves indeed never did, nor ever intended, for doubtless they resolved at
first, to bring their defignes to pass by any means, and rather then fail,
to get assistance Flectere si superos nequeunt Achero^^a movere, and therefore
themselves are free, and do as they please, whereas the King is entangled in
his own promises.

They say Page 58. As to the bringing in of foreign forces, The King, Mar. 9.
1641. in his Declaration from Newmarket says,

Whatsoever you are advertised from Rome, Venice, Paris, of the Popes Nuncios
soliciting, Spain, and France, for foreign ^ydes, We are confident no sober
honest man, can believe Us so desperate or senseless, to entertain such
designs, as would not only bury this Our Kingdom in soddain destruction and
ruin, but Our Name and Posterity in perpetual scorn and infamy.

Also they tell us of other words, which the King spoke some three weeks after,
to the same purpose, which indeed (as I take it) do express the inward ground
and Motive, that caused him to speak the former, viz.

We have neither so ill an opinion of Our own Merits, or the Affections of Our
Subjects, as to think Our self in need of foreign force.

Also August the 4. in his speech to the Gentry of Yorkshire the King
acknowledges (say they) that

He is wholly cast upon the Affections of his people, having no hope but in
God, His just cause, and the love of his Subjects.

Now these observators having quoted these three expressions of the King, do
conclude, saying, What distinction can now satisfy us, that neither Irish,
French, Lorrai^ers, Dutch, Danes, are forreiners? To which I answer;

First for the Irish, they are no more forreiners then the Scots are, nor in
some respect so much; for Ireland has been a dependant unto the Crown of
England, many hundred years before Scotland was: and then for French,
Lorrai^ers, Dutch, and Danes, I shall answer concerning them, when they are
landed, for the Kings assistance: and in the mean time it would be but just,
that they should satisfy us, that neither the Irish, Scots, French,
Burg^ndi^^^, Dutch, Wall^ns, Itali^ns that are already in their Armies, are
neither Papists nor Forreiners, as I said before, the time and place is known
to many, where near 30. of their men being taken were At Perin in Cornwall,
when the King defeated Essex and his Army.
examined, and found to be of six several Nations, all forreiners, and all
Papists.

But these words of the King alleged by these men against Him, do plainly
discover to every honest eye, that His Majesty's design was, never to use any
but His own Subjects; nor did He think it possible, (and the rather in regard
of His own good merits) that people so long instructed in Protestant Religion,
should ever prove so ungrateful, as to force Him (their Prince) to stand in
need of foreign assistance: and therefore the Heads of the faction, having in
their malicious policy, (to work fears and jealousies against Him) told the
people, that the Popes Nuncio (that great Bulbegger) was soliciting both in
Spain and France the Kings business for foreign aides: and of this they said
they were advertized, from Venis, and Paris, yea, and from Rome it self; (with
which it seems they held intelligence even from the very beginning.) My self
did hear (in Avignion) a Gentlemen, belonging to the Cardinal Barbarine
mention by name one of their Agents, at Rome: and how many thousand pounds a
year (he believed) he did there spend in his Negotiation, for them.
Now to remove this foolish vanity, and to retain a clearness in His peoples
hearts, the King expressed himself in that sort unto them; assuring them that
they were all forgeries against Him; and that he did wholly cast Himself upon
the Affections of His people, and was confident that no sober man, could
believe Him so senseless, as to entertain such a design, which would have
been so detrimentall both to Himself and His Kindom; and in very deed, if
before he had tried his own people, he had called in such Armies of Forreiners,
as they reported, it must needs have been confessed a desperate part in him,
and a mean to have brought a sudden Destruction upon his Kingdom, and a
perpetual Infamy upon His Name.

But if after three years, (as long as was allowed to the figtree in the
Gospel) the King finding his Subjects unfaithful and cold in their affections
toward him: Nay more, perceiving by so long experience, that their endeavors
were to take from him both his Life, and his Inheritance, yea, and his Honor
too, and that they abused his good opinion of them, by mis-interpreting his
professions unto them; and conceiving him tied thereby, from using others help,
for defense of himself and Monarchy: I believe if he had or should alter his
Resolution, and call in any Prince in Christendom to his assistance, in the
maintenance of Regal Authority, which God has entrusted him withal: and of
that Government, (which as the most absolute) God established among his own
people, and has always blessed this Nation under; (He being utterly disabled to
do it otherwise) it should be reckoned by the Almighty, at the great day, (if
any fault at all) but among his infirmisies: Yea and if destruction thereby,
should fortune to come to the whole Kingdom, the whole infamy and guilt
thereof, should be charged upon the Heads of these his most perverse and
injurious people; even as that of Jerusalem by Titus Vespasian is laid upon the
seditious, that were therein, even unto this day. But my humble prayer to the
Almighty is, that he would yet please to spare us, and to bestow his grace at
length upon the people of this land, that they might cease provoking his Divine
Majesty, to punish that way, this so Horrid a sin, and so High abuses to his
own Anointed. And thus I have done also with this particular.

SECT. XXIII.
1. The Libellers Cavills at the word Mongrill Parliament: At the Commissioners
for the Treaty at Uxbridge: At the Kings pawning His Jewels, answered. 2. His
Majesty's Affection and Goodness to His Subjects (for want of other matters)
objected as a fault against Him by these Libellers.

IN the third place they accuse the King, for a slight esteem of his friends at
Oxford, whom they would fain seduce from him: to which purpose they take great
advantage, from a word they find in one of his Letters (scil. in Paper 13.)
which they dress up for their own purpose, with 2. more of their own adding,
(according to their wonted honesty) and affirm them to be spoken by the King,
and applied to the persons of his friends. But in answer to this matter, (or
word rather) I shall allege the Copy of a Letter writ by His Majesty's own
hand, to Secretary Nicholas about the same, I received it also from the mouth
of the forementioned Gentleman, of whom I had the former, which to another
purpose I have set down: He had the perfect Copies of both, though at a great
distance, but he had so well observed them, that he was confident, he failed
but little (if at all) in remembering the very words, Which to this particular
were thus,

I Am very sorry, that I have been so unfortunate to have my private Letters
taken by the Rebels, but if all men's private thoughts were seen as mine are, I
believe I should appear as innocent as any: it may be that many expressions in
those Letters, might have been prudently omitted, but if one be well
understood, I care not although the rest take their fortune, and that is
concerning the Mungrell Parliament at Oxford; indeed when I was disturbed in
mine Affairs, by Sussex and his faction, in my passion I writ so to my Wife,
but both by the precedent, and subsequent clauses of that Letter, it may easily
be understood, that I meant it of him and his adherents.

And indeed let the Letter be read, and to an equal eye, it can appear no
otherwise to be intended then his Majesty has expressed: Yet these liars in
wait, do collect from thence, and tell the Lords and Gentlemen at Oxford, that
the King despises them all, and that only for their retaining some little
Conscience to Religion; and because they be not wicked enough to serve his
purpose fully; that is, (as they say afterward) to think and act the same
things, which the inhumane Irish Rebels, or the worst foreign Enemies of our
Religion and State could wish to be done: and thereupon they compare their
Sovereign, (the most Religious and Gracious Prince that ever this Nation had)
to Richard the third; who first rejected and then beheaded the Duke of
Buckhingham, because when he had furthered him, in deposing and dis-inheriting
the two Princes, he was not wicked enough (say they) to consent also to the
Murder of them; and to advise the Lords and Gentlemen to take warning by the
Dukes example, and timely to turn away from the King unto goodness, that is,
to their society: it is sufficient only that I have related what they say; that
villainy needs no further discovery or Confutation: Only I add this, those
Lords and Gentlemen whom they labor to seduce; and whom love and Conscience
has engaged to their Sovereign, are not capable to be drawn from him by these
men's insinuations, or driven from him by their violence: How cheerfully have
they all Hazarded (yea many of them sacrificed) their lives for Him? How
joyfully have they endured the spoiling of their Goods for His sake? With what
admiration do inferior men behold the cheerfullnesse and contentedness of
great persons in great afflictions? and are ready daily to cry out unto them, O
Christians most truly Noble, How much better have you learned Christ then we
have done? Assuredly as never Prince was more unhappy in many of His people
then ours is, so never was any more Happy in others of them, then He has been,
more truly beloved, more sincerely affected, (even by some of all sorts) and
this Himself has so well acknowledged, and merited from us; that our grief is,
that we have no more Fortunes and Estates to lose, nor more lives then one to
adventure for Him: The Libellers do but labor in vain, if they think to draw
us from our obedience.

Another thing they lay to His Charge in these words; He seeks Treaties in
show, and wins upon the people by that show, yet chooses such Commissioners,
and binds them up, with such instructions, that all accommodation is
unpossible: The Rancour of this Accusation needs no Confutation neither: for
how real His Majesty has been in his endeavors for Peace, Heaven and Earth
can witness; yea, the very choice of his Commissioners, (as these men well
know, notwithstanding their perverse Cavills) sufficiently proves it, being
persons of such approved Honor, and candid affections to their Country; that
none in the Nation goes beyond them: and let the Directions which the King gave
them, be viewed by all men, and judged of; whether they be such as speak all
accommodation impossible; unless with the most unreasonable men living, who
will have no Peace: O how often (as the world knows) has His Majesty tendered
them pardon for all their unrepairable wrongs done against him! if they would
but let Him and his People live in quiet? yea, How often has he been heard in
secret to say: O that I knew what I might do to satisfy these men!

In very deed, what these Libellers are pleased to report of the Kings
Commissioners; was true of those that were sent from the men of Westminster;
they were tied up, (as themselves in open conference at Uxbridge did not stick
to acknowledge) whereas the King declared openly, that he meant not his
Directions to his Commissioners should be obligatory, only by them, he did
acquaint them with his sense, and left them free to themselves to do that
which became men of Honor: and all this the Authors and Authorizers of this
Libell, knew well enough, therefore from this their Accusation we only learn,
of what great use sometimes to some men are brass brows and hard foreheads.

They accuse him also for pawning the Jewels of the Crown, their Anger is,
because they escaped their fingers; they can see no Error in themselves for
robbing him of all things el^e, and bringing him to such a distress, as he was
forced to part with them, for supply of his necessities, but they observe a
great fault in him, for not suffering himself to perish, rather then Pawn his
own Jewels; that these men want nothing but matter, appears by this, and will
be more evident by and by.

For having vented as much Poison, as their venomous skill would serve them, to
suck out of the Kings inoffensive Letters: to lengthen the Catalogue, and make
the heap show bigger, they begin to object as faults against him, diverse of
his former most affectionate expressions, and desires for the good of his
people: hoping that now, they have imbittered men's hearts against him, with
their virulent lies and perversions, even his greatest indulgencies will appear
distasteful.

The first of which they instance in, is his profession, Dec. 2. 1641. which
they say, was in these words.

I am so far from repenting of any Act done this Session, for the good of my
people, that if it were to do again, I would do it, and will yet grant
whatelse can be justly desired.

And he concludes (say they) with a recommendation of the business of Ireland,
and (finding the preparations for ^he same slow) again (say they) on December
14. He is patheticall in quickening them thereunto: thus they.

Then they are not ashamed to relate the whole story of their own unchristian
and currish behavior toward him: and his most meek and gentle carriage
toward them. I need not baulk to repeat, what themselves blush not to set
down, which I shall do as briefly as I can, and with a better heart then they
have done it: let the Reader but afford patience.

SECT. XXIIII.
The Story of the Rebels unchristian behavior toward their Sovereign, and his
meek and gracious Carriage toward them, since the beginning of these troubles
related by themselves, and their impudency therein noted.

THey begin thus: Notwithstanding all this (scil. the gracious profession
forementioned, and patheticall quickening them for the relief of Ireland) the
Parliament out of their Jealousy, did open the indisposition of the whole
State, in a plain and sharp Remonstrance; to which the King Answers, (most
mildely indeed, as themselves witness, by alleging his words to be these:)

For the preserving the peace and safety of the Kingdom, from the designs of
a Popish party, we have and will concur with all the just desires of our
people, in a Parliamentary way. For Ireland we thank you for your care and
cheerful engagement, for the speedy suppression of that Rebellion, the Glory
of God in the Protestant Profession, the safety of the British there, our
Honor, and this Nations so much depending thereupon, etc. your promises to
apply your selves to such courses as may support our Royal Estate with Honor
and Plenty at home, and with Power and Reputation abroad, is that which we have
ever promised our self, both from your Loyalties and affections.

Now mark these men: because the King had not answered their rude Remonstrance,
with a like style and spirit as they did write it, they quarrel at him, and
begin thus: Here are words that sound nothing but grace, and here is a clear
Testimony from the Kings own mouth, concerning the merit of this Nation unto
this day: the King had too good an opinion of them, and gave better words of
them, then they deserved, and this was his fault; or else their thirst was
strong for blood, their fingers itched to be fighting with him; and because by
his soft answer to their wild and unparaleld provocation, they were delayed,
and put off from doing mischief, therefore they open the mouth against him:
their Consciences told them, that the words imported more Grace, then belonged
unto them, therefore they cry, They are but bare words: and to persuade others
thereunto, they add, But notwithstauding these promises and Testimonies, the
King discovers more and more regret for Straffords execution, (as if it were
impossible the Kings regret for that, and these promises should be consistent)
Yea and (say they) He sticks closer to the Counsels of the same faction, (but
who were of that faction, could never be named unto this day, only all in
general, that were Loyal and loved the King, or hated Rebellion, Sedition and
Blood, since Straffords death, have been esteemed of Straffords faction.)

Then they tell us of a Business, which they had published to the world, at
least an hundred times before, and repeated over, (for want of other matter)
nine several times in one of their particular Declarations; and for peoples
better observance of it, lest happily we had forgot it, they again relate it,
scil. The Kings Charge of Treason against the six Members: His coming to the
House to require Justice against them: (though they never mention, how the King
was provoked thereto, by their neglect, and contempt of his Messages, sent
formerly unto the House to the same purpose:) And this (say they) was the
fatal commencement of the War (now they had that occasion of quarrel so
long thirsted after) for the House declares the next day, that themselves could
not sit in safety any longer at Westminster, and thereupon adjourne for some
days, and retire into the City, require a Guard, which the King dislikes, with
these expressions.

We are ignorant of the Grounds of your apprehensions, but protest before the
face of Almighty God, had We any knowledge or belief, of the least design in
any, of violence either formerly, or at this time against you, We would pursue
them to condign punishment; with the same severity, and detestation, as We
would the greatest attempt upon Our Crown: And We do engage solemnly the word
of a King, that the security of every one of you from violence, is, and shall
be ever, as much Our care as the preservation of Us and Our Children.

These words of the King (they confess) were sweetly tempered, but (say they)
won no beli^f, (for they were resolved to go on in their way, and a Guard they
would have against His will, if not with it: Yea, and the Tower of London,
rendered up into their Hands to boot) wherefore the Major, Aldermen, and
Common Council of the City, are set awork to move for it, that the same may be
disposed of to persons of trust. The King answers,

That his reception of such an unusual request, is a sufficient instance of
his singular estimation he has of the good Affections of the City, which He
believes in Gratitude will never be wanting to His just Demands and service.

From which they gather: That the King speaks nothing hitherto, but in
justification of the Parliament and Peoples Loyalty: it seems he had not yet
learned to amend his Error, in speaking better of them, then they deserved.

Then they go on and mention the Tumults about White Hall, of which they speak
very sparingly, as if they had been raised neither by the rabble, as (they say)
the King imputed them, nor yet by the Kings party, (as they had formerly
affirmed) but by their own very selves, saying, They amounted to no War,
viz. to no such bloody War yet, as they intended.

Then they declare us two more of his faults. 1. The Kings declining the
pr^secution of the six Members, as if themselves had offered them to the trial
of law, but He having nothing to charge them withal, declined the Business.
2. His departing the City, which was because Had His Great Council shown but
half that zeal in their Master the Kings behalf, as of late they have done in
their own, (concerning a like tumultuous business) He had not departed from
them.
His great Council, would take no order upon his earnest request, to suppress
those unlawful Tumults. He might well think, they desired to have him Murdered
by the hands of the Rabble* and therefore had reason to provide for his safety
by departing; wherein he did according to Christ's example, when they would have
thrown him down headlong. Luke 4. 30.
He departed from among them, (says the Text) and went his way: and according
to David's Example, who thought it no safe staying for Him in Jerusalem, when
Absalom had stolen away the hearts of the people. 2 Samuel 15.

Yet soon after (they tell us) the King sent them a message to state the
differences between them on both sides, promising that when they shall be
digested into a body fit to be judged of, it shall appear what He will do. In
this (sure) the King was in a great error, thus to send to them about
composing differences, when their intended work, was to make, and widen them
rather: wherefore wholly neglecting that particular, The House of Commons, (say
they) the Lords refusing to join, did only in Answer thereto requi^e the
Tower of London to be at their disposing, and withal, (for the King ever saved
as little, by delaying to grant their first demands, as by yielding to them)
they require now, that the Militia of the whole Kingdom, be put into such
hands, as they should recommend: to which the King makes a reply, (which is
also to be reckoned among the rest of his faults) in these words as themselves
testify.

That the Militia by Law is subject to no Command, but His own, which He will
reserve to Himself as a principal and inseparable Flower of His Crown, and
professes to take care of peace, and the rights of the Subject, equally with
His life, or the lives of His dearest Children. He further also conjures them,
by all Acts of Duty and favor received, by hopes of future mutual happiness,
by their love of Religion, the Peace both of this Kingdom, and Ireland, not to
be transported with fears and jealousies.

Surely here was enough from the mouth and hand of a Religious King to have
prevailed with any, that had not before entered into a Covenant with Hell: But
(say these men) the Parliament could not (because they would not) believe
themselves secured by these professions, and asseverations: and the King would
not (because He could not) understand, that the settling the Militia at this
time in confiding Hands, to prevent Civil War, was any other, then the taking
the Crown from his Head. Hinc illa Lacrymae (say they.) So they are resolved
(it seems) at the very first, to raise a Civil War, unless the King would
believe that he might put more confidence, in other men, then in himself, and
that he might maintain his Crown and dignity, without having any Command over
the Militia: Well yet notwithstanding all these affronts, put upon His
Majesty's faithfulness, and these contempts of His gracious Asseverations: The
King (say these men) nevertheless persists to declare his abhorrence of the
Irish Rebellion, frequently inciting the Parliament to send succors, (which
made them more averse thereto, lest the King should please himself, in thinking
they regarded Him, or his desires in any thing, which (indeed) would have been,
a very Grand error in him.)

Then they relate, How the King abjures any privity to plots and designs
against the Laws, and makes strict Proclamation for putting them in execution
against Papists, (who were reported to be the plotters) that so if possible He
might give satisfaction. But the Parliament being resolved, do still pursue
their own design, and (as if it had been the only Business, for which the
King by his Writ did call them together) they still urge Him to settle the
Militia upon them, And (as they remember us) upon his refusal so to do,
(thoughts of peace being laid aside) they seized upon the Town of Hull, (His
Magazine of Arms) without his leave, and held it out against Him, and so
taught him to seize upon New Castle: And now (say they) the War being thus
far advanced, yet it is not agreed, which part was put to the Defensive, and
(as it seems) to resolve this, the 19 Propositions were dispatched to the
King: which indeed were the means of Light to thousands in this Kingdom, of
discovering the scope of their intentions, namely to be, to ruin the King, and
to bring him into a worse Condition then his meanest vassals. Many men (whereof
my self was one) did conceive from the grosnesse of them, that they had been
divulged, by the special endeavo^rs of the Kings friends in the House; for to
discover to the world the unreasonablenesse of the then growing turbulent
faction; to the end that peoples spirits might be awakened to appear generally
against the same, in the defense of the Honor, the Rights and Liberty of their
Sovereign.

SECT. XXV.
1. Their Pretenses of bringing Delinquents to punishment made a ground of the
War: The King acknowledged by his Enemies to be on the defensive part. 2. His
Majesty's good opinion (a long time) of the Parliament objected as a fault
against Him by themselves. 3. The King makes no War against His Parliament
Evidenced. This Conspiracy of Traitors at Westminster no true Parliament fully
proved: The Conclusion of the Answer to the Libell.

BUt the maine thing in those 19. Propositions, (say these men) were
Reformation of Church Government: that power Military and Civil might be put
into confiding Hands: and that Justice of Parliament might pass upon
Delinquents; We grant they were; for these three contain all the rest. But
here I must beg leave of the Reader to digress a little, to speak a word of
this last particular, having discussed at large of the two first already.

They had, or have two Reasons, for their requiring of the King, that Justice
of Parliament might pass upon Delinquents.

1. To punish the Kings Error in his requiring the Justice of Law against six
of their Members; it shall cost Him the Estates and lives of all his friends,
(if they can bring it to pass) that He may the better remember hereafter to do
no more so: His fault was so great and high, in desiring that half a dozen of
them, might be tried by Law, that it cannot be expiated, without His yielding
up many thousands of his friends, yea, of all that love him, to be condemned
without Law, by bare Vote, which they call Justice of Parliament, from which,
Good Lord deliver us.

2. To out-voice the Kings demand forementioned: for if they should not show
zeal against sin, in calling themselves for punishment to be done upon
Delinquents, the world would think that the six Members (whom they rescued from
a legal trial, which the King would have had them unto) might be very faulty,
and that His Majesty had just reason to take Arms to bring both them, and
their abetters to it; but to prevent this, they ( by affirming, they take up
Weapons to bring Delinquents to punishment) do avow the War to begin on their
side, and so leave the King to be Defender. Although I must tell the world that
this devise of bringing Delinquents to Punishment, was resolved upon, to be a
chief ground of the War, some certain months after the War was begun: I
believe I could name the place and time, when it was first taken into
Consideration, and upon what occasion; and though I nominate not the Persons,
yet I may tell the story.

Upon a time, diverse of the Members were met together at a certain easy
Lords House in the Kingdom, (who was also in his Country, one of the maine
Pillars of this rank faction) where in like sort were present, some of their
Chaplains, and amongst them, there was one Scholar; who I think (truly) was
an honest man at that present, (and verily I believe, does still so continue) he
being (like that Disciple which was known to the High Priest) well John 18. 16.
acquainted with the Company, and therefore might speak more freely to them,
and amongst them, then another man could be suffered to do; and indeed so did:
He moved them to this purpose, while they were at Supper, or sitting at Table.

Gentlemen, you have begun a Civil War in this Kingdom and you are come
bear into the Country, to draw us further to your assistance, by requiring us
to Associate with you: You shall do well to declare what it is, that you do
bottom your War upon, and what is the cause of this your undertaking, that
Seeing your Grounds to be lawful and good, we may with the better Conscience
concur with you: for though we take you to be wise, and honest men, yet it does
not become us to yield you our blind obedience, in a matter of so High
concernment as this is. Say therefore (I pray) for what cause do you wage this
War? Is it for Religion? Can you complain of any restraint in that? Are not
the Temples open? Have we not Liberty to Preach and profess the whole Truth of
God? Is true Religion so freely exercised in any Nation under Heaven as here?
Is not the King himself a Protestant ^ Has he not granted you a power to
devise for its continuance, and a promise of his concurrence with you, to
establish and settle it as strongly as you please? What can you hope to get
more by War, concerning this thing, then you may have, nay, then is offered
to you in a way of Peace? Wherefore declare (I beseech you) whether it be for
Religion that you fight: and if so, what Particular in Religion it is, that you
would have us join with you to maintain and defend. One of the Members that
thought himself the best speaker, undertook to Answer the Scholar, (for the
Chaplains (poor souls) were posed, they sat still and said nothing: though
some of them had been as far as Edge Hill.) And at length, did (after some
shuffling) fairly confess, being thus urged, that in very deed, it was not
Religion they fought for; the Doctor asks, Why do you then pretend it to be so
unto the people? His answer was, we shall never else win the people to us.
Well, but what is it then? (replied the Doctor) Is it the Abolition of
Episcopacy, that you so contest about? You know God has sufficiently
manifested his approbation of this Government, by his so abundant blessing of
this Church and Nation under it: none in the world has thrived better, nor so
well under any, as ours has done under this: you know also, that the King has
given you leave to punish, or to see punished in a regular way, all persons,
that have miscarried themselves in the execution of that Government (without
exception of any.) He has given you power to see that all abuses in Discipline
be removed, yea, and what ever is liable to exception in our Canons and
Lyturgie to be altered, for the ease and satisfaction of tender Consciences:
yea* He has yielded to you, for prevention of injustice afterward, the taking
away the High Commission, and has left it to you to purge all Ecclesiastical
Courts beside; and as a pledge of Assurance against all growing Corruptions; he
has enacted a Trienniall Parliament, for the calling of ill officers, and
faulty Church Governors to an examination, every three years before your
selves. Now do you think that notwithstanding all these particular
Considerations, that the Abolition of Episcopacy is a thing of that grand
necessity, as to imbroile this whole Nation and Kingdom in its own Blood? The
Member (being convinced also by these Reasons of this particular) answered,
Truly it was not; but as the former, so this pretense also was to be used, to
win and hold the Let the people observe by this, how they have been cheated.
people. Why then (says the Doctor) will you tell us, what is the cause, why
you fight? The Wiseman answered, to bring Delinquents to punishment: and so
(for ought I know) the disputation ended, for this is all that I heard of it.
But I would have any of them all, to name six Delinquents if they can, that
were so declared to be* when they raised their first Forces; some 3. or 4.
persons perhaps fled the Kingdom, but must the whole Nation bleed for that
reason? It Is true (indeed) they fell afterward to make Delinquents apace, and
all that would not renounce the Doctrine of Christ's Gospel, which is a Doctrine
of Loyalty and obedience, and which they had always been instructed in; all
that would not abjure their Oath of Allegiance, and break that Protestation
lately imposed by these very men, (which was to maintain and defend the Kings
Person, Honor, and Estate) are looked upon as Delinquents, and persecuted as
such, with fire and sword: yea, diverse of the Members of both Houses who had
(to speak in these men's own phrase) so much Conscience and goodness in them,
as not to desert their trust in Parliament, to their King and Country, by
giving up themselves to their wills, are all become Delinquents too upon the
sudden, and to bring all these to punish nent, (that Justice of Parliament
may pass unto them) are these Wars said to be undertaken and pursued: and
when they have by their Votes, put all them to death, whom they have done wrong
unto, perhaps they will sit still and be quiet, but not before. Well fare the
good King yet, He named six notorious Delinquents, (whereas these men never
named any) and when he saw he could not have the Justice of Law against them,
rather then make any further disturbance, he declined their prosecution; indeed
he is blamed for his so doing by these men (as was noted before) but O that
they had had the grace to have been guilty of such an error! And thus much by
way of digression in the case of Delinquency: I now return to their Story.

They tell us that the Answer returned to the foresaid Propositions was, That
if these things were granted, the King should remain but the outside, but the
picture, but the sign of a King: which very Answer (they say) was the Trumpet
of War, and the sound of defiance, scil. in their ears; who had a great lust to
quarrel, now they had got weapons: but their misery was, the King still crosses
them, for He would not permit it to be so owned, Still (say they) He says, He
intends not to fix any disloyal design, upon both or either House of
Parliament: He is rather most confident of the Loyalty, good Affections, and
integrity of that great Bodies good intentions; but the malignity of the design
(He says) has proceeded from the subtle informations, mischievous practices,
and evil Counsels of ambitious turbulent Spirits, not without a strong
influence upon the very Actions of both Houses. Thus they of the King.

And the Result which they make of this their whole relation is twofold.

1. To justify themselves; which they would do from the Kings expressions of
them: He did not give them such ill language as they gave him, Ergo, they would
conclude themselves to be as Innocent as they make him Faulty: to his words
last alleged they add, this was the utmost Charge that could be then brought
against the Parl. they argue a non velle ad non posse: He did not, or would
not, Ergo, He could not: Let the Reader judge of this Argument.

2. To cast further blame upon the King, scil. for having a worse opinion of
them now, then (by these expressions) he seemed to have had then, when he
returned that answer to their 19. Propositions: Our Propositions (say they) at
Uxbridge in Feb. 1644, being no other in effect then those of June 1642. This
inference may be truly made, that the King has no cause to look upon us now,
otherwise then as he did then: and if he have varied since from those Vows and
Asseverations which He made then, the blame will not remain on this side, but on
His; so that the bare calling to mind what has been said by the King, is now
sufficient for our purpose. These be their direct words: But how ill a
consequent they make, and how false an inference this is: how truly little to
the purpose, I have shown already, and to what is there said, I refer the
Reader.

They then fall to reckon up the Vows and Affeverations, made by the King,
which they would have apprehended to be broken by him, which I have opened the
nature of, and answered already also, yea and manifested evidently, that if the
King has swerved any thing from his primitive purposes, it has been full sore
against his will, and only by their inforcement. I add but this, we find in
the 11 Paper, these words of the King to his Queen, The breach of my Word, is
that I hate above all things: and we remember that the publishers of these
Letters have told us, that what we find in them are Evidences of truth, and
therefore we are abundantly satisfied concerning the Kings truth in his
promises, what ever can be said by them to the contrary. Indeed we do believe
that as Gods promise to the sons of Aaron did not bind him to the sons of
Belial, no more does the Kings promises to his Great Council, tie him to his
Grand Enemies. I said indeed (says the Lord to Eli) that thy house should walk
before me (scil. in the Priests 2 Samuel 2. 30.
office) for ever: But now (I say) they that Honor we will I Honor, and they
that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed: If holy Priests turn filthy
Adulterers, or if good Subjects turn impudent Traitors, neither does God, nor
the King swerve from their former selves if they break with them: Hophni and
Phineas might with as much justice have taxed God, as these men do their King.

But there remains yet one particular, and only one not replied unto, which I
shall also now do, and so conclude.

They accuse the King of making War against his Parliament: Having (not only
spoke so well of them, as before, but) renounced all intentions of War: to
which purpose they allege chiefly his Declaration at York, June 16. 1642.
wherein (they say) are these words: We assure the World, in the presence of
Almighty God, our Maker and Redeemer, We have no more thought of making War
against Our Parliament, then against our Children: yea, and again in July the
same year (after the date of Essex his Commission from them to War against him)
He desires (say they) no longer the protection and blessing of Almighty God
upon himself, and his Posterity, then He and they shall solemnly observe the
Laws in defense of Parliaments: Also in August 12. He acknowledges that the
King and Parliament are like the Twins of Hypocrates, which must laugh and cry,
live and die together.

These were the Kings words (say these men) It is true indeed (say they)
afterward, He was driven (by their making Wars upon him) to save himself by
distinctions, saying, He had not disclaimed all War in General, but all
invasive War; all War, but what was in order to his own defense: which
distinction they scorn at, and say, it was not thought of, or foreseen before:
perhaps so, for it was beyond the imagination or foresight of man, that any
Subjects pretending as they did, being so dealt withal, as they were, should
bring their Soveraig^ to such a strait, or drive Him ever to use any
Distinction at all.

Then they deride Him also for another, which they did put him upon, scil. That
the King may defend himself, against a Parliament, but not fight against it; or
He may assail a Malignant party in Parliament, and yet not touch the Parliament
it self. And surely so He may: For as there may be a Malignant party in a
Church or family, that may be assailed and corrected, and yet the Church or
family it self, be no way damnified or hurt thereby, but bettered rather: So
also in a Parliament; for as the whole Church of God, consisting of Head and
Members, is said not to Err in matters of God, though there be many wicked men
in the Militant part thereof: so in matters of State, a complete, and whole
Parliament, consisting of Head and Members, may be said not to Err, though
there be many wicked ones amongst them, that deserve punishment. And they are
not ashamed to say, that the distinction which they deride the King for, is
good when themselves use it, but not when the King uses it: it will hold (say
they) on our side, but not on His. All things are lawful to them, but unto the
King nothing is allowable.

But (say they) by what distinction will the King put a period to this pertual
Parliament without violence? Or how can He deny it the name of a Parliament
without hostility? As if they had said more fully out thus, We are sure we have
posed him in one thing, and put him to a nonplus: We had him on the hip, when
by feigning our selves honest men, we got Him to sign the Bil of continuation
of the Parliament, which we resolve shall be perpetual, and last for ever in
despite of him: All his distinctions shall not serve his turn to put a period
to that; He must do it by open force and violence, if he do it at all; but we
by that fine Christian Policy of ours, in getting him to pass that Act, have
got possession of so much strength and power, that we are able to keep it in
being, for all the violence that he can use to the contrary: we have fastened
him now upon the Cross, wherefore if he be the Anointed of God, and would be
so accounted, let him loosen himself (if he can) and come down; (but let him be
sure he shall never do it without violence, if he can do it that way, and we are
able to hold it out against him no longer) then we will believe him, and
acknowledge him. Confident we are, that he cannot, (at least he shall not) deny
us the name of a Parl. without hostility: secretly indeed we understand by his
Letters, that he does not acknowledge us to be a Parl. though he does it
publicly: He imparts unto us the name, but not the thing; yea, but we having
got all the Militia, by Land and Sea into our Hands, we are resolved to fight
it out with him, in maintenance of our selves, and of our Title: we are a Parl:
and we will be a Parl. yea, and a perpetual Parl. too, in despite of him, let
him say and do the best he can to the contrary.

These are pretty men (we see) every Age cannot show their fellows: But (truly)
if there was no othet reason for the King to desire and seek to put a period to
their Parliament, this were alone sufficient, in that they call it perpetual,
and intend so to make it, for the Kings Office and duty is, not only to give
his people good Laws, but also to see, they have the use and comfort of them;
now I would have these men, with all their wisdom, show the world, how we shall
ever enjoy the benefit of the Tryennial Parliament (which was the highest Act
of Grace ever granted, and the most likely foundation of future happiness,
that was ever laid for the Subjects of this Kingdom) wherein all corrupt
instruments and enemies of their Countries welfare, of what rank soever, are to
be called to answer for their demerits, and to be censured accordingly. I say,
let them show how possibly we can enjoy the benefit of this Act, unless a
Period be first put to this perpetual Parliament (as they call it) which indeed
is rather a Combinanion of Tyrants Covenanted together, to enthrall their
Countrymen in perpetual bondage, a very Confederacy of Conspiratours against
the Realm and Church: therefore it is undoubtedly the Kings office and duty, as
he will answer it to Almighty God, to do his utmost to disband them, and to
bring them to their Legal trials, and this he may do without making War against
his Parliament; nay, (in order to his solemn observance of the Laws) in defense
of Parliaments. Yea, and all those that have taken the General Protestation,
are bound by the same (as well as by their Oath of Allegiance) to aid and assist
the King and His Friends, in the bringing to condign Punishment these
dishonourers of Parl. who under the name thereof, have scandalized and defamed
its reverend esteem and dignity: and by Force, Practice, Councels, Plots,
Conspiracies, and all other ways have done things contrary to every thing in
the said Protestation contained: let all men read over their Protestation, and
withal consider well of these men's doings; and then speak their Consciences in
this particular.

But further, to answer these men, though they think they have posed the King,
when they say, How can he deny them the name of a Parliament? Yet let them
know, that not only his Majesty, but all men else too of reason and judgment,
may both deny them the name, and also prove that (in the truest and best sense)
it Romans 9. 6.
does in no sort appertain to them; for as S. Paul said, All are not Israel,
that are of Israel; so may we say, All are not the Parliament, that are of the
Parliament. As there was of old, a malignant party, that stood more upon the
Title of Israel, then the true Israelites did: so is there now a like company,
that make more ado about the Title of Parliament, then those who are the true
Members of it, whose endeavors rather are (as they ought to be) to approve
themselves, by their actions, worthy of the name: our Savior John 8.
in the Gospel, disputes the matter at large, with those false Israelites, who
pleaded lustily against him, (as these do against the King) that they were
Abraham's Children, which our Savior denies to be true, in the right and best
sense, for, (says he) You do not the works of Abraham, you go about to kill
me, a man who has told you the truth, (your Savior and your Sovereign) so did
not Abraham. I desire that these men would but seriously in their consciences,
consider whether this be not the very case: and if so, then let them be
content, that the King should imitate the Son of God, in his thinking and
speaking of them; and deny them to be a Parliament in the truest and best
sense, or some time (as they say he does) yield them a Parliament in public,
and yet secretly not acknowledge them so to be: for as S. Paul yields the Jews
to be Israel, and yet not Israel; and as Christ yields them to be Abraham's
Children, and yet not Abraham's Children: so the King may yield them to be a
Parliament, and yet no Parliament.

Again, as the Council of Trent is denied by all the Reformed Churches of
Germany and other Countries, to be a true Council, because it was not free for
all persons to come unto, with their Appeals, their Complaints, and their
Reasons, (as Councels ought to be) for the honest Protestant party were not
admitted a safe conduct, but in danger of their lives, if they did adventure to
come, by the Maglignant and Popish faction, who bare all the sway, and were
both Accusers and Judges; so upon the very same Ground may this Parliament be
denied to be a true Parliament, for a Parliament ought to be free ('it is the
special Privilege of it) for all men, specially for its own Members, all of
them ought to have liberty to speak their minds and consciences, and all the
Kingdom beside to bring their grievances and petitions thither: But in this
particular Assembly, which they call the Parliament, there is no such thing;
for as at Trent, so at Westminster, the Malignant and rebellious Faction alone,
bear all the sway, they are both Accusers and Judges, they imprison, murder,
persecute the honest side; yea, many of their own Members they have forced and
driven away from thence, whereby in very deed, themselves have dissolved the
very being of the Parliament, and made it to be no Parliament at all: indeed as
that Assembly at Trent, is customarily called a Council, and therefore
(perhaps) has that appellation also, even among the Protestants: So the King
may happily sometimes call that Assembly at Westminster a Parliament, but it is
only for custom sake, and because it is so fancied by the Malignant party.

Once more, upon the very same grounds, that Rome is denied to be a true
Church, by the men of this faction, (which we are troubled with) may themselves
be denied to be a true Parliament; they say, Rome was once a true Church, at
its first institution; but now so many corruptions have crept into it, that it
has un-Churched it self, and is become no true Church of Christ: but even the
very Throne of Antichrist, thus they: And thus may we say of them, they were
once a true Parliament, at their first constitution and meeting, but now they
swarm so much in evils, are guilty of acting and authorizing so much
wickedness, that they have plainly un-Parliamented themselves, and are become
no true Parliament, but even the Throne and Synagogue of Satan.

Besides, a true and complete Parliament, (as every one knows) consists of Head
and Members, of King and People; and as a man without an Head, is no true man;
so a Parliament without the King, is no true Parliament. Indeed if the King
should come to Westminster, and sit amongst them, and they behave themselves
toward him (yet at last) as becomes Christians and Members of that Honorable
Court, I know no reason but they may (by the Kings mercy and favor) recover
again that truly honorable Name and Title.

Though some affirm, when both the Speakers fled This was inserted be reason of
the late Accident.
from them (in regard of these late tumults) that according to Law, the
Parliament was dissolved; The true Parliament, (they say) ran away, and that
which now remains is an Adulterous Parliament, a very Junto, and there must
of necessity be a new Writ from the King, to the making of a true Parliament.
(But I leave that to be argued by the Lawyers) My observation only shall be, of
Gods Hand in that business: First, that themselves were driven away from the
Houses, in the same manner, as by their procurement, the King and His friends
were formerly. Secondly, that the Almighty by his permissive Providence has
exposed them, (who thought and called themselves a perpetual Parliament) to be
denied to be any Parliament at all, by their own Adorers, and to become a
public scorn and derision, by the means or assistance of those that had so
many years together paid their devotions to them: Let all the world admire Gods
wisdom: And let all that fear the Lord, praise his holy Name.

And thus all may see whither I have brought these men, or rather more properly
whither they have brought themselves, by this their impertinent and peremptory
question, How can the King deny us the name of a Parliament? They are proved to
be no true Parliament, by the witness of Jesus Christ, (who is Truth it self)
by the testimony of S. Paul in a like case, by the judgment of all Reformed
Churches in Christendom, and by the evidence of their own dear selves and
faction, in their way of opposition unto other parties: Wherefore still may His
Majesty in truth, and with a good Conscience say, as He did at first, We again
in the presence of Almighty God, Our Maker and Redeemer, assure the world, We
have no more thought of making War against Our Parliament, then against Our own
Children. And He may desire still no longer to enjoy the Protection of Almighty
God, upon Himself and His Posterity, then He and They shall solemnly observe the
Laws in defense of Parliaments: for as yet He has done nothing against His
high Court of Parliament, nor ever will He; for according to His own
acknowledgment, He, and that are like Hypocrates twins, they will live and die
together. And let them not die, but live, O Lord our God; Let the King live,
that Parliaments may not die; save thou Him, that this Kingdom may still be
blessed with them; and in thy pity to this poor Nation, break thou in pieces
this confederacy of rebellious men, who do so earnestly endeavor the
destruction of both. Put thou a period to this false Parliament, (which they
resolve shall be perpetual, in despite of Thee; O God, and of thine Anointed)
that we may have the benefit of a true one, for the mending up of those great
breaches (which have been made by these Conspirators) upon our Religion, our
Laws, and natural Liberties; yea, and upon our high Court of Parliament it
self: This grant (O thou mighty Majesty of Heaven an Earth) for thine own
Honor and Justice sake, and for the sake of Christ our Savior.

Amen.
A TRUE PARALLEL BETWIXT The Sufferings of our SAVIOR and our SOVEREIGN, in
diverse particulars.

TOGETHER WITH

1. A Brotherly Discourse to the Seduced and Oppressed Commons. 2. A
Ministerial Admonition to the Troublers of our Israel. 3. A Consolatory Speech
to the Truly Loyall-Hearted.
And A Postscript to the Reader.

There is also prefixed in this Edition, a Preface unto the Parallel, to give
satisfaction to those who took some offense at it.

By the Author.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

TO THE READERS.
Readers,
I Thought it requisite (in this new Edition) to prefix a few words to this
following Parallel, because I understand that some few persons, (through
inadvertencie) have taken offense thereat, and affirmed of me, that out of my
zeal to flatter the King, I had blasphemed Christ, in comparing them thus
together: Yea some of them, upon their bare view of those words in the Title, A
Parallel between the sufferings of our Savior and our Sovereign, have
presently shot their bolt, (as men biased with ignorance and prejudice use to
do) and rejected the whole Book as unworthy their further inspection. Now
though the ready and friendly acceptance which the same has found with the
Church and people of God, does speak me clear in the opinions of most* so
that I need not say any thing to vindicate my self, from the inconsiderate
censure of these few; yet because Souls are precious things, and I am
forbidden (as a Brother) to suffer sin to rest upon any: and commanded Lev. 19.
17.
(as a Minister) to instruct with meekness them that oppose, or are contrary
minded; therefore I must not slightly, and with contempt of 2 Timothy 2. 25.
them, pass by their error, (as they do my Book) but will speak somewhat
for their satisfaction, or better information, in the thing which they take
offense at.

The two crimes which (at one breath) I am charged withal, are Blasphemy and
Flattery. Concerning the first, may my Accusers please to know, That I
understand not the word Parallel as Mathematicians do, though perhaps if I
did, I should not (in the judgment of learned me^) transgress much; for with
them a Parallel is a Parallel, be it at as great a distance, as betwixt Heaven
and Earth: but I intend it not in so exact and strict a sense; I take it only
in its ordinary acceptance, as it is commonly used amongst us, viz. for a
similitude, a likeness, or a resemblance.

May they also please to consider, that the persons betwixt whom the Parallel
is made, are Christus Dominus, and Christus Domini, our Savior and our
Sovereign. It Is true (as they object) the one is the Eternal Son of GOD, and
the other a Mortal man: yet Christ was Man too, and as Man He suffered, He was
in all Miseries like unto us, and Heb. 4. 15.
therefore, sure He cannot Blaspheme, that says, another may in miseries be
like to Him: Nay, every true Christian must hold Parallel with Him (the
Captain of our Salvation) in such things, and be conformable to Heb. 2. 10.
Him in some measure and degree; it is so appointed. We must suffer with Him
(says the Apostle) that we may be glorified with Him: Romans 8. 17
and in another place, He inferres, that we cannot know the power of His
Resurrection, unless we have a fellowship in His sufferings: As Phil. 3. 10
Mat. 9. 3. 4 John 10. 33.
He was traduced, sclaundred, censured for a blasphemer (as I am now) when He
spoke but the truth; as He was rejected, betrayed, falsely accused, and
unjustly dealt withal, etc. so must we be used at one time or other, in the
very same kind; and this is, to have a fellowship in his sufferings: or (which
is all one) to hold Parallel with Him in His sorrows.

Yea, we are often told from His own mouth, that we must take up His Cross,
and follow Him: That we must have the same entertainment Mat. 10. 36 10. 24,
25. Luke 17. 1, 2.
in the world, which He had: And it cannot be (says He) but offenses will
come: injuries will be offered to the righteous, (of what rank and condition
soever they be) though woe will be to them from whom they come, or by whom they
are offered, it were better for such to be thrown into the Sea with milstones
about their necks, then so employed. A dangerous thing it is (we see) to be
instruments in making the meanest (much more the Supreamest) Christian
conformable to Christ in sufferings; but surely to demonstrate and note the
same when it is done, (which is all that I have done) ought not to be called or
entitled Blasphemy.

May my mistakers please therefore to observe well, the things wherein the
Parallel or Resemblance is made, or shown to be: It is not in similitude of
sinlesse or spotless nature: I have not applied or communicated to the King
any of the Divine Attributes, (as some have to their Parliament) nor do I
liken him to the Son of GOD in measure of graces, nor yet in the merit of his
innocent sufferings: I say not they are satisfactory (as Christ's were) for the
sins of his people, I believe indeed, they cry for vengeance rather, though I
know His Majesty, like a pious Christian, a gracious Prince, and a tender
Father, does endeavor daily that their cry against us, may be out-voiced by
that other of his prayers for us.

Nay further yet, I have not equalized the Kings afflictions and wrongs, with
those of Christ in measure and degree, I have only noted their likeness in
kind: and declared Historically, in an Observationall way, (and that by
evidence of many particulars) what a specificall similitude there is, or has
been betwixt them; upon the which I may, and do affirm, that the King has
tasted of Christ's very cup, yea drunk deep of his very sorrows: and as the
Apostle said of himself, so may I of His Majesty, (and yet be guilty of no
Blasphemy) that He has filled up that which was behind, of the Afflictions of
Christ in his flesh, for his Bodies sake which is the Church, (whereof He is
appointed Col. 1. 24
Protector and defender,) viz. for its imitation and consolation; in a like
condition. And indeed we the persecuted and oppressed Members of it at this
time, looking upon the most Heroic and Christian example of our King, do with
the more courage and patience run the race that is set Heb. 12. 1.
before us: And we believe it is a great matter of rejoicing to our Sovereign,
that He is thus, at this time, for this end a partaker of Christ's sufferings;
that seeing He cannot free us, from our sorrows, He does yet strengthen us
under them by His own; These things I desire those that have taken scandal at
me, to consider seriously upon; which if they shall vouchsafe to do, I presume
they will not in their hearts think me a Blasphemer for saying of Him, whom God
has sanctified, (and fitted for such great trials) that He is (at least in
this) like unto the Son of God.

The second Crime laid to my charge is flattery of the King, which is fancyed
to be the ground of the former: I blasphemed Christ (say they) out of my zeal
or desire to flatter the King; but upon due consideration, this foundation may
happily prove as vain, as the structure upon it has appeared faulty: I was
never till now (that I know) taxed of flattery, though (I confess) often of
indiscretion, for not serving the times (as others did) to mine own advantage;
my Lot has hitherto lien on the side of the oppressed: I remember well some
six years ago, when Gods Children (as they were called and accounted)
began-first to turn Rebels against their King, and Apostates, from the Gospel
(which they had formerly professed, while they were in this their more proper
and low Condition,) diverse of mine acquaintance met together about me, to
consider what the reason was, that I who had always took part with the Church
and people of God, in their Afflictions, did thus desert them in prosperity,
now they had got power into their own hands, and were entering into their
long-expected flourishing condition: it was confessed, that I had faithfully
discharged my Conscience, unto that present; and had preached against the
irregularities of the times, and had suffered much disturbance, for not
complying with the ungrounded fancies, and practical innovations of some men:
And after some debate to this purpose no reason being given, the result of all
was this; Certainly God has even given him up to the spirit of madness. Now I
do verily believe that I might (upon better grounds) be concluded mad at this
present, both by them, and many others if I should affect to flatter the King,
as the world now goes with him, He not being either in a condition or in a way
to be so dealt withal, for indeed they are ways of sin and not of
sufferinge that flatterers use to assist in* Flatterers are men, that look at
themselves, at their own speedy advantage, and therefore are unseparable
servants, even Covenanted Hang-byes to the Militia; they love not to plow in
winter, they sow all their seed in summer, because they lack patience to wait
long for an Harvest; therefore if I am one of them, certainly I am a rare one:
for my flattery appears to be the fruit of my faith; the thing it looks at, is
a great way off, even in Gods own hand not yet visible, nor scarce credible to
the outward senses.

True flatterers (as I was saying before) are no Purgatory Bats, but pure Birds
of Paradise, Butterflyes of Prosperity, that can at any time (with ease) leave
Gods blessing for the warm sun; they frequent Westminster (now a days) as
flies do the Butchers shambles, where something is to be gotten: and were I of
their number I would thither too; and there tell the Lower House that they are
the supreme power and Judicature in the Kingdom, unto whom all other powers
ought to submit. I would never suggest what men say of them, viz. that they are
ipsis nati, multis noti, and omnibus nocui, empty Vines, better known then
trusted, and Physicians of no value, though at first apprehended desirous to
cure the diseases of the State, yet now found upon experience to study only to
keep themselves up, and their patients down: I would never talk to them of
such stuff, but I would tell them, that all the people do with all
thankfulness acknowledge, their unwearied pains, uncessant labors, and
constant endeavors, in the Common cause of. God and this Kingdom, and that
the Nation, does at this present enjoy a quiet exemption, from all illegal
impositions, a blessed deliverance from all tyranny and oppression; and many
unparalleld benefits and freedoms, by their sole means and happy Government: I
would applaud all they do, their very opening of Tavernes and Alehouses by
command, and shutting up Church doors on Christ's birth day; their silencing,
suspending, and imprisoning the Ministers of Jesus, for taking the opportunity
to offer the knowledge of him unto the people; I would warrant them they did
all things well, and nothing was amiss in their doings; though their
infallibility should fall into contempt, yet their power will carry them out.
Thus would I busy my self, and thus make my applications to men of place and
power if I were a flatterer; and not stand wasting time and words in speaking
good of the King, unless He were in a more shining and promising Condition: I
think most men of commonsence (considering His Majesty's present state) will
take my word in this particular, and so acquit and discharge me of the second
imputation.

But now let me ask my Accusers a few questions: would they in their good
natures have no man lay to Heart, or take notice of the sufferings of their
Sovereign? desire they that He might have the occasion also to use those
words, Have you no regard all you that pass by the way? Do they think it was
well done of the Priest and Levite, to afford no compassion Luk 10. 32
to the wounded man? would they have me carry my self toward the King, as
many of my Coat (in these days) have done; Help to wound Him, and then divert
others eyes from looking on Him? must I be a blasphemer and a flatterer, if I
do not add something to His burden, and speak of Him as of one hated of God,
because afflicted? were Jobs friends commended by the Almighty for so doing?
let them deal ingenuously, and make the case their own: suppose themselves
were in the Kings condition, afflicted and wronged on every side as He is: and
I (as a Minister) should remember them of their Saviors usage in the world;
and show them how in many particulars their condition is like unto His, and
thereupen should say unto them in the Apostles words, Rejoice that 1 Pet. 4. 13
you are partakers of Christ's sufferings, would they account this Blasphemy and
flattery in me? I suppose not: must the King then alone be deprived of the
Comforts of Gods word, and of Christ's Example? must these together with those
of His Crown be taken from Him? then I would say, O the miserable Condition of
a King! That is now accomplished Preface to Accomplishment of Prophecies.
in our land and days, which Moulin Prophesied would come to pass, (if
Jesuiticall spirits and attempts were not prevented:) viz. that it is even a
punishment to reign, and the Coronation of Kings is but a designation to
Misery, a consecration of sacrifices marked out to slaughter.

Well, be advised all you who think all is yours: who ingrosse to your selves
the comforts of Gods word, as well as the goods and possessions of your
Brethren; who cannot abide any body should be thought well of, unless they be
of your faction; who think it a sin to speak Reverentlyto, or of, your Lord
and Sovereign: who call Civility flattery, and Truth Blasphemy, if it looks
to himward: Be advised (I say) the times may change, and the cold North-winde
may blow upon you; Judge not that you be not judged, speak not to the grief of
the grieved, but rather so, M^t* 7. 1, 2.
as your selves in your Afflictions may be Comforted; for with what measure you
meat, it shall be measured to you. Be it known unto you all, this Anointed of
God whom you have persecuted, however He has been neglected and is still
rejected and refused, by the new Master builders of these times; yet must be
the very Head stone of the Corner before any thing can be settled among us, to
our comforts: He it is that must reduce Ireland, and compose Scotland: He and
none but He, can make up the sad and wide breaches of poor England: He, He is
that right-handed man ordained and appointed of God for that Happy work, and
furnished from above with wisdom, Mercy, and abilities to effect it; yea His
inspection into State affairs, especially into the Constitution of this
Natitions Government, is far beyond that of all your New State-mongers; He
alone is able to do more in six weeks for the benefit of it, by His direction
(if he might be suffered to go about it) then they have done in this six
years by all their Consultations: yea and He who (by that Divine strength
bestowed upon him) has been able hitherto, to stand under such a weighty
burden of wrongs and sorrows, is only able to remit and forgive so many and
such High indignities as have been offered to Him: And believe it, (all you His
guilty and distrustful people.) His high virtue and Magnanimity disdaines to
take revenge upon you: It would be dishonorable for Him, that has Paralleld
with Christ in so many other things, not to conform also to his example in
pardoning Injuries; yea and in praying too, Pater ignosce illis.

I am persuaded that nothing but the Kings prayer can obtain Gods pardon for
His Afflicters: it is worth the observing; the Sin of Jobs friends (and we know
what that was) could not have been forgiven if Job whom they had afflicted,
(though but with harsh censures,) had not been their intercessour: the Lord
said to Eliphas the Temanit, my wrath is kindled Job 12. 7, 8.
against thee and thy 2 friends -- wherefore go ye to* my servant Job, and
offer up for your selves an offering, and my servant Job shall pray for you,
for him will I accept, lest I deal with you according to your folly.

To conclude therefore, let me advise all, that have had any hand against the
King, in the causing or aggravating of his sorrows, that they would fear the
wrath of God, which hangs over them, for the same; and (in pity to their own
souls, and to their posterity) that they would in true humility go to their
Sovereign and beg both his Pardon and his Prayers; And so, by giving him the
advantage of showing his mercy and goodness, they may at last (there being now
no other way left) be helpers in making him to appear (according to their word
at first)

The most Glorious Prince in Christendom. The God of all power and grace, bow
and incline their Hearts unto it.

Amen. Amen. In the Pref. at the beginning of the Book, p. 5. l. 15. for
commonly, r. commendable. and p. 6. l. 20. r. masked.

SECT. XXVI.
A true Parallel between the sufferings of our Savior, and our Sovereign, in
diverse special particulars.

THus have I (by Gods assistance) discharged this part of a Subjects Duty in
vindicating my Lord the King, from the aspersion of these men, whereby they
endeavored to besmeare his Honor, in their malicious Notes upon his Letters;
they aimed to make him (as the Philistims did Sampson) an object of contempt
and scorn, but their pillars being false, and therefore weak, whereon their
building stood, the same is fallen most heavy down upon their own heads; they
hoped to portray him forth, according to the Image of him in their own minds,
by wresting his expressions to the highest pitch of misconstruction, and
charging upon him their own conditions; but through Gods help, those filthy
Garments they arrayed him with, are taken off, and sent home to their proper
owners: And what ^s to be done now? having unclothed the King, shall I so
leave him? (as many false friends have done,) that would not be so comely;
wherefore I will present him once again, as habited in another mantle, more
truly his, then that other was, though put upon him (for the most part) by the
same men; in opposition of that Act of theirs, which I have undone, I will set
him forth in Christ's Robes, as clothed with sorrows; and show what a perfect
similitude there has been and is, between our Savior and our Sovereign in the
four last years of both their sufferings.

Such entertainment as Christ had, such usage as he met withal, from such
conditioned enemies, and such friends; such temptations as he was assaulted
with, such wrongs, and for such things; such causes of sorrow, and of complaint
in all particulars, even in specie, has our King had in the like manner:
observe I pray you, and mark it well, O all you Loyal English, Scottish and
Irish, and you will say, that never Prince had a more perfect fellowship with
the Son of God, in this worlds miseries, then yours has: never was Christ's
yoke better fitted for any, never did any bear a greater measure of his
burden: And if nearenesse in condition here, fore-speaks a nearness of
conformity in the life to come, as the Apostle teaches, then think with your
selves, from what you observe, how superlatively glorious above other Kings
will yours be at Christ's appearing.

First of all, was Christ rejected of his own people? so the Text says, He
came to his own and his own received him not; nay, so far were they from so
doing, that they denied the Joh. 1. 11.
Holy and Just one, and desired a Murderer to be granted to Act. 3. 14.
them: This has been directly the Kings case: He has been rejected by his
own people, who have refused to own him for their King, denying the Supreme
power to reside in him, which they have labored to take from him; yea, with
open Luke 19. 14.
mouth they have cried out, we will not have this man to reign over us, we are
none of his Disciples, we are for the Parliament, they have preferred Murderers
and Robbers before him, choosing rather to live under the bloody and iron yoke
of such, then to submit themselves to his most just, gentle, and easy
Government.

2. Did Christ complain that the foxes had holes, and the birds Mat. 8. 20.
of the air had nests, but himself had not where to hide his head; and may
not the King take up the same words? all that was his, is taken from him,
crafty Foxes and ambitious Kites have seized as a prey upon his Houses and
Habitations: when his Majesty at the beginning of these Troubles, had traveled
from Shrewsbury to Wrexham in Denbighshire, and being to return the same
night, he dismissed the Gentry, desiring his stay, with these words, Gentlemen,
Go you and take your rests, for you have Homes and Houses to go unto, and beds
of your own to lodge in, and God grant you may long enjoy them, but I am
deprived of those Comforts, I must intend my present affairs, and return this
night to the place from whence I came.

3. Was Christ tempted in his necessity to distrust God, to Mat. 4. 3.
turn stones into bread for his present sustenance? and has not the King been
tempted so to do? sure little else have they allowed him to live upon: Was our
Savior moved to take desperate courses, to cast himself down, yea to humble
himself Mat. 4. 68.
unto his Creature; and was he offered to be made a glorious Prince, if he
would so do? to have the Kingdoms of the world bestowed upon him by one that
had no right to give them? All men know that such assaults, and such motions,
with such like profers, by such persons, have been made, and put, and tendered
to our Sovereign.

4. Was not Christ accounted a deceiver of the people, called a Joh. 7. 12.
Joh. 9. 29. Joh. 8. 48. 52. 10. 20.
fellow, an impostor, a Malignant, one that had a Devil, and railed upon in
all places, whispered out of credit where ere he came, by a Pharisaicall brood,
who sought only to themselves men's praises? and has not the King been so
called, entitled, esteemed, and used by a like selfe-seeking generation? Indeed
Christ and the King have like conditioned Enemies, great pretenders to Religion
(and in that regard of great repute among the people) were and are the the
chief opposers both of the one and of the other: the great Sanedrim or
Counsel at Jerusalem were the Heads of the Faction against Christ, and plotted
all his miseries, they made Decrees against him and his Followers, and molested
those that did confess him, they stirred up the people to cry out upon him,
and countenanced all men in speaking evilly of him: they hired the Soldiers
and men of war, to go out with swords and staves against him, and (as if he
were a thief) to apprehend him: And has not the Sanedrim, or great Counsel
at Westminster been the Authors of all such things against the King? as
Scripture affirms the one, so (alas) does experience confirm the other.

5. As Christ was opposed by men of several Sects and Factions, as by
Pharisees and Sadduces, who were at odds enough between themselves, yet banded
together against him: So is the King assaulted by men of several Religions and
Opinions, as by Presbyterians and Independents, who are divided sufficiently
inter se, yet both united in their oppositions against him; Mar. 3. 6.
nay, as the profane Herodians, were admitted Associates with the precise Jews
in their conspiracies against Christ; so the most vile cursers and profane
swearers, (being apprehended likely, by their greatness, wealth, or friends to
further the design) have been admitted by these pure conceited fellows, into
their combination against the King; and advantages taken from their private
discontentments, to hook them into their Association.

6. As Christ was watched in all he did, and perverted in all he said, if any
thing that proceeded from him could be wrested Mar. 12. 13.
to a wrong sense, it should be surely done, but no notice at all would be
taken of his Virtues or his Miracles; yea, he was often Mar. 2. 16.
Luke 15. 4.
accused for his eating and drinking with Publicans and sinners, even by these
men that would allow him no other Company, for they had thrust him out from
among themselves, because he disliked and reproved so sharply their hypocrisy
and base carriages; and even thus has the King been dealt withal: His actions
have been watched, his words misconstrued, his graces neglected, yea obscured,
and himself censured for his followers, by them that have forced him from
their own society, for his not allowing their unjust proceedings; when Christ
was at Jerusalem, those his Enemies stirred up the people, to be tumultuous
against him, and to throw stones at him: when therefore he had Joh. 8. 59. 10.
31.
withdrew himself from thence, they whispered surmizes and suspicions of him;
what think you (say they) that he will not come up to the feast? so that
whether he were present or absent, Joh. 11. 56.
he could not please them, they were never content till they had him in the
condition of a Prisoner, and then how they used him the Scripture shows. And
even this has been directly the Kings condition, when he was at Westminster,
Tumults were raised, and stones and blasphemies cast against him; when he was
retired from thence, they mouth it as fast in suggesting misprisions, what
think you (say they) that he comes not to the Parliament? nay, let him but
offer to go thither again, why they will none of him, but are ready to cry, He
comes to torment us before the time: unless they may seize upon him in the
nature of a Prisoner, nothing will give them satisfaction; and how they
Experience, since this was written, has given a full confirmation to this
particular.
will use him then, we may easily conclude by their former dealing with him and
language of him.

7. Christ's Doctrine though uttered with better Authority then that of the
Scribes, was less regarded; he and that too were both slighted and despised;
his complaint was, if I tell Luke 22. 67.
you the truth you will not believe me, nay, they forbad the people to hear
him; the Devil is in him (cry they) why hear you Joh. 10. 20.
him? they would have their own example the sole rule for all men to go by, in
their regards and thoughts of him; Have Joh. 7. 48.
any of the Rulers or Pharisees believed on him? because they had not, they
expected that no body else should; thus they dealt with our Savior, and have
they not even so done with our Sovereign? are not his Dictates and Commands
though uttered with far better Authority then the Votes and Ordinances of
his Enemies, of less observance? are not they and himself too slighted and
contemned? may not he also complain, though I tell you the truth, you will not
believe me? do not Luke 22. 67.
the Heads of this Faction against him expect that all men's credit to him and
carriage toward him, should be ordered by the square of their own example?
Has it not been cried, do any of the Worthies of Parliament believe him, or
give respect to any thing that proceeds from him? Are not all men brought into
a wretched and cursed condition that do not in this conform themselves and
their judgments to the Parliament practice? I would to God all these
particulars were not too evident.

8. Christ's enemies not only hated and abused him, but for his sake, all that
loved him, all that were instruments of others believing in him, it is said
Joh. 12. that they consulted how they Joh. 1^. 10, 11.
might kill Lazarus also, because by reason of him many believed in Jesus; and
most urgent were they with our Savior about his Disciples, asking him of them,
because they would have had him betrayed them into their own hands; which he,
knowing Joh. 13. 19.
their malice, would by no means do: nay, this was his only request, when he
delivered up himself into their hands, that his Followers might but have their
lives spared; I say unto Joh. 18. 8.
you, I am he, and if you seek me let these go their way: And in this the King
also is Christ's direct Parallel, for all his friends are hated in like manner
for his sake, those that are instruments of working a good opinion toward him
are persecuted to the very death; and to the end they might wreake their malice
upon such, they have been urgent with his Majesty to deliver up his friends
into their hands, which the King (according to Christ's example) thinks by no
means he ought to do; yea, and when he has offered up himself unto them (as
we know he has done) he has made only Christ's request, that his friends may
go away in peace and safety, but this would not be granted; for it is Blood,
Blood, Royal Blood, and Loyal Blood, and Christian faithful Blood, which
these bloody and deceitful men thirst after, nor will a little measure of it
satisfy their greedy appetites.

9. Yea and as those enemies of Christ would have no man to love or confess
him, so not to conceal or hide him from themselves, who desired above all
things to lay hands upon him; and therefore they set out an Ordinance against
harboring or concealing of him, requiring and commanding that if any man knew
where he was they should discover him: And truly Joh. 11. 57.
so have the Enemies of our King done, set out a like Order to a like purpose,
though with far more severe and cruel penalties to the contemners of it;
witness their very words, Die Lunae May 4. 1646. Ordered that it be, and it is
hereby declared by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled; That wh^t
person soever shall harbor and conceal, or know of harboring and concealing
the Kings person, and shall not reveal it immediately to the Speakers of both
Houses, shall be proceeded against as a Traitor to the Commonwealth, and
forfeit his whole estate, and die without mercy.

10. In a word, as Christ was belyed, slandered, betrayed, bought and sold for
money, reviled, mocked, scorned at, spit on, numbered among transgressors, and
judged to be such a one from his great misery, and from the success his
enemies had Mark. 15. 28.
against him, and at last put to death; even so has the King been used in all
respects by his rebellious people, who have already acted all the parts which
the Jews acted upon the Son of God, the last of all only excepted, which may
also be expected in the end from them, when opportunity is afforded; they have
baited him weekly for four years space at the stake of scorn; emptied the froth
of their scurrilous wits upon him, and spit out the scum of their ulcerous
lungs against him; they have crowned him with Thorns, and then derided at his
sorrows, fastened him to his Cross (as I may fitly speak) and then bad him come
down from it; no man could possibly be more vilely used then he has been,
numbered he is (to this very day*) among transgressors, and crucified between
Thieves on both sides; yea, many of those that suffered with him, have been
tormentors also, and abusers of him, and (like that wicked Thief) Luk 23. 39.
even because he did not help them when he could not, have railed upon him.

11. And further, as Christ was thus afflicted by his open enemies, so to
greaten the burden of his sorrows, he was too much troubled with the
contestations of his own followers, who strove for places of preferment, and
who should be the greatest Mar. 9. 34.
among them: which doubtless, was no small molestation to his heavenly Spirit:
nor was this all, he met with many unkindnesses from them too, he was wounded
in the house of his friends, Zach. 139.
forsaken of his Disciples, when the times grew black and cloudy; Joh. 6. 66.
yea, and afterward his very Appstles themselves fled from him, one forswore
him, and another betrayed him: And even in this also, has the King been like
unto him; there has been strange divisions and strivings among his Followers
for place and preferment, to his Majesty's great grief and damage: He has had
wounds given him by his friends, and deep ones too, they have enlarged his
sorrows; they that had dependence on him, have forsaken him, because his
afflictions were great upon him: His servants have renounced their relation to
him, yea, those whom he trusted have betrayed him, they that eat of his bread
have lift up the heel against him: only Christ had but one Judas, whereas the
King has had many; but Christ indeed, knew what is in man, and therefore did
not commit himself unto Joh. 2. 24. 25.
them, in which knowledge the King has been defective, and so has been
deceived.

12. Christ expected that his three special Apostles whom he chose out of all
the rest for that purpose, should watch and pray with him and for him in his
greatest Agony, but they even they ^lumbred and slept, and left him in that
great and sad hour Mat 26. 40.
to tread the Wine Press himself alone. Even so the best of us, from whom his
Majesty may expect most special services of this Es. 63. 3.
nature in his agonies and sorrows, (for that we are ordained on purpose, in
regard of our office and calling to watch and pray:) Alas, we sleep, we fail
in such our duties for him; we have left him in a manner quite desolate, that
he may take up to himself that word of Christ, and say, of my people there was
none Isai. 63. 3.
with me: And as our Savior (notwithstanding that failing in duty toward him
in his necessity) did excuse the weakness of his Disciples, the spirit (says
he) is willing, but the flesh is weak; so has our King done, even excused the
failings of his Subjects toward him: How often has he been heard to say of
many, they are willing to help me, but are not able; and when Mat. ^6. 41.
he heard related the weakness of one, who ( Peter-like) had saved his life by
a recantation, the man (says he) I think is honest, and loves me well, only
he is afraid to die.

13. But to draw to a conclusion, as Christ deserved none of this hard measure
(which he found) at the hands of those that offered the same, he always
merited their greatest respect, Joh. 10. 32.
and loving affections, many good works (says he) have I done, for which of
them does you stone me? Many Sermons had he preached, many good Prayers had he
made, many Diseases had he cured, many Miracles had he wrought, yet all was
forgotten, malice and spite did raze out the remembrance of all: So the King
has deserved nothing but good from the hands and hearts of his Subjects: He
may also say, many good Acts of Grace have I passed for your benefit, O my
people, many blessings have you enjoyed under my Government, many years of
peace and plenty under my protection, for which of them do you thus hunt me,
thus persecute and molest me? Indeed Christ's enemies sinned against their own
Consciences in all they did against him, as appears by that their saying, if
we let this man alone, all Jo. 11. 48.
will believe in him: as if they had said, he is so holy in his life, so true
in his sayings, so gracious and good in his conversation, so mild, so sweet and
affable in his whole carriage, that we are like to lose all our credit with the
people, unless we ruin him, and therefore on purpose they belyed and
beslandred him; yea, by all means labored to engage the people with themselves
against him; yea, they made them their instruments to do him all the
mischief, and persuaded them that in their so doing, they did God good
service: Thus the Kings enemies also have gone against their own Consciences
in all their doings against him, and for the very same reason, they know him to
be so full of grace and goodness, that if people were but let alone, they
would quickly all adhere unto him, and so themselves of all men should become
the most odious; to prevent which, they have bedaubed him with lies and
slanders, and engaged the people to be their instruments to persecute and abuse
him, yea, and made them to think that they serve God in so doing.

14. Last of all, the Pharisees pretended salutem populi in all these their
doings against Christ, and that they did all for the good of the Commonwealth,
better one man die (says the Joh. 11. 4^.
chief of them) then all the people perish; yet Pilate easily perceived that
all was out of mere envy and malice, and therefore asks them, what particular
accusation they could bring against Joh. 18. 29. 30.
him, but they could allege none, only they tell him in general terms, if he
were not a Malefactor, we would not have brought him before thee: He must take
their words, and contrary to his own sense believe, that they were too holy to
harbor envy, or to do any thing against any man without cause; indeed
afterward they inferred plainly, that the reason why they sought to take away
his life, was because he was their King: Joh. 19. 13.
He makes himself a King (say they) and therefore is not Caesar's friend: S.
Matthew says, that this was his very accusation, Mat. 27. 3^.
which Pilate set over his head on the Cross, Jesus of Nazareth King of the
Jews, which was in effect thus much; This Jesus was accused, and thus
crucified (as you here see) only because he was King of the Jews: The
Pharisees (indeed) would have had him altered the words, and set down, because
he said Joh. 19. 29.
he was the King of the Jews: but says Pilate, quod scripsi, scripsi, what I
have written is the truth, and so it shall stand, in Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin, that all the world may know your Jewish baseness. Thus were their
dealings with our Savior, and thus also have our English Jews in all respects
dealt with their Sovereign; they have pretended salutem populi, the
preservation of the Commonwealth, as if that were like to perish if he did
not; yet one that has but a Pilates eye, a mere natural eye (if not colored
with Rebellion) may plainly see that the root of all is mere envy and malice;
let any body ask the chief among them, what personal evil or accusation
they can bring against the King, there can be nothing answered, but in general
terms, if there were not a cause, if he were not a malefactor, His great
Council would not do as they have done against him: But what that cause is,
or wherein he is so faulty, cannot be made manifest, only their words must be
taken against all sense and reason, nay, they have plainly inferred (as has
been observed) that they seek his ruin, because he is a King, and would
maintain Monarchy: He that makes himself a Monarch or a King, is no friend to
the Parliament: Well, when he is dead, as I think no wise man expects
otherwise, but that they will murder him It is one of their Tenants, that evil
may be done to further a public good, and that only is, what they so declare;
yea and some of them have vented their intentions to this purpose (even since
he has been in their power) in such black expressions as I tremble to ^ehearse.
openly, or secretly shorten his days, if they can get him, and God do not in
a miraculous manner again deliver him; for as nothing but Christ's Crucifixion
would please the Jews of old, so nothing but the Kings extinction will
satisfy the malice of some in this Age: but I say, when he is dead, we shall
in this one thing imitate Pilate, and publish to all the world his accusation
and cause of his death; This shall be his Title: Carolus Gratiosus, Rex
Angliae: CHARLES the Gracious, King of England, was put to death by the
Pharisaicall Puritans of his Kingdom, only because he was their King, and in
many respects so like unto Jesus Christ the Worlds Savior. I wish with my
soul, and I pray with my heart, that they may yet at length prevent us in
this, by their unfeigned Humiliation for the wrongs they have done him, and by
their right acceptance of him and obedience to him,

Thus have I shown in many particulars how fitly the Kings sufferings do
parallel with those of Christ; I might instance in more, but I hope the well
disposed from this which has been said, will of themselves make observation of
the rest. I might here also evidence on the other side, How his Majesty's
Enemies do resemble him whom themselves call Antichrist, in their conditions;
yea, I could by comparing their doings (in this their generation,) with the
worst Acts of the worst of Popes in several Ages, demonstrate to the world,
that these men of all men, are most like them: but mine aims are not so much
to decypher them, as to offer a true presentment of the King unto his people;
to declare his virtues and wrongs (which they labor to conceal) is rather my
work, then to proclaim their ungodliness, which indeed speaks it self loud
enough without my discovery. And truly, had it been possible for me to have
healed the wounds made by them upon my Sovereigns Honor, without laying open
their corruptions, I should not have mentioned them so much as I have done: for
my delights are not to be stirring in such obscene and stinking puddles; But
all men know, that he who takes upon him to justify the Righteous, must of
necessity condemn the wicked, the goodness of the one cannot be vindicated,
unless the vileness of the other be detected, specially when they thus stand
in competition; wherefore omitting what might be spoken of them to this
purpose, I shall rather (as Christ's Minister) apply my self to speak unto
them, after I have uttered a few words to those well-meaning Common people, who
have been seduced by them, whom in the first place I desire to listen to me.

SECT. XXVII.
A serious and Brotherly Discourse to the seduced and oppressed Commons of this
Nation; their dangerous condition related* diverse and necessary considerations
propounded to their thoughts to dissuade them from persisting in their present
way: Their Objection of keeping their late Oath and Covenant, Answered.

Contrymen and Fellow Subjects, you see I have dealt with you as Pilate did
with these people of the Jews, whom the subtle Pharisees had prevailed with,
to be their instruments in seeking Christ's ruin; for the desiring to divert
them from further proceeding in so evil a way, against so just a Person,
brought him forth before their eyes crowned with Thorns, and arrayed with
sorrows, and bad them Behold the man; supposing Joh. 19. ^.
that the sight of his griefs already suffered, by the wrongs and abuses
already offered, would make them desist from offering more; So I desiring with
my soul (as God is my witness) to stop you in this your ungodly way, which
the crafty Pharisees of these times have thrust you into, and to stay you from
furtheir endeavoring your Kings destruction, have set him before your eyes in
the same sad and afflicted condition that Christ was in, and whereinto your
selves (alas) have helped to bring him: Now I beseech you all Behold the man;
consider how much you have wronged his innocence already, and abused his
goodness; and whether you have not shown unkindnesse enough unto him, who
has been unto you the Author of so much good, so many years together.

You will say, had we lived in the days of Christ, we would not have joined
with the Pharisees in persecuting and abusing him and his Disciples; and yet
you are partakers in the like evils; will you disallow of such things against
your Savior, and yet act them against your Sovereign? Have you any other
evidence against the King then those people had against Christ, the bare
testimony and report of his deadly enemies? or have you any better warrant from
Gods Word, to rise up and cry out against the one, then those had to do so
against the other? surely you have not: O foolish people (therefore) and
unwise, who has bewitched you? who has perverted you? I know you will say, even
they whom we thought we were bound to follow, (scil.) our Teachers and our
Leaders; true, and God shall require your blood at their hands; but in the
mean time, if you die in this way, you will die in your sin, for as Esaias Esaias
9. 16
says, the Leaders of this people cause them to err, and they that are led by
them are destroyed, that is, are in the undoubted way unto destruction; and
what will you do at the end thereof?

Perhaps your consciences are yet asleep: so was Judasse's, till his work was
quite done, his Master murdered, and himself received his wages; but then it
began to open indeed, and so to roar within him, that it debarred him quite
from all contentment in his money; for he brings that back to them, who had
employed him, and makes his moan unto them, and perhaps expects comfort from
the^^, but they having served their turns of him, left him in the briars,
whereinto they had brought him, and rejected his complaint with a quid hoc ad
nos? what ^at. 27. 4.
is it unto us, see you to it; their own consciences did not yet stir, nor
had they any respect at all to the troubles of his spirit.

Now truly friends, this will be the condition of many of you, when you have
damned your souls in serving the lusts of these men, and think to enjoy
comfort in that wages of iniquity, (the Estates of other men which you gape
after, and is promised unto you as the price of blood) then will the doors of
your consciences be unlocked, and the sense of your guilt will make you as sick
as he was, both of your rewards and lives, and then, if you lament and cry, we
have sinned in spilling innocent blood, the blood of our Sovereign, or the
blood of our Contrymen that never did hurt or harm unto us, they that
brought you into these miseries, however they courted and encouraged you
before, will reject your complaints with a quid haec ad nos? you should have
looked to these things before hand; for Pharisees will be Pharisees unto the
worlds end.

It is a fearful thing to be given up to shed blood; King James would say, if
God should leave him to kill a man, he would think God did not love him: and I
believe your selves were of the same opinion, all the while the Doctrine of
Jesus Christ (which commands love to enemies) did season your hearts; but
what a strange alteration is there now in your dispositions, since the Doctrine
of Devils has been preached unto you, for no other is this of butchering your
brethren, of killing, slaying, and destroying, then the doctrine of him who is
a murderer from the beginning: you would not have been hired heretofore to
have acted the executioners part, which is a lawful office, upon a Malefactor
condemned by lawful Authority, so tender you were of shedding blood; but now
you make no scruple at all of it, you are greedy and thirsty (many of you) to
spill the blood of Innocents only for their constancy in that Doctrine of
Obedience and Loyalty to the King, which your selves also in Christ's School
have been instructed in, merely upon the temptation and motion of them you call
the Parliament, who have no more Authority over the lives of men without the
Kings allowance, then your servants have over yours; nay, which is more strange
yet, you are bewitched by their seduction, to think that in killing your
Brethren you do God service, though Joh. 16. 2, 3.
our Savior fore-speaking of this very particular, shows the ground of this
ill opinion to be only ignorance of God, and want of knowledge.

Nay, not only those that have been Agents or Soldiers in this Rebellion, but
in like manner, all you who have willingly contributed Plate, Moneys, Horses,
or any thing tending to the advancement of it, I fear you are under the guilt
of blood, and will be indicted one day at Gods bar as accessaries to all
these evils that have been committed against the King and against your
brethren; all the men and all the women that brought in their Salts, Spoones,
Rings, and Thimbles, by the suggestion and persuasion of false Teachers, must
hold up their hands at Gods Tribunal as guilty persons, for doing things (by
the seduction and example of others) so clean contrary to that light of the
Gospel, which so many years together had been taught unto them. O friends!
strong and strange is the delusion that is fallen upon you, and thick is the
veil that is over your eyes, far are you gone without looking back, and most
difficult is it yet to persuade you to it: I have often feared with my self
that place in Esaias, to have too near a relation to you, The hearts of this
people are made fat, their eyes dim, and Esa. 6. 10, 11.
ears heavy, and to continue so till the Cities be wasted without an
inhabitant, the houses without man, and the Land be utterly desolate.

I beseech you, in the bowels of Jesus Christ, think seriously upon the matter,
(O that I could persuade you to it) while there is time for repentance, and
save your selves at length yet, from this untoward generation; break their yoke
from off your necks, Act. 2. 40.
renounce their societies, have no more to do with them, read, mark and ponder
upon that place, Prove. 1. 10. to the 20. Verse, and remember from whence you
are fallen, and return to your Prove. 1. 10* etc.
Loyalty; O Contrymen, Return, return; and to provoke you more earnestly
hereunto, consider with your own hearts of these particulars.

1. Whether this way wherein you have gone, be not directly opposite both to
Christ's Doctrine and example? does not the Gospel command to give tribute to
whom Tribute is due, fear to Romans 13. 7.
whom fear, and Honor to whom Honor belongs? and does it not teach that
all these appertain to the King? and yet have they not all been withheld from
him? was not our Saviors practice in this particular most remarkable for our
imitation; He wrought but one money miracle while he was on the Earth, and that
was to have wherewithal to pay Caesar his Homage; and himself says he did
it, least he should offend, so careful Math. 17. 27.
was he not to displease the King; and being tempted at another time, to give
some countenance for withholding the Kings Rights, disclaimed the motion, and
cried out, read Caesari, quae sunt Caesaris, and Deo quae sunt Dei; inferring
that God Math. ^2. 21
and Caesar in such matters go together; to injure the one is to wrong the
other, for God has commanded that Caesar be honored, and that all which is
his be rendered to him: Now whether you and your Leaders have done according to
this doctrine and example, let your own consciences judge.

2. Consider whether this way wherein you have gone be not also contradictive
to the Law of the Land: The denial of the Kings Supremacy in this Kingdom,
has been wont to be accounted so heinous an offense, that he who is guilty of
it, is judged by the Law to die as a Traitor: And the doing of any thing in
prejudice of the Kings Authority, as the raising of Forces without him, nay
the having but thoughts of mischief toward him, though they never break forth
into Action, is reckoned by the Law for no less then High Treason, and some
have suffered death for such things; nay, further yet, the bare instilling
misconceits of the King into the people, to withdraw their affections from
him, has even in this very In the Charge against the Earl of Strafford.
Parliament been called High Treason: Now whether the Kings Supremacy, not only
in things Spiritual, but also Temporal be not denied, and whether by your
opposition to his Majesty's Person and commands, and by whispering, yea, by
open speaking evilly of him, and consenting to what has been written against
him, you have not made your selves guilty of that grand Crime, let your own
consciences also determine unto you.

3. Consider whether it be not against common equity to practice the taking
away from any one, that which comes unto him by lawful inheritance,
succession, or just election? whether you would not so judge it, if any should
divest you of what was left you by your Parents? and whether the Kings
Authority and Revenews, (which you with others have endeavored to dispossess
him of) be not of the same Tenure, and held by the best Title: indeed if men
come to power and Authority by fraud and violence (as your new Masters have
done) the case is otherwise, lives lost in conspiring the downfall of such, may
be reckoned well sold; every man in common equity (were there no tie of duty or
allegiance) is to help him to right that suffers wrong: but to concur in
oppressing the Supreme Magistrate, and in taking from him what belongs unto
him, if conscience be suffered to make report, it will be confessed to be the
highest injustice; for as to detract from the Standard which is the rule of
measures, is the greatest sin, so is it to detract from the King who is the
Standard of righteousness in his Kingdom.

4. Consider whether the demand of having the Militia out of the Kings hand
(wherein his Authority and Power consists) which your Leaders and you insist
upon, be not against piety, and a plain urging the King to act Esau's part in
resigning up his Genesis 2533.
birthright; and whether you think in earnest (as some of your Preachers have
suggested,) that you have a sufficient ground to expect Gods blessing upon your
undertaking, though it be unlawful, because Jacob was blessed afterward,
though the means Genesis 27. 19. etc.
which he used to accomplish his design were not approvable? nay, seeing the
King is not like Esau, so easily drawn to part with his birthright, but rather
like Naboth will keep his 1 King. 21.
inheritance, for fear of Gods displeasure: consider I pray whether you in
going about to force him thereto by violence, are not all the while acting the
parts of Ahab and Jezabel, who were persons that had sold themselves to work
wickedness? nay, whether you are not more deep in the evil then they were, in
regard the King is not to you as Naboth was to Ahab, a subject, nor have you as
he did, tendered an answerable exchange, or rather a better for what you demand
from him; consider I beseech you and think well in your own hearts of this
particular.

5. Consider and call to mind, whether those Teachers who have been most active
and busy in drawing you into this your way, have not hereby contradicted their
own former Doctrines: It was said of Stephen Gardener, that no man (in the
days of Fox. Martir^logy.
Hen. 8) had spoken better for the Kings Authority then he had done in his Book
de vera obedientia, and yet no man more violent then he was in Queen Mary's
time, in persecuting those that held fast to the same truth and Doctrine: may
not the like be said and affirmed of many of your Preachers; that no man taught
the duty of Obedience better, or inveighed more against Rebellion and shedding
of blood, then they heretofore have done: but now none more violent then
themselves in opposing those that practice according to the same Doctrine: if
it be lawful to resist, defame and oppress the King now, why did they then
speak against such doings? or if good language of him, as their Sovereign, and
humble obedience to him, was true Doctrine then, how comes it to pass, that
it is not preached still, now there is such need of it? truth is unalterable.
They tell you of a certain New Light received, which it seems, was an
attendant upon the Militia, for till this was seized on by their Faction, that
was not seen; and had not this been first obtained, probably that had been
still concealed; may not this New Light therefore be suspected? and the rather
because it is so contrary to that which Gods Word holds out unto us; which as a
sure and certain 2 Pet. 1. 19.
guide we are commanded to take heed unto? Esaias affirms, Esaias 8. 20.
that whoever speaks not according to the written Testimony bath no light in
him. And Saint Paul is resolute, that if an Gal. 1. 8.
Angel from Heaven shall teach contrary to that Gospel himself had preached
(which was the Doctrine of obedience to Princes, and of love to his Brethren)
he ought to be held accursed: wherefore consider seriously in your own hearts,
whether you have done well in suffering your selves to be thus led by your new
lighted Teachers.

6. Consider whether they do not only oppo^e their own former Doctrines, but
also their own former doings, and persuade you to go with them, in those ways
which heretofore they exclaimed much upon others for going in? did not they
complain much against forcing tender Consciences, and against urging
subscription to things of an indifferent nature, though allowed by Law, because
scrupled at, affirming the same to be against Christian Liberty? and yet do not
they now countenance far greater violence, in pressing of things more
directly unlawful? As for example; would not they have the King forced against
his Conscience, to consent to the altering of that Church Government, which he
in his soul is persuaded to be most Orthodox, and agreeable to Gods Word, and
to the State of this Kingdom, and which this Church and Nation has so thrived
under; yea, and which himself at his Coro^ation took a solemn Oath to
maintain? And have not their very selves been the chief Instruments of urging
their Brethren to the taking of new and unlawful Covenants? and when unto
tender and scrupulous Consciences, the offensive Oath has been tendered in one
hand, and an Halter in another, with a furious Commination, that they should
have the one, if they did not presently accept of the other, a course which the
Bishops never used: have not some of these Ministers approved of this rigorous
dealing? yea, and when some of the members of Christ have been at the place of
Execution, to be murdered and Martyred by their Faction for their Loyalty to
their Prince, or for falling off through trouble of Conscience from their
ungodly Covenant and way; have not some of their Preachers stood barking at
them, on purpose to disturb their spirits, and to hinder their quiet passage
out of this miserable World; even as that bawling Friar did do unto Archbishop
Cranmer? (when some have seen or heard them acting their parts in this manner,
they have thought of that Friars Picture as it stands there in the Book of
Martyrs.) And here (by the way) let me exhort all men to read that Book often
in these times, and they shall find a very great resemblance between the bloody
Persecutors of those days, and these now, and a great similitude in their
courses; it was not doubtless, without a special providence, that the said
Book was of late twice reprinted, that so there being a greater plenty of them,
we in these times might (being many of us) be more enlightened, supported and
comforted in our sufferings: And I would have you observe among many other
things, that Note of Mr. Fox, How Henry the Fourth, that deposed Richard the
Second, was the first of all English Kings that began the merciful burning of
Gods Saints, for their standing against the Papists: so that we may thence
learn, that it is no new thing for them to be given up to the acting of
cruelties against Gods Church and people, who have first given up themselves to
practice Rebellion against their Sovereign; these two sins (as it seems)
before now have gone together: But I return.

Did not many of those your Ministers complain most fearfully in times past
for the mere change and alteration of some few phrases and expressions in the
Common Prayer Book, holding it then (as it seemed) so perfect a platform of
Church Service, as that no word or syllable ought to be altered in the same;
and yet now upon the sudden have not themselves abolished the same wholly, as
if there were nothing at all good in it? How lamentably did they (some of them)
rail even in print upon the Bishops, for endeavoring (as they said though
most unjustly) to weaken that honorable esteem which the people had or ought
to have of the Kings Wife and Children, by Yet that omission and change was by
the Kings own self dictated, and not by any Bishop, and the Kings reason was,
because he judged that old phrase at that time the more improper, he having
then no children.
omitting in the prayer for them, that usual attribute therein given to God,
scil. that he is the Father of his Elect and of their seed; and putting in the
room thereof, the fountain of all goodness: which thing did then speak to
their hearts (as themselves then said) that the Prelates would have the world
think that the Queen and the Royal Progeny to be none of the number of Gods
Elect, and yet since that time, how themselves have concurred in speaking of
the Queen, and in abusing the whole Royal Stock and Family, is too
sufficiently evident to all people, and too gross for me so much as to repeat:
Consider I beseech you (good people) of these things and conclude in your own
hearts, whether it be any wisdom in you to follow such Whirle-gigs, such
Weather-Cocks, as these your Preachers are.

7. Consider, how these your men have most carefully shunned all public
Disputes with our Orthodox Divines about this case of Difference, which
themselves have helped to raise against our Religion, Church, and King; for
might we but have obtained so much from them as the Martyrs in Queen Mary's
days did from the Papist^; we doubt not but long ere this, by Scripture
Evidence, and streams of Reason in Truths behalf, to have overborn that
power, by which now they over-beare us; and to have made you (the seduced)
confess in falsehoods ruin and discovery, that the credit of your Teachers
(like that of facing shifters) is but very little being well known: might such
men as Dr. Usher, Dr. Morton, Dr. Hall, Dr. Prideaux, Dr. Featly, and many
others that might be named; who have most valiantly held up the Banner of
Christ against the Papists, have been but suffered to defend his Cause also
against these men, the veil had been pulled from your eyes many years ago; but
these Craft-Masters are so full of their Trent wisdom, that by no means will
they abide any disputes face to face, with our Protestant Divines. The Militia
is their best Argument, fire and sword is more suitable to their purpose then
Gods word is. And as the Papists urge the Authority of their own Pope and
peculiar Church, so do these of their Parliament, for a sufficient ground of
peoples faith and practice; the Parliament judges so: Ergo, it is verity, and
you must believe it, without any hesitation or doubting that it may be
otherwise. Because Mr. John Goodwin did but conceive a possibility of error in
the Parliament, and out of love to them (as himself professes) was afraid
they might possibly tread awry, and hurt their foot against a stone, See Mr
Goodwins Book called Calumny arra^gned and cast, about page 12. and 13.
Prynne (the Parliament Champion) cries out upon him for being malignantly
jealous over them, and says, it is most uncharitable, unchristian, detestable,
fanatique, groundless and execrable jealousy in him, yea, venomous
Malignancy, Oxfordian Aulicisme. But to proceed; These men do, and will (as you
shall find, unless God blast them) require as simple, as absolute, and as
unlimited an obedience at your hands, as ever the Turk or Pope has done from
their Vassals; an obedience not of will only, but of judgment also, which is a
direct blind obedience; And truly as the Doctrine of infallibility is the root
of all error among the Papists, so is it now among them that are the
worshippers of the Parliament; for when it was once believed that the Pope
could not err, then he might oppose Princes, Excommunicate Kings, absolve
Subjects from their obedience, raise wars, shed blood, yea, live as wickedly
as he pleased, have as many Bastards as he could get, the people were fast
enough locked up unto him in obedience; so now this being swallowed that the
Parliament cannot err, the lusty Members thereof may raise Rebellion too,
absolve people from their Loyalty, persecute the King, and murder his
Subjects, seize upon all their Estates, and sell or give them to whom they
please: yea, and let them live as wickedly as they list, as vilely and basely
as they please, let them get Bastards, ravish and defile Ladies of Honor, and
then defame them when they have so done, or attempted so to do, they may do it
impune, for they be worthy Members all the while, they have none above them to
call them to an account, and the people being fast linked to them, by the
virtue of blind obedience, will be apt to give fair interpretations of all
their doings; well, think seriously of these things in your retired thoughts.

8. Consider also of times past, and compare your experience of the present,
with them and say, whether the light of God does now shine so comfortably upon
your Tabernacles, as when the King enjoyed his Rights and possessed his Throne?
whether you are now so stored with coin, or have that leisure and wherewithal
to build pleasant Houses? whether you lie so soft, all of you, fare so well,
and have that entire Command in your own Houses, over your own goods and
servants, as formerly? whether you can say as truly and freely, that what you
have bought and paid for is your own, as heretofore? I would that the
Londoners and Citizens would consider, whether they be all so well Plated,
Jewelled, and attired, themselves, wives and children? whether their bags be
not lanker, their banks lesser, and their means scanter then in those times of
old? whether they enjoy like Liberties and Privileges under their new Masters,
as they did under their King? And I would have the Countryman consider,
whether his payments be not more, and his oppressions greater, then they were
wont to be? whether he had not a merrier heart in his bosom, and more money
in his purse, when he paid his Rents to the true owner, his right Landlord,
then ever he has had since he dealt with these new Usurpers? O you poor
seduced and abused people! these new Lords promised indeed that you should have
your Farms at a lower rate then formerly, so they might receive the Rents; but
consider with your selves, has not your supernumerary Rates and Taxations, and
your Billiting and furnishing out Soldiers, amounted to more then the full
payment? and can you think that you shall not be skrewed up to the highest pin
by those Hucksters to whom they shall sell or give away your true Landlords
Estates, or appoint to be as their own Taskmasters over you? can you expect
possibly any thing but blows and beggary under them? perhaps indeed you may
obtain at last (in lieu of all your Wealth and Labors, and former happiness)
to be partakers of that Privilege which the Pesants of France and specially of
Normandy do enjoy, scil. you shall have leave to beg freely up and down the
Kingdom without danger of whipping; consider seriously of these things I
beseech you.

Nay, consider (O all ye people of all sorts) whether you think in Conscience,
these your new Rulers with their crew be the very meek Ones of the Earth as
they account themselves, to whom the entire right and possession of all earthly
blessings and inheritances do appertain? whether it be a true position which
since the Militia has been in their hands they have been bold to maintain,
viz. that right by Conquest is the best Title, else Gods providence would not
permit them to be successful? and whether (if that Tenent be maintained) any
one of you all, can promise to your selves the use and comfort of any thing,
that is either left unto you or purchased by you? let this also be thought upon.

9. Consider, whether in any thing these men have performed what at first they
promised? whether Religion be better settled, the Church better reformed, and
united, the Commonwealth more flourishing, the Subjects more happy, then when
they took these matters into their hands? you were told by them (as you well
know) when they first enticed you, to engage your selves with them in this
War, that the same would be quickly over; and oft-times since when they came
to borrow more money of you, have they not pretended continually that the work
was almost done, if you would but come off well and afford another good pluck,
it would be quite ended? they promised also (when they moved unto the war)
that they would exact nothing against your wills from you, no, God forbid that
they should use any violence, they desired that men should do freely and
without constraint, only what themselves pleased, they were all for the
freedom of the Subject; but have they proved as true of their words as you did
of your Assistance? have they used no enforcements to get your money since that
time, or are your miseries concluded, and your expenses yet at an end? Are the
Scots paid all their Arrears? Is Ireland reduced to obedience or as quiet as at
their first meeting? Is the King settled in his proper Rights and Dignity as
was pretended, and the Subjects in their Liberties? Is Judgment and Justice
executed in our Gates, and oppression driven from our Streets, and every thing
removed that may provoke Gods further displeasure? Nay, does not the late
prevailing of these men speak rather a neernesse of Gods more heavy Curse upon
us, and a beginning rather then a finishing of your sorrows? Is it not
probable that God will take the matter into his own hand by Plague or Famine
and call both them and you to a reckoning for that Christian blood that is
spilt by you without lawful Authority? Or are not all the Nations of the
world Gods Instruments, and cannot he employ some of them to punish you, for
your punishing others without a warrant from his Vicegerent? or cannot he send
a spirit of division amongst your selves, as once between Abimilech and the men
of Sichem, after that by conspiring together, they had prevailed against the
House and Family of Gideon? sure blood and oppression are crying sins in Gods
ears, and the Judge of all the world will do Justice; and it is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of God when he is angry; consider in your hearts
of these things.

10. Consider the conditions of your chief Leaders in special, and of their
Faction in general, whereunto you have adhered, whether they be such as
becomes the Gospel of Jesus Christ, or rather whether in your observation they
be not such as the Apostles Paul and Peter prophesied should be in the worst
men of the last and worst times? Have they not shown themselves a covetous 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3.
and self-seeking Generation? did they not at the first seek and sue with all
their strength and policy for the dignity to be chosen Parliament Men, and
have they not since placed themselves in the best Offices of the Kingdom, are
not many of them* that were lean and bare before, grown plump and fat and
shining? are they not in the mannagement of their prosperity and success,
boasters, proud, supercilious and scornful persons? have they not often
blasphemed Gods Word, by perverting the same to their own purpose? have they
not showed themselves disobedient, ungrateful, without natural affection to
their Country and friends? are they not manifest promise, Oath and
Protestation- Breakers? do they not daily approve themselves to be false
accusers of others, fierce-spirited in persecuting their unjust and mischievous
accusations; also to be Traitors, heady, high-minded, having only pretenses to
Godliness without any true power thereof? And further, are they not despisers
of Government, 2 Pet. 2. 10.
presumptuous in their ways, selfe-willed, not fearing to speak evil of
dignities? do they not run the black course of reproaching their betters, as
well as the red of cruelty against their brethren? Now the Apostles tell us
that all such conditioned men are reprobates concerning the true faith, and
made to be destroyed; and do you think that there is safety in being of their
society? Es. 39. 3. 7.


Again, are they not of that number whom Esaias the Prophet mentions, whose
hands are defiled with blood, and whose fingers with iniquity, whose lips have
spoken lies, and whose tongues have uttered perverse things, is not wasting and
destruction in all their ways? have they not refused to know and to own the
way of peace? And now if they be such, consider whether you are like to gain
any thing by adhering to them, seeing that Verse. 5.
their eggs are Cockatrice eggs, whereof whosoever eats dies, and their
webs are spiders webs, which shall never become Garments to cover themselves,
much less others: Be serious I beseech you dear Christians, in thinking of
these things, and let not their Religious pretenses, their many fastings and
thankesgivingdayes make you think ever a whit the better of them; for Satan's
Ministers have come in the shape of Angels of light before now; 2 Cor. 11. 13.
14.
it has been the old custom of Hypocrites to deal thus with God Almighty by
fastings and thanksgivings to uphold their reputation; for their Fastings read
Esaias 58. chapter, and for their Es. 58.
Thankesgivings, see Jer. 7. where it is said of them, that they Jer. 7. 9. 10.
could steal, or plunder, murder and shed blood, speak falsely and commit
adultery, yea, and worship Baal (as some do now the Dan. 11. 38.
Militia or God of forces) and yet (says the Lord) they come and stand before
me in my House, and say, we are delivered to do all these abominations: they
acknowledge Gods deliverance, (and perhaps his assistance of them) but so as if
the same had been vouchsafed on purpose, that they might be, and continue to be
the Actors of those villainies; so in Esaias. ^6. there is mention made of others
that were frequent in their oblations to God, and as appears, verse. 5. had
(just as these men do) hated their Brethren, Esai. 66. 5.
and in a pretense of zeal to Gods name had cast them out of their
possessions, (though they were such as truly feared the Lord, and trembled at
his word;) yea and for their success against them, in these their mischiefs
and unjust doings, they praised God and said, The Lord be glorified, they had
days of Thanksgiving to that very purpose: Therefore since it has been the
usual custom of the grandest Hypocrites to do after this fashion, you have
no reason now to think any whit the better of these men, for their outside
professions.

Last of all, consider the relation which these men (the Members of the Commons
House I mean) do stand in unto your selves, whom they command, and to your
Sovereign whom they oppose; to your selves they are public Servants, chosen by
you to agitate for you (in Gods way and according to Law) your common affairs;
scil. to confirm your Religion, Peace, and Possessions to you; and not to
raise wars to the destruction of all these. To the King they are sworn
Subjects, bound by Oath and Protestation to preserve his Person, Estate, and
Honor, safe and entire against all people; in brief, they are the grand
Jurymen of the Kingdom and nothing else, and their office is not to judge, or
pass sentence against any persons, but to enquire after the grievances of the
Country, and to make presentment of them with all humility, unto the King who
is the Judge so deputed of God, and to the Nobles of the upper House, who are
with him as Justices upon the Bench, and to supplicate of them, (in whom the
only power judicative is resident,) a redress of things amiss; and then when
a good Law is made, to give their assent unto it, and notice of it to the
Countries or places whose Deputies they are, and to stir them up to honor
their King, and to praise God for him who is so ready to do Justice and to show
grace unto them; this is the proper office and work of the House of Commons, in
the discharge of which only you are to show countenance unto them; but if they
shall do things out of spleen or unbecoming their places, you are to withdraw
your favor from them, and to bestow your frowns upon them; for if the Grand
Jury at an Assizes, in stead of doing that duty, (whereto by Law they are
designed) should fall to pull the Justices from the Bench, and to beat the
Judge out of Town, and to imprison and kill their Neighbors (as good men
perhaps as themselves,) would you think it fit to take their parts in such
their doings? would you not rather all join to lay hands upon them, and bring
them to be punished, for their misdemeanors; and desire to have them put out
of their places, and wiser men appointed in their stead that know how to behave
themselves better? I pray consider well of these things, and remember at length
what you have done, and what you have now to do, under whose fealty you were
born, and to whom you have sworn Allegiance: and observe what intimation our
Savior gives in that saying of his, if my Kingdom were of Joh. 18. 26.
this world then would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the
Jews; or to them that seek to take away my life: does he not plainly infer
thereby, that the Subjects of earthly Princes who have Kingdoms in this world,
ought to fight for their Sovereign, to endeavor his deliverance from injustice
and wrong, and not to suffer him (in any sort) to be rendered up into the hands
of his enemies; and be you certain of it, that so long as the King (Gods Deputy
and your Protector under God) is thus abused and kept from his Rights, you
shall never enjoy peace or prosperity, nor the quiet possession of what is
yours, for Gods heavy Curse will so long hang over this Nation and Kingdom:
Well, think of it well, and do accordingly.

Confident I am (Brethren) that the major part of you did Associate your selves
with these ill disposed men (as they of old did with Absalom and Achitophel) in
the simplicity of your Hearts, by giving too much credit (as they did) to those
false reports, which in their wicked policy they cast out against the King and
Government; you were persuaded before you were instructed, and in your good
zeal you have walked thus far, to the extirpation (as you hoped) of Popery and
profaneness; which alas, you have exceedingly increased, though sore against
your wills; and are likely to thrust your selves into it, or into other as deep
errors: you have heard say, that zeal without knowledge is very dangerous;
and let me tell you further, that the highest Heresies have risen from
misguided zeal: Arrius upon detestation of Gentilisme least he should seem to
acknowledge more Gods then one, by confessing a Co-equality of Christ's
Divinity with his Father, denied the same; and Sabellius in detestation of
Arrius, fell into the other extreme, and denied the distinction of Persons. And
be your selves the Judges, do not many of you measure what is good and holy by
its opposition to the Constitutions of the Church of Rome, accounting most
perfect what is most opposite thereunto, and that polluted which participateth
in any thing with the same? do you not think your selves rightest when
unlikest the Papists, and nearest to Heaven when furthest from them, though
perhaps then you may be nearest to them in substance, even when most opposite
in Ceremony? (somewhat in this Book has been discovered to this purpose;) but
that is not the right rule to go by: well consider I beseech you, of what I
have said unto you, and desist from having any further hand against your King,
and from laboring the extirpation of that Government you were born under,
which to do, doubtless is a most heinous sin; if a man were borne in
another Land, where is a Government less perfect then ours is, he ought not by
any means to join in fighting for the destruction of it; nor is our
Posterity so strictly bound by such strong engagements of Conscience to
endeavor the restoration of this (if by these violent and unlawful courses
it should be altered, which God forbid) as we are now to uphold and maintain
the same, or to prevent the Change thereof. Wherefore (I beseech you all)
remember your selves, think what you have already done, what you are in doing,
and stay your hands.

Object. Perhaps some of you will say, but we have taken an Oath, a Covenant
(which our Preachers put us often in mind of) to persevere in our way, and not
to forsake those men with whom we have entered into Association.

Answ. Master John Goodwin one of your Ministers does enform you in his 12.
Serious Considerations, that to violate an abominable and an accursed Oath out
of Conscience to God, is an holy and blessed Perjury. Now therefore if I prove
that your Oath and Covenant is abominable and accursed, then it will follow,
that as it was an high sin to take it, so is it an higher to keep the same,
and according to the Doctrine of one of your own Teachers, an holy and blessed
Perjury will it be to break it. But this I shall make good, and thus I argue.

That which is ungodly and unlawful, both in respect of matter and form, is
abominable and accursed: But such is that Oath and Covenant which you have
taken, therefore you ought to break it, and in no hand (unless you will run
upon your own damnation) to keep the same.

This I shall evidence in both particulars, that it is ungodly in respect of
matter, and unlawful in respect of form.

First, An Oath is ungodly in respect of matter, (and so by consequent
unlawful,) when it is to perform ungodly and unlawful things, viz. things
forbidden of God, and formerly disavowed by us; But of this nature is this Oath
and Covenant: For

1. It Is to oppose the King, and Forces raised by Him, whom God has forbidden
you to resist, and commanded you to fear, honor and obey, and whom you have
sworn Allegiance unto, and Protested to defend in his Estate and Dignity
against all Opposers, with your lives and fortunes.

2. It Is to kill, slay and destroy your Contrymen and Brethren, which as a
work of the Devil you renounced in your Baptism, and is directly opposite to
the sixth Commandment, viz. Thou shall not kill, which then also you vowed and
promised to keep and observe.

3. It Is never to lay down Arms, or to be quiet, so long as there is any left
on the Kings side for you to oppose; whereas strife and contention are works of
the flesh disclaimed also in Baptism and forbidden in Gods word, which commands
you to live peaceably with all men, to study to be quiet, to love your Enemies;
and to conquer them by patience and well-doing, and not by killing of them or
fighting against them: Now,

Therefore this your Oath and Covenant being of this nature, it is utterly
ungodly and so unlawful in respect of the matter of it; it is of the same kind
with that which the forty men entered into, neither to eat nor drink till
they had killed Act. 23. 21.
Paul; which none of you will grant had been fit to be kept, nay, rather it is
of a far worse kind then that was, for it is a Vow or Covenant, not only to
break Gods Commandments, and to kill your Brethren, but also to slight your
Promise in Baptism, and to renounce all your Oaths and Protestations of
Loyalty and Obedience formerly taken; yea, and to persist in so doing: think I
beseech you, how you will answer this at Gods Tribunal.

Secondly, An Oath (as I apprehend) is unlawful in respect of the form (and so
by consequence ungodly too) when it is not expressed, administered and taken in
such very words as by Law are prescribed, or when it is not enacted by full
and complete Authority: But of this nature is this Oath or Covenant which you
stick upon: Ergo, it is unlawful and by consequence ungodly; for confirmation
of this; let it be remembered, how (before this unhappie Parliament begun at a
meeting in Yorkshire about the first coming in of the Scots,) the King tendered
an Oath of Loyalty to the Lord Say, and some others, who refused the same upon
this ground, It was not lawful in respect of form, for the words, method, or
frame thereof had not been agreed upon, settled, or established by Act of
Parliament, viz. by the King and the two Houses: And so the alleged reasons,
why those Oaths tendered by Bishops and Archdeacons at their Visitations were
condemned by this very Parliament for unlawful* was in respect of their
forms, they were not administered in the precise terms, and direct words which
by the King and whole Parliament were prescribed and Authorized.

Now if this be so, then this very Oath and Covenant which you have taken,
being as you all know, defective this way, cannot be legal, the King and whole
Parliament never enacted it as a Law for you to take and observe. But only
that corrupt Faction in Parliament, who (having themselves deviated from the
ways of God and Laws of the Land) have imposed and forced the same upon you,
to the end that with your lives and fortunes you might stand in the face of
dangers for their sakes, and be as a strong wall to hedge and defend them in
their wickedness, and well they will requite you for this service. And for
your Preachers who persuaded you at first to take this Covenant and now to keep
it, they being in the same condition with them that imposed it, no marvel if
they labor to hold you still under the bondage of it. But why do not those
your Preachers answer those Books which have been written against it, wherein
the impiety and unlawfulness of it is fully evidenced; four Besides the
Oxford Reasons lately published, which all the Assembly of Divines are never
able to confute.
several Books have been written against the same, and not one of them yet
answered, which very thing (if well considered) discovers their resolution in
evil; they persuade you to take and keep a Covenant, which themselves are not
able to maintain to be lawful by Divinity, or Reason, or any other Argument,
but only Club-Law: Nay, one thing more let me mind you of, do but think with
your selves how God has manifested himself against this Covenant in breaking
asunder many of those that were knit together by it: How are they divided? How
bitterly the Presbyterians and Independents write and speak against each other?
a rotten Covenant it must needs be, that cannot hold the spirits of the Takers
one three years together; does not God hereby plainly manifest his dislike of
it? has he not visibly made good his word against it by this breach among
them? Es. 8. 9. Associate your selves O ye people, and ye shall be broken in
pieces, give ear also you of a far Country (you Scottish Covenanters) gird
your selves altogether, yet shall ye be broken in pieces; gird your selves and
ye shall be broken in pieces: It Is worth the marking how the words are doubled
in the Text, which according to the interpretation of Joseph, in whom the
Spirit of God dwelt, is to show the Genesis 41. 32.
certainty of the thing that God has established it, and will Indeed this day
this Scripture is fulfilled in our eyes.
shortly and surely bring it to pass.

One place more let me remember you of, it is Hos. 5. 12. and I pray consider,
whether the same may not fitly be applied unto you, Ephraim is oppressed and
broken in Judgment, there is his present misery; the cause of it follows,
because he willingly walked after the Commandment, scil. of Jeroboam and his
Rebellious Faction, who by some new Ordinance of their own devising had tendered
some Oath or Covenant to the people against their King whom they opposed, and
against the right and old way of worshipping God at Jerusalem; this (it seems)
the people at first had consented willingly unto; and for the same were soundly
oppressed by their new Masters (that had imposed it on them:) Now oppression
makes even wise men mad, (especially when it falls unexpected,) and hence it
comes to pass, that they were broken in judgment, they became even like
distracted men, because through their own easiness, they had been persuaded
into such bondage under such Masters as did nothing but pill and oppress them,
and would afford no justice or remedy unto them upon their complainings. Nay
and yet this was but the least part of their punishment, the worst is behind,
verse. 13. Therefore says the Lord, (viz. because they willingly walked after
the Commandment, or were so easily persuaded to take a wicked Covenant;) I
will be unto Ephraim as a moth, and to the House of Judah as rottenness; i. e.
my Curse shall consume them and their Families as a moth does a Garment, or as
rottenness does a thing that is already putrified.

Consider I say, whether this may not in some sort concern you, and if you
think it may, I beseech you (dear Countrymen) renounce speedily that sinful
Oath which you have too unadvisedly taken, least as oppression has already
overwhelmed you; so the moth and rottenness from the Lord do also seize upon
you, Say not you a Confederacy any longer with them that Es. 8. 12.
have confederated against your Church and King; neither fear you their fear;
God is yet gracious and will pardon what is past if you repent, therefore let
him only be your fear, let him be your dread: And your King also is gracious,
ready upon your return to Loyalty (like the Prodigals Father) to remit your
unkindnesse and to receive you with gladness; let him also be the object of
your Reverence, and let the desires of your souls be to rejoice his spirit
now, after this time wherein you have so sadded and afflicted him, that so at
last yet, he may give up his account with joy, which will surely be most for
your profit. Heb. 13. 17.


And now for those your Teachers who have seduced you, both from Gods blessing
and the warm Sun too of outward prosperity, which did so comfortably shine
upon you, undoubtedly they were Satan's Ministers in Angels shapes: as once he
made use of 2 Cor. 11. 13
Peter's tongue to tempt our Savior, so now he has of theirs Mat. 16. 2^.
to deceive you; and observe them well, their gilt ere long will fall off, and
their good report will die before them. And (dear Contrymen) let me not be
thought to boast overmuch, if 2 Cor. 11.
after S. Paul's manner I compare my self with them to your cogitations and
opinions; Are those your Preachers Englishmen? so am I; are they Protestants
(at least in your esteem?) so am I; are they Ministers of Christ (think you?)
know this, that by the favor and grace of God so am I; and perhaps may say,
that (through divine assistance) I have given as true a proof of my Ministry
among some that know me as they have done: I have been in labors as
abundant, and in reproaches (for Christ's sake) more, in prison as frequent, in
dangers of death as often; in as many perils by Robbers, by mine own
Countrymen, by false brethren as the best of them: And therefore I hope I may
obtain credit with you as well as they; I tender your salvation I dare
confidently say, for Christ my Masters sake, as truly as they do; I have no
design at all of mine own upon you, to get your moneys or ought you have: I
aim only (God is my witness) to free you from the snare wherein you are
entangled; I am a stranger to you, and so am content to be until the great
day, when we shall all meet before the great Judge, to have our hearts opened,
and our works manifested; And I do beseech you, God knows I write this with
tears, and beg of you even in the bowels of our Savior, and for the sake of
those your precious souls, which he purchased with his dearest blood, that you
would but be advised to consider seriously of what I have said unto you; my
prayer to the Almighty is and shall be that you may but accept of the same with
a like heart and spirit as it is propounded, say but you Amen, to this my
petition, and we shall be again of one mind and judgment. And O let us not,
let us not my dear Brethren, thus continue fighting one with another, or
divided one from another, for if we do, we shall ere long, be destroyed one by
another, but let us lay aside all malice against one another, and all evil
speaking one of another; Sirs, we are Brethren, why should we strive, and
quarrel after this sort, to the sport and scorn of all that dwell about us,
and to the obloquie and disgrace of our Holy Religion? O let our contention I
beseech you only be like that of the Vine and Olive, which of us shall bear
best fruits, and not like that of the Bryer and Thistle, which of us shall be
most mischievous and unprofitable. And so (Countrymen) I conclude my speech
unto you, with this Prayer for you: Pater ignosce illis, quia nesciunt quid
faciunt, Father of mercies forgive the people of this Land, (who have been
seduced into this Rebellion against the King) their sins committed in the
same; for they know not what they have done, lay not the evil unto their
charge, but wink at their former ignorance, and open their eyes now at length,
and henceforth to see their error, and bless these considerations unto them,
to that end and purpose for Christ Jesus sake. Amen.

And be you assured, Sirs, that not only my self, but also many others whose
blood you have thirsted for, whose Estates you have gaped after, and whom
diverse of you have been wont to entitle with the odious names of Malignants,
Papists, Devils and Dogs, do daily pray to this purpose in your behalf;
for we apprehending you to be in the same condition and state Act. 9. 1.
as S. Paul was in, while he yet went breathing out threatenings against the
Church of Christ, do think it our duty to approve our selves such as he was,
when he prayed for the persecuting Israelites (his Brethren according to the
flesh) that they might be saved: we conceive of you, as he did of them, that
you have a zeal, though not according unto knowledge; this our Religion Romans
10. 1. 2.
teaches us to do, and thus to think: And so God be with you.

SECT. XXVIII.
A faithful and Ministerial Admonition, to the Troublers of our Israel: scil.
the Factious Members of the pretended Parliament at Westminster, who are
Evidenced to be neither Patriots to their Country, Wisemen, nor good men: Their
Religion discovered to be nec una, nec vera, nec bona.

IN the next or second place, I shall assume the boldness to speak a little
unto you, (O you men of Westminster) and I pray observe my words, if Providence
shall please to bring this my Book unto your view. And first let me desire of
you not to be angry, if I speak rather to profit then to please you, forbearing
altogether those false and clawing expressions, which your adorers use, when
they address themselves to speak unto you: I dare not tell you of any Humble
tenders of my constant Devotion to serve you in your way; for I am sure it is
not the way of Christ and God, nor can I humbly acknowledge your great Labor
and endeavors employed these many years in the Reformation and preservation
of Church and Commonwealth: for I know no such matter, but rather the direct
contrary; I love not to jeere you, for such language to you I take to be none
other then a plain jeering of you: nor can I tell how to give flattering
Titles; I am one of Christ's Messengers, and have a Esa, 58. 1.
charge to tell you aloud of your transgressions, and of your sins; perhaps
there are but few, that will in all things, do it so plainly, as I have done or
shall do; but as it is my duty, so I thank God it has always been my custom
and care, to keep a good Conscience in this matter; and though I am guilty of
many sins, (for which the Lord be merciful unto his servant,) yet praised be
his grace, I never had any inward check, for any known flattery of any in the
serious discharge of my calling; I hope I may without presumption say, that I
am as free from that sin as Luther was from that of Covetousness; I make no
question, if you can gripe me, you (the guilty Faction I mean) will deal with
me, as your Forefathers did with my Master Jesus, for my going in this his
way, of plainly detecting Hypocrites and evil men; and therefore I shall keep
my self out of your power so long as I can, and do pray that if it be my
portion at last, (when mine hour is come) to fall within your reach, I may have
strength and patience from above to endure the pains of death, which I shall
confidently look for at your bloody hands; though let me tell you one thing,
and it shall be only that which blessed Sanders the Martyr, told your brother
Stephen Gardener, you were best to take heed of Fox Marti^ol.
shedding innocent blood, for truly it will cry: And as Jerome of Prague did
his Enemies at the Council of Constance, so shall I cite you to answer for it,
before the Tribunal of the most High and just Judge: Well, this being
premised, I do now address my self unto you, for the present in this manner.

Be it known unto you, (O you unhappy men) you have been the principal
instruments of all our woes, and have given life and motion to all our
miseries; you are they that have most highly scandalized the Gospel of the
Son of God, by your acting under the profession of it, most horrid evils, as
if that had countenanced you in your so doing; you are they that have turned
this well-ordered Commonwealth into a confused Chaos, and have labored with
all your might to pull down the prosperous Government of this most renowned
Church; you are they that have persecuted and defamed a most pious King, and
exposed to eternal disgrace and suspicion the Religion of the Protestants; you
have suppressed, silenced, banished, murdered, and undone many thousand
Preachers and Professors of it; you are they that have deceived your Country
in abusing that trust which they imposed in you; you would be accounted
Patriots forsooth, but you have acted the part of Butchers rather, both upon
the souls and bodies of your Contrymen; you would be thought wise men, but
your wisdom has been only shown in ill doings; you would be esteemed holy
persons, but where then is that harmlesness, that undefiledness, which should
have appeared in you? you have been full of bloud-guiltinesse; yea, of
Rebellion, 1 Samuel 15.
which as the Scripture says, is like the sin of Witchcraft; Majesty and
Mercy were wont to be the strongest guards against Treason, till your days;
but you have violently burst through that double fence, and pierced through the
privy maile of Innocence too; Majesty, Mercy, and Innocence, all have been
rather as a prey to invite your evil natures, then any guard to keep you back
from offering violation; O to what an high pitch have you ascended? what
transcendent impieties? what bloods and blasphemies have you countenanced and
committed? quis talia fando temperet a lachrymis, who without floods of tears
is able to express or think of what you have acted.

First, for the Title of Patriots which you thirst after; O had you been
advised by your King, had you closed with your Sovereign when he at first
committed things to your care, to order, rectify and settle for our good, had
you minded that work for which you met, and made that your business as he
would have had you, how should we all have rejoiced in the very mention of you
as of Patriots indeed? how should we have hugged your names in our affectionate
memories, and conveyed them to Posterity with a charge to keep in everlasting
Honor?

As Adam and Eve were our undertakers or representers in Paradise, so were you
in Parliament, and as God to them, so the King to you, gave a Liberty over all
the Plants and Creatures in his Garden; restrained you in nothing, save only
from one particular thing, which was the forbidden fruit; but nothing would
satisfy your ambitious reach save only that, whereby you have brought upon us
all, Gods heavy curse, and all kind of miseries. O how far were you from
the disposition of honest Joseph, who being tempted to meddle with that which
belonged Genesis 39. 8. 9
not to him, was withheld by the consideration of that great trust, which his
Master had reposed in him, and of that liberty and authority which in all
things else was granted to him: And how did God soon after reward this his
faithfulness by advancing him to as great Authority over the whole Realm, as
he had before over one Family; wherein also all but the Throne was at his
disposing, in that only (says Pharaoh*) I will be above thee: which he (good
man) was far enough from Genesis 41. 40.
seeking after; for his endeavors only were to settle Pharaoh more firmly in
it, and to advance his wealth and dignity, as the story at large tells us; by
which means he procured honor and favor sufficient to himself, both with
God and Man; he lived desired of all, and died lamented by the whole Nation. O
I say, that you had had the wisdom and the grace, to have imitated this
Joseph, this good Counselor of State; you were tied in as great engagements
of gratitude as he; but you without any other temptation, save only the
corruption of your own hearts, have labored to ravish from your Lord and
Master his reserved jewel of Majesty, and to rob him of his wealth and of the
hearts of his people: yea, and to invest your selves with that Honor and
esteem which with your strongest studies you ought to have fastened eternally
to his Crown and Diadem. Therefore you must never think (however your
flatterers do bedawb you,) that you shall ever be dignified by good men with
that Title of Abraes, as Joseph was, or be reckoned for Patriots of your
Country.

I have read that true Patriots have these four conditions.

1. They will love and obey their true and lawful Prince, giving example to
all others of doing the like; for to love their Country and hate their Prince
can never stand together.

2. They will defend their Prince and Country against such as are enemies
thereof, and that go about to dispossess him of the Rule and Government.

3. They are careful to conserve their Country from desolation and ruin, by
inland dissentions and Civil Wars.

4. They will also maintain others that are borne in the same Country as well
as themselves in the fruition of their lands and goods rightly belonging to
them.

Now I would have your own consciences speak, whether any one of these four
conditions have appeared in you since you met together; nay, have you not
rather shown a direct opposition unto them all? have you not carried your
selves toward your natural Prince in all ways of hatred, contention and
disobedience? Have you not abandoned his Authority and gone about to take away
his absolute Soveraigntie from him? Have you not occasioned desolations,
spoils, and robberies, throughout the whole Nation, by these unnatural
divisions and Civil Wars which you have kindled? Have you not taken by
violence from your Country men their ancient possessions, left them by their
Fathers, giving and selling the same away to strangers, broken all their strong
Privileges, and most tyrannically and cruelly shed their blood? let your own
Consciences speak whether these things have not been done by you.

You would (I know) be famous amongst men, and to this end you set your adorers
on work to talk of great things which you have done, and to attribute to your
sole praise those acts of grace, which were the fruits of the Kings goodness,
(the benefit whereof notwithstanding you will not suffer the people to enjoy,)
yea, and they call you the Phoenix-Parliament, and the wonder-working
Parliament, but if we speak the downright truth, you are famous only in
infamy; it was said in Josiah's praise, but it may be affirmed on the contrary
to your disgrace, that never the like went before you, nor followed after you;
and therefore you are indeed a rare and Phoenix-Parliament: and wonders we
confess you have wrought too, even such as Hell it self does both rejoice in
and stand amazed at; but Christian mankind has cause for ever both to abhor
and loath: It Is true, pulchrum est eminere inter illustres viros, (as Seneca
says) it is a fair and desirable thing to stand in the rank of renowned men;
but they that will do so, (as he teaches Consulere pat^iae, parcere afflictis,
fera caede abstinere, tempus atque irae dare, orbi quietem, seculo pacem suo.
) must consult for their Countries good, comfort afflicted souls, abstain
from blood, bridle their passions, be peacemakers and instruments of
quietness in their generation: Haec summa virtus, petitur hac caelum via, this
is true Honors road, this is the way to Heaven; wherein as yet you have not
entered, and therefore are no true Patriots.

Secondly, nor are you truly wisemen, which is another Title you challenge to
your selves: Let me tell you, that men qualified with true wisdom have
heretofore judged War the greatest evil, as whereby crescit scelus dum
punitur, sin is rather increased then punished in a Nation; and they have
deemed the best use thereof to be the same which Nurses make of Robin
Goodfellow, only to terrify; for instead of refining, it corrupts and
depopulateth Churches and Kingdoms; therefore how far will Posterity judge
you to have been from true wisdom, in choosing to accomplish your ends by
this means, when they shall read of your doings, and withal, that what ever
good you could expect or durst pretend to reap by it, was offered you without
it? you thought meet in your wisdom to walk rather in the way of fear, then
in that of love, and to force your King to grant you more, then was fit for him
to give, or you to take; but this showed your great ignorance, as of God and
his paths, so of noble Natures, with whom compulsion prevails never; the
limits of Princes are not to be so bounded; Rex est qui metuit nihil; Majesty
and fear cannot lodge together nor ought they; inforcement kills Authority;
it is an (...), for subjects to give Laws to their superiors; and that
Servants should bear rule over their Masters, is the first Prove. 30. 21. 22
of those four things, for which the earth is disquieted, says wise Solomon.

Truly (Gentlemen) I would have you wise men, and so to approve your selves,
your place requires it, but by no means will I allow you to be wicked; for as
wisdom best, so wickedness of all others does worst become you; Pallas the
Goddess of wisdom, was feigned by the Ancients to have a Buckler all over
covered with Snakes and Serpents, and I allow the like to you, but it was of
pure Crystal all bright and clear, and so must your wisdom be: They gave
her also a spear cum acuta cuspide, with a sharp point, and so let it be, but
it was of true Steel and not wrought but by Vulcan whom they feigned a God;
they said she was a subtle woman: be you as subtle as she; but she was ever a
Virgin, she was always honest and would never be defiled, such must your
wisdom be; they said her Council was always to be approved, but they
therefore held that she had no humane Mother, but was borne above, even of the
brain of Jupiter. And so from above would I have your wisdom to proceed,
which S. James describes to be a Jam. 3. 17*
wisdom that is pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy,
and good fruits, without partiality and hypocrisy. I confess the truth unto
you, you are no fools in one sense, you have a wisdom, and it appears
sufficiently, (by all your doings) where you had it; you have been Serpentine
enough in your whole working, had you been but as Dovelike too, you might have
been Chronicled for right wise men. Solomon reckons up the Spider, to be one of
those four little things that are exceeding wise; but yet the Spider was
always odious unto Pallas, Prove. 30. 28.
not for her subtilty but for her venom, and because her web is made so slight
that it will make no Garments, of which nature will all your contrivements
prove in the conclusion; they will not be able to cover your selves from the
eye of Gods Justice or of the worlds notice; entangle you they may, (as
sometime we have seen the Spider entangled in her own web, as well as other
Flies which she has spread her net for;) insomuch that (as Bildad in Job
says) your hope shall be as the Spiders web, that is, Job. 8. 14.
dashed in a moment, even as the Spider and her web both, (which she took such
pains about) is by the good Huswifes broom thrown down together in an instant;
so shall you and your long machinations, be brought to a sudden period; when
the great Housekeeper and heart-searcher, shall come amongst you, with the
beesome of destruction.

And I pray Sirs let me ask you a question, do you in your wisdom think in
good earnest, this world will last always with you? can you promise your
selves a continuing happiness in your lofty and Rebellious way? did you never
hear of that saying, sequitur superbos ultor a tergo Deus, nor of that ubi non
est pudor, nec cura juris, sanctitas, pietas, fides, instabile regnum est? or
can you be so blind as to think any of these are in your selves? some folk
perhaps according to the form by your selves prescribed, do sometimes betrim
you with such strange Titles, but are you so simple as to conceit that wise men
do fancy them to belong unto you? no, no (Gentlemen) befool not your selves;
all people have not lost their eyes, nor is it a Cloud but a net that you dance
in; we see plainly under what pretenses you have divided our Doctrine of unity,
and unswadled the bonds of Peace and Charity amongst us; we perceive how you
go about to make your usurped greatness, wealth and honor, the rules to
square out Cannons of Faith for us by, and how you set your Assembly of
Divines, (as you call them) on work to devise Arguments to uphold the same; how
you have silenced and suspended from preaching Gods truth, all those laborious
and faithful Teachers that will not preach to please your lusts, but rather to
the discovery of your base ends and ways: And how you have set up an High
Commission Court (or something worse which you call a Committee) in all Counties
to that purpose; notwithstanding not long ago, your selves did vote against
some Bishops for so doing; and did declare that in the sense of the House, it
was a very ungodly and wicked thing, to bar any good man from Preaching and
revealing the whole will and Counsel of God; We perceive well enough how you
have pursued your own private ends in all your ways, notwithstanding your
public pretenses; how you have greatned your selves, by that wealth and moneys
extorted both from City and Country, and how unwilling you are to come to a
reckoning for the same; we cannot but note, how you have invested your selves
with all the Kings Revenews, with all the great Offices of the Kingdom, and
with the Estates of all Loyal Subjects, whom you have made Delinquents; and I
pray wherefore? but only for their Conscience and Loyalty. I dare challenge you
to declare if you can any other reason, why many of your fellow members, who
were men of sound and upright judgments, sincere hearts, and known integrity,
of as good credit in their Country as the best of your selves, and chosen with
as general a consent unto their places; why, I say, or for what other reason
they have been made Delinquents by you, then only because their Consciences
would not suffer them to go along with you in your way, which they knew to be
directly opposite to Gods word and the Law of the Land.

But do you think that these and many such like things, being observed and
alta mente reposta, will be patiently born always? will men of noble blood and
spirit endure this thraldom at your hands? will they with contented eyes, see
Strangers enjoy and possess that weath, and those inheritances which God has
given to them, and their Fathers have left them? will they not rather hazard
their lives to cut* your throats in revenge of their own wrongs, and think they
do God service in it, seeing you have disabled Him from doing them justice
whom God has entrusted with the sword for that purpose? do you not think it is
possibie that you may eat the fruit of your own ways, and drink the juice of
your own Doctrines? quicquid indignum aut ferum cuiquam potuit, hoc fecit
dolor, tenebraeque (says wise Seneca.)

Nay (Sirs) do you think that the Common people who now adore you, will not at
length fully sent you? did you never read or observe, that the temper of
popular affection is very Aguish, and its tenure slippery? do not you
apprehend, that many of them already do more fear then love you? whence else
(being asked the Reason of their adherence to you) do they usually answer in
this manner? what would you have us to do? if we should not do as they would
have us, they would plunder us of all we have, and not leave us worth a penny:
Can you fancy that this business will not work in It begins to work already,
as evidently appears by that free and broad language which in all places is
uttered against you.
time? verily I am persuaded, (unless you break off your sins by repentance,
and desist from Rebellion, rapine and blood) rather then you shall go
unpunished, (if the Sectaries whom you have fostered do not) the very people
whom you have seduced will, even tear you in pieces as you go in the Streets,
as they did Dr. Lamb (whom they took for a Conjurer) some 18* years ago, and
will pluck you as small as the people of Rome did Sejanus in times past; for
their apprehensions of you will be every way as bad as theirs was of him: you
know how your selves and your Preachers have taught the vulgar, who were
otherwise instructed before, that the Supreme Power is in themselves, and that
they may reform and punish Malefactors and do God good service therein, if they
cannot otherwise have justice done upon them; and you in your wisdom have so
exercised them of late, that they have undoubtedly learned to make no great
scruple of shedding blood, specially of such as themselves apprehend to be
guilty; it would be your wisdom to think of these things in time.

As yet perhaps your vengeance sleeps, and facta populus cogitur quam far
tam laudare, people are forced to bear with patience, yea, and to praise your
doings; but remember quos cogit metus laudare, eosdem reddit inimicos metus,
that fear which extorts praise, does also engender and increase hate: when
they come to be sensible of your position and resolution, scil. People begin to
see this now; for they say the 80000l. a month lately laid upon the Kingdom,
is to maintain a War against the kingdom, the people must give so much to keep
an Army on foot only to awe and undo themselves.
Malis domanda est audacia populi, and gravi semper jugo premenda, ne quid
simile tentare audeat, i. e. the people must be kept bare and low, in an
underly condition, least they attempt such a thing against us, as we have done
against the King; I say, when they come thoroughly and generally to be
apprehensive of this your purpose, they will then remember where your selves
have said the Supremacy lies; when they feel the Souldery maintained by you
to offer them violence, and no benefit of Law allowed them to right themselves
(as to this it must come, that you will not dare to gainsay the Soldier in any
of his ways) when these things come to pass, then look to your selves, for
your time approaches; but I am weary of your wisdom which will undoubtedly
end in folly. I will consider also what your piety is; for as was said, you
would also be esteemed Holy Persons.

Thirdly, Therefore for the Title of Godliness. The Psalmist Psalm. 12. 8
says, that the wicked walk on every side, when the vilest men are exalted;
We may give a guess then at what is in you, by the conditions of those persons
that are above-board with you, and employed by you; as also by that progress
which Religion has had since you have domineered; for the goodness or
badnesse of Rulers has always been concluded upon from the growth or decay of
Religion in their days. But truly (Sirs) not to flatter you, we observe your
Piety to be nec una, nec vera, nec bona, and therefore conceive it to be, in
very deed nulla; I must be plain, it is my profession, and my resolution, and
therefore you must bear with me.

First, It Is not una, for you are divided in Religion, the very best among you,
I shall mind you to this purpose of some passages in Print, between your two
so much extolled Professors (nay, Martyrs so entitled, so honored) William
Prynne and Henry Burton, (whom at the beginning of your meeting you sent for,
and reeeived with more affectionate and general applause, then ever since was
shown unto your Sovereign:) these two (however conjoined in that ridiculous and
admired Triumph, which your selves with the City of London, was pleased to make
them,) even these very two have been at daggers drawing, almost ever since,
about their Religion; and each of them have (even amongst your very selves)
Followers and Disciples great plenty; they are indeed the two grandest
Champions of the two grandest Factions of those 52 which (as reports goes) do
swarm among you; Prynne is (as appears) for the Presbyterians, and Burton for
the Independents: And their controversy is about no less then a maine part of
the Gospel, for of that nature is Church Government in Burtons present
judgment, and Prynne was apprehended of the very same opinion all the while he
held up Satan's banner against the Bishops; though now it seems (as many others
of his Sect are) he is fallen from it; for he holds now (as Prela^s did before)
that there be National Churches, and that each has a Liberty to choose and
settle such a Form of Church See for all this and that which follows Burtons
Vindication of Independent Churches against Prynne his Brother.
Government, as is most suitable to the Laws, Customs, and manners of the
people; yea, and further, that there is no direct precept or pattern in Sacred
Writ for particulars in Discipline and Ceremony, but they are left to humane
prudence: And to prove this against his Brother Burtons Faction, he does use
those very Arguments, which were wont to be used against himself and his Sect,
and are to be found originally in Mr. Hookers Ecclesiastical Policy; But
Burton spits at him for this, and affirms plainly, that to shape Religion in
point of Church Government to humane Policy, is to shape a Coat for the Moon,
and humano capiti cervicem jungere equinam, and populo ut placeret fabulas
facere, to coin tales to please people; Wherefore he taxes his Brother Prynne
of high presumption, in thus attempting to mingle Earth and Heaven together,
(they are his own words, for I Will not vary a syllable from his own
expressions,) what (says he) cannot your Law and our Gospel cotton together,
unless our Gospel wears your Laws Liverie, and be tired in a Gown like one
of your Sergeants, made up of two several colors.

Prynne is peremptory, that Church Government and Power of making
Ecclesiastical Laws to bind, was ever in the Civil Magistrate; the Priests
or Clergy never had any thing to do in that work by right; and now (says he)
the power is in the Parliament; that place Math. 18. 15, 16, 17. If thy brother
offend, etc. He will have to be meant not of Excommunication, but of the Civil
Court of Justice: And he says further, that in the Assembly or Evangelicall
Synod, Act 15. the Apostles did not pass their Votes as they were Apostles
guided infallibly, by the Holy Ghost, but rather as they were in their ordinary
capacity as Elders and chief members of it, and this he concludes to be an
undeniable Scripture Authority for the lawful use of Parliaments and Synods
under the Gospel, upon like necessary occasions, and for their power to
determine Controversies of Religion, to make Canons, maugre all evasions and
exceptions of Independents to elude it; all which with much more such stuff,
to the same purpose (as it seems) Prynne has against his Adversaries, and
proves it (as Burton notes) with an (...); but says he, that shall not serve
the turn, for he denies every bit of it, with another (...), as good as his;
he is very positive, that we should have a very mad world of it, if Civil
States or Parliaments should have liberty to frame Church-Governments, or set
up Discipline; He allows a State to pull down an old Church Government indeed,
but by no means to set up any, for that (he says) is another thing. And he
tells Prynne plainly, that he is out of his proper orb in talking thus, and
it is out of his jealousy that Church Censures should trench upon his pleadings
at the Bar of Justice; and for his part he is confident that the place Mat.
18. belongs not to Civil Courts, but to the Church (as all Presbyterians
heretofore did expound it) and for the Decrees made at the Synod Act. 15. He is
of opinion, because they were binding, that they were made by the Apostles, as
they were Apostles, and that the Parliament now has no power to make the like.
And he is directly of opinion, that that Assembly or Church-meeting was no
Parliament, scil. no such Parliament as Prynne would have it, and therefore he
advises him thus; Good Brother, be not so peremptory, but take in your
top-saile, it is too high to bear up against so stiff a gale of Scripture and
reason.

Prynne affirms beforehand; that whosoever submits not to that
Church Government which the Parliament shall set up, is guilty of arrogance,
schism, contumacy, and liable to such penalties as are due to those offenses:
Burton cries out, Good Brother, be not so legal, what if they set up such a
one as godly people cannot submit unto? must they either violate their
consciences or suffer in their good names, for arrogant, contumacious
schismatics, and be liable to I wot not what penalties beside? why good
Brother, if we should go and live under the Turkish Government, and could not
in Conscience turn Turks in the Religion there established, yet there is a way
of exemption for it, namely, to become Tributaries to the State, as many
Christians do: Good Brother let us not have any of Draco's Laws executed upon
innocents; shall we now turn worse persecutors of the Saints then the Prelates?
Surely Henry Burton being so wise and so good a man in your esteems, you cannot
imagine, but he sees some reasons for his thus speaking.

Again, Prynne in another place, requires absolute obedience to the general
consent of the Assembly and Parliament; which Burton holds utterly unlawful,
and alleges to prove it so, that generality of Votes, whereby the Jews State
did carry it away to crucify their King; inferring thereby, that he thinks it
possible that this Parliament may Vote a like business: and he says further,
that we must not pin our souls to their sleeves, we do not know whether they
may possibly carry them; a Parliament is not immediately inspired by the Holy
Ghost as the Apostles were.

Prynne is very eager for forcing men's Consciences: But Burton is still as much
against that Tenent as Prynnes own self was in former times, and affirms,
that no Rule nor Example, nor Reason, can be drawn from Scripture to force men
to any Religion; no (says he) we are not to proceed any further with the
Papists themselves, then to information, and rectifying their Consciences by
instruction and admonition: And he advises Prynne in these words, Brother, let
not that impartial Edict be revived, that if any confessed themselves to be
Christians, they should be put to death, nomen pro crimine, the very name of
Christians was taken for a crime; it seems he is of opinion, that if the
Presbyterians prevail it is not unprobable that Edict may be revived again.
And afterward when Prynne would have the Civil Magistrate to suppress,
restrain, imprison, confine, and banish the setters up of new Forms of
Ecclesiastical Government without lawful Authority, Burton conceiving
himself aimed at cries out most pitifully; And must I undergo all these
terrible censures, because you so judge? but what if your judgment be
altogether erroneous? what punishment is due to him that condemns the
Innocent? you may be a Civil Judge one day; Remember then (Brother) that if I
come before you, that you meddle not with my Conscience; if you should make a
Law, like that of the Jews, that who so confesses Christ to be the Son of
God shall be Excommunicate; I shall be apt to transgress that Law, but yet
take heed how you punish me with an ense rescidendum, or I know not what
Club-Law. It seems Burton himself fears when his Brother Prynne comes to be
Judge (as if you his good Masters prevail, you cannot reward him for the loss
of his ears, and good service done you, in writing and pleading for you, with
a less place:) we are in some likelihood to have such Laws put in Execution
against Christians, as were of old among the Jews; for as John Goodwin
(another of Prynnes Brethren speaking of him in his Calumny arraigned, page 33
Book forequoted) says, the Statutes of Omri are as good for his turn (if
authorized by Parliament) as the Statutes of Moses, the manner of the House of
Ahab, as laudable as the manner of the House of David, yea, of God himself:
And indeed Prynnes behavior and language has been such toward his Sovereign,
toward the Church of England his Mother, and toward some of his own Brethren
of late, that every honest man has cause to put it into his Let any and say,
from Prynnes pride, malice, and cruelty; from his bloody disposition and
Tyranny; from his cursed lies and calumnies; his Religion, practices, and
blasphemies, Good Lord deliver us.

But to make an end with these two Brethren, Prynne accuses Burtons Faction of
obstinacy, singularity, arrogance, selfe-ends; and says, that Independency
stripped of all disguising pretenses, is nothing but Pharisaicall, vainglorious,
selfe-conceitednesse of superlative Holiness; Burton takes Pepper at this, and
says, that Prynnes malice is liberal in throwing dirt in their faces, and
confesses ingenuously, that if he and his side should undergo all these
(...), and say nothing, a fools Cap and a Bell were fittest for them, with
which I leave them.

Now the reason of this large repetition of the Passages betwixt these men, is
to show a proof of that little agreement that is amongst the best of you; and
truly, till you have brought these Brethren with their followers to a better
unity, we shall never think you guilty of any great Piety, what ever your
pretenses be.

Besides (by the way) you may observe and s^e, that Henry Burton himself does
not very well approve of your Parliamentary proceedings, and less cause have
we to like well of them; I wonder how the best of you all will answer this; you
all take Henry Burton for a very honest man; one he is that has suffered much
for the Cause, and was up to the ears in the business as well as Prynne, and
in your grave judgments as worthy as he, of the greatest Triumph that ever was
permitted by a Court of Parliament to fellows of such demerit since the world
began; one that is deeply gone in the way of perfection, yea, so far, that I
hope you will think it impossible that he should slide back or fall away,
specially in these times of new Light and Revelation: And further too, himself
affirms before all the world in his said Book (whether you take notice of it
or no, I cannot tell, but if you do not, you are much to blame) that he was
out for the State (that is, for you the Parliament) 4 or 500 l. this was year
1644. (it seems the Bishops had not left him so poor as you leave your
prisoners, or else he had thrived well since, that he could spare so much,)
yea, and he professes too, that he did it with a cheerful heart, not for
squint-eyed respects, to lay out so much at once to receive of the State so
much Annuity, (as it seems some provident men do:) No, what he did was out of
pure and perfect love to you; therefore no man can think that he speaks any
thing of you out of malice or disaffection; but only out of truth and
singleness; and yet you see, he dares not trust his soul with you, as you are
a Parliament; he reports of you as of persons to be suspected, notwithstanding
your Memberships: And how you will ever be able to acquit your selves in this
business, I know not.

But again, as there is no unity in your Piety or Religion, 2. and 3.
so neither is there any truth or goodness in it; it is neither vera nor bona;
and therefore you cannot be such holy persons as you would be accounted; you
entitle God indeed to your doings; but this is no argument of godliness,
unless your Actions were more godly, you mind not to approve your selves like
him, but desire that he should be thought like you; you would have us conceive
you to be great with God, but we perceive you either will not or dare not trust
him; and this makes us believe that you are not very inward with him; let your
own Consciences speak, do you not confide more in the Militia of the Kingdom
then you do in his strength and providence for protection and preservation? why
else do you keep such a racket, to have the management of that out of his
hands wherein God has placed it? did you live by Faith as the just and
righteous do, you could not possibly be so eager after the arm of flesh; the
true Church of Christ was never in more security, then when she had least of
that to trust to. I have heard it affirmed by a learned and peaceable I wish
all his brethren of that Church were but men of his temper and spirit.
Minister of the Protestant Church of France, that they of their Religion never
lived so safely and so comfortably before, as they have done since they were
disarmed of their weapons, which they were at the end of their last war,
which he called a Rebellion. But with you, all the strength and promises of God
it seems are nothing, unless you have somewhat that is sensible to trust
unto; O if you knew God, and were religious indeed, you would be of another
mind, for they that know thy Name will trust in thee, says the Psalmist.

Nay, we read in Scripture of haters of God, that should come in the last
times, who should have a form of Godliness 2 Timothy 3. 4, 5.
notwithstanding; we fear you are rather of that number, and that you hate God
for his word sake, because therein he so plainly opposes those ways of
Rebellion, cruelty, oppression, and injustice, which you walk in, and
commands so strictly those things which (as it appears) you have resolved
against, and for his sake you hate all that belongs unto him, his Church which
you have destroyed, his Prophets whom you have persecuted, his Service which
you have abolished, his Temples which you have defiled, and his Anointed whom
you have vilified, because in meekness, gentleness, mercy, patience, and
goodness, he is so like unto him; and are these marks of true Piety? not they
that commend themselves, but whom their works commend, and whom God commends,
are and shall be the only approved persons. I dare boldly affirm, (and I call
your own Consciences to witness it with me) that Kingly Majesty was never so
blasphemed, and exposed to vulgar contempt as it has been since you sat; nor
was the dignity of Parliament, which (next to the Kings honor) ought by all
true Englishmen to be held as sacred, so abused as it has been by you, who
have used its venerable name to countenance all your evil and illegal actions
against your Sovereign and his Subjects, and have made that High and Supreme
Court (as the Pharisees of old did Gods House) no better then a very den of
Thieves; and I am confident if Jesus Christ my Master were here, he would tell
you so to your faces, and bestow as many woes upon you as he did upon your
Brethren in those days, who (like you) did pretend so much to Piety when they
had so little of it.

You take to your selves the Title of the Lords Worthies, forfooth, but good
names do not always prove good men; Titles without truth serve but to enhance
and disexcuse damnation: you call the war on your side Sacrum, (so was the
Pope wont to call his) though it be both against Law and Religion: your League
and Covenant you style Holy, (as was that in France when time was) though like
that, it be to root out Protestant Profession and the King; your Armies you
entitle the Armies of God, as the disobedient Barons in King John's time did
theirs, and your work you call opus Domini, the Lords work, and the Lords
cause, though such as the Lord abhors and detesteth; thus bold are you with
the Almighty, as if he were such another as your selves; but is this true
Godliness? it will not be so found at the great day; you talk much of
Conscience, but does this alone prove you have any? do not many men use to
plead Conscience, when through passion or opinion they pursue a cause with
greater heat then themselves can give, or others discern a reason for? your
Consciences scruple, as you would have us think, at a gesture or a Garment in
Gods Service: but they are secure in Actions of killing, robbing, rebelling,
and breaking all Laws of private interest and Sovereign Power; we see you are
resolute in blood and rapine, and can even scorn at those that make Conscience
at such crimes: you talk of men's having Authority from Gods word for what they
do, and yet practice your selves things above measure sinful, as if they were
necessary duties, and are able to show no Scripture at all for the same; we are
posed we confess at your Piety, we can see no dram of goodness in your
doings, and therefore must conclude there is as little in your selves: Policy
we confess, we see great store 1 King 12. 25 etc.
in you; even such as was in Jeroboam that son of Nebat who made Israel to
sin: for to prevent the peoples return to their Loyalty, (whom himself had
drawn into Rebellion,) he altered the established way and manner of worshipping
God, which he knew would have reduced them to their right obedience, ver. 27.
Jeroboam said in his heart, if this people go up to do sacrifice in the house
of the Lord at Jerusalem, then shall the hearts of this people turn again unto
their Lord, even unto Rehoboam King of Judah, and they shall kill me: And
hereupon he sets forth a And for the peoples willing obedience to the same, it
was, that they were so oppressed and broken in judgment, and had Gods curse
like a moth or rottenness seizing upon them, witness the Prophet, Hos. 5. 11.
12.
Directory or new way of serving God, and persuades the people, that other
places were as fit for that purpose as the Temple or Church it self: yea and
verse. 31. He made Priests of the lowest of the people which were not of the
Sons of Levi; and Chap. 13. 33, 34. Whosoever would, he consecrated him, and
he became one of their Priests; which thing. (says the Text) became sin to
the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it from off the face of the earth. Truly
Sirs, it is too evident to all men that your Piety has run in the very same
Channel, after Jeroboams example, you have made England to sin; look you to
the consequent.

We confess also you have as much Religion and Piety as Absalom had, enough
to vizard over for the while your cursed Design, till you had supplanted your
Sovereign, stole away the hearts of his people from him, insinuated into them a
suspicion of his truth and justice, persuaded them to accept of you to be
Judges in his place, wherein you have received as many complaints, and relieved
as few as ever Absalom did.

In brief, such has been your godliness and humility, that you have
declared the King to have failed in his Trust, and Voted the Royal Power to be
in your selves; yea, a power more then Royal, even to subvert all Laws, which
because the King approves not of, you have drawn his own sword against him,
and pursued him as eagerly on all advantages, as ever Absalom did his Father,
while he in the mean time ( David-like) has pitied you, and was unwilling to
spill your blood; surely, if there were nothing else then your unnatural
violence against your Sovereign in all your ways, opposed to his mercy toward
you, in the height of injury, it were abundantly sufficient to discover to all
the world that little true Piety that is in you: But if to this we add also
the consideration of that superlative cruelty toward your brethren, we are
confident that no tongue touched with Christianity, will dare to speak one
word in your commendations: Your proceedings against them, speak you to be of
the Tyrant Maxentius mind, that the blood of Christians is the best Sacrifice
to God; and of a like Religion with the Assassines among the Mahumetans, who
deem it Sovereign devotion, purity of manners, and the readiest way to
Paradise, for to kill those of a differing opinion to themselves; and of the
same faith with the Donatists of old, who held none to be Gods children, but
themselves, and made it both their position and their practice, occidere
quenquam, qui contra eos fecerit; to kill and make away whoever durst oppose
their doings, or was conceived to be any hinderance to their growing Faction:
But what warrant you have for these things we know not; sure we are, you have
none from the Old or New Testament delivered by the Prophets and Apostles from
God to the Church: what to this purpose will be found in your new As the
Remists among the Papists, did set out a false and corrupt Translation of
Scripture, with Notes of their own upon it to make it speak for them; so some
here (as is said) are in hand with a like work, in the behalf of their
Faction.
Bible, which (as reports goes) you are about to set forth, we cannot yet tell,
nor can we imagine how you will escape that threatening of God, Bloody and
deceitful men shall not live out half their days; God accounts man's blood
so precious a thing, (though you have set a low rate upon it,) that he requires
the unjust spilling of it, from the unreasonable creature; and would not allow
the known Murderer the Sanctuary of his Altar: Therefore we are confident,
that when he makes inquisition for blood, he will remember you to your smart
and sorrow, for all your Piety; and will call you to an account for that, and
all your other evils, with so much greater severity, as Conscience has been
pretended to such high and open violations of Sanctity and Holiness.

In a word, your Piety is an enemy to Truth, for it persecuteth that; it is an
adversary to Peace, for it opposes that; it is a foe to Order, for it has
pulled down that; it will allow of no Bishop, no King; like that of the Pope,
it must be above all; or that of Lucifer, it will admit of no Superior; it
has not only defiled the whole Land with blood, but the whole blood of the
Land with Treason; for scarce a Family throughout the whole Nation, but some
one or other of it has been drawn by you into this Conspiracy; insomuch that
Norfolk I fear can no longer boast of her 100. Houses of Gentlemen never yet
attainted; Cheshire I am sure by your means, has lost for ever her ancient
glory; which was, that it was never stained with the blot of Rebellion, but
always stood true to their King and to his Crown; whose Loyalty Richard the
second, so far found and esteemed, that he held his Person most safe amongst
them, and by Authority of Parliament, made that County (for this cause) a
Principality, stiling himself Prince thereof; doubtless when these things
come to be considered upon in after-Ages, most odious will your names be to
succeeding generations.

To conclude, your piety has merited for you those Titles which S. Paul
bestows upon Elimas the Sorcerer, Act. 13. 10. and it being attended with so
much knowldge, I fear it has advanced you to that high pitch, which those
Pharisees in Christ's time were ascended to, whom our Savior intimates to have
committed that sin which should never be pardoned in this world, nor in that
to come; and so it has made you capable to be given over ad Hospitalium
incurabilium (as Erasmus spe^kes.) But my prayer for you is and shall be, as
Peter prayed for Simon Magus, Act. 8. 22.
that if it be possible you may be pardoned, and that the wickedness of your
hearts and ways may be forgiven you. And to this purpose I desire you all who
like them Mat. 21. 45. do conceive your selves concerned in these my words,
that you would but consider of this short advice which I shall propound unto
you, and then say Amen to a short Collect which I shall make for you.

My advice is this, that (upon your serious thoughts of these things which (as
Gods Minister) I have said unto you,) you would remember what poor worms, what
Grasshoppers, what grains of dust your selves are, in compare with that great
God whom you oppose, (by your endeavors to pull down his Anointed, the King,
and his Spouse the Church,) and whose eternal curse hangs over your heads,
which together with the odium of the whole Nation will o're-whelme you
speedily, if you do not by your more speedy and unfeigned Repentance prevent
the same: And thereupon cast down your lofty looks and stout hearts, lay
aside your high stomachs, and in an humble selfe-denying way throw your selves
down at the feet of your Sovereign; yea, if it be in the habit and posture of
those men, of whom you may read, 1 King. 20. 32. it will be so much the better:
for believe it, you have far more reason to do it in that manner to your
King, then those Syrians had to do so to the King of Israel; and resolve with
your selves, that if your lives be granted, you will spend the remainder of
them solitarily in practicing the duties of Penitentiaries; this is mine advice
to you, which by Gods grace may prevent Hell, if embraced by you; my Prayer
follows in these words:

O omnipotent and Almighty God, to whom nothing is impossible, be thou pleased
to magnify thy power, and thy mercy in converting these men; bring them upon
their knees, (good Lord) before thee, before their Sovereign and before the
Nation, and persuade their proud and rebellious spirits, to beg pardon of all
for their evils done, and to beseech the supplications of the whole Church and
Kingdom unto thee for themselves; and to this end let them feel that Hell
which is in their own bosoms; let the blood which they have shed cry, and the
evils they have committed roar within them; let them seriously think of those
devouring flames, of those everlasting burnings, upon the worm that never
dies, and upon the fire that never shall be quenched; as their sins have
abounded toward thee* so let (dear God) thy grace be more abounding toward
them; it will be to the greater glory of thy goodness at the great day, to
have pardoned such great sinners as these be, when every Saint shall extol thy
mercy to his own particular self, if they shall come forth among the rest and
say, but to us, to us, God has been more merciful then to all others, in his
forgiving us more and greater evils. O remember (holy Father) thy Son came
into the world to save chief sinners, and these are such, and his blood is
able to wash away the deepest stains, even those of these men; therefore for
his sake grant pardon if possible, unto these bloody and rebellious persons.
Amen.

And thus Gentlemen I have as Christ's Messenger, discharged mine office to
you, in telling you plainly of your transgressions; I thought, though perhaps
others may not be of my mind, this time of your height and greatness to be
fittest for this performance; for if not now, I know not when had been the
season; when your night which is drawing on has overtook you, and brought you
under hatches, into bonds and prisons; it will not be then so proper for a man
of my condition, to torment you further with the remembrance of these things:
and the truth is, I am not base enough to act Prynnes part, or to visit you, as
some of your Ministers did the Bishop of Canterbury in the Tower, to triumph
and insult over him in his miseries: I abhor to set my foot upon the neck of
a fallen foe, to widen wounds, or to greaten sorrows: I bless my God, I can
look upon mine enemy in his affliction with an eye of pity, and weep for him;
yea, and I hope when that day of darkness comes upon you, to be one of those
that shall endeavor to bring balm from Gilead to you: and indeed if God would
but please, after all my sufferings at your hands, to vouchsafe me but that
honor, I should conclude it were enough for a poor mortal, and should say
upon it with that Simeon in the Gospel, Lord now let thy servant depart in
peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation; thy rich, thy great, thy
plenteous salvation unto thy people that wait for thee; and so till then,
Gentlemen, Adieu.

SECT. XXIX.
A consolatory Speech to the Loyall-hearted, that suffer for Conscience sake in
these times: Arguments to assure them of Gods help in due time. 4 Marks to
know the approach of that time: How they are to demean themselves in the mean
time, living, and dying.

I Have now but a word more to add, and that shall be to those Loyal men, who
for Conscence and duty sake, have adhered to their Sovereign, and kept
themselves unspotted from this sin, which like the Arian Heresy has so
suddenly orespread the whole Nation, and for this cause have been persecuted
and hated by these evil men, who have also deprived them of all their outward
comforts: And what shall I now say unto you, (most worthy and approved?) shall
I bewail your sad condition, or lament over you for the wrongs suffered? this
would be an endeavoring to bring you lower then you are, to draw you down to
baseness, to weaken your spirits, and to expose you to be more despised, and
so to do you a greater injury then has yet been done you; for Pity is the
poorest and most helpless salve of misery, and by noble minds far more
abhorred then the worst of fortune: Away therefore with such feminine and
feeble Cordialls, which women use, and children relish; let me tell you, that
you are more then men, you are Christians chose out of many by Almighty God, to
suffer for his sake; to be in your Age the glory of Religion, and the honor of
your Nation: you are no chafe, the wind has not blown you away, nor can the
flaile hurt you, as they fancy that afflict you; they think they rob you, in
taking from you what God gave you; but they think amiss; for he can make them
vomit up again that wealth of yours which they have swallowed, or can return
it in specie another way; all the substance and riches of the Earth are at his
disposing, who observes and notes who they are, that lose all for his sake; at
least doubtless, he will and does repay outward losses with inward graces: And
be confident of it, the more damage and affliction Gods truth brings you, the
more felicity and joy abides for you; it is Gods cause for which you stand,
it is the honor of the 5. Commandment which you maintain, as the Martyrs in
Queen Mary's days did of the second; and hence it is that you are spoiled, and
have your lives sought after; but what an high dignity is it, in the mean
time, which God has here called you to? It was the confession of blessed Mr.
Bradford in a case of like nature, that himself had deserved the miseries he
lay under at Gods hand, and not only them, but even Hell too; notwithstanding
(says he) so loving has God been, that he has converted the punishment of my
sins into a testimonial of his truth and verity, which indeed the Prelates
persecute in me, and not my sins; and therefore they persecute not me, but
Christ in me, who I doubt not but will take my part unto the end; put but
Parliament instead of Prelates, and the words may be your own without
alteration of a syllable. So Bishop Hooper in those days, being at the stake
appeals to God in these words; ' It Is known to thee O Lord, wherefore I am
come hither, and why the wicked do persecute thy servant, not for my sins
and transgressions committed against thee, but because I will not allow of
their wicked doings, to the contaminating of thy blood, and the denial of thy
truth received; each of you in your condition may make a like appeal, and also
add what another Martyr said, in the behalf of himself and others, If we
would but seek to please men in things contrary to thy holy Word, we might (as
others do) enjoy the Commodities of Wife, Children, Goods, and Friends.

Besides, it is not for Gods truth only, that your engagement is; but for your
Country too, and dulce est pro patria mori, it has at least, in old time been
so accounted; nay, what good man can wish life to see his Country buried?
vitae nimis est avidus, quisquis non vult mundo secum pereunte mori, says wise
Seneca, they are over greedy to live, that think it not an honor to die at the
funeral Celebration of Church and Kingdom, which to the eye of over-timerous
and doubting nature, may seem perhaps to be near approaching. And were it so,
that a general destruction should come, yet how happy shall you be above
those other men, who having first made shipwreck of a good conscience, are
forced afterward to lose all things else.

But our duty is, both to hope and pray for better; for God is now the same he
was of old, as gracious still as ever, nor must we as many do, trouble our
selves with Gods Decree, and grow dull upon it; for himself says, if the same
at any Jer. 18. 7. 8.
time be gone forth for the plucking up or pulling down a Nation or Kingdom,
an Humiliation or turning from sin, shall suspend the execution; so did that
of Ninive in like case, and that of Hezekiah when word was brought him that he
should die; it is Gods custom, to seek out for a man that (Moses-like) may
stand in the gap upon such occasions; he had spared Sodom Ezekiel. 22 30.
it self, had there been but ten righteous in that City; his bowels are no
whit contracted in these Gospel Times, and there are no doubt many thousands
in this Land whom himself is pleased to account righteous.

Nor does God regulate his dealings by what is in us, but by what is in
himself, and there is mercy in him, though no merit in us; Christ is full of
righteousness, though we be full of sin; Holiness and Truth are in Gods
nature and promise, though there be nothing but corruption in our nature and
practice; and for mine own Name sake (says the Lord) I will defer Esa. 48. 9.
11.
mine anger, and for my praise will I refrain from thee, that I cut thee not
off; and again, the second and third time, Ezekiel. 36. 12.
for mine own sake, even for mine own sake will I do it; and in another
place, not for your sakes be it known unto you, will I do this, but for mine
own holy Name sake: this Name of God is that strong hold which Zachariah, the
Prophet directs Zach. 9. 12.
unto, in times of danger; and that Tower whereunto the righteous Prove. 18. ^0.
fly and are safe, as Solomon tells us.

But then though our selves indeed be as nothing in this case, yet our miseries
(which are great upon us) may be said to have an influence upon Gods pity to
stir him toward us; for the oppression of the poor and sighing of the
needy, I will Psalm. 12. 5
arise (says the Lord) and will set him in safety from him that puffs at
him; And again, because they have called thee an Jer. 30. 17.
outcast, I God calls himself the gatherer of the outcasts, Esaias 56. 8.
will restore health unto thee, and heal thy wound; thus have they called us,
thus have they made us, and that for Gods name sake, which makes the more for
us; yea, and yet they give God thanks for their success against us, as if he
approved of their injuries to us, and this is further also to our advantage, as
the Spirit tells us in the Prophet, Your Brethren that hated Esaias. 66. 5.
you and cast you out, for my name sake, said, let the Lord be glorified, but
he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed, as if he had said, the
sooner for that.

And to assure us of this, we have a further argument yet, scil. the engagement
of his Gospel with us, which is as deeply interessed in our sufferings as we
our selves are, and does as equally need deliverance; yea, that is likely to
abide under disgrace and obloquy, if the cause we are persecuted for, be not
supported; nay, if our enemies meet not with Confusion in their way, Christ's
whole life and carriage as well as his Doctrine will fall under suspicion and
condemnation by their prevailing; it is well known that his name is pretended in
all their proud, rebellious, butcherly opinions and proceedings, as if he had
given some precept or example for such doctrines and doings; and had
discountenanced that low way of humility, obedience, meekness, and love to
Brethren, yea, to enemies, which we maintain and suffer for: But Christ's
Gospel is his glory; it is his word which he is resolved to magnify above all
things; and Mat. 28. 18.
to vindicate the Honor of that, his Father (to whom he cannot be unfaithful)
has committed all Authority and power into his hand; wherefore we need not
fear, though we are now down, we shall rise again; though we sit in darkness,
yet the Lord Mich. 7. 8. etc.
shall be a light unto us; he will plead our cause, he shall execute Judgment
for us.

Yea, and that for his Justice sake also, for Christ is King still, for all
this, and Judge of all the earth, and his office is, to help them to right that
suffer wrong, to punish ill doers: yea, his delights are to confound the
crafty, and to throw down the proud and lofty: Blood guiltiness he hareth; how
was Cain branded for it, and cursed? How were Simeon and Levi in Genesis 4. 11.
etc.
their posterity scattered, but for one bloody act in heat and Gen 49. 6.
anger? they had not yet arrived at, studied or reiterated murder. Rebellion
he abhors, and rather then that shall go unpunished, God will create a new
thing, the earth shall Number. 16. 30. 31.
open her mouth, and swallow up Corah and his Companions, 2 Samuel 17. 23.
if Moses cannot master them: and rather then Absalom and 2 Samuel 18. 9
Achitophel shall escape their due demerits, the one shall hang himself, and
his hair the other; let David do his best to save his sons life, he shall
not have his will; for God is King above him, and has decreed that Justice
shall be done upon all Traitors: Treachery and falsehood his soul loatheth,
and therefore has ordained, it shall cut its own throat, rather then want an
Executioner, and be the cause of its own ruin; in deed what was never true in
it self, cannot be long true unto it self: Ephraim and Manasseh may be both
against Judah, Esa. 9. 21
but before they have done, they will be as much against each other; nay,
rather then fail, Egyptian shall be against Egyptian, Esa. 19. 2.
falsehood will find enemies amongst those of its own House and herd; there may
be a Conspiracy in it, but no true concord; for it is only righteousness and
peace that can kiss each other: The strongest firebrarnds in ill, are like the
firebrarnds of Sampsons Judge. 15. 4.
Foxes, knit but in the tails, not heads, nor hearts; how sure in the end are
they to burn their own knots asunder? No Confederacy (says God) nor
Association without me shall stand; take Council together it shall come to
naught; and gird your selves Esa. 8. 9. 10. etc.
as strongly as you can, you shall without fail be broken in pieces; the zeal
and justice of the Lord of Hosts will bring this to pass for us. He has done
the like for his people in times past, and he will not leave his ancient
custom, which may bring to our thoughts another Argument of assurance.

It has been Gods wont when he has beat his child, to burn the rod; Babylon
the Hammer of the whole earth, was at Jer. 50. 23.
length broken. Ashurs glory and greatness, though some Esa 13. and 14. c.
years in growing, was consumed in a moment; the rod of Gods anger is also the
object of his indignation; the instruments of his Esaias 10. 5.
judgment escape not his fury, the dreggs of the cup fall out to be their
portion, I will take the dreggs of the cup of my fury out Esaias 51. 22 23.
of thy hand (says the Lord to his people, with whom he had begun) and will
put it into the hand of them that afflict thee, and have said to thy soul, bow
down that we may go over; The Psalm. 125. 3.
rod of the wicked may be upon the back of the righteous, but it shall not rest
there, namely for ever.

But perhaps you will say, when will God do this? How long? How long shall we
stay before we have experience of it? Himself says, after a little while mine
indignation shall cease toward Es. 10. 25.
thee, and mine anger shall end in their destruction. God does all things in
due time, he gives rain to the earth, food to man and fury to his enemies, and
all in due serson; to me belongs vengeance and recompense (says the Lord)
their foot shall slide Deuteronomy. 32. 35.
in due time, for the day of their calamity is at hand, and the things that
shall come upon them make have; every thing is most beautiful in its season,
and a work of this nature is then in season, and most beautiful, when Gods
hand is so clearly seen in it, that all men may confess and say, verily it was
his doing.

But what are the signs of that season? I Will name four, and so leave you,

1. When Humane helps are gone, and no power left among men; no reserve of
succor to be looked for at their hand from whence formerly it was wont to
come; no second causes to be seen, then will God arise and judge for us: so we
are told, Deuteronomy. 32. 36.
The Lord shall judge for his people, and repent himself for his servants when
he sees their power is gone, and trere is none shut up or left; and therefore
we are advised in another place, Esaias 50. 10.
when we are in darkness and see no light, then to trust in the Name of the
Lord, and to stay our selves upon our God David 1 Samuel 30. 6.
did so* and found the comfort of it, 1 Samuel 30. ^. etc. God's use is, not to
reach out his hand, till Peter be almost sunk, but then he fails not.

2. When the wicked that pretended to us, but were not of us, are scattered,
and destroyed, when they that envyed at us, maliced us, and abused us, because
we durst not be so vile as they, to run with them into the like excess of
riot, but were more affected then they would be with our Kings sorrows, and
Gods judgments upon our Nation: when these (I say) are come to nothing, and so
likely to have no part of the glory of the work, when done; then will God
himself appear for us; and this is intimated to us (as was noted once before)
in Esaias 26. where Esaias 26. 11. 13.
speaking of such a profane and wicked crew, who when God's hand was lifted up
in judgment, would not see it, nay, they maliced and envye^, as it seems,
those that did see it, and laid it to heart; but the fire of thine enemies, O
God, shall devour them for it, says the Prophet: i. e. rage shall continue
powerful even in their hands whom thou hate, till those other wretches are
consumed, or blown to nothing, and then it follows, O Lord, thou will ordain
peace for us, yea, thou shall then work all our works for us.

3. When the sin of the enemy is high, and himself higher in his own opinion
then ere before; when he puffs at his opposites, as too far below him for
to reach him, and promising himself security, thinks the work done, dares
affront God, his Word, his Name and Glory, and profane what ever has his mark
upon it, then will the Lord rouse up himself against him; It is Psalm. 119. 126.
time for thee Lord to work; for they have made void thy Law, says Dan. 5. 3.
5.
David. When Balthazar was bold with those Vessels appointed to holy use, the
handwriting appeared against him: when Rabshakeh and his Master were so bold
with Gods name, as to entitle that to their villainies, the Lord put an Hook
into their noses, Es. 36. and 37. ca.
and a bridle into their lips soon after: when the proud Philistine disdained
David's littleness, his own ruin was nigh at hand: when those Amalekites that
took Ziglag, were eating and drinking, 1 Samuel 17.
and dividing the spoils, and dancing for joy of their great booties, they
lost all again upon the sudden, and their lives withal: and the Apostle
speaks it positively of all ungodly and self-promising men, that when they
shall say peace and safety, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2.
then sudden destruction comes on them, as travail upon a woman with child,
which they shall not escape; yea, the day of the Lord shall come upon them, as
a Thief in the night, suddenly, unexpectedly, when they are at rest, and look
for quiet.

4. When the Stomachs of Gods afflicted people be down, and Es. 10. 6. 12.
they not only made like mire in the streets, but contented with it, in as much
as they see Gods hand in it: Behold (says the Esaias 5. 21. 23
Lord) I have taken the cup of trembling out of thy hand, and thou shall no
more drink of it, but I will put it into the hand of them that afflict thee,
and they shall drink of the dreggs thereof, even they which have said to thy
soul bow down, that we may go over, and thou have laid thy body as the ground,
as the street to them that went over; when the people of this Land have been
content to bow their backs so low as under the name of Delinquents, meekly and
patiently to buy over at the hands of the Rebels those Lands and Inheritances
left them by their Fathers, then may the Lord make good his word unto the
peeled and oppressed people of this woeful Nation.

In a word, as when the wise Parent has brought his child to kiss the rod,
then he gives over beating him and burns that; so perhaps will God deal with
us, beat us with the rod till he has brought us for to kiss it; and this we
do, when with appeased spirits we can supplicate him to pardon them that have
thus abused us; when we have laid aside all thoughts of revenge toward them,
all purposes of crying quit for quit with them, if God restore us and bring
them into our condition.

Wherefore friends and fellow sufferers, we now see what we are to do, even to
resolve by Gods grace, if we live and thrive, not to do to them as they have
done to us; but to return rather good for evil, for thus it becomes us to do,
as we are Christ's members, nos pati poenas decet, non esse poenas, we must be
ambitious to be conditioned in this case, like that good Archbishop Cranmer, of
whom it was said, Do my Lord of Canterbury a shrewd turn, and you shall have
him your friend ever after; but of all people, we must take heed of being like
our enemies, of whom it may be said on the contrary, Do them a good turn, and
you shall have them your enemies ever after; their custom you know has been,
when we have fallen into their power, to interpret the same to be by Gods
providence, to the end that they might torment, mischief, and abuse us, which
they, or some of them have not failed to do in full measure; and when they on
the other side have fallen into ours, and fared well, to insult thereupon, and
say, no thank to us therefore, for we would fain have done them hurt, but God
would not suffer us, but restrained us, by holding our hands whether we would
or no, and delivered them from us, to the end they may do God service in
punishing us afterward, if they can but get us: Now perhaps they may be of the
same opinion still, when hereafter they shall be at our mercy; but we must look
to God and not to them, remembering always though they deserve no favor from
us, yet God deserves to be obeyed by us, and for his sake we must show mercy:
we Genesis 50. 15.
have heard of Joseph's kindness to his brethren, that had evil thoughts to
him-ward, we must resolve to do like him, and if the conditions of Joseph be
in our carriage, the blessing of Joseph shall be our portion; this must be our
resolution if we live.

And if we die, by their despightful hands, before God does turn the wheel upon
them, we must resolve to conclude our days as Christ our Savior did, with
prayers in our mouths for them, which it may be (through Gods working) may have
a like effect after our death, as Christ's had, to the conversion of some of
them; the conversion of those 3000. Act. 2. is held to be a fruit of Christ's
prayer upon the Cross; and Saul's conversion, of Stephens prayer at his death;
so who knows, but our meekness, our patience, and our prayers at such a time,
may be effectual to a like purpose? even to draw some of our persecuting
Countrymen from their bloody and rebellious way, into the paths of Christ and
of his Gospel; yea, whether we live or die, if we can do Christ and the King
service no other way, let us resolve and endeavor to pray down their and our
enemies by praying for them: And by all means while breath is in us, let us
have a care so to live, as we may still credit our righteous cause, and as
becomes those that are designed to slaughter for Jesus sake, and for the
Doctrine Act. 2. and 3. cap.
which he left us; Holy blood (believe it) will prove of harder digestion to
them, then profane; that they had killed the holy and the just one, was that
which afterward pierced the hearts of these men's elder Brethren when time was;
I say no more: But, the Lord strengthen and guide us all in our Christian and
Loyal way by his grace and spirit; that though we be a people robbed, spoiled,
snared in holes, hid in prison-houses, driven to banishment, and exposed for a
prey; yet we may walk before our God in all humility and well-pleasing, to the
restoration of his Gospells honor, the inward comfort of our own spirits in
the midst of miseries, and to the conviction and shame of our unnatural
Contrymen, who seek to take away our lives also from us.

Soli Deo Gloria. Amen, Amen.
May 26. 1646.
A POSTSCRIPT to the READER.
THis Book was prepared (as now you have it) and might have seen the light,
within less then the compass of that year, wherein the Libell (which it
Answers) was first published, had there been at hand the convenience of a
Press, and strength to bring forth: But it is no small advantage, which the
enemies have, against Truth and the King, that with them is both liberty and
ability to vent what they please, whereas with us is neither: Had we but half
the like helps, encouragements, and powers, which they have had, the world
should see that the King has Subjects, and the Truth Defenders.

There has been a further alteration of Affairs (to the worse on the Kings
side, since this Book was written (as may be collected from many passages
therein:) and diverse particulars concerning the enemies deportment, here
expressed, have so fallen out, as foreshewn (for indeed it is no difficult
matter, for any man acquainted with their spirits to fore-speak their doings:)
Had there appeared any change in them to the better; nay, had their growth but
promised a probability of more Christianity and duty, in their future, then
has been in their past Actions, or then was here prognosticated of them, this
publication perhaps, (having been thus delayed) had been still suspended;
though in very deed, there is no reason, why for such a cause it should have
been quite stifled; seeing that their Libell (which it confuteth) is divulged,
printed, reprinted, and still sold, to the Kings darkening and defamation:
Besides many other scandalous and vile Pamphlets have been and are daily sent
forth on purpose, to damp his Luster, and to stain his Glory; yea, and
translated too they are, into other Languages, that he might appear deformed
and spotted to the eye of Foreign Nations; which because they have not been
Answered with a like industry on our parts, Strangers have thought, yea, and
affirmed, that nothing could be said for him, because nothing was; ( scil. to
their capacity,) we have (say they) read in our own languages many Books
against him, but none in his behealfe; it must be acknowledged in very deed,
that this way the enemies have been more diligent in defaming, then we have
been in defending the King; though in our own tongue there has been abundance
written in his justification and to their detection.

The Protestants of other Countries unto whom the Kings bosom was always open
in their distress, toward whom his bowels always yerned, and for whose
relief his commands went often forth, to all Churches in his Kingdoms to make
Collections; how have they (at least too many of them) by means of those
industrious Lies and Libels, opened their mouths and stretched forth their
tongues against him? And how are we (that suffer with him and for him, or
rather for the Truth maintained by him) esteemed of, in our banishment amongst
them? are we any other but objects of scorn and taunting to them? 'twas our
delight (but 'twas our duty, and our work is with the Lord) to obey God and him
in contributing to their necessities in the day of their visitation; but they
take pleasure in this of ours to wound our very wounds, and to enlarge our
sorrows, yea, every way to help forward our affliction; at what a distance have
they looked upon us, because the hand of God is out against us? what bitter
words have they darted at us, and which is to our great grief, against the
Sacred Person of our Sovereign? with what violence and confidence do they
ignorantly undertake to justify the false reports of his enemies against him?
Nay, how is our Church it self. (the late glory of Christendom, and of the
whole Earth) despised and slighted by them, in this time of our persecution?
The Papists on the one side, scoffingly ask us, where is now your God? where is
your Church become? you may now freely boast of its Invisibility (if you
please) you have a ground for it, etc. And our Brethren on the other side,
(that outwardly profess the same Faith with us, and from whom we expected
better) they act Edoms part as reproachfully upon us; crying out against our
Church, and the Government thereof, down with it, down with it, even to the
ground; For they (the Protestants of France in special) are willingly
persuaded, by those Letters and Pamphlets sent them out of England, that the
Professors of the true Religion here (before this Parliament begun) were kept
in a like underly condition, as themselves are in their own Country; though
those French Congregations allowed in England might in their gratitude to our
King, have given them a better and more true information, had they so pleased;
But upon this conceit they in France apprehend this War here against the
King, to be undertaken only to recover Liberty to worship God in the right
manner; that is to say, after the French Mode or Discipline (as they think at
least, and are made to believe) and most people loving their own ways and
fashions best, (though less perfect then their neighbors) cannot but wish
good luck to all such as are stooping toward them and rejoice for them; though
we believe it would be wisdom in them to beware that their Jubilation at the
prevailing of the English Rebels, does not work a jealousy and suspicion
against themselves in the hearts of their own Princes; our prayers are and
shall be that God would not lay their inhumanities against us to their charges;
we know the Lord was sore displeased at the Heathen, for their unkindnesse
Zach. 1. 14.
to his people in their affliction; and we believe he cannot be well pleased to
see Christians so conditioned; O Obad. 12.
says God to Edom; Thou should not have looked with pleasures on the day of
thy Brother, in the day that he became a stranger, neither should thou have
rejoiced over the Children of Judah, in the day of their destruction, neither
should thou have spoken proudly in the day of distress. That speech of God
to Moab is worthy the observation of all that are at ease, when other Nations
are in trouble; Take Council and be well advised, let mine outcasts Esaias 16.
3.
dwell with thee Moab, make thy shadow as the night, in the midst of the
noonday; be thou a Covert to them, from the face of the spoyler hide them,
and bewray not him that wandereth. But Moab cast these words behind her, and
was so far from comforting the distressed Israelites, that she derived at
them in their banishment, Jer. 48. 27.
and skipt for joy to see them miserable; and therefore within three years
after, Moabs own self was in as woeful and deplorable a condition, which (as
appears by the two Prophets) Read Esa. 16. and Jer. 48.
was laid upon her for a punishment of that her unkindnesse; Had she afforded
shelter, she had not her self (at least so soon) been put to seek it, Deus
fratribus nostris (Ecclesiae Gallicanae praesertim) avertat omen.

But probably these sins of our Brethren of other Churches, will in a great
measure be imputed partly to the malice of our enemies: for impoysoning their
minds by their Lies and Pamphlets, and partly to our negligence (if it may be
so called) who have not been as equally active, in giving them the true
information of things in their own Language from the beginning.

Wherefore I wish that now at length, all those who love the Truth, and are
acquainted with our English Affairs, and have a skill in foreign Languages,
would consider seriously of this particular; and as they are Christians, not
permit those, for whom Christ dyed, thus to perish in their Errors for want of
knowledge; Thou shall in any wise (says the Lord) rebuke thy brother Lev. 19.
17.
(when faulty or misled) and not suffer sin upon him; yea, I would desire
all Loyal Englishmen to whom God has given the tongue and pen of the Learned,
that they would employ their Talents at this time this way, in the vindicating
of Truth, and the King, and so manifest their bowels of compassion toward
their dear and native Country; for undoubtedly so long as our Sovereigns name
lies thus imprisoned under obloquy, we his people and the whole Nation shall
lie burdened under misery; (never since the birth of that grand scandalous
Remonstrance, (which as an usher made way to all the reproachful Libells and
Sermons, that have been vented since) did this Kingdom enjoy one day of
felicity:) The Prince's Honor is the Subjects glory, and so ought to be
esteemed; it is that Majesty, that beam of Divinity which God has stamped upon
Him, and commanded us to maintain and reverence in Him; it is to be regarded by
us above ten thousands of us; yea certainly, he that preferres not the
advancement and illustration of it, before his own pofits and safety and all he
has, deserves not the name of the Kings friend, of a Loyal Subject, nor of a
good Christian.

Many think and say, that writing will do no good, enough is writ already; for
people are given up to believe lies, they are willingly deceived, and even
hardened against the knowledge of the truth. Perhaps all are not, but were they
so, how came they into this condition? was it not by those untruths which have
bin Published and Preached to them? Surely, by defaming the King these
mischiefs have been raised, this Rebellion against him has been woven up; is
it not therefore the more probable, that the same may be unreaven again by a
full Vindication of the Kings name, and a frequent ditection of these evil
workers? What is not effected at first, may be done at last, and by others,
which is not by some, In the morning sow thy seed, and in the Eccles. 11. 6.
evening hold not thy hand, thou know not whether may prosper, this or that;
if we persevere with meekness to inform the contrary-minded, 2 Timothy 2. 26.
God may at length give light and repentance to them: This has been wont to be
Gods way, both of converting the ignorant, and confounding the obstinate; and
the truth is, we have nothing else now left us, but tongues to pray for our
King, and pens to write for him; but the Apostle 2 Cor. 12. 10.
tells us, that when we are weakest in our selves or to outward appearance,
then are we strongest, scil. in regard of the neernesse of Gods blessing; his
power is most apparent at such a time, he 1 Cor. 1. 27.
chooses the weakest to confound the mightiest; poor Luthers tongue and pen
(when things were in a low condition) did Christ and his Gospel more service
against the Pope, then all the swords that have been drawn against him or his
Religion have done ever since.

Doubtless there be thousands of honest and Religious souls, that in the
simplicity of their spirits, are hooked into this black Rebellion, by the craft
of others, to whom if the wickedness of the scope, aims, and actions of their
leaders were well laid open and proved, they would hate them with a perfect
hatred, and rather lose all they have lent them then proceed one foot further
in their way with them; Nay, who knows but the greater part of their Soldiers
and men of war, (in many of whom (to speak truth) the sparks of Ancient
English valor are apparent) if they were at length but well informed, might
quickly turn the points of their swords the right way, and so redeem their
lost glory? without all question discourses of this nature will be means to
rouse up and awaken those truly generous and noble Spirits that have been always
loyal and are still alive; to consider more feelingly yet of the condition of
their King, of their Country, and of the Royal Progeny, those sweet and
heart-conquering Princes (who are all now either in banishment, or in bondage)
and thereupon, to enterpize in their behalf, some such high and worthy Acts as
may eternize their own names, and convey them with an honorable mention to
Posterity.

Or however, were we certain of it, (as we are not) that these of this Age on
the one side, (who received not the Truth, or 2 These. 2. 10.
retained not the love thereof, when they had it) are given up to such strong
delusions, that they cannot be recovered out of Satan's snare: and those on the
other side, were not likely to be quickened by such endeavors; yet our duty is
to have respect to after Ages, and to prevent, that the spirits of Posterity be
not stained with a false opinion of our King, as doubtless they also are like
to be, by those Books and Libels of the enemy conveyed unto them, unless as
much or more of ours be left too, to present him in his true character to their
knowledge. Without question, we that are now alive shall never escape the censure
of succeding Generations, ( viz. to have been too basely sluggish and
faint-heared) if such transcendent villainies should be acted in our days
against our King, our Religion, and so many of us, and many of us should not be
found to have laid open the enemies baseness to their faces; nay, when they
that come after us shall apply themselves to write the History of these our
times, how will they be able truly to depaint these superlative Hypocrites in
their due colors, if plenty of our Books be not extant to this purpose, to
hint the notice of their true conditions.

Let no man therefore plead that writing will do no good, as if silence could
do more, or had done any; I know indeed that much has been writ already; more
a great deal then has or may be read; for the enemy has set forth many
threats and orders against such as shall sell or buy the same; and hereupon
many are discouraged from writing more. And perhaps too, many have feared to
Publish what they have further written, lest they prove obstructers to a
desired Peace, and so do damage to the Public, in regard of the enemies
height and greatness; but sure these men know not the spirits of this kind of
enemies, with whom we have to do; who are such as will neither know nor own
the way of peace, but having made themselves Esaias 59. 8.
crooked ways to walk in, as the Prophet speaks, have no judgment in their
goings; their condition is ( Satan-like) to triumph most, where least opposed,
and to be most vexatious, where they have least occasion; resist the Devil and
he will Jam. 4. 7.
fly; so hold these at open defiance, let them know you scorn Psalm. 15. 4.
and contemn them (for all their greatness) as vile persons; set the glass of
Gods word before their eyes, make them know themselves, and let the World know
them, it is the only way to make them calmer, and to bring them into order:
whereas, say nothing against them, and they will proclaim, that it is because we
have nothing to say, and that our consciences tell us they are in the right,
and so we are silent against our wills. Surely the best and most Christian
charity that can be shown them, is to reach unto them the proper fruit of their
own ways to feed upon; for could they be but filled with shame, they might Psalm.
83. 16.
be brought to seek God: And suppose they turn again and rend us for our love,
and use us the worse for our endeavoring to make them better, what new thing
shall they do? did not the Pharisees even the same in their dealings with our
Savior? and shall not they by doing so, confirm more fully to the world, that
to be true which we have written of them? should they chase us up and down the
Kingdom with their bloud-hounds to destroy us, would it not become them
better, to hunt fleas, then to hunt Kings? nor could it be to the advantage of
them at all, or of their cause; but of the truth rather, and of us, if they
should prevail against us, even to kill us upon this occasion; that which we
maintain is not the first of Gods truths, that has been sealed with blood;
some think that every of his commands at one time or other must be so
confirmed, and why may not the fifth Commandment at this time, as well as the
second was in the days of Queen Mary? to every thing there is an appointed
Eccles. 3. 1.
season.

Whosoever is in the straight and narrow way, must look for oppositions and
discouragements; but faith which over-commeth the world, is able to carry
through all them; Christ was opposed in all he did, (as much as possible he
could be by man;) he met with contradictments in all his intendments and
undertakings, even from friends sometimes as well as enemies; Master spare thy
self, says Peter to him; the like must we expect Math. 16. 22.
if we follow him; but should not this rather evidence the divinity and justice
of our way unto our own consciences, then be any case of damping to our
spirits? Non nobis nati sumus, 1 Cor. 6. 19.
we are not our own, nor must we be men of private spirits, specially in these
times; Nay, we must take pains and be content, not to see the fruit of our
labors; but that others should reap the benefit of our sowings, when we are
gone. After the death of Christ and his Apostles, their Doctrine and Writings
did most good in the world; and so perhaps may ours, when we have ceased to be
and are no more seen. God has promised his blessing, first or last to honest
endeavors; but we must tarry Gods time.

Wherefore you (in the first place) to whom God has given inward abilities, up
and be doing with the same, and (be confident) the Lord will be with you;
Remember how they that employed 1 Chro. 22. 16.
their gifts, had more comfort at the reckoning day, then he had who had hid
his talent in a napkin.

You, secondly, that have outward strength, be not backward to assist the weak
in bringing to light unable births; give none occasion to think or say, those
that had or look to have the greatest share in the Kings happiness, when the
sun shines upon him, are least regardfull of his Honor, when the times are
dark and cloudy.

You, thirdly, that refuse to further or countenance works of this nature, I
beseech you also do but disdain to hinder.

And you, (lastly) who ere you be, that look for salvation from the Lord, rest
your selves in him, wait patiently for him, fret not because of evil doers,
nor be you envious against the workers of iniquity, Isal. 37. 1. 7.
for their present prosperity in their way; they shall erelong Verse. 2.
be cut down like the grass, and wither as the green herb; be you in Prove.
23. 17.
the fear of the Lord all the day long, and be certain your expectation shall
not be cut off: He that testifies these things says, surely Pro. 24. 19, etc.
I come, I come quickly, Amen, even so come Lord Jesus; The Grace Rev. 22. 20,
21.
of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, Amen.

The End.
The Contents of the chief particulars discoursed of in this Book.
PREFACE. The Reasons. 1. Of the Authors undertaking this work, and at this
time. 2. Of his special zeal against the sins of this faction, which he
opposes. 3. Of his prayers for their persons. 4. Of his former intentions to
conceal his name. Sect. I. OF the supposed Authors of the Libell. Of the
Authorizers thereof, and their special Order: How fit the same should be
recalled; A president propounded to that purpose. A serious expostulation with
them about the same, and of their maintaining a base fellow to deride and
scoff at their Sovereign in his affliction. page I. Sect. II. Of the
pretended end of publishing the Libell; the true end thereof hinted. Their
blasphemy against God noted. How these Letters of the King might have been made
use of as Evidences of truth and Loyalty. Of what stock and lineage the
Authors of the Libell discovered themselves to be. Of their subtilty, and of
that spirit and meekness which they boast of. How aptly for themselves they
allege the Example mentioned by S. Jude. page II. Sect. III. The Kings great
and true affection to his people Evidenced. How far diverse of them that call
themselves, His Great Council, are from proving themselves his good
Counselors. The ten Rules or Precepts whereby they have proceeded. Of the
Language and Titles which they complain of, and how truly the name Rebel
belongs unto them. The true cause of their great grief and sorrow so often
mentioned: An impudent Charge against the King propounded by the Libellers.
page 23. Sect. IV. The Nature of their Charge opened. Their villainous and
bloody Scope therein, clearly Evidenced, and proved. How perfectly in their
Tenants they hold with the Jesuits in the points of King-killing and
King-deposing, fully declared. page 34. Sect. V. The falsity and injustice of
the said Charge against the King manifested in all the particulars. Who they
are that sit in the Scorners Chair. The Enemies reasons and ends of Charging
the King with their own Conditions. page 49. Sect. VI. Of the Kings Error in
following evil Councillors, and who they were: His Majesty scorned at by the
Libellers for his tenderness of Conscience, and hopes in Gods Justice. The
folly and falsehood of the Libellers Charge against Strafford and Canterbury.
The Enemies acquit the King of having a voluntary hand in Straffords death.
They hint the right Reason of his withdrawing from Westminster. page 56. Sect.
VII. What that Liberty is, which the pretended Parliament, do maintain: And
what that Religion may be which they are about to set up: Reasons to prove it
may be the Popish: Reasons to show it may be the Turkish. Six Arguments to
prove it cannot be the Christian Protestant. page 67. Sect. VIII. Of the
feigned Combination against the Parliament. Our Judgment of the Papists, and
of their assisting the King. Our abhorment of the Cruelties of the Irish. How
they are out-gone by the English Rebels: our Opinion of the Court-faction: of
what Flock we profess our selves to be: How the Libellers and their side call
themselves the more believing sort of people. page 77. Sect. IX. The slander
laid upon us, to be Enemies to Parliaments and Reformation Confuted. Of
pretended Miracles, Revelations, and new Lights. The taking the Kings Cabinet
in Battle, no Miracle. The Libellers Argument to prove an impossibility of
forgery in their Parliament. page 85. Sect. X. Of that perspecuity and Modesty
which the Libellers boast to be in their own Annotations. Their pretty
confident way of persuading all men to be of their Opinions. Their Reasons why
they did not Publish all they had against the King. page 94. Sect. XI.
Censuring Superiors unlawful. Why the Enemies must continue to slander the
King. How easy a thing it is for wicked men to deprave the best writings: Of
the Kings integrity and goodness: And of Englands happiness under him. The
maine Particulars of offense under his Government nominated: No just matter of
blame from them, can now be objected to His Majesty. page 102. Sect. XII. The
Adversaries industry to find things unbeseeming the King in his Letters. The
Letters freed from any such thing. Certain Christian considerations propounded
to the Readers, to Evidence the same: Of the Rebels pertinacy in their
Rebellious way; their endeavors that the Kings promises might neither be
believed, nor performed. page 111. Sect. XIII. Of their 3. Propositions at
Uxbridge. 4. Pretenses for their Abolition of Episcopacy. 4. True Reasons of
that their impious requests. page 123. Sect. XIV. Their unreasonablenesse in
desiring the Militia to be in their sole disposal. 4. Vain pretenses for it.
4. True grounds of this their demand: How sinful and dangerous it might be for
the King to grant it. page 135. Sect. XV. Of their Vindicating the Irish
Rebels: how fully they have done it already in one sense: and how glad we
should be if themselves would go and do it in the other: their true intent in
that demand opened. page, 157. Sect. XVI. Of the Enemies late sufferings; of
their strange patience: of their extraordinary great success, the true grounds
thereof. Success no argument of a good cause. The wicked have been always wont
to use that argument. page 156. Sect. XVII. Another charge against the King,
confuted: of clandestine proceedings: The Kings condemning all that be
Protestants at Oxford, a most impudent and malicious slander. His Toleration of
Idolatry, another. The occasion of the Kings promising liberty of conscience to
Papists. The reasonableness of that promise at that time, and upon that
occasion. The objection of the Kings former resolution to the contrary
answered: as also his promise not to abolish the laws against them. page 174.
Sect. XVIII. The King granting indemnity to the murderous Irish another
slander. The necessity and reasons of making peace with the Irish at that time.
The conditions upon which that peace was to be made, this Act not contradictive
to any of his former expressions against their detestable doings. The vanity of
their charge against the King, for going in a close trading way. Two sufficient
evidences of his Majesty's sincere and constant affection to the Protestant
Religion. The whole charge against the King, most truly retorted upon the
objecters. page 185. Sect. XIX. Of the enemies malicious devises to scandalize
the King, with favoring the Irish Rebellion detected and confuted. The Kings
requiring secrecy of the Queen and Ormond in the matters writ to them
justified. The Rebels blasphemy against Gods Providence, and in asking Gods
blessing upon their Libell, noted. page 193. Sect. XX. What good use might have
been made of the Kings letters. Of the faults laid to the Queens charge;
specially in loving her Husband. page 198. Sect. XXI* Of the Kings fault for
loving his wife. The manifest and m^^cious falsifications and perversions of
diverse of the Kings e^pressio^s to his Queen, noted. page 207. Sect. XXII. Of
the Kings fault in laboring or indevouring to uphold Monarchy. His Majesty's
soliciting the King of Denmark to this purpose no whit contradictive to his
former resolutions of not calling in foreign aid. page 214. Sect. XXIII. The
Libellers Cavils at the word Mongrill Parliament, at the Commissioners at the
Treaty at Uxbridge, and at the Kings pawning his Jewels, answered. His
Majesty's affection and goodness to his subjects (for want of other matters)
objected as a fault against him by these Libellers. page 220. Sect. XXIV. The
story of the Rebels unchristian behavior toward their Sovereign, and his
meek and gracious carriage toward them, since the beginning of these troubles
related by themselves; and their impudency therein noted. page 224. Sect. XXV.
Their pretense of bringing Delinquents to punishment, made a ground of the war:
the King acknowledged by his enemies to be on the defensive part. His Majesty's
good opinion a long time of the Parliament objected as a fault against him by
themselves: The King makes no war against his Parliament evidenced. This
Conspiracy of Traitors at Westminster no true Parliament, fully proved. The
conclusion of the answer to the Libell. page 229. Sect. XXVI. A true Parallel
between the sufferings of our Savior and our Sovereign, in diverse special
particulars. page 241. Sect. XXVII. A serious and brotherly discourse to the
seduced and oppressed Commons of this nation, their dangerous condition
related, diverse special and necessary considerations propounded to their
thoughts, to persuade them to desist from their present ill way. Their
objection of keeping their Oath and Covenant to the pretended Parliament
answered. page 257. Sect. XXVIII. A conscientious and home discourse, to the
pretended Parliament at Westminster; who are eviden^ed to be neither Patriots
to their Country, wisemen, nor good men. Their Religion discovered to be nec
una, nec vera, nec bona. page 274. Sect. XXIX. A consolatory speech to all the
Loyal hearted that suffer for conscience sake in these times. Arguments to
assure them of Gods help in due time. Four marks to know the approach of that
time: how they are to demean themselves in the mean time, living and dying.
page 296. Postscript. The reason why this book was not published sooner. The
necessity and benefit of writing books of this nature, with an exhortation
thereunto. page 305.
The End.

