A VINDICATION OF COLONEL SANDYS His Honor and Loyalty: from A DECLARATION
pretended to be set forth by him at Worcester October 11. 1642.

Which is here also republished with it.



Printed Anno M. DC. XLII.

The Declaration of Col. EDWYN SANDYS, in Vindication of himself from those
calumnious Aspersions cast upon him by the Lord Falkland, and Secretary
Nicholas.
Published and subscribed with his own hand at the Randevouze at Worcester,
October. 11. 1642. in the presence of Sergeant Major Berry, Thomas Cox, Doctor of
Physic, Captain Walter Long; Captain Robert Long; Lyonell Copeley, Muster
master General; John Rushworth Clerk, Assistant to the Commons House of
Parliament.
IT pleases God yet to detain me in that condition, that my pen, and not my
sword must vindicate me from the aspersions, which the Letters of the Lord
Falkland and Secretary Nicholas have cast on my Reputation, and fidelity in
that cause, in which I was lately, and still stand engaged. Both these persons
charge me that I should say, That death did not so much trouble me, as that I
had endeavored to defend so bad a cause, which I was driven unto, as well by
my own ambition, as by persuasion of other men; and that I wished that all the
Actions of the Parliaments Forces might hereafter be unsuccessefull; and
especially, that I should desire God and the King to forgive me this great
sin of Rebellion, etc. They that know me well, know that I have not so much
vanity, as to think any discourse necessary for my defense in this case; yet
that I may stand clear, as well in the thoughts of strangers as of my friends,
I thought fit to render this account to the world. The apprehension of death
never hitherto so nearly touched me, but that if God shall once restore me to
my former strength, I shall by his help with as much alacity, and I hope
courage, endeavor to defend, and maintain with my dearest blood, this so good
a cause, as ever I was at first engaged in it. Not my Ambition prompted me
unto it, but a legitimate and ardent desire of advancing that cause, which I
conceive honors the meanest of them that are employed therein; nor was I
drawn into this business by any Persuasions, but such as were backed by the
best of Arguments, the maintaining of the true Religion, the honor and
security of my Prince, the Rights and Privileges of the Parliament; and the
whole Kingdom; such a success I pray for to the designs of the Parliament,
and in particular to this Army under the Command of his Excellency the Earl
of Essex, as by the best of men can possibly be desired, both on His Majesty's
Person, and this whole Kingdom. And lastly, I profess to the whole World,
that my conscience did when I was in the gieatest danger of death, and does
still clear me from the guilt of Rebellious or tumultuous thoughts, and that
the most puissant motive which carried me on to this Action, was loyalty to my
Sovereign, and love to my Religion and Country: They certainly thought me dead
when they writ these Letters, and by this means hoped to have served their
ends, upon some feeble unresolved spirits. But I wonder they should write there
are so many hundreds of our men slain, when it is most apparent, that the
number both of them that dyed in the place, and since, never amounted to thirty
persons; and their loss no way inferior to ours, considering their great
advantage of place, and that they were at least double for number. There was
indeed a Divine, who I think was the Deane of Worcester, who came to me to
the house where I was first taken up, and accompanied me to the place where I
now lie, he continually urged and pressed my conscience, how great a sin I
was guilty of in taking up arms against my Sovereign, I was not then in case
to entertain him in discourse, only at last answered him, I never had, nor
ever would take up Arms against my Sovereign, but ever should be ready to lay
my life, and whatsoever was dear unto me at His feet: of this judgment and
resolution I still am, and solemnly make this Protestation, in the same sense
I have here already declared, and according to the sense of the Parliament in
all their Declarations, of which I hope with Gods blessing upon my recovery to
give further testimony to the World, by the continued engagement of my life and
fortune, in this so just and honorable a cause.

EDWYN SANDYS.
At the Rendesvouze at Worcester, the 11. of October. 1642.
To Colonel Edwin Sandys.
Sir,
I have this very October to chanced upon a Printed Declaration, pretended to go
out under your name: the Title of it premising, A vindication of your self,
from some calumnious aspersions of my Lord Falkland, and Mr. Secretary
Nicholas. It will hardly obtain credit with men of free, and disingaged
understandings, that personages of so much trust and honor, should
over-lightly adventure their own fames, by imposing calumnies upon another. I
therefore little doubt, but that these honorable personages had their grounds
from some such good hands: as might either take up some part of the report from
your own mouth, or from some others whom they credited. Such as heard it (at
first or second hand) from those that visited you upon your bed at Worcester,
at such times as you felt more ease from your wounds, and more wounds from your
Conscience. For I cannot think, but that among those many visitants, you might
utter more of the same kind of remorses, then you did unto my self. But
leaving those honorable personages to the vindication of such particulars as
you charge upon them, in the general, I am induced to answer thus much for
them: for that to my self in pretense of your cousin Mr John Sandys, you were
so free and ingenuous in your acknowledgements and Confession.

The person of your Confessor, I perceive you have mistaken: by reason,
perhaps, of that Canonical coat, in which I visited your self, and such other
dying men, before you, as I could come at in the field, and time of battle;
but that mistake may be rectified at our next meeting. In the mean time, if
your memory were not then as weak as your body, and that you still continue in
the same ingenuity which I left you, you will not, cannot deny the generals,
and scope of these passages to be true, which you here find asserted: and which
upon my credit I will justify to the world; and if you please unto your self,
at our next meeting. What you shall here find goes under the name of a Minister
of Prince Ruperts: as the copy of it was at first given abroad. I had no time
to alter it, or saw I any cause to change any thing I had written in it.

Some Notes of the Conference betwixt Colonel Sandys, and a Minister of Prince
Ruperts.
THe Minister being met in the field by my Lord Andover, was advised to visit
Colonel Sandys, and to exhort him to repent of his sins; who finding the
wounded Colonel in a little house, presented unto him (among his other sins)
the unhappiness of his present condition, to suffer in so bad a cause; This
with some expressions of remorse he acknowledged, and withal professed, that
if it were to do again, he would never appear in it.

Then the Minister diswading the people of Worcester from stripping him,
contented one of them by taking off one of the Colonells spurs and giving
them to him; but with this condition, that he should carry up Master Sandys
his legs: and upon this consideration, that if so he did, the spurs would
then hurt the bearer. But the Colonel feeling the chair uneasy, the Minister
borrowed a sheet of the house to carry him into the Town. At all this was his
Cozen, Master John Sandys present, and with the Minister went all the way with
the Colonel, and housed him at the Green-Dragon in Worcester. There the
Minister left him for a while: Not long after came Sergeant Major Francklin to
the Colonel, and brought Master Catenby the Surgeon to dress him. To whom the
Colonel said, Woe, woe to evil Counsel, and happy are they that do not take
it; with other words to the like purpose, as the Sergeant Major told the
Minister at first: since which time the Surgeon has by word of mouth justified
it to the Minister. The Minister now returning, first put the Colonel in mind
of the haynousnesse of the sin of Rebellion, that it was as the sin of
Witchcraft; and that God had commanded, Thou shall not suffer a Witch to live,
which doom was now likely to fall upon him, for God had found him out in his
sin: He acknowledged himself to have fallen into the sin of Rebellion, and
that God was just in his Judgments; professing therewithal his sorrow and
remorse for it. Upon which the Minister returned; That herhaps if ever he
recovered the same arguments from others, and inconsiderateness in himself,
might again endanger to draw him to continue in his Rebellion: At which words,
a little heaving up his hand, he professed He would rather have it cut off,
then ever again lift it up against the King. Nor did he at this profession
make any mention at all of the Parliament; or conjoyne their cause with the
Kings. Indeed, said the Minister, you have no reason to appear against the
King, if you well considered the cause; and that His Majesty was but enforced
to take up defensive Arms for the Reformed Religion, His own Crown, the
Laws and Liberty of the Subject; And therefore there was much difference
betwixt the two causes of the war: these that suffered on the Kings side,
being a kind of Martyrs. Whereupon the Colonel acknowledged the Justness of
the Kings cause; and that he had observed a special blessing of God to go
along with it, by the extraordinary successes of it: To this the Minister
replied, Sir, I am witness to all these words of yours; but do you give me
leave to testify this repentance of yours unto the world? This he freely
desired him to testify, and asked God forgiveness: withal praying for the
King, and for a blessing upon his cause and proceedings.

The Minister then added, Sir, I have one sin more to press your conscience
with: Sir, you are descended from a Bishop, and your family has been raised
from the Church, therefore the spoil and outrage committed by you in
Canterbury Church, was more abominable in you then in another man. To which
with some quickness he replied, That it was much against his mind; and that
so soon as he heard what his men were doing, he ran among them with his
Pole-Axe to beat them off; until he had like to have been hewn in pieces by
them.

The Minister added, Sir, it uses to be required of men dying for their
offenses, to reveal something that may do right to the party wronged:
Wherefore, Sir, it would much ease your conscience, and make the King some part
of satisfaction, to discover the secret of the great design against him; Of
which, when by one or two earnest denyalls, he professed himself ignorant; The
Minister then desired him to discover what strength the Parliament Forces were
of: He said, he could not tell. How strong, said the Minister, are their Foot?
Not considerable, says he; Why Sir, said the Minister, you were present lately
at their Muster on Dunsmore-Heath, and could you neither by your own
observation, nor from the report of others, make judgment of their numbers?
Were they 8000, or 10000, or 16000? Neither, said the Colonel: not above 6000,
or 7000. How strong then are their Horse? Seventy Troops, said the Colonel:
At which the Minister making some doubt, and wonder. On my faith its true, said
he, its no time now to dissemble; you mean Dragooners and all, said the
Minister: No, only Troopers, said the other, of my knowledge.

Then the Minister renewed the motion before made in the little house by the
field, concerning the perfecting of his Will; for which he desired him to come
again a day or two after. So the Minister perceiving him faint, unwilling
therefore to speak much, and desirous to take rest, took his leave; his Cozen
Sandys and a Servant remaining still with him in the Chamber.

His Cozen can affirm all this; and since told the Minister, that the Colonel
said much more to him in testimony of his repentance. And among the rest, he
bade me report this passage for one. That he asking him, Cozen, what meant you
being a Gentleman of so fair estate, to engage your self in this Treason: The
Colonel replied to him, That he was so far drawn in before he was aware,
that he knew not how to come off without the danger of his head. This will his
Cozen justify to him.

Sir,
TO this Testimony of your Confession, some passages in your Vindication
provokes me to subjoyne this Postscript. And first to that (page 7.) of your
Declaration, (yours if it be, which I much suspect) where you seem to excuse
your self from taking up Arms against your Sovereign: and that you think
your understanding the cause in the sense of the Parliament Declarations, can
justify you. Plainly, Sir, I was more watchful upon you then so, to be
deceived by words of doubtful, or double sense. Your expressions were clear
and explicit, such as best became a Penitent and dying man: nor did you ever
so much as once refer your self to any sense of the Parliament Declarations.
And if upon recovery you ever engage your self against the King, in this cause
and sense, let your own hand, then lifted up, be witness with me against you.
Take heed, (Master Sandys) of equivocating with God and his Anointed; or of
dallying with imprecations. But I will hope you to be sincere and real, and
that this Declaration (if yours) was but forced from you.

The other points that I find my self provoked to give answer to, are first,
concerning the numbers on both sides slain in battle at Worcester: Though
truly Sir, with no delight (God knows) do I remember (much less glory) in
the numbers of slain Contrymen; yet Sir, whereas the Soldiers ordinary
phrase after a victory is, The more blood, the more honor. I cannot but take
notice of the diminution of honor, which those valiant Princes, Lords,
Gentlemen and Soldiers, on the Kings party have received, by your affirming
your loss never to have amounted to thirty persons; and that our loss was no
way inferior to yours, considering our great advantage of place; and that we
were at least double for number. In confutation of all which in one period, let
the Reader (till a larger Narration can be published) be pleased to accept of
this little: First, That (if we count right) there were more then that number
of thirty found dead in the field after the victory. More then that number also
chased into Worcester; and there either slain, or (as our Soldiers supposed
when they gave them over) deadly wounded. More also then so many Prisoners. All
which wounded and captived men, Prince Ruperts noble clemency gave free life
and liberty unto. We heard also by Townsmen, and such as dwelt by the river
and bridge, which your defeated Troops fled over; that more then that number
were taken up drowned. As for the slain on the Kings side, on my credit we
could never hear of five, which is just so many as your side lost Colors.
Secondly, for the plate, 'twas a plain field upon a hill; the place chosen by
your selves to charge in: where the difficulty of your little ascent to it was
fully recompensed, by your having both Wind and Sun of us. As for inequality
of numbers, you Sir, had ten Troops, and the Prince had fourteen, but scarce
half of them charged; as being sent to guard the Town and Lane that led to
it. Thus Sir, praying that by continuance in the same royal mind I left you,
your self may confute this supposed Vindication, I remain as ready, either to
serve, or inform you, as I then was; for I hear you are yet living.

FINIS.

