A Genealogical History OF THE KINGS OF ENGLAND, AND MONARCHS OF GREAT BRITAIN,
etc.

From the Conquest, Anno 1066. to the Year, 1677.

IN SEVEN PARTS OR BOOKS.

Containing A DISCOURSE Of their several Lives, Marriages, and Issues, Times of
Birth, Death, Places of Burial, and Monumental Inscriptions.

With their Effigies, Seals, Tombs, Cenotaphs, Devises, Arms, Quarterings,
Crests, and Supporters; All Engraven in COPPER PLATES, Furnished with several
Remarques and Annotations.

By FRANCIS SANDFORD Esquire Lancaster Herald of Arms.

In the SAVOY: Printed by Tho. Newcomb, for the Author, 1677.

CHARLES R.

CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all Our loving Subjects of what Degree, Condition or Quality soever, within
Our Kingdoms and Dominions, Greeting;
Whereas Our Trusty and Welbeloved Francis Sandford Esquire Lancaster Herald, has
employed himself near fifteen Years in the Compiling A Genealogical History of
the Kings of England, and Monarchs of Great Britain, from the Conquest An.
1066. to this present Year, 1677. and the Twenty ninth of Our Reign, in seven
Parts or Books. Containing a Discourse of their several Lives, Marriages, and
Issues, Times of Birth, Death, Places of Burial, and Monumental Inscriptions;
with their Effigies, Seals, Tombs, Cenotaphs, Devices, Arms, Quarterings,
Crests, and Supporters: All Engraven in Copper Plates, Furnished with several
Remarques and Annotations. Which by Our Gracious Approbation and Influence, and
the Encouragement of several of the Nobility and Gentry, is now (after much
Expense, Labor, and Industry,) brought to Perfection. KNOW ye therefore, That
it is Our Royal Pleasure, and We do by these Presents, upon the humble Request
of the said Francis Sandford, not only give him Leave and License to Print the
said Book, but strictly Charge, Prohibit, and Forbid all Our Subjects to
Reprint, within this Our Kingdom, the said Book in any Volume, or any Part
thereof, or any Abridgement of the Genealogical History, etc. therein
contained, or to Copy or Counterfeit any the Sculptures or Ingravements
belonging thereunto, or to Import, Buy, Vend, Utter, or Distribute any Copies
or Exemplaries of the same, Reprinted beyond the Seas, within the Term of
fifteen Years next ensuing the first publishing thereof, without the Consent
and Approbation of the said Francis Sandford, his Heirs, Executors, or Assigns,
as they and every of them so offending will answer the contrary at their
Perils. Whereof as well the Wardens, and Company of Stationers of Our City of
London, the Farmers, Commissioners and Officers of Our Customs, as all other
Our Officers and Ministers whom it may concern, are to take particular Notice,
that due obedience be given to this Our Royal Command herein declared. Given
under Our Signet and Sign Manualat Our Court at Whitehal the 3d day of January,
1677. in the 29th Year of Our Reign.

By His Majesty's Command, H. Coventry.

To the KING.
SIR.
THis GENEALOGICAL HISTORY, etc. which (encouraged by Your Majesty's Gracious
Approbation and more Special Favor) I have (with the expense of all that time
which in near fifteen years I could spare from the necessary attendance on that
Employment which Your Majesty has been pleased to confer upon me) brought to
such a Perfection, as my mean Abilities could give it, (though neither such as
the Kingly Subject requires or deserves) I now humbly Present to Your Majesty,
to Whom only of Right it belongs, You being (as it were) the Ocean into which
all these Mighty Springs of Royalty have, through the Streams of so many
several Generations, discharged themselves, and in Your Veins running the Royal
Blood of all those Kings of so many sundry Nations, Who, within the Records of
Time, have swayed the Scepter of this Noble Island.

Your Majesty, when You were first Acquainted with the Design, and whilst there
was yet but a Prospect of it, were pleased to say, That it would be a very
useful Book. An Encouragement so Royal, That it was able to put life into the
meanest Undertaker. And I cannot but boast it as my greatest Honor to
acknowledge that the Remembrance of those Words of Your Majesty, did, through
the whole Course of the Work, Animate me to a more diligent Search and stricter
Scrutiny of the certainty of Things, in a Matter so Nice and Curious, so Noble
and Illustrious; That this History, which I wanted the Art to adorn with the
Flourishes of Eloquence, might at least appear to the World, though in the less
Gorgeous, yet more Glorious Habit of Truth.

Nor do I doubt, but in this Plain and Humble Dress (guarded by Your Majesty's
Patronage and Approbation) it may prove as Acceptable to all Well-minded Men,
and produce its desired Effects, which are, The Preserving the Memory of the
Seals, Monuments, and Epitaphs of the Royal Family, from Devouring Time, and
the Fate of Accidents, and the Convincing the People of the Reasonableness of
their Obedience. For though Kings ought to be Honored as the lively Images of
the Divinity, and Gods Vicegerents upon Earth, yet it must needs be
Acknowledged, That when their Title is Strengthened by a Descent from so many
Royal Progenitors, made Famous from Age to Age by their Renowned Actions and
Heroical Virtues, and the Blood of all these United in one Person or Family, to
make their Right indisputable, Loyalty Redoubles, and Acts more vigorously in
the Breasts of those Subjects whom God has submitted to so Undoubted and
Lawful an Authority.

And this is a Consideration which ought, in a more particular manner, to
Oblige all Your Majesty's Subjects to a Nearer and Dearer Veneration of You
their King than the Subjects of any other Prince in the World; For whether they
derive their Descent from the Britains, Saxons, Danes, Normans, or Scots, (of
all which Nations the Inhabitants of this Island are Composed) You are still
their Lawful Sovereign, by a continued Succession of near Twelve hundred
Years. You are Flesh of the Flesh, and Bone of the Bone of every one of us; so
that no Native of this Island can say as once the Ten Tribes did to 2 Chronicles.
chap. 10. v. 16.
Rehoboam, What Portion have we in David? And we have no Inheritance in the Son
of Jesse: For You are equally alike to all of us, our Portion, and our
Inheritance.

But this, Great SIR, is not all: Providence has not only Obliged us to our
Duty, by giving us, to Rule over us, the greatest King in Christendom, in
Respect of Blood: You are not only of the Most Ancient Kingly Descent of any
Christian Monarch, being the Eleventh that in a due and direct Succession have
worn a Diadem; But You are likewise the Inheritor of the Gloririous Endowments
of Your Royal Progenitors. Their Virtues are United in You as well as their
Blood. Not to fetch Examples from Darker Antiquity; In You we daily behold the
Courage and Magnanimity of King Edward III. The Prudence and Policy of King
Henry VII. The Peaceable Inclination of Your Royal Grandfather King James; And
the Piety and Clemency of that Blessed Martyr Your Father. * Where then should
we find a Center to fix our Obedience, but where Heaven has cocentred all these
Advantages of Blood and Virtue?

And yet, SIR, there still remains one more Signal Observation, which seems to
Cry out like a Voice from Heaven, and Challenge our Duty and Allegiance to Your
Royal Line, which is, That when ever, for the Sins of the people, God has
permitted Invaders or Usurpers to Disturb the Peaceable Course of some of Your
Ancestors Reigns, yet never did the Intrusion last beyond the Third or Fourth
Generation, but, by some means or other unthought of by and undiscernable to
Mankind, Providence has Ordered the Return of the Crown to the Lawful Heir.
This indeed is Digitus Dei; which has powerfully been shown upon sundry
Occasions, but never did the Arm of God more plainly appear than in that
Miraculous Preservation and Restoration of Your Majesty to the Throne, when
without Dint of Sword, or any open Violence, even the Malice of Your very
Enemies, was, by the Divine Power, lulled asleep, and You endeared to us by
being made the Restorer of those Breaches both in Church and State, which, by
the Pride, Ignorance, and Folly of a violent Party among us, were opened so
wide, that they threatened nothing less than utter Desolation.

And now surely he must be the most perverse of Mankind, that will not yield
that to be Right which Heaven and Earth Proclaim to be so, such Monsters
deserve not only to be cut off from the People, but razed out of the Memory of
Mankind. May Your Majesty's Dominions never breed more such Vipers, but all
Your good Subjects, with an unanimous Heart, join and say with the Prophet
David, 2 Samuel chap. 7. v. 29.
Therefore now let it please thee to bless the House of thy Servant (the King)
that it may continue for ever before thee, for thou, O Lord God, have spoken
it, and with thy Blessing let the House of thy Servant be Blessed for ever.
Which shall be the daily Prayer of,

(May it Please Your Most SACRED MAJESTY;) Your Majesty's most Dutiful, And
most Obedient Subject and Servant, FRANCIS SANDFORD, Lancaster Herald.

BOOK I. The Norman Dynasty.

CONTAINING A Genealogical History OF THE KINGS OF ENGLAND, etc. From WILLIAM
the CONQUEROR, to HENRY II.

From the Year 1066. to the Year 1154.

HOC ANGLIS REGEM SIGNO FATEARIS EVNDEM


WILL. I

HOC NORMANORUM VVILLELMVM NOS EE PATRONVM SI


Genorosissimo Viro Dno ROBERTO VYNER Equiti aurato et Baronotto, nec non
celeberrima Civi statis LONDINI Senatori Tabulam hanc Sigillorum H. D. F. S.



VVILIELMVS DEI GRATIA REX ANGLORVM


WILL II

VVILIELMVS DEI GRATIA DVX NORMANNORVM


HENRICUS DEI GRATIA REX ANGLORVM


HEN I

HENRICUS DEI GRATIA DVX NORMANORVM


HENRICUS DEI GRATIA REX ANGLORVM


HEN I

HENRICUS DEI GRATIA REX NORMANORVM


Generosissimo Viro Domino, IOSEPHO SHELDON Equiti Aurato, nec non Celeberrima
Civitatis Londini Senatori. Sigillorum hanc Jabulam H. D. F. S.



MATHILDIS DEI GRATIA ROMANORVM REGINA


blazon or coat of arms

STEPHANVS DEI GRATIA REX ANGLORVM


K. STE.

STEPHANVS DEI GRATIA DVX NORMANNORVM


A GENEALOGICAL TABLE Of the First BOOK.
1. WILLIAM the First of that Name, King of England, and Duke of Normandy,
called The Conqueror, Page 1. MAUD, Daughter of Baldwin the Fifth, Earl of
Flanders, p. 3. 2. ROBERT Duke of Nomandy, p. 7. Sibil of Conversana, page 14.
3. WILLIAM Earl of Flanders, p. 16. SIBIL of Anjou, p. 18. JOAN of Savoy, p.
18. HENRY, p. 18. Natural Sons, viz. Richard and William, p. 19.
RICHARD, p. 7. WILLIAM the Second, King of England, p. 19. HENRY the First,
King of England, and Duke of Normandy, p. 24. MAUD of Scotland, ibid. WILLIAM
Duke of Normandy died. S. P. p. 28. MATILDA of Anjou, p. 29. MAUD the Relict of
HENRY the Fourth, Emperor, p. 34. Remarried to GEOFFREY Earl of Anjou, p. 34,
35. 4. HENRY the Second, King of England, etc. Mentioned in the First Chapter
of the Second Book, continued the Descent. GEOFFREY Earl of Nantes, p. 37.
WILLIAM, p. 37.

CICILIE Abbess of Cane, p 9. CONSTANCE, Countess of Britain, p. 9. ADELIZA, p.
10. ADELA or ALICE, Wife of Stephen Earl of Blois, p. 10. STEPHEN King of
England, p. 38. MAUD of Bologne, p. 10. and 40. BALDWIN, p. 42. EUSTACE Earl of
Bologne, p. 42. CONSTANCE of France, p. 42. WILLIAM, p. 43. ISSABEL Countess
Warren, p. 43. MAUD, p. 43. MARY Wife of Matthew of Flanders, p. 44. Natural
Sons, viz. WILLIAM, p. 44. GERVAIS Abbot of Westminster, ibid.
WILLIAM, p. 10. THEOBALD Earl of Blois, p. 10. HENRY Bishop of Winchester, p.
11.
GUNDRED Countess of Surrey, p. 12. WILLIAM de Warrenna, ibid. AGATHA, p. 12.

Natural Issue of King HENRY the First, and their Descendants.
3. ROBERT Earl of Gloucester, p. 45. MABEL Fitz-Hamon, ibid. 4. WILLIAM Earl of
Gloucester, p. 48. HADEWISA, p. 47, 48. 5. ROBERT died S. P. p. 48. MABEL Wife
of ALMERICK Montfort, Earl of Evereax, p. 48. AMICIA married to GILBERT de
Clare Earl of Gloucester, p. 49. ISSABEL Wife of John Earl of Mortaigne, p. 49.
ROGER Bishop of Worcester, p. 47. RICHARD Bishop of Bayon, p. 47. HAMON, p.
47. MABEL Wife of AUBREY de Vere, p. 47. MATILDA married to Ranulph Earl of
Chester, p. 47.
RICHARD, p. 30. AMICIA de Guarder, ibid. REYNALD Earl of Cornwall, p. 50. N --
Fitz-Richard, ibid. HAWIS Countess of Devon, p. 51. MAUD Countess of Melent, p.
51. URSULA Lady of Castlecomb, p. 51. SARAH Vicountess of Lemoges, p. 51.
ROBERT, p. 30. GILBERT, p. 31. WILLIAM de Tracy, p. 31. HENRY, ib. MAUD or
MARY Countess of Perch, p. 32. Rotrock Earl of Perch, ib. MAUD Countess of
Britain, p. 32. CONAN Earl of Britain, ibid. JULIAN, p. 32. N -- married to
William Goet, ibid. CONSTANCE Vicountess Beaumont. p. 33. ROZCELIN. Vic.
Beaumont, ibid. N -- married to Matthew de Montmorency, p. 33. ELIZABETH Wife
of Alexander King of Scots, ibid.
portrait of William I K WILL CON^
portrait of William II K WILLIAM 2
portrait of Henry I K HENRY 1
portrait of King Stephen K STEPHEN
Anne Domini 1066. October. 14.
1. WILLIAM I. KING of ENGLAND, and DUKE of NORMANDY, called the CONQUEROR.
Gules 2 Lions passant guardant Or, are the Arms assigned to this WILLIAM the
Conqueror, as also to Rebert Duke of Normandy, King William II. and King Henry
I. all three his Sons, the two last his Successors, derived (as Tradition tells
us) hereditarily from ROLLO, the First Duke of Normandy; who is said to bear in
his Escocheon or Shield, the same Charge, affecting as several other Northern
Princes did, that Sovereign Beast the Lion. I term these Arms attributed, or
assigned, because I cannot find either by Monuments, Coyns, Seals, or any
Cotemporary Author, that such were in use with these several Princes, but that
following Ages did assign or fix them upon the Norman Line, to distinguish it
from the succeeding Plantagenets, that did bear Gules' 3 Lions passant guardant
Or (King Henry II. the First of that Race, adding to the Norman Arms the Lion
of Aquitain of the same Metal, in a Field of that Color, in the Right of
Elianor his Wife, Heir of that Country) and for this cause are they painted
for the Conqueror, upon the Tomb of Queen Elizabeth in Henry VII. Chapel at
Westminster, impaled with those of Queen MAND of Flanders his Wife, viz.
Gironne of eight pieces Or, and Azure, an Ineschocheon Gules, Arms attributed
to the Forresters, and First Earls of Flanders, to the time of Robert the
Frison; ( Olivarius Uredus in Sigilla Com. Flandriae p. 6.) and the Arms also
of King Henry I. impaleing them of Queen Maud of Scotland, viz Or, a Lion
rampant within a double, Tressure counter-flowry Gules; when indeed Impalements
were not known before the time of Henry the Thirds if so soon, as I shall prove
in its proper place.

To pass by the Poetical Fictions of Devises assigned to the Trojan and Grecian
Captains, those attributed to Solomon, David, and Josbua, yea and our Savior
himself, by Monks, Poets, and Painters ( Hen. Spelman Eq. Anr. in Aspilogia, p.
41.) We may upon better grounds not only note the Devises of several Romans
upon their Consular Coins ( Carolus Patin in Antiquis Numismatibus, etc. page
257. and 313.) but take a view of their Practice in the time of Trajan the
Emperor, upon whose Pillar (one of the Worlds most famous Monuments in being)
are not only variety of Devises, but also the exact form and difference of the
Roman, German, and Dacian Shields. But to confine my self within the limits of
my Story, and to prove that Devises were in use about the time of the
Conqueror, we may note in the Challenge of Geffrey Martell Earl of of Anjou
returned him, being only Duke of Normandy near Damfront, by Roger de Montgomery
and others; where the Earl, that he might be the better known to the Duke,
describes, Qualem Equum in praelio sit habiturus, quate SCUTUM, and qualem
vestitum: and Roger on the behalf of the Duke of Normandy, Equum vicissim
Domini sui praefignat, vestitum and ARMA, Gesta Will. Ducis Normanuiae, page
113. Upon this ground Samuel Daniel in his History of the Conquerour's Life,
page 26 (surnished with what other Authority I know not) enlarges thus: That
Count Martell made this return by Roger de Montgomery, viz. Tell the Duke, to
morrow by daybreak, he shall have me there on a White Horse, ready to give him
the Combat, and I will enter Damfront if I can; and to the end he shall know
me, I will wear a SHIELD d' OR without any devise. Roger replies, Sir you shall
not need to take the pains, for to morrow morning you shall have the Duke in
this place, mounted on a Bay Horse, and that you may know him, he shall wear on
the point of his Lance a STREAMER OF TAFFATA to wipe your face.

Here was a Shield d' Or (of Gold) without any Devise, which implies that
Devises were used in that time, but it seameth only momentary, taken up, and
laid down at pleasure: For had they been personal, that is, for life, Count
Geffrey might have been as well known by his Devise, as Families are by their
Arms at this day. And its probable the reason why the Shields of that Age were
lest Blanks, or of one Simple Color or Metal, was to receive the Impress of
every Fancy that either pleased the Bearer or the Painter.



CHAP. I.
THere had been a continued Succession of Six Dukes of Normandy, Gesta Norman.
ex Veteri Codice, M.S. page 213.
beginning with ROLLO, who being a Nobleman of Denmark, came forth with the
exuberancie of his Nation, and compelled Charles surnamed the simple, King of
France, by force of Arms to make him Duke of Normandy. To Rollo succeeded his
Son William the Second Duke, (called Longue-Espee or Long-Sword) Father of
Richard, Third Duke of Normandy; who had issue Richard, surnamed the Hardy, and
Emma (Wife of King Etheldred) Mother of St. Edward the Confessor, Will.
Malmesh. Will. Gemmeticonfis p. 230. d. and 231. a, b, c.
King of England; from whom our succeeding Monarchs derive the Cure of the
Kings Evil. Richard Duke of Normandy II. of the Name, surnamed the Hardy, had
two Sons, Richard and Robert; Richard succeeded his Father by the Name of
Richard III. and was Fifth Duke of Normandy, who deceasing without issue, the
Duchy came to his Brother Robert the Sixth Duke of Normandy, Father of this
WILLIAM II. of the Name, Seventh Duke of Normandy and Conqueror of England,
begotten on Arlot a Skinners Daughter of Falais, Rob. of Gloucester.
whom he affected for her Beauty, and Comely Dancing (which he by chance
beheld) among her Country Companions. WILLIAM thus meanly generated, yet
wanted not before, and at his Birth, Presages of his future Greatness; for his
Mother being with-child of Him, The Norman Dinasty
had a Dream (like that of Mandana Mother of Cyrus the First Persian Book I.
Monarch) that her Bowels were extended over all Normandy and England; and
even his Bastardy seemed to have an allay, if it be true as Will. Malmesh. lib.
3. in principio. Ingulph. lib. 6. cap. 19.
some write, that his Father took Arlot to Wife. Nor was Bastardy at that time
accounted a scandal or reproach, for this WILLIAM in his Grant to Alan Earl of
Britain, of the Lands of Earl Edwin in Yorkshire, styles himself WILLIAM,
surnamed Bastard, King of England; it being then also a general Custom in
France, that Bastards did succeed even in Dignities of highest condition, as
Children lawfully begotten. Scevola and Louis de St. Marthe. lib. 2. p. 68.
Thierry Bastard of Clouis, had for his Appennage with the Lawful Children of
the said Clouis, the Kingdom of Austrasia, now called Lorrain; so likewise in
England, Harold surnamed Harefoot, Bastard to Canutus, succeeded him in the
Kingdom, before Hardy-Canutus his Lawful Son. The like Custom has also been
observed in Spain and Portugal, and its probable this use was grounded upon
often experience, that Bastards (as begotten in the highest heat and strength
of affection) have many times been Men of excellent proof both in courage and
understanding. But however it was, Duke Robert esteemed our WILLIAM worthy to
be his Successor, for undertaking his Pilgrimage to the Holy Land (whether out
of Devotion, or Penance, for procuring his Brother Richards Death, whereof he
was suspected) he caused his Nobles to swear Allegiance to WILLIAM; and after
his Death to receive him for their Prince, being then only Nine years old; the
Tuition of whom he left to his Brothers, and the Guardianship of his person to
Henry the First, King of France, Will. Gemmet. lib. 6. oh. 7.
into whose Custody he delivered him with his own hands; that King owing Robert
a kindness for former assistance in the preservation of his Crown.

But Duke Robert's Journey and Life ending together, the Nobles of Normandy by
much entreaty got him out of the French Kings hands, thinking by his presence
to awe his Estate the better; but soon they found that having his person among
them, without his power, was but to put them into more disorder and faction;
and more than that, WILLIAM's Bastardy gave occasion, and his Youth opportunity
to Roger de Tresny his Cousin (though in a remote degree) and William Earl of
Arques his Uncle, Gesta Guil. Ducis Nor. etc. p. 184. b. c. d. and 185. a. b. c.
to lay claim to the Duchy of Normandy; the first of which bringing his Title
to the Trial of a Battle, was by the valiancy of Roger de Beaumont slain upon
the place, with his two Brethren; and Arques, though privately assisted by the
King of France (who now grew jealous of Duke WILLIAM's Successes) was
overthrown by Count Guiffard the Duke's General, leaving the Town of Arques
(the First Arch of Triumph) to this Conqueror, not yet arrived the Age of
Seventeen years. A third Competitor there was, Guy of Bourgoigne; who though
more distant in blood, yet by the treasonable practices of his discontented
Lords, had succeeded in his Design; had not the Duke (warned by a certain Fool)
by a sudden retreat into France, not only avoided them, but persuading that
King to assist him in Person with his Forces, returned home, and at the Battle
of Dunes cut off that Knot of Confederacy; forcing Bourgoigne to submit to
mercy. This happened when he was about Two and twenty years old. Several other
Affronts were afterward offered him, some by meaner persons, some by the King
of France himself; all which he overcame with such Prudence and Valor, that
they got him a high opinion in the World, and settled him on the Basis of a
firm Government. And being thus fixed, his Nobility minding the Duke of a
Succession, persuade him to marry MATILDA or MAVD, His Marriage.
Daughter of Baldwin V. surnamed The gentle, Earl of Flanders (by Hadala or
Alix, Eldest Daughter of Robert II. of the Name, King of France, Son of Hugh
Capet) a potent Prince at that time, and so much the more, in that he was
Scevola and Louis de Sante Marthe. p. 305. a.
Guardian to the young King of France Philip (Son of King Henry) by Baldwin's
means made afterward instrumental to Duke WILLIAM's greatness. The Solemnity
of this Marriage was celebrated at Augi in Normandy, and in the second year of
WILLIAM's Reign over England, she was Matthew Westminst.
crowned Queen, upon Whit-Sunday in the year of Our Lord God One thousand sixty
and eight, by Aldred Archbishop of York. She had by Him a Numerous Issue, among
which her eldest Son Robert was her Darling; witness her maintaining him in his
Quarrel for Normandy against his own Father, and assisting toward the payment
of the War out of her own Coffers. Which act of hers rather caused the
displeasure, Mat. Paris p. 11. Robert of Glocest. p. 186.
than hatred of the King her Husband, it being for the advancement of her Son.
She departed this life the second day of November (being All-Souls-Day) in the
17th year of WILLIAM the Conqueror, Will. Malmesh. fol. 62. b. number. 10.
and of our Lord 1083. and was interred in the Monastery of the Holy Trinity
(of her own foundation) at Cane, betwixt the Choire and High Altar; where King
WILLIAM caused a stately Memorial to be raised for her (embellished with Gold
and Precious Stones) and inscribed with this Epitaph in Golden Characters.

Egregie pulcri tegit haec structura Sepulcri
Moribus insignem, germen Regale MATHILDEM. Ordericus Vital^s p. 647. and 648.

Dux Flandrita pater, huic extitit Hadala matter,
Francorum gentis Roberti filia Regis,
Et soror Henrici Regali sede potiti,
Regi magnifico WILLELMO juncta marito,
Praesentem sedem praesentem fecit and aedem,
Tam multis terris, quam multis rebus honestis
A se ditatam, se procurante dicatam,
Haec consolatrix inopum, pietatis amatrix,
Gazis dispersis pauper sibi, dives egenis
Sic infinitae petiit consortia vitae
In prima mensis post primam luce Novembris.
Duke WILLIAM now toward his declining Age, Rob. of Glocest. p. 186.
undertakes his Expedition for the Conquest of England, unto which Kingdom he
pretended a Right, by the Rogerus Hoveden sol 348. a. n. 30. and n. 40. Gesta
Guil. Ducis Nor. p. 196. d. n. 198. a. b.
Gift of King Edward, (for his Sanctity surnamed the Confessor) lately
deceased, Cousin German to his Father Duke Robert; nor wanted he a powerful
incitement to put his Title in execution: for perjured Harold, Earl Godwin's
Son, who had formerly sworn to assist him in the gaining of the Crown; not
only falsified his Oath, but being appointed Regent of England during the
minority of Edgar-Etheling (or Prince Edgar) the Lawful Heir, deposed his said
Master, and set the Royal Diadem on his own Rebellious Head. Notwithstanding
which Duke WILLIAM sent several Proposals to Harold in order to an
Accommodation, all which being by him slighted, was indeed the true cause that
spurred on the affronted Duke to this Expedition; not thinking himself too old
for a Kingdom, when Galba aged near 73 years, buckled on Armor to obtain the
Roman Empire. But being of himself too weak for such an Enterprise, He by fair
promises, not only engages the Emperor Gesta Guil. Ducis, etc. p. 197. c.
Henry IV. and the young King of France Philip (by means of his Father in Law
Baldwin Earl of Flanders, who sent him large supplies) but also (to make
Religion give Reputation to his Pretended Right) procures from Pope Alexander a
Gesta Guill. p. 197. c. and 201. c.
Banner of the Church, with an Agnus of Gold, and one of the Hairs of St.
Peter. With this collected force, being near 60000 men, Duke WILLIAM arrives at
Ibid. p. 199. a. b.
Pevensey in Sussex; who to create a more desperate valor in his soldiers,
sends away his ships: King Harold (having lately won the Battle of Stamford,
and slain Harold Harfager King of Norway) hearing of his Landing, advances with
all speed, and gathering together his wearied Troops, and increasing them in
his March, over-hastily (contrary to the advice of his best Counselors) gives
the Duke Battle at Hastings in Sussex upon the 14th day of October Anno 1066.
Where after Prodigious Acts of Valor performed by these two great Chieftains
in a doubtful Fight, and the loss of above 66000 soldiers on both sides, the
Normans won the day, and Harold lost his life, and whole England with him her
Ancient Laws and Liberties (except the Kentish men, Ingulphus fol. 512.2. n.
20. Matthew. Paris p. 12. n. 30.
who circumvented the Conqueror by Stratagem, and thereby retained their Old
Customs.) The Place of Fight WILLIAM made famous, by the Erection of Battle
Abbey, dedicated to St. Martin; and from the time, being the 14th day of
October, began the Computation of his Reign over England; unto which Victory he
also owed his Appellation of The Conqueror. Upon Christmas day next following
he was crowned at Westminster in the Church of St. Peter, W. Malm. fol. 57. b.
n. 50. Henricus Hunting. fol. 211. a. n. 50. Gesta Guil. Ducis, etc. p. 206. a.
by Aldred Archbishop of York (the Archbishop of Canterbury Stigand, to whom
that Office did properly belong, not being admitted for some defect in his
Investiture, or perhaps some corruption in his Manners) where according to
Custom, the Bishops and Barons of the Realm took their Oaths to be his true
Subjects, and he reciprocally made his Personal Oath before the Altar of St.
Peter, To defend the holy Churches of God, and the Rectors of the same; To
govern the universal people subject unto him, justly; To establish equal Laws,
and to see them duly executed.

In the second year of his Reign, Matthew. Paris page 5. n. 20.
viz. 1067. Edgar Etheling, with the discontented Earls Edwin and Morcar, made
some resistance, but to no purpose; so that Edgar with his Mother and Sisters,
were forced to fly into Scotland; where King Malcolme entertained them nobly,
took his Sister Margaret to Wife, and by his constant and effectual standing
for him, Edgar was reconciled to the Conqueror, and had royal allowance from
him: several of the Nobility and chiefest of the English Clergy were guilty of
this defection, whom WILLIAM punished in their Estates; which he alienated, and
burdened with unusual Taxes, and therewith gratified his Normans and other
Adventurers; and for his future security, disarmed the Commonalty, and ordained
the A Law, that every one should put out his Fire and Light, at the ringing of
the Eight-a-Clock Bell, to prevent Insurrections; called at this day by the
Vulgar Curfur.
Conure Feu. He purchased the departure of the two Sons of Swayne King of
Denmark, (who had invaded the North Parts of England) with money, Mat. Paris p.
11. n. 10.
and in the 13th year of his Reign, Anno 1079, he constrained the Princes of
Wales to do him Fealty, as before in his seventh year he had forced Malcolm
King of Scots to be his Homager; so that if England made him greater than he
was before, a King of a Duke, he no less made England greater, by joining
several Dominions in one. He caused a Great This Seal has on the one side, the
Picture of the King in his Robes, sitting on a Throne, with his Crown on his
Head; in his right hand he holds a Sword, and in his left a Mound, with a Cross
thereon. On the other side he is rep esented on Horsback armed at all points,
in his righthand he has a Streamer (issuing from the Staff) slit in form of a
Trident, and in his left he bears a shield of an oval shape, the unequal side
next your sight; so that if there were any devise thereon, its not to be
discovered.
Seal to be made for himself, wherein was circumscribed on the one side,

HOC NORMANORUM WILLELMUM NOSCE PATRONUM And on the Reverse was engraven, See
his Great Seal in Speed, p. 115.
HOC ANGLIS REGEM SIGNO FATEARIS EUNDEM.

Thus Englished.

This Sign does WILLIAM, Normans Patron show,
By this the English Him their King do know.
To those Insurrections that vexed him in England, his Son Robert added a more
unnatural one in Normandy (by the instigation of the King of France) which King
WILLIAM hastening to appease, Mat. Paris p. 10. n. 10. a. 1075.
was by his own Son unhorsed; whom yet upon submission, he was content to
pardon: but afterward taking revenge upon the scoffing of the King of France,
in his return into Normandy (being corpulent and in years) by a leap of his
Horse, he took a rupture in his inward parts, which putting him into a Fever,
he died thereof at Roan, Will. Gemmet. p. 292. Rogerus Hoveden, fol. 348. a. n.
50. and 264. a. n. 20.
upon the V. of the Ides of September ( viz. the IX. day of September) Anno
1087. aged above LXIV. years; having governed Normandy LII. and reigned King of
England XX. years, and near XI. months. The disposal of his Estates to his
three Sons, these few Old Rhimes comprehend.

He yaf his Eldest Son Normandy, Continuation of Robert of Gloucester, p. 335.

And to the Secund Engelond truly,
To the Thridde his Goods menable,
This was hold ferme and stable.
WILLIAM thus overcome by death, was forsaken of his Followers, despoiled of
all, and left naked on the ground, till at last one Harlewyne a Country Knight
embalmed his Body, and conveyed it to Cane; where in the Office of Burial it
was thrice forsaken, and then a Composition forced for his Grave by Anselme
Fitz-Arthur, which at last proved too little for so great a Conqueror.

But afterward King William Rufus his second Son, and immediate Successor in
his Kingdom of England, caused a most stately Mausoleum to be erected for Him,
Will. Gemmet. p. 292.
before the High Altar of St. Stephen (an Abbey of the Order of St. Benedict,
of his own Foundation) at Cane, his Burial Place. One Otho a Goldsmith was the
Workman, and the Materials Gold, Silver, and rich Stones, and although several
Epitaphs were composed by the Wits of that Age, yet only that of Thomas
Archbishop of York was preferred, and pencil'd upon his Tomb in Letters of
Gold.

He that the sturdy Normans ruled, and over English reigned,
And stoutly won, and strongly kept, what he so had obtained.
And did the Swords of those of Man's by force bring under awe,
And made them under his Command, live subject to his Law.
This great King William lies here, entombed in little Grave,
So great a Lord, so small a house, suffices him to have.
When Phoebus in the Virgins lap, his circled course applied,
And twenty three degrees had past, even at that time he died.
Qui rexit rigidos Northmanos atque Britanos, Ordericus Vitalis, P. 663.

Audacter vicit, fortiter obtinuit.
Et Caenomenses virtute coercuit enses,
Imperiique sui legibus applicuit,
Rex magnus parva jacet hac GUILLELMUS in Vrna
Sufficit and magno parva domus Domino
Ter septem gradibus se volverat atque duobus
Virginis in gremio Phoebus, and hic obiit.
This stately Monument flourished until the year 1562. Sir Rich. Baker in the
Life of King William I. page 34.8.
and then Chastillion taking the City of Cane, certain dissolute soldiers
opening it, and not finding the Treasure they expected, brake it to pieces, and
threw forth the Conquerours Bones with great derision; some whereof were
afterward brought into England. But the Monks lately in the year 1642. in the
place thereof caused a plain Altar Tomb to be built, the sides and ends of
which are of speckled Marble, red and white, the Top Stone of Touch, the whole
frame raised on a Pedestal of Freestone; on an Escocheon at the Head are the
three Lions of England, and at the foot, upon another the two Lions of
Normandy; on the South side the above recited Epitaph is restored. The Figure
of which Monument I here present you, with the Inscription on the North side
thereof, transcribed from the Original by a Jervas Holles Esquire one of the
Masters of Request to His Majesty King Charles ^I.
Person of Worth, and a Lover of Antiquities.

monument Clarissimo Generosissimoque, Viro, Domino GEORGIO de CARTARET, Eqviti
Aurato et Baronelto. Classium Regiarum Thesaurario Domus Regiae Vice Camerario.
Serenissimi Dni Regis Caroli II a secretioribus Consilijs.

Tumuli hanc Regis Willelmi Conquorteris Figui^m. H.D.F.S. 1666

LOYAL DVOIR

HOC SEPVLCHRVM INVIOTISSIMI IVXTA ET CLEMENTISSIMI CONQVESTORIS GVILLELMI, DVM
VIVERET ANGLORVM REGIS NORMANDORVM COENO MANORVMQUE PRINCIPIS, HVIVS INSIGNIS
ABBATIae. PIISSIMI FVNDATORIS. CVM ANNO 1562 VESANO HAERETICORVM FVRORE
DIREPTVM FVISSET PIO TANDEM NOBILIVM EIVSDEM ABBATIAE RELIGIOSORVM GRATITVDINIS
SENSV IN TAM BENITICVM LARGIROREM INSTAVBATVM FVTT ANNO DOM. 1642 DOM^NO IOANNE
DE BAILHACHE ASCETORII PROTO PRIORE P. D. D. D.



Children of King WILLIAM the Conqueror by Queen MAVD of Flanders his Wife.
2. ROBERT Eldest Son, succeeded his Father only in the Dukedom of Normandy,
whose Story follows in the next Chapter.

2. RICHARD second Son was born in Normandy, Rob. of Glocest. p. 173. Order.
Vital. p. 573. c. 781. a.
and after his Father had attained the Crown came into England, where in his
youth (for he had not yet received the Girdle of Knighthood) as he hunted in
the New Forest in Hampshire, he came to a violent and sudden death by the
goring of a Stagg (others say by a pestilent air) and is noted to be the first
man that died in that place, the justice of God punishing on him, Will.
Gemmeticensis p. 296. d.
his Fathers depopulating that Country, to make a habitation for wild Beasts.
His body was thence conveyed to Winchester, and there interred on the South
side the Chore of the Cathedral Church; where are two black Marble Stones
inlaid into the new work (built by Bishop Fox) one of which stands edgewayes in
the wall, and the other lies flat; both marked with the Letter A: the manner
exactly drawn from the Original, in this Figure; containing an Epitaph on the
verge thereof in Saxon Letters, signifying the Person there interred to be Duke
of Bernay ubi Abbathia pulcherrima in la Bailliage d' Alenson in Normandy.
Philippus Brierius Para^ella Geographiae veteris and novae Tom. 1. Part. 2.
lib. 7. cap. 4. page 398.
Bernay in Normandy, viz. HIC JACET RICARDUS WILLI. SENIORIS REGIS FILL. ET
BEORN. DUX.

monument INTVS EST CORPUS RICHARDI WILLHELMI CONQESTORIS FILM ET BEORNIE DVCIS

(...) WILLI SE^^^^RIS REGIS (...)

Nobili et egregio Viro Domino EDWARDO HVNGERFORD de Farley Castle in Com^
Somerset Equiti de Balneo Tumuli hanc RICARDI Willelmi Conquestoris filij
Figuram, H.D.D.D.F.S.



2. WILLIAM the third Son of King William and Queen Maud, succeeded his Father
in the Kingdom of England, whose History follows in the III. Chapter of this
Book.

2. HENRY fourth Son, after the death of his Brother King William, obtained
both the Kingdom of England, and Dukedom of Normandy. See more of him in the
IV. Chapter of this First Book.

2. CICELIE Abbess of Cane, Ord. Vital. p. 484. d. 512. d. 548. b. e. 638. d.
Rob. of Glocest. p. 173.
Eldest Daughter of William the Conqueror, was born in Normandy, brought up in
England, and returned again into Normandy; where in the Ninth year of King
William's Reign, Anno Dom. 1075, she was by her said Father, on Easter Day with
great Solemnity offered up in the Church of Feschampe, by the hands of John the
Archbishop, and veiled a Nun in that Monastery. Gemmet. p. 310. a. 282. c.
After the death of Matilda Abbess of the Holy Trinity at Cane (founded by
Queen Maud her Mother) this Cicelie undertook that Government, which she
managed with singular piety for the space of XIV. years, Ceonica St. Steph.
^adomensi^ p. 1019. b.
and then departed this World upon the xiii. day of July Anno Dom. 1126. in the
XXVI. year of the Reign of King Henry the First, her Brother, and was interred
in the same Monastery; having worn a Religious Habit the space of LII. years.

2. CONSTANCE Countess of Britain, Ord. Vital. p. 484. d. 512. d. 544. c. 573
d. 638. d.
second Daughter of King William and Queen Maud, was the first wife of Alan
Earl of Little Britain, surnamed Fergant in the British, and in English the
Red (Son of Howell, second Son of Caignard, by Hawis his Wife, Daughter and
Heir of Alan Earl of Britain, and great Aunt to William the Conqueror)
married unto him at Cane in Normandy; in regard of which alliance, and his
service done at the Conquest of England, his Father-in-Law in the Third year of
his Reign (at the Siege of York) did give unto him and his heirs, W^^. Gem. p.
310. a.
all the Lands and Honors late belonging to Earl Edwin in Yorkshire; whereon
he built the Castle, and whereof he made the Earldome of Richmond: which long
after belonged to the Earls and Dukes of Britain, his Successors. These are
the words of the Grant translated into English, I William ( surnamed Bastard,
King of England) give and grant to thee my Nephew Alan Earl of Britain, and to
thy heirs for ever, all those Villages, Towns, and Lands, which were late in
possession of Earl Edwin in Yorkshire, Milles p. 588.
with Knights-Fees and Churches, and other Liberties and Customs, as freely
and honorably as the said Edwin held them. Given at the Siege before York.
This Constance Countess of Britain (after she had been married XV. years) died
without issue, and was buried in the Abbey of St. Edmondsbury in Suffolk; Ord.
Vital. p. 544. c.
after whose death Earl Alan espoused Ermingard Daughter of Foulk Earl of
Anjou, and had by her Conan le Gross, unto whom King Henry the I. gave one of
his Natural Daughters to Wife, named Matilda or Maud.

2. ADELIDIS or ADELIZA, third Daughter, Will. Gemmet. p. 310. c.
was in her Childhood contracted unto Duke Harold, when he was in Normandy,
being a young Widdower; notwithstanding which he refusing her, took another
Wife, and usurped the Kingdom of England, after the death of St. Edward the
Confessor: Ordericus Vitalis p. 638. d.
whereby he occasioned his own ruin, and the Conquest of his Kingdom; which
afterward fell out, when her Father sought revenge, which some write was so
much to the coffeehouse of this Lady, Will. Gemmeticensis p. 285. c.
that for grief of these misfortunes she ever after refused Marriage, and led a
single and solitary life; though others upon better warrant collect, that she
died young, and before William her Father set forth for England; Harold himself
pleading that he was free from all Covenants and Promises to the Duke by reason
of the death of this his Daughter.

2 ADELA or ALICE, Countess of Blois, Will. Gemmet. p. 310. c.
fourth Daughter of the Conqueror and Queen Maud, was contracted unto Stephen
Earl of Blois, for the Confirmation of a strict Union betwixt that Earl and her
Father. This Ceremony was performed at Bretville, Ord. Vital. p. 573. c. and
574. a.
and afterward their Nuptials were nobly celebrated at Chartres. She outlived
her Husband, and in her Widowhood governed the County Palatine of Blois, during
the Minority of her Sons, and then took upon her Religious Orders in the Priory
of Nuns at Marsigny in France; Will. Gemmet. p. 313. d.
where she continued in Devotion unto her lives end: which happened to be two
years after the death of King Henry I. her Brother: leaving issue by Earl
Stephen four Sons and one Daughter: Viz.

3. WILLIAM, her Eldest Son, was an Innocent (says Ralph Brook York Herald,
Ord. Vital. p. 810. d. and 811. ad ^20. d. and. 972 c.
and Speed who exactly follows his Copy) but as simple as he was, I find that
he had a Wife, Daughter of Gilon de Soleio; whose Estate he peaceably possessed
during life: and also issue by her, three Sons, Odo, Raherius, and Henry de
Soleio Abbot of Feschampe; and a Daughter married to Henry Earl of Augi Son of
Earl William.

3. THE OBALD, Earl Palatine of Blois, called the Great, Ord. Vital. p. 811. a.
(second Son of Stephen Earl of Blois) was a man famous in War, and as great a
Justicer in the time of Peace; and both for his virtue and riches ranked among
the chiefest Princes of France. After the death of Henry the I. King of England
his Uncle, he took Normandy into his hand, and forced the Inhabitants to
Obedience. His Wife was Mand, Daughter of Duke Ingelbert, by whom he had issue
three Sons, Henry Earl of Campaigne, Theobald Earl of Blois, and Stephen Lord
of Servicium in Berry, and several Daughters. He departed this world Anno 1151.
Chronica Normanniae, p. 985. a.
and upon him Giraldus Cambrensis wrote this Epitaph: Ille Comes, Comes illo
pius THEO BALDUS eras, quem
Gaudet habere polus, Camden's Remains, p. 355.
terra carere dolet.
Non hominem possum, non adeo dicere numen:
Mors probat hunc hominem, vita fuisse deum.
Trans hominem, citraque deum, plus hoc, minus istud,
Nescio quis, neuter, inter utrumque fuit.


3. STEPHEN, Third Son of Stephen, was Earl of Mortain and Bollein, after the
death of his Uncle King Henry I. he usurped the Kingdom of England; of him you
may see more in the VI. Chapter of this First Book.

3. HENRY, Will Gem. p. 310. c, d.
Bishop of Winchester, Fourth Son of Stephen Earl of Blois, was a Monk of Cluny
from his Childhood, from which place he was removed, and made first Abbot of
Bermondsey, and afterward of Glastonbury; among many Books which he wrote in
Prose and Verse, Bals.
one was an History of the finding King Arthur's Bones in the Abbey of
Glastonbury, being a principal Actor in that discovery. He was by his Uncle
King Henry I. upon the 17 of November 1129 preferred to the Bishopric of
Winchester, Godwin. Catalogue of Bishops. fol. 170, and 171.
not by favor only, or in regard of his high Extraction; for he was very
learned. And though his Brother King Stephen found a good friend of him, upon
his gaining the Crown of England, yet being taken prisoner by Maud the Empress,
he accursed and excommunicated all that resisted her: Notwithstanding he had
many contentions with the said Empress, unto whom he was at last reconciled.
And although he is charged with the burning of most part of Winchester, and the
Religious Houses, with the Ruins of which he enriched himself; yet to balance
that with his good Deeds, we must also remember, that he founded the Hospital
of St. Cross near Winchester, and built the Castle of Farnham. He contended
often with the Archbishop of Canterbury for Superiority, under color that he
was the Popes Legate a Latere, and (as some write) a Cardinal. He is reported
to have obtained from Pope Lucius the Title of an Archbishop, Matthew Westminst.
with the presentment of a Pall, and Authority over Seven Churches. He lived in
great honor till the Reign of King Henry II. whom he sharply reproved, as the
Causer of Thomas Becket's death, and deceased upon the 6th of August 1171.

3. MAUD Countess of Chester, Will. Gem. p. 310. c. and 313. e.
only Daughter of Stephen Earl of Blois and Adela, Daughter of William the
Conqueror, was married to Richard the young Earl of Chester (Son of Earl Hugh,
and Grandson of Richard Viscount of Auranches) who enjoyed his Earldome 12
years only, for this Richard and his Wife Maud, William Son of King Henry the
First, and near 200 persons more were drowned near Barbfleet, Order. Vital. p.
787. c. 870. d.
in their passage from Normandy, upon the vi. of the Kalends of December, viz.
the 26 of November, Anno 1119. so that dying without issue, the Earldome of
Chester, came to Randol Meschines his Cousin German.

2. Infra Receptam Scaccarii apud V. C. Johannem Bradshaw.
GUNDRED, Countess of Surrey, fifth Daughter of King William the First was
married to William de Warrenna a Nobleman of Normandy; who came with the said
King to the Conquest of England: and was afterward by King William Rufus
created Earl of Surrey. He deceased upon the viii. of the Kalends of July (
viz. the 24. day of June) Anno 1088. Ord. Vital, p. 680. d.
and was buried in the Chapter House of the Priory of Lewis in Sussex, a
Monastery by him founded and dedicated to St. Pancrace, with this Inscription
engraven in white stone on his Tomb.

Hic, GUILLELME Comes, locus est laudis tibi fomes, Ibidem.

Hujus fundator and largus sedis amator.
Iste tuum funus decorat, placuit quia munus
Pauperibus Christi, quod prompta mente dedisti.
Ille tuos cineres servat Pancratius haeres,
Sanctorum castris quite sociabit in astris
Optime Pancrati, fer opem te glorificanti.
Daque poli sedem, talem tibi qui dedit aedem.
The Countess Gundred died in Childbed at Castle Acre in Norfolk, upon the vi.
of the Kalends of June ( viz. the 27th day of May) Anno 1085. about three years
before her Husband, and was also interred in the said Priory of Lewis, leaving
by him two Sons and three Daughters, viz. William Earl Warren, and Surrey, Lib.
Lewe^s. M. 8. Ordericus Vitalis, p. 680. d. Will. Gemmet. lib. 7. cap. 1.
Progenitor of the succeeding Earls, and Reginald Warren, who also had issue,
Gundred eldest Daughter, Edith first married to Gerald de Gurney, and
afterward to Drew de Monceux; and another Daughter the Wife of Ernisius de
Colunchis.

2. AGATHA the sixth and youngest Daughter of William the Conqueror, is
reported to spend her time so much in prayer, Vitalis p. 573. c.
that with continual kneeling her knees were brawned. She was affianced unto
Alphonso King of Galicia in Spain, Founder of the Kingdom of Portugal, renowned
for his Victories against the Moors; but this Lady Agatha having not only an
aversion to the person of Alphonso, but unto marriage it self, Rob. of Glocese.
p. 173.
made it her prayer that she might die a Virgin, which came to pass, for being
upon her journey into Spain, she deceased, and her Body being brought back into
her Native Country, received Burial at Bayeux.

William the Conqueror, besides these Children his lawful issue, Milles p. 62.
is (by Thomas Milles in his Catalogue of Honor) said to have a Bastard Son,
called PEVERELL, who was Lord of Nottingham and Derby.

2. ROBERT DUKE of NORMANDY, named COURTOIS.
CHAP. II.
Gules 2 Lions passant guardant Or, are the Arms assigned to Robert Duke of
Normandy; which indeed are painted on the surcoat of his Effigies upon his Tomb
at Gloucester. But many years after his interment, as evidently appears by
several Escocheons of Arms depicted on the sides and ends of the same
Monument, unto which I refer the Reader.
AMongst the Children of William the Conqueror and Queen Maud, Matthew. Patis
page 12. l. 38.
this Prince was the eldest Son, surnamed Courtchoyse, of his short Thighs; or
Courthose, of his short Breeches; or Courtois, of his courteous behavior: (for
so many are the Comments upon his Name.) He had his birth in Normandy, many
years before his Father subdued England; to which Dukedom, and also the
Earldome of Main, Gemmet. p. 298. and 293.
he pretended a Title; to Normandy, by the Gift of King William his Father, and
to Main, upon the interest of Margaret his betrothed Wife, Daughter of Herebert
Earl of that County (although she died in the Nunnery of Feschampe before the
Consummation of her Marriage.) This was not the first promise the Conqueror
had broken, and therefore ROBERT resolved by force of Arms to gain these
Territories rather then with dutiful patience to expect them; and the King of
France that now began to fear King William, endeavors by assisting the Son, to
lessen the Father; nor found he a less friend of his Mother, who grown
impatient not to see her Son in the possession of a Duchy, underhand
contributed largely with her own purse. Mat. Paris page 10. n. 10. Anno 1075.
ROBERT thus confederated, gives his Father battle at the Castle of Gerbery,
Anno 1075; who was there launced through the Arm, and unhorsed (but being
discovered, remounted again, and conveyed out of the battle, leaving him the
honor of the day.) Which unnatural action of Duke Robert did not so much
incense the King, but that he performed his promise to him at his death; yet
with such a brand, that he seemed rather therein to justify himself, than to
accommodate his Son. These are the words of his Will, The Dukedom of Normandy
(said he) before I fought against Harold in the Vale of Senlac, I ganted unto
my Son Robert, for that he is my first begotten, and has already received
homage of all the Barons of his Country; that honor given cannot be again
undone. But yet without doubt, I know it will be a miserable Region which is
subject to the rule of his Government; for he is a foolish proud Knave, and to
be punished with cruel fortune. These indeed prophetic expressions of the
dying Father, had their sad influences upon the Son, whose rebellion had forced
his curses; for upon discontent that Normandy was still retained (before his
Fathers sickness) ROBERT was gone into Germany to solicit assistance, for the
obtainment of his right in that Duchy; but hearing of his death, hasted into
the Province, Mat. Paris p. 10. n. 10.
and was peaceably received and made their Duke; which Title notwithstanding
seemed to him dishonorable, being disinherited of a Kingdom, into which his
younger brother William (taking advantage of his absence) had invested himself;
Rand. Higden in Potyehr. lib. 7. cap. 5.
but not so absolutely, but that ROBERT forced him to the payment of 3000 Marks
yearly during his life, and the Crown of England in reversion after his death.
Upon this agreement ROBERT undertook the Crossiade to the Holy Land with
Godfrey of Bulloigne against the Saracens; where for the space of four years he
behaved himself with such excellent courage and conduct, that when the
Christian Princes had subdued the City and Teritory of Jerusalem, they made him
the first offer of that Crown; which he refused (hearing of the death of his
brother King William) to receive his own in England: and in his return married
SIBIL daughter of Geoffrey and Sister of William, Earls of Conversana in Italy,
His Marriage. Gemmet. p. 299. a. Ord. Vital. p. 780. a. and 810. a.
a Lady which wanted no virtue to make her an acceptable Wife. To her the Duke
in his absence always left the rule of his affairs at home, which contracting
the envy of several Noble Women of Normandy, they made shift to remove her by
poison; having been his Wife five years. William Archbishop of Roan celebrated
her Exequies, and interred her in the body of the Cathedral Church of our Lady
at Roan, in a Tomb of white polished Marble; upon which these Verses were
engraven, Nobilitas, species, laus, gloria, magna potestas, Ord. Vital. p. 810.
a. b.

Vivere perpetuo non faciunt hominem.
Nam generosa, potens, dives Comitissa SIBILLA
Hoc jacet in Tumulo condita, facta cinis.
Cujus larga manus, men's provida, vita pudica,
Prodesset patriae, si diuturna foret.
Normanni Dominam, gens Apula deflet alumnam,
Cujus in occasu gloria magna ruit.
Velleris aurati cum Titan fidus inibat,
Mortem passa ruit, sit sibi vita Deus.


King William Rufus was scarce cold in his Grave, when Henry, Duke ROBERT's
youngest brother an Englishman born, taking the second time advantage by his
absence, usurps the Royal Diadem: And ROBERT being now returned into Normandy,
is easily persuaded by Ralphe Bishop of Durham, to claim his Kingdom with his
Sword; who urged to the Duke, That indeed King William Rufus had reason to
pretend to the Crown of England, because his Father had given it him by his
Will; but to what could Henry pretend, who had his portion left him in money;
and besides it was agreed with William, by consent of all the Lords of the
Realm, that the survivor of them should succeed. These pregnant reasons
quickly inflamed the Duke, who immediately raises a force, comes for England,
and by a conjunction with his friends here, makes up a formidable Army; but
instead of a battle, which in all probability might have put him in possession
of the Kingdom, Henry Hunting.
he was cheated into a composition at the old rate, 3000 Marks per annum, and
the Crown in reversion, and so returned home; which so much disobliged his
Normans, that they never after heartily asserted his interest. After this, he
made a visit out of kindness to see King Henry his brother, where he was so
well pleased with his entertainment, that in requital thereof, and to oblige
the Queen that was his God-daughter, Will. Gem. p. 298. a.
he released to King Henry the 3000 Marks. But returning home, and considering
better what he had done, he so repented him, that he spared not to say his
brother had directly cousened him, which coming to King Henry's ear, he was so
incensed, that he takes the occasion to invade Normandy, and at the battle of
Tenarchbray fought upon the fifth of the Kalends of October ( viz. the 27th day
of September) in the seventh year of his reign, Will Gem. p. 298. c. d. Ord.
Vital. p. 373. b. and 823. a. b. 887. a.
anno 1106. ROBERT was made prisoner, and sent into England, and kept in
durance sometime in the Castles of Bristol and the Devises, and last of all at
Cardiff in South Wales, where he remained a prisoner till his death, used for a
time with reasonable liberty for recreation, till attempting to make an escape,
it was thought fit to put out his eyes (an unbrotherly act) which though it
increased his misery, yet it shortened not his life; for he lived many years
after; in all from the time of his first imprisonment xxviii. His death (as
Mat. Westminster has it) proceeded from grief taken at his brother King Henry,
who (according to custom) sending him a Scarlet Robe; which he had tried on,
and finding the Capouch to be somewhat too strait for his head, thereupon sent
it to Duke ROBERT, whom he said had one much less. The Duke demanded of the
Messenger if any one had worn it, and being informed the King had first essaied
it, and what words he used, replied, I have now too long protracted a miserable
life; since my brother is so injurious to me, that be sends me his old clothes
to wear; and from that time would never eat any meat, or receive any comfort.

He deceased upon the iv. of the Ides ( viz. the 10th day) of February, Vitalis
p. 893. d. Will. Gemmet. p. 301. a. b.
Anno 1134; and was interred in the Chore of St. Peter's Church at Gloucester
before the high Altar, where not long after was erected for him a Tomb (in form
of a Chest) of Wainscot, with his Image thereon cross-legged; carved to the
life in heart of Oak; upon the pannels of the Chest are pencilled the Arms of
several of the Worthies, and at the foot the Arms of France and England
quarterly. Which show these Escocheons to be painted since the Reign of King
Henry the Fourth. This Monument (to the great credit of the substance of which
it was made) stood firm until that the Parliament Party having garrisoned the
City of Gloucester against King Charles I. the rebellious soldiers tore it to
pieces; but the parcels thereof (ready to be burnt) were by the care of a Sir
Hum. Tracy of Stanway in the County of Gloucester.
Loyal Person bought of the soldiers, and privately laid up, till the
Restoration of his now Majesty King Charles II. when the old pieces put
together again were repaired and beautified with Gold and Colors, at the
charge of that worthy Person; who has also added a Wire Skreen inform of an
Arch, for its future preservation. This is the form of the Monument, taken from
the Original in the Month of October, Anno 1665.

Honoratissimo et Nobilissimo Domino EDWARDO Baroni HERBERT. de CHIRBVRY. et
CASTLE-ISLAND, Tumu^ hanc ROBERTI Ducis NORMANNIAE Figuram. H.D. F. S.

FORTITVDINE ET PRVDENTIA

monument

Children of ROBERT Duke of Normandy by SIBIL of Conversana his Wife.
3. The Arms of this Earl William are said to be Gironne of eight pieces, Or
and Azure, an Ineschocheon Gules, which were the reputed Arms of the Forresters
and first Earls of Flanders to the time of Philip of Alsatias who as tradition
goes (in his first Expedition to the Holy Land) having slain a certain
Mahumetan King of Albania, did afterward bear his Arms, being a Lion Rampant
Sable, in a field Or; and transmitted them to his Posterity. As to the Arms of
the Forresters, the only example exhibited by Olivarius Vredius for the proof
of them, is the Monument of this WILLIAM, in Sigil. Commit, Flandriae, page 14.
which you have exactly drawn from his Copy in the next leaf; not so much as
seconded by the Seals of this WILLIAM or any other: but on the contrary by the
same Author exploded, as rather belonging to the Monastery of St. Bertin, where
several of those Earls received burial, and long afterward had their plain
Shields adorned with the Arms of the said Abbey. For it appears evidently by
the Seal of Robert the Frison, above 54 years before the time of this WILLIAM,
that the Lion was used for the Arms of that Earldome; and also that the said
Philip of Alsatiae Earl of Flanders, 17 years before his first Voyage to
Palestine, did bear in his Shield the same Lion rampant; which have ever since
been used for the Arms of that Earldome; and does contradict that general
opinion of the occasion of bearing the Lion.


WILLIAM Earl of Flanders, born at Roan in Normandy, Ord^^ital. p. 724. b. v:
Ibidem p. 780. ^.
so called from William Archbishop of that City, who gave him his Name at the
Font, was elder Son of Robert Duke of Normandy, and for his Covetousness
surnamed Miser. He was made Earl of Flanders by Philip le Gross King of
France, in the right of Maud Queen of England his Grandmother, and succeeded
Charles of Denmark in that County, Anno 1127. notwithstanding that several
other Lords laid claim to the said Earldome; as William de Loo Viscount of
Ipre, Theoderick of Alsatia, and Baldwin of Hainalt; having good reason to
contend, in respect of their proximity and descent, Petrus Baltasar in comitum
Flandriae Imagines. p. 80.
as appears by their Genealogies. This WILLIAM, before his advancement to the
County of Flanders, behaved himself with a seeming modesty and temper; but
being once possessed thereof, became tyrannical and cruel; by which carriage he
caused the Estates and Nobles of Flanders to reject him, Henninges in Quaria
Morarchia p. 78. and 79. Gemmet. p. 3 1. b. Ord. Vital. p. 887. a.
and choose in his room Theodorick Lantgrave of Alsatia, with whom WILLIAM
fighting the Battle of Aelst in Flanders, got the Victory, but in the
prosecution thereof lost his life by the wound of an arrow in his hand, upon
the vi. of the Kalends of August, ( viz. the 27th day of July) in the XXVIII.
year of King Henry I. his Uncle, Anno Dom, monument HIC IACCET GVLLIS COMES
FLANDRIE FILIUS ROBERTI DVCIS NORMANIE QUI OBIIT ANN DNI M.CC.XXVII
SIGILLVM GVILLELMI COMITIS FLANDRIE
seal of William Count of Flanders Clarissimo Generosissimoque viro. Dno:
IOHANNI FORTESCU de Salden in co Buckinghamiae Equiti aurato et Baronetto
Tumulti hanc GVILELMI Comitis Flandriae figuram D.D.D. F.S.

SIGILLVM WILLELMI COMITIS FLANDRIE
seal of William Count of Flanders 1128. (six years before the decease of Duke
Robert his Father, whose releasment and re-establishment he had strenuously
endeavored and was interred at St. Omer, in the Monastery of St. Bertin,
Sigilla Comitum Flandria, page 14.
leaving his Successor Theodorick in quiet possession of the said Earldome. The
Streamer or Sandard of WILLIAM Duke of Normandy (mentioned in my Annotations in
the second Page of this First Book, and new discoursed of upon the exhibition
of these Seals of WILLIAM Earl of Flanders) you have exactly represented upon
his Great Seal, when he afterward came to be King of England; on that of his
Son King William Rufus, and upon the Coin of King Stephen, charged with a
Cross: Nor was this Standard figured only upon the Seals of our Kings at home,
but abroad also, among the Neighboring Princes; for this WILLIAM Earl of
Flanders, whose Monument and Seals are depicted in the precedent Page; on that
marked with the Letter C. is noted to have a Standard also ( Olivarius Vredius
in Sigal Com. Flandr. p 11.) and for another instance of this kind, you may
observe that Humbert Earl of Morienne, now called Savoy, to a Grant made to
Boson Viscount of Augusta, sealed with his figure on Hors-back, armed at all
points, in the right hand of which is a Standard charged with an Eagle
displaied, which was his Devise (the Charter dated Anno 1206. ( Histoire
Genealogique de la Royalle Mayson de Savoye par Samuel Guichenon, p. 121.)
which Streamer is never to be found in the Seals of other than Sovereign
Princes. Of this sort were those Standards of Edwin King of Northumberland, who
began his Reign Anno 677, carried always before him: and called in English a
Tuffe, as Venerable Bede observes. That of King Aelfred, named Reofan, that is
Corvus; of which it is reported, That if they who displaied it in Battle were
destined to Victory, there would appear in the middle of the Ensign as it were
a Living Raven upon the wing; but, if to be overcome, it would hang directly
downward, without motion. A third was the Standard of King Oswald, of Gold and
Purple, interwoven; which after his death was set up over his Tomb at Beardney
Abbey. Bid lib. 3. cap. 11. And lastly, That of King Harold, lost with his
life and Kingdom to William the Conqueror, and afterward by William sent to
the Pope; the form thereof resembling an Armed Man, wrought in Gold and
Precious Stones with most exquisite workmanship. (mentioned by Malmesbury.)

And well might this Imperial Ensign be exhibited among the Regalia and Marks
of Dominion, when it was displaied only in the Army where the King or Sovereign
Prince himself commanded in Person; (for which cause it has with us the
Denomination of the STANDARD ROYAL) In levioribus enim congressibus (says Sir
Henry Spelman in Aspilogia, p. 22.) nunquam visum est (meaning the Standard)
sed tantum in ipso regio exercitu jam de summa rerum confligente. And
Huntington fol. 388. number. 20. speaking of David King of Scots invading King
Stephen, has it, Erecto (viz. Standardo) huic concurrendum est ut de salute
publica perictitaturis. Sic Davide Scotorum Rege innumerabilem exercitum in
Angliam promoventent contra Stephanum proceres Boreales viriliter restituerunt,
fixo STANDARDO, idest, Regio insigni, apud Alverton. And Brito Armoricanus (in
Apice, lib. cjus 11.) mentioning the Conflict of Otho the Emperor against
Philip Augustus King of France, emphatically expresses the Dignity of this
Ensign in this Hexameter

STANDARDO Mundi Dominum se disputat Otho.

As the Middle Ages among the Romans (says Sir Hen. Spelman) changed the
Imperial Banner into the Name of the Labarum, so other Nations in the more
Modern, that of the Labarum into the appellation of a STANDARD, a word derived
from the Germans, signifying a Stationary, or thing fixed. The Saxons called it
Becan, its probable because Becen signifies Discernabic; from which our Becons
set upon the tops of Mountains and Hills (fired to give notice to the Country
upon occasion of Insurrections and Invasions) derive their Denomination.


The form of his Tomb of Gray Marble, I present to your view in the foregoing
Page (copied out of Olivarius Vredius) upon the Verge of which is this
Inscription, HIC JACET GUILLELMVS COMES FLANDRIE FILIVS ROBERTI DVCIS NORMANIE
QVI O'BIIT ANNO DOMINI M.CCXXVII. which Epitaph disagreeth 99 years from the
time of his death; for he departed this World in the year of our Lord M.
CXXVIII. The two Seals (mentioned in the precedent Page) are taken out of the
same Author, Page 11. and 12. that marked with the Letter C. annexed to
Charters dated Anno 1127. and that noted with D. to one bearing date Anno 1128.
( ei fatalis, meaning thereby the year of his death.)

This WILLIAM Earl of Flanders had two Wives, Will. Gem. met. p. 299. a. b.
the first of which was SIBIL (whose Mother also named Sibil, was Daughter of
Foulk Earl of Anjou) after divorced from him and remarried to his Successor
Theodorick beforementioned; His Marriages. Ord. Vital. p. 784. b.c.
after which he took to his second Wife Joan Daughter of Humbert Earl of
Morienne (now called Savoy) Sister of Queen Alix of France, Wife of King Lewis
le Gross; but by neither of these had any Child.

3. HENRY the younger Son of Duke Robert, Will. Malmesb. fol. 62. b. a. 30.
hunting in the New Forest in Hampshire, was ( Absalom like) caught up in the
boughs of a Tree by the Jaws (his Horse passing under) and so was left hanging
until he died; being the second person that in that same place came to a
violent death, Order. Vital. p. 781. a.
preceded by Richard, and succeeded by King William Rufus, both his Uncles; who
also there had their untimely ends.

Natural Issue of Duke ROBERT.

3. RICHARD and WILLIAM, Ordericus Fitalis p. 780. c. and 781. a.
Bastard Sons of Robert Duke of Normandy, whom he begat of the young and
beautiful Concubine of a certain old Priest living on the borders of France.
These Children were by their Mother for a long time carefully educated, and
being grown up, by her presented to the Duke in Normandy, who by several tokens
made her self known to him; but he doubting of the Children, she in his
presence purged them by Fire-Ordeal. These Sons coming to man's estate, one of
them took a surfeit in Hunting, of which he died; and the other (after his
Father Duke Robert was taken prisoner at the battle of Tenarchbray) undertook a
Voyage to Jerusalem, and there died fighting valiantly against the Infidels.

WILLIAM II. KING of ENGLAND, and DUKE of NORMANDY, surnamed RUFUS.
CHAP. III.
WILLIAM the Conqueror being dead, An. Dom. 1087. Sept. 9.
the Crown of England did by right of succession fall upon his eldest Son
Robert, but this WILLIAM his third Son (born in Normandy, in the XXI. year of
his Fathers Dukedom, and surnamed of the red color of his hair in French
Rous, and in Latin Rufus) always framed his actions so parallel with his
Fathers humor, that he thought him much more worthy to succeed him in his
Kingdom. Matthew. Paris p. 14. n. 10.20. Rob. of Glocest. p. 192. Rogerus
Hoveden, p. 264. a. n. 30.
And Lanfrank the learned Lombard, this William's Tutor, Archbishop of
Canterbury (who had given him his Education and the Order of Knighthood) so
prevailed with the people, that Robert (being absent at that time in Germany)
was rejected, and WILLIAM hastening into England, was crowned at Westminster by
the said Lanfrank upon the vi. of the Kalends of October ( viz. the 26th day of
September) in the year of our Salvation 1087. seventeen days after the decease
of his Father. But having gotten a peaceable possession of the Crown, he must
not think to hold it so, for both his brother Robert prepares to recover it
from him, and the Lords of England combine with Robert to assist him in it. The
first mover of this trouble was Odo Bishop of Bayeux his Uncle, in his Fathers
time imprisoned by Lanfrank, and therefore owed him a grudge; but though this
storm was violent, yet it soon passed over; that indeed of his Lords with more
difficulty, Matthew. Paris, p. 16. n. 10. Rand. Higden in Potychr. lib. 7. cap. 5.
but that of his brother Robert with more cost; for it was at last agreed that
Rufus should pay him 3000 Marks yearly during his life, and leave him the
Kingdom after his decease. Some of the Lords were reconciled to the King by
fair words, and others again reduced by force; and Odo chief Engineer of all
the work besieged in Rochester Castle, taken prisoner, and forced to abjure the
Realm.

Malcolme King of Scots taking advantage of WILLIAM's troubles at home, invades
Northumberland, burns and harrasses the Country, and returns home laden with
his spoils; upon which King WILLIAM and Duke Robert invade Scotland, Mat. Paris
p. 16. n. 10.
and force Malcolme to acknowledge his former Homage, and upon faith given,
return; Being by these successes better assured of an establishment than
before, WILLIAM now began to tread his Fathers steps, and with the like
severity and oppression to humble the haughty spirits of the English, by
imposing on them many intolerable Taxes, thereby keeping them low, and
bereaving them of those requisites that might either promote their hope or his
fears.

Duke Robert at this time finding his brother King WILLIAM not to keep his word
in paying him his Pension, Willel. Gemmet.
complains to Philip King of France, and by his aid takes some Towns which he
before had delivered in pawn for Money to his brother WILLIAM, who hearing
thereof, hastens into Normandy; and the King of France by him bribed, forsook
Robert; so that being deprived of assistance, he was compelled to crave pardon;
shortly after which he undertook his Voyage to Jerusalem.

His war made upon Rhees ap Tewdor the last Prince of South Wales, Chron.
Willia.
proved tedious, but was at last recompensed with a signal Victory, by the
death of that Prince, and a better assurance of subjection from that people,
than had been exacted by any of his Predecessors. At which time Rob. Fitz.
Hamon and his followers obtained a fruitful possession in those parts.

King WILLIAM being at Gloucester, was out of kindness visited by Malcolme the
valiant King of Scots, but not admitting him to his presence, it put the Scot
into such a passion, that returning home he raised an Army, and the second time
invaded and spoiled Northumberland; Matthew. Paris, p. 17. n. 30. Vincent. p. 369.
but by Robert Mowbray the Kings General, Earl of that Province, he, together
with his eldest son Edward, were defeated and slain near Alnwicke, Anno 1092.
and Mowbray demanding a reward of King WILLIAM for his service, and being
neglected, was so highly moved, that he combined with diverse Lords to depose
the King: but the plot being discovered, (for Traitors seldom thrive better)
Mowbray after some resistance, Rogerus Hoveden, fol. 267. n. 10, 20, 30.
was forced to seek Sanctuary at Tinmouth; from whence he was taken, and
imprisoned at Windsor Castle, about the year 1095.

The Pope had no friend of our WILLIAM, who slighted his binding and loosing,
and held it unavailable to invocate Saints, he punished the then swelling
Clergy for their pride, luxury, and avarice, by heavy impositions; by which
means he filled his Coffers: heard a Disputation of the Jews (who bribed him
to favor them) against the Christians, but they lost the day and their money
together. Rob. of Glocest. p. 196. b. and 197.
A Groom of his Chamber on a time bringing him a pair of Breeches of three
shillings price, was by him blamed, and commanded to furnish him with a pair
fit for a King, that should cost a Mark; he goes, and presenting him with a
meaner pair, which he said cost so much; Yea Bellamy (or by St. Luke's Face)
said the King, they are well bought; such was the frugality of those times. His
liberality to religious persons and places, do manifest he was not void of
Religion; and those stately Structures of the Tower; and Westminster Hall of
270 foot long and 74 in breadth, are sufficient marks of his Magnificence. And
although it be somewhat tedious, yet I cannot omit (among many) this one
example of his Magnanimity; Word being brought him, as he sat at dinner, that
his City of Man's in Normandy was besieged, and in great danger to be taken, if
not suddenly relieved; whereupon King WILLIAM asked which way Man's lay, and
then caused Masons immediately to take down the wall, to make him passage the
next way; and so rode instantly toward the Sea; his Lords advising him to stay
till his people were ready, No, said he, but such as love me, I know will
follow me; and being on shipboard, and the weather growing tempestuous, he was
advised to stay for a calm season, No, replied he again, fear nothing, I never
heard of any King that was drowned; and thereby coming to Man's unexpected, he
raised the Siege, and took Helias Count de la Flesche (Author of the tumult)
prisoner; who vaunting to the King, and saying, Now indeed you have taken me by
a wile, but if I were at liberty again, you should find another kind of
resistance; at which the King laughing, said, Then go your ways, and do your
worst, and let us see what feats you can do; and so set him at liberty.

His death was casual, Gesta Guil. Ducis Nor. p. 213. c. will. Gemmet. p. 296.
d.
, by the glance of an arrow from a Tree (some say from the beam of a Deers
Horn) shot at a Stagg (by Sir Walter Tyrrell a French Knight) in the New
Forest (near a place called Charingham) upon the iv. of the Nones of August (
viz. the 2. day of August) Anno 1100; after he had reigned 12 years, 11
months, and 9 days.) wherein 4 Abbeys and 36 Parish-Churches had been
demolished, with the removing of all the Inhabitants, to make room for wild
beasts, or dogs game; as Gualter Mapes, who lived immediately after, has it.

monument Reverendo in Christo Patri GEORGIO P^^lione Divina Episcopo
WINTONIENSI Nobilissimique Ordinis Garterij Praelato; Hanc Tumuli WILLELMI
secundi Regis, cogno minati RVEL Figuram, H.D.D.D.F.S.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE


Chap. 3.
Rex cervum insequitur, Matthias Prideaux M. A. in his Introduction to History.
p. 315.
Regem vindicta, The King the Stagg, Vengeance the King does chase, Tyrell's
hard happ, concludes this Tragic Case.
Tyrellus
Non been provisum transfixit acumine ferri. William II.

He was the third man of his Fathers Progeny that in this place came to an
untimely end, Will. Gem. p. 296. d.
thus finishing his troublesome yet victorious Reign, having governed 12 years
and 11 months, wanting 8 days; aged above 40 years: who being of an able
Constitution, and neglecting Marriage, is generally charged with incontinency,
but with nothing in particular; for neither is mentioned any violence he ever
offered to any, nor is any woman named to be his Paramour; and Princes
Concubines are seldom concealed. But Sir Richard Baker tells us of a Bastard
Son he had, called Bertrannus; whom he advanced in honor, and matched into a
Noble Family.

The dead Body of King WILLIAM being thrown into a Colliars Cart, was in the
journey overturned and left in the dirt; whence it was taken, and had Royal
Burial in the Cathedral Church of St. Swithen at Winchester (by the appointment
of his Brother and Successor King Henry I.) before the High Altar; Will Gem. p.
297. a.
where his Tomb is in being, of Gray Marble, raised about two foot from the
Pavement; the Figure of which you have in the precedent page marked A. with a
prospect of the said Altar copied from the Original; which Monument being broke
open (by the Rebels in the reign of our late Sovereign Lord King Charles I. (as
I am informed) was found to contain the dust of that King, some Relics of
Cloth of Gold, a large Gold Ring, and a small Chalice of Silver.

Upon his Great The Great Seal of this King nearly resembles that of his
Father, excepting the Crown on his Head (which is much like the Coronets that
our Earls use at this day) and his Standard slit up almost to the Staff, and
charged with cross strokes. Both which differences are expressed over the
Effigies of this WILLIAM in the first page of this Book.
Seal he wrote himself WILIELMUS DEI GRATIA REX ANGLORUM, Speed p. 427.
and on the reverse WILIELMUS DEI GRATIA DUX NORMANORUM. Although its well
known he had no Title to Normandy, but only by pawn from his Brother Duke
Robert.

HENRY I. KING of ENGLAND, and DUKE of NORMANDY, surnamed BEAU-CLERKE.
CHAP. IV.
HENRY fourth and youngest Son of William the Conqueror, For the Devise or
Arms of this King HENRY, I cannot omit or pass over in silence the Story of
John the Monk of Marmonstier (or de Majori Monasterio) in Tourain, an Author of
the time, who tells us, That when this King chose Geoffrey Plantagenet Son of
Foulk Earl of Anjou, Tourain, and Main, to be his Son in Law, by marrying him
to his only Daughter and Heir Maud the Empress, and made him Knight; after the
hathing, and other solemn Ritesperformed ( pedes ejus sotularibus in superficie
Leonculos Aureos habentibus munianter) Boots embroidered with Golden Lions were
drawn on his Legs; and also that (Clypeus Leoriculos Aureos imaginarios habens
collo ejus suspenditur) a Shield', with Lions of Gold therein, was hung about
his Neck. Favine lib. 3. page 577. 578, and 579. Here we find the Lions of
England (the golden Lions) but cannot s^^ in what color Field, of what number,
or in what posture; which Lions were not fixed, nor became hereditary to the
Kings of England, till the Reign of Richard I. when he caused his second Great
Seal to be made.
born at Selby in Yorkshire Anno 1070. in the third year of his Fathers Reign,
An. Dom. 1100. August
was bred at Paris (say some) others, at Cambridge; Rob. of Glocest. p. 212. b.
Matthew. Paris p. 6. d. 30.
its probable at both places: wherein he so profited, that he acquired the
Surname of Beauclerke, or The fair Scholar. Upon the death of King William
Rufus (taking advantage of the absence of Duke Robert his eldest Brother at
that time in Apulia, Ord. Vital. p. 665.
on his return from the Holy Land) he suddenly seized his Treasure, and then
usurped his Throne, and was crowned at Westminster upon the fourth day after
his Brother King William's death, being the 6. day of August, in the year of
our Lord 1100. by Maurice Bishop of London (Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury
being then in exile) which enterprise was highly advanced by the Authority and
Industry of Henry Newborrow Earl of Warwick; Gemmet. p. 227. a. 6.
the people expressing also to King HENRY a prone inclination, for that he was
born in England, and after his Father was crowned King. On which politic
criticisme, he claimed and obtained the Kingdom. Having thus mounted the Seat
of Majesty, he neglected no means of a firm settlement therein, W. Malm. fol.
88. a. n. 30. Matthew. Paris p. 58. l. 6.
against the return of his Brother Robert. And to that purpose (in the first
year of his reign, Anno 1100, upon St. Martins day, at London) he contracted
both amity and alliance with Edgar King of Scots, by taking his Sister Maud (in
her Baptism called Edith) to Wife; His first Marriage. Ord. Vital. p. 784. a.
and 843. b. Will. Gemmet. p. 297. a. b.
by which act he not only diverted that Prince's Sword, but stood assured of
his assistance. She was Daughter of Malcolme III. of the Name (surnamed Canmoir
or Great Head) King of Scots, by Margaret his Wife, Sister to Edgar called
Etheling, and Daughter of Edward, Son of Edmond Irouside, the most valiant
Saxon King, Robert of Glocest. p. 213.
the scourge and terror of the Danes; so that by her intermarriage (...)
HENRY, the two Families of the Normans and Saxons were united in the
sovereignty. And this, more than any other respect, both gained, and ever after
continued the peoples affections firm to HENRY. The solemnity of her Marriage
(and afterward that of her Coronation, upon Sunday the 11th of November in the
same year 1100. at the Abbey of Westminster) was performed by Anselme
Archbishop of Canterbury. Her education she had among the Nuns of Wilton and
Rumsey, W. Malm. page 92. b. a. 50.
whether for her love to a single life, or to avoid some inferior matches
offered by her Father) Writers do differ; yet sure it is, that for the common
good she abandoned her devoted life, and by the aforesaid Anselme, without
dispensation from Rome, was joined to King HENRY; who having been his Wife 17
years and upwards (famed for her humility, piety, charity, and all virtuous
dispositions, far from the ordinary, Will. Malmesh. page 93. a. n. 30. Rogerus
Hoveden, page 271. b. n. 50. Robert of Glocest. p. 217. a.
either vices, or imbecilities of her Sex) she departed this world (to enjoy a
better) at Westminster the first day of May, in the 18th year of his Reign, and
of our Salvation 1118. And was interred in the Collegiate Church of St. Peter,
in the Chapel of the Kings, on the South side of St. Edward the Confessor. Her
devotion, time of death, and time and place of burial, is thus remembered by
Robert of Gloucester.

This Queen Molde at Westiminster long and many a day
In prayers and in penance by the Kings leave lay:
And after deyed as it is radde the xi. hundred yer
And xviii. after Mary our Lord bear.
At Westminster head was I buried a Saint Philips day,
And Saint Jacob, as hit falleeth the ferste day of May.
As King HENRY by this Marriage seemed to strenthen the Title of their Issue to
the Crown, so the more to cement the people to his interest, he made fair
promises for reforming those rigorous Laws imposed by his Father and Brother;
and in some sort restored those of St. Edward the Confessor. He granted the
Nobility free leave to hunt, and to enclose Parks for Deer; banished from his
Court all Flatterers, regulated the Extravagancy of Apparel, and Luxury in
Diet: Rob. of Glocest. p. 336.
Ordained punishment by death for Thieves and Robbers, and the loss of sight to
them that counterfeited his Coin; and also is said to have held the first
Parliament, which he ordained should consist of the Three Estates, of which
himself was Head. He obliged the Clergy by recalling Anselme Archbishop of
Canterbury from banishment, and furnishing the Vacancies in the Church, with
learned and grave Divines.

And because it is not less pleasing to the people to have bad Ministers
punished, than the good to be advanced, he imprisoned Ralph Bishop of Durham (a
principal Causer of their late troubles.) In this posture stood King HENRY,
when Duke Robert his Eldest Brother was by slow journeys returned from the
Holy Land into Normandy; to whom Bishop Ralphe (having broke prison) repaired,
and by many reasons persuaded to dispute his Title to England with his Sword:
whereupon he levies an Army, arrives in England, and the day of Battle being
appointed, by the mediation of Friends an Agreement was made betwixt the two
Brothers on the same terms as in William Rufus his time, an unfortunate one for
Robert; by which he lost not only his Kingdom and afterward his Pension, but
his Dukedom of Normandy, and his eyes into the Bargain; for King HENRY not
long after (whether out of distaste at some affront offered him by Robert, or
which is more probable, stirred up with desire of enlarging his Dominions)
invades, and after many bickerings, conquers Normandy (and takes his Brother
Robert prisoner at Tenarchbray) about that time forty years that Normandy had
before subdued England. And now was that prediction of the Conqueror on his
Deathbed fulfilled; who observing his Son HENRY to be much discontented, for
that he had bequeathed Normandy to Robert, England to William, and no appennage
to him, but only a bare Portion in money; said unto him, Content thy self
Harry, for the time will come, when thy turn shall be served as well as theirs.
Verified in the possession of both their Dominions, as the Inscription on his
great Seal does testify; viz.

On the one side of this great Seal is represented the King on his Throne, in
his right hand he holds a Sword, and in his left he sustaines a Globe
surmounted by a Cross patee, upon which is fixed a Dove; a bird I observe to
be used upon the Scepter of St. Edward the confessor, as appears by his great
Seal ( Speed page 398.) and its probable that this Dove was taken up by King
Henry as an Emblem of the Restoration in some sort of St. Edwards Laws, and
the mittigation of those of his Father and Brother; so that, practicing the
clemency of King Edward, he would also bear his Symbol or Devise: that as the
Sword in his right hand was to denote his Power and Justice, the Dove standing
on the Mound in his left hand, was emblematically to demonstrate that his
Government was to be mixed with Clemency and Mercy. This Dove was used in like
manner by his Successors King Stephen and King Henry II. but discontinued by
King Richard I. Upon the reverse of this Kings Seal is a Man on Horsback armed
at all points, holding in his right hand a Sword, and in his left an Oval
Shield, the unequal side only to be seen.


HENRICUS DEI GRATIA REX ANGLORUM. Speed p. 434.


And on the other side,

HENRICUS DEI GRATIA DUX NORMANNORUM.

Not four years after the death of Queen Maud (married upon interest of State)
King HENRY (for the love he had to beauty) took to his second Wife Adeliza or
Alice, His second Marriage.
Daughter of Godfrey the First Duke of Brabant (Sifter to another Duke Godfrey
and Josceline of Lovaine, Henricus Hunting. fol. 218. b. n. 10. Matthew. Paris,
p. 69. l. 14.
Ancestor in direct Male Line to Algernone the present Earl of Northumberland)
whom he married at Windsor on Candlemass day ( viz. the second of February)
Anno 1121. in the 22 year of his reign. She was afterward crowned at London by
Ralph Archbishop of Canterbury with great Splendour, and is thus characterized
by my old Poet.

Now a go to Queen Alice that ich er of told, Rob. of Glocest. fol. 216. and
217.

So fair as she in Christendom was there none I hold.
He spoused hur at Wyndesor that himself ganne rer
Of his Coronement, the two and twentieth year.
And of our Lord 1121.
To Queen Alice the King gave in Dower the Castle and Earldome of Arundell, who
having been his Wife about 14 years, Chron. Normanniae, page 978. b.
but ever Childless, surviving him was re-married to Will. Albaney, in her
right Earl of Arundell; and by him had issue Earl William the second (from whom
by the Fitz Alane's Earls of Arundell Thomas Howard the present Duke of
Norfolk and Earl of Arundell, etc. derives his descent) Godfrey de Albiney and
Alice married to John Earl of Augie. Rob. of Glocest. page 219. a.
The time of her birth I find not, but the place of her interment to be the
Abbey of Reading, near to her first Husband King Henry. The princely virtues of
which King being profitable to all, did with their luster so dazzle the eyes of
his subjects, that they could not discern his vices; for besides his Usurpation
of the Crown, and his cruelty to his Brother Duke Robert, he was also very
wanton, as appears by his numerous natural Issue, all by him publicly owned;
Will. Gemmet. p. 306. d. 307. a.
the Males highly advanced, and the Females richly married: His sobriety other
ways was admirable, whose temperance was of proof against any meat objected to
his appetite, Lampreyes only excepted, on a surfeit of which he died at St.
Denis in the Forest of Lions (after seven days sickness) upon the iv. of the
Nones of December ( viz. the second day of December) in the LXV. year of his
Age, Ibidem p. 309. b.
and of Our Lord 1135. when he had reigned King of England 35 years and 4
months, lacking one day, and been Duke of Normandy 29 years, two months, and
four days; (in whom ended the Heirs Males of the Norman Line, so that his
Daughter and Heir Maud the Empress, transmitted the Crown into the Family of
Plantagenet, in her Son Henry II. of the Name, called Fitz-Empress;
notwithstanding her Cousin German Stephen Earl of Mortain, both usurped and held
it during his life.) From thence his Corpse was conveyed to Roan, Robert of
Glocest. p. 219. a.
and there his Bowels, Tongue, Heart, Eyes, and Brains were taken out, and
buried in the Church of St. Mary de Prato; the body also sliced and poudered
with salt, was wrapped in a Bull hide, to avoid the stench, being so
intolerable that the Physician that took out his Brains was poisoned
therewith, and immediately died; whereupon some observed, that other Kings
killed men in their life time, but he also, after he was dead: thence also was
his Corpse carried into England, Will. Gemmet. p. 309. b. 308. a. b, c.
and honorably interred in the Church of our Lady in the Abbey of Reading
(upon Christmas day next following, King Stephen with many of the Clergy being
present) which he had founded, and richly endowed, as he also did the Abbeys of
Hide and Circester, and the Priory of Dunstable. His Wife Queen MAVD also
founded the Priory of Holy Trinity within Aldgate, and the Hospital of St.
Giles in the Fields, so that by himself, his Queen, and other pious persons, 24
Foundations to religious uses were in his Reign erected. In Gemmeticensis I
find these several Epitaphs composed for him not long after his death. Ibidem,
p. 309. c, d.


Quod modicum praestent, quod opes magnum nihil extent,
Rex probat HENRICUS, Rex vivens pacis amicus.
Extiterat siquidem praecunctis ditior idem,
Occiduae genti quos praetulit ordo regendi.
At necis ad pestes, quid gemmae, pallia, vestes,
Aes varium terrae, quid castra sibi valuere?
Vilibus hinc aequam dans sortem, pallida, nequam,
Portendendo pedem, mors ejus pulsat ad aedem.
Quo dum dira febris prima sub nocte Decembris
Mundum nudavit, mundo mala multiplicavit.
Quippe pater populi, pax and tutela pusilli,
Dum pius ipse ruit, furit impius, opprimit, urit:
Anglica lugeat hinc, Normannica gens fleat illinc.
Occidis HENRICE, tunc pax, nunc luctus utrique.
Another, Sensu, divitiis, aditu, feritate decenti
More, plus dictu, vim perpessis scelerosis,
Excellens, locuples, haud difficilis, reverendus
Hic jacet HENRICUS Rex quandam, pax, decus orbis.


Yet another, Victor, sectator, vindex, tutamen, amator,
Bellorum, pacis, scelerum, regni, bonitatis,
Continet hunc loculum Rex notus ubique locorum,
HENRICUS pridem, tunc terror, nunc cinis idem.


I do not question (although we find not any particular mention of this Kings
Monument) but that the Abbot and Monks of Reading crected a Tomb answerable to
the Dignity of so magnificent a Founder: But well might the memory thereof,
perish and be buried in the rubbish of Oblivion, when the bones of this Prince
could not enjoy repose in his Grave (not more happy in a quiet Sepulcher than
the two Norman Williams, his Father and Brother) but were (upon the suppression
of the religious Houses in the Reign of King Henry VIII.) thrown out, Tho.
Milles page 78.
to make room for a Stable of Horses, and the whole Monastery converted to a
dwelling house; which sacrilegious Act, is thus lamented by a Modern Poet: O
soul impiety,
HENRY the First, that famous King,
which here entombed did lie,
Now as a rascal is dug up,
and turned our of his Grave;
And as a stranger seeks in vain
a resting place to have:
For why, the greedy thirst of gain,
affords even Kings no place,
But dreadful is unto their Tombs,
least it should them deface.
-- Heu dira piacula, Primus
Neustrius HENRICUS situs hic, inglorius urna
Nunc jacet ejectus, tumulum novus advena quaerit
Frustra; Nam Regitenues invidit arenas
Auri sacra fames; Regum metuenda sepulchris.


Children of King HENRY the First by Queen MAVD of Scotland his First Wife.
3. WILLIAM only son of Queen Maud and King Henry (by Ord. Vitalis called
Guillielmus Adelinus) was born in the second year of his Fathers Reign, Ord.
Vital. p. 702. a. b.
Anno 1102. At the age of 14 years, the Nobility of England did Him homage,
Ordericus Vitalis, p. 841 b. and 851 b.
and swear fealty to Him at Shrewsbury. In June, An. 1119. He took to Wife
Matilda, Daughter of Foulk, Earl of Anjou, the Marriage being solemnised at
Luxseul, in the County of Burgundy; upon which Alliance, besides a strict
League contracted betwixt the two Fathers, William had the County of Maine.
Rogerus Hoveden, f. 273 a. numb. 20.
And the same year being made Duke of Normandy, did homage for it to Lewis the
Gross, King of France, and received the homage and oaths of the Nobility of
that Country, who were soon after discharged of that tie: For Duke William the
same year returning thence for England, Ordericus Vitalis, p. 216.649 b. 870 a.
869 a.
was upon the 26 of November ( viz. the VI. of the Calends of December) An.
1119. in the Seventeenth year of His age, cast away near Barbflete, together
with Richard his Base Brother, Maud, or Mary, Countess of Perch, His Natural
Sister, and near 200 others; for the sake of this Sister, Prince William is
said to have lost His life: For the Ship being dashed in pieces against a Rock,
He, and some few others secured themselves by leaping into the Boat, and might
have escaped: But the Duke being more moved with the sad cries of the Countess
his Sister, then possessed with the consideration of his own safety,
endeavoring to receive her in, had the Boat so overcharged with the Company
which pressed in with her, that they wholly perished, except one unwelcome
Messenger, who escaped with this sad news, to the great grief of his Father,
and the whole Kingdom. Upon this William I find this Epitaph.

Abstulit hunc terrae matri maris unda noverca, Camden Remains, p. 354.

Proh dolor! occubuit Sol Anglicus, Anglia plora:
Quaeque prius fueras gemino radiata nitore,
Extincto nato vivas contenta parente.
The Princess Matilda, Rogerus Hoveden, f. 273. number. 20.
Widow of Prince Adeline signifies Etheling in the Saxon, or in Latin Princeps.
Adeline, aged only Twelve years, highly favored by King Henry the First, her
Father-in-Law, returned not suddenly into Anjou, but remained some time in
England, where she was treated and served according to her quality. But the air
of her own Country, after some years of absence, seeming more sweet to her, she
returned into the Court of her Father, Gabriel du Moulin in Histor. Normanniae,
page 322 and 323.
which she abandoned Ten years after; when by the advice of Geoffrey, Bishop of
Chartres, she quitted the World, and took upon her a Religious Habit in the
Abbey of Fout-Eurault.

3. MAVD the Empress, only Daughter, and (after the death of her Brother) Heir
of King Henry the First, and Queen Maud his first Wife; of whom, see more in
the V Chapter of this First Book.

Natural Children of King Henry the First.
3. ROBERT, Earl of Gloucester, first Natural Son of King Hen. I. whose story
follows in the VII Chapter of this First Book.

3. RICHARD, another Base Son of King Henry, was, as appears by an ancient
Register of the Monastery of Abingdon, born in the Reign of William Rufus,
Ordericus Vitalis, p. 852 a. 854. a, b, c, d. 867 c. 875 d.
of the Widow of Anskil, a Nobleman of the Country adjoining to that Abbey. In
the year 1119. this Richard was with His Father King Henry, at the reducing and
burning of the Town of Evereux, held out against him by the partakers of
William, Son of Robert, Duke of Normandy; and also, at the Battle of Brenvile,
where the said William, and Lewis King of France, were forced to fly for their
lives, leaving King Henry the Field, with several Prisoners of note. And much
about the same time, Richard was sent with 200 Horse to the succor of Ralph de
Guader; with which assistance, Ralph was so well pleased, that in requital he
bestowed upon him his Daughter Amitia, with the Seigneuries of Bretvile, Gloz,
and Lyre; but this Marriage was prevented by the death of Richard, drowned near
Barflete, in his return for England, among other of King Henry's Children, the
26 day of November, An. 1119. And Amitia, his espoused Wife, Williel. Gemmet.
p. 306 d.
was afterward married to Robert, Earl of Leicester.

3. REYNALD, Earl of Cornwall, Third Natural Son of King Henry I. mentioned at
large in the IX Chapter of this First Book.

3. ROBERT, another Base Son of King Henry I. was born of Edith, the Sister of
Ive, Son and Daughter of Forne, the Son of Sigewolfe, both of them great Barons
in the North; Williel. Gemmet. p. 306 d.
which Edith, King Henry afterward gave in Marriage to Robert Doiley, Baron of
Hook-Norton in Oxfordshire, and with her bestowed on him the Manor of Eleydon,
Speed, p. 443. col. 2. number. 69.
in the County of Buckingham, by whom he had issue Henry Doiley, Baron of
Hook-Norton, who often mentions this ROBERT in his Charters, ever calling him
ROBERT his Brother, the Kings Son. I have seen a Charter of (Mahalt de Abrinco
uxor Roberti filii Regis Henrici) Maud de Auranches, the Wife of Robert, In
Camera Ducatus Lancastriae.
Son of King Henry, to which Her Seal is appendant; impressed with Her
Effigies, without any Shield of Arms; which Maud, in all probability, was the
Wife of this ROBERT.

3. GILBERT, Williel. Gemmet. p. 306 d.
another Natural Son of King Henry, is mentioned by William Gemmeticensis, the
Norman Monk in the Chronicle of that Country, written by John Tailor, being a
Translator of that Work out of Latin into French; and not long ago, Speed, p.
443. col. 2. number. 70.
in the Treaties betwixt England and France, written in the French Tongue by
John Tillet, Secretary to King Henry II. And yet in them not any other mention
is made, but only of his name.

3. WILLIAM de TRACY, Williel. Gemmet. p. 306 d.
another Base Son of Henry I. had for his Appennage, the Town of Tracy in
Normandy, from which he took his surname, and was called WILLIAM of TRACY,
whose death immediately followed that of his Father King Henry I. Speed, p.
443. col. 2. number. 71.
But whether he were the Progenitor of the Tracies, sometimes Barons in
Devonshire, or of them which now be of the same surname? or, whether Sir
William Tracy, one of the Four Knights that slew Thomas Becket, Archbishop of
Canterbury, were any of his Posterity? is not certainly reported, nor any thing
else concerning him.

3. HENRY, Speed, p. 443.
another Base Son of King Henry I. was born of the Lady Nesta, Daughter of
Rhees ap Tewdor, Prince of South Wales. (Who was the Wife of Sir Gerald
Windsor, and of Stephen, Constables of the Castles of Pembroke and Abertivy in
Wales, Brook, York Herald.
and Progenitors of the Families of the Fitz-Geralds and Fitz-Stephens in
Ireland,) He was born, and bred, and lived, and married in Wales, having issue
two Sons, Meiler and Robert. The elder of which, Meiler, took to Wife the
Daughter of Hugh Lacy, Lord of Mead in Ireland. He lost his life in the
conflict betwixt Magnus the Son of Harold-Harfager, King of Norway, and Hugh
Mountgomery, Earl of Arundel and Shrews-bury, An. 1197. I have had the view of
a Pedigree, which deriveth the descendants of Henry Fitz-Herbert, Chamberlain
to King Henry I, and Sibill Corbet his Wife, Concubine to the said King, from
this HENRY, who in that Genealogy is called Henry Fitz-Roy, or the Kings Son.
But in a Commission (of which, I have a Copy) sent into Wales to the Jeavan ap
Redderick ap Jeavan Lloyd of Cardigan Esquire. Howel ap David ap Jeavan ap
Reece. Howel Sundwal, Jeavan Dilwine, Jeavan Brashay.
Bards there, by King Edward IV. to enquire of the surname of William, by Him
created Earl of Pembroke; the said Bards make return, That the said Earl
William, was the Son of William, Lord of Ragland, Son to Thomas, Son to
Guillime, Son to Jenkine; the Son of Adam, the Son of Reynold, the Son of
Peter, the Son of Herbert, Base Son of Henry the First, King of England. Upon
which, King Edward IV. gave him the surname of Herbert: With which, a Lib.
Annotat. E. 12. fol. 42. b. in Officio Armorum. Vincent, p. 236.
Pedigree in the Office of Arms agrees in this point, That Herbert was a
Natural Son of King Henry I. and had in marriage with Lucia his Wife, the
Forest of Dean. Yet Vincent in his Correction of Brooks Errors says, That this
Lucia, the third Daughter of Milo Fitz-Walter, Earl of Hereford, was Wife to
Herbert, Son of Herbert, and Grandchild to Henry Fitz-Herbert, Chamberlain to
King Henry the First, by Sibill Corbet aforesaid.

3. MAVD, Countess of Perch, Williel. Gemmet. p. 306 d. 307 a. and 311 a.
a Natural Daughter of King Henry the First, was espoused to Rotrock, Earl of
Perch, (called also Consul of Moriton) with Lands and other rich Dower in
England; and also the Town of Belismo, in Normandy, by the gift of her said
Father. Eli. Reusnerus, page 347.
She was the first Wife of this Rotrock, first of the name, Son of Arnolfe de
Hesding also, first Earl of that County, and had issue by him, one only
Daughter, Magdelen, first Wife of Garcia IV. King of Navarre, Ordericus
Vitalis, p. 787 c. 870 a. 891 a.
(who died by a fall from His House, in the year of our Lord 1151.) and Mother
of King Sancheo, surnamed The Wise, from whom the succeeding Kings of Navarre
are derived. Speed, p. 443. col. 2. number. 73.
She perished by Shipwreck with her Half-Brother Duke William, upon Friday the
26 of November, in the 20 year of her Fathers Reign, and of Grace M.CXIX.

3. MAVD, Countess of Britain, another of that Name, Williel. Gemmet. p. 307 a.
and Natural Daughter of King Henry, was married to Conan, first of the Name,
surnamed The Gross, Earl of Little Britain, (Son of Earl Alan, by Ermengard
his second Wife, Daughter of Foulk Rechin, Earl of Anjou) and had issue Howel,
pronounced Illegimate, Constance that died without issue; and Bertha, Speed, p.
443. col. 2. number. 73.
the Wife of Eudes, Earl of Porrohet, Mother of Earl Conan the younger (or le
Petit) who by Margaret, Sister of William, King of Scots, had issue Constance,
His sole Daughter and Heir, married to Jeffrey Platagenet, Fourth Son of King
Henry the Second.

3. JVLIAN, Ordericus Vitalis, p. 810 c. 577. b.
another of the Natural Daughters of King Henry the First, was married to
Eustace de Pacie, the Illegitimate Son of William, Lord of Bretvile, Pacie, and
Ivory, Son and Heir of William Fitz-Osborne, and Elder Brother of Roger, both
Earls of Hereford in England. And this Eustace, Williel. Gemmet. p. 307 a.
had he been lawfully begotten in wedlock, had been Heir to the Earldoms of
Hereford and Ivory, but notwithstanding he had a small part in that Inheritance
of the Town of Pacie; Speed, p. 443 and 444. col. 2. number. 75.
from which he took his surname, and had issue by this Julian his Wife, William
and Roger of Pacie, his Sons.

3. N -- another Base Daughter, Williel. Gemmet. p. 307. Speed, p. 444. col. 1.
number. 76.
mentioned by William Gemmeticensis, and John Tillet his follower, and is said
by them to have been married to one William Goet a Norman, but nothing
recounted of her Name, his Issue, Estate, or other Relation.

3. CONSTANCE, Vincent, p. 712. ex Rotulo Chartarum, An. 1. Johannis, p. 1.
number. 72. Ordericus Vitalis, p. 900. c.
Viscountess Beaumont, another Natural Daughter, to whom her Father, King Henry
the First, gave the Manor of Aielrischescote, in the Parish of Suthanton, and
County of Devon. She was the Wife of Rozceline, Viscount Beaumont, (so named
from Beaumont, a Town in the County of Maine in France) and by him, was Mother
of Richard, Viscount Beaumont, (Father of Queen Ermengard, the Wife of King
William of Scotland, and of Constance de Toen, to whom King John, on the 22 day
of September, Williel. Gemmet. p. 307. a.
in the First year of His Reign confirmed the Estate of the said Constance her
Grandmother) and of Ralph, Bishop of Angiers; mentioned by Robert the Abbot of
Mount S. Michael.

3. N -- Sixth, Williel. Gemmet. p. 307. a.
Natural Daughter of King Henry the First, The Arms of this House of
Montmorency (as Marc de Wison has it) wear, Or, Cross Gules inter 16 Eaglets
displayed Azure. The Original of which Arms is considerable, for Bouchard,
first of the name, Lord of Montmorency, added 4 Eagles to the Ancient Cross of
his House, as a remark of 4 Imperial Ensigns taken by him in a Battle against
the Emperor Otho II. When his Army was defeated by the French, upon the Banks
of the River Aisne, An. 978. Which number of 4. was afterward augmented to 16.
by Matthew de Montmorency, Second of the Name, in memory of 12 other Ensigns or
Imperial Banners forced from the Soldiers of Otho the Fourth, at the Battle of
Bouvinnes, in the year 1214. La Science Heroique. p. 333.
was married to Matthew, the Son of Bourchard de Montemorenceio or Montmorency
(who derived his original from Lysoye, a French Knight, Baptized with Clovis
the First Christian King of France) from whom descended the Ancient House of
that name, Marc de Wison, Sieur de la Colombiere en la Science Heroique, p. 425.
who afterward came to be Earls and Dukes (being grown to be one of the
greatest Families in France, next to the Princes of the Blood; both for
Possessions, Alliances, and Honor) and in commemoration of this timely
conversion, have always used this Motto, or Cry of War.

Dieu aid au Premier Chrestein.
God assist the First Christian.
3. ELIZABETH, Williel. Gemmet. p. 307. a.
the Seventh and youngest Natural Daughter of King Henry (by Elizabeth, Sister
of Waleran, Earl of Melent) was married to Alexander, King of Scots, Brother,
and Successor of King Edgar: Which Alexander dying without Issue, Ordericus
Vitalis, p. 702. b.
was also succeeded by King David his youngest Brother (all three Sons of King
Malcolme the Third) from whom the succeeding Kings of Scotland, to His most
Sacred Majesty King Charles the Second, do derive their descent.

3. MAUD. The Empress, Daughter of King HENRY the First, and Lady of the
English.
CHAP. V.
The Arms attributed to this Maud, were those of Her Father King Henry 1. viz.
Gules, 2 Lions Passant Guardant, Or. And the Arms Assigned to Her Second
Husband Geoffrey Plantagenet, Earl of Anjou, Gules, a chief Argent, over all an
Escarbuncle of 8 Rays, Pometty, and Flowrey, Or. Which Coat is set up for Earl
Geoffrey upon the, Cornish, on the Tomb of Queen Elizabeth in K. Henry VII. his
Chapel. But the Seal of Maud the Empress, exhibited in the Front of this First
Book, presents you not with any Arms of Her Self, or either of Her Husbands.
Nor did Women at that time make use of Arms, either upon Seals or otherwise,
that I yet have observed.
AFter the death of Her Brother, William Duke of Normandy, drowned at Sea in
his passage for England. This Maud came to be sole Heir to Her Father, King
Henry the First; in the Fourth year of whose Reign she was born, Williel.
Gemmet. p. 297 c. Ordericu^ Vitalis, p. 763. Hoveden, p. 271 a. number. 20.
and had not passed the Sixth year of Her age, when She was affianced at
Vtrecht, nor the Eleventh, when She was married to the Emperor Henry the
Fourth, with a Portion of 10000 Marks. The solemnity both of their Nuptials and
Coronation being celebrated at Mentz in Germany, with great splendour upon the
Eighth of the Ides ( viz. the Sixth day) of January, An. 1114. She was His Wife
12 years, but without Issue; so that the Emperor deceasing in the year 1126.
the Empress Maud was remanded into England by Her Father King Henry, whither
being returned, She had fealty sworn to Her by the Barons; the chief of which,
was Stephen Earl of Mortaign, Her Cosin-german; who being the first in course
that made Oath, was also the first that made bold to break it, and seize upon
Her Throne.

The most convenient match that King Henry could propose to Himself for His
Daughter, the Empress, was Geoffrey the Consul, or Earl of Anjou (by reason his
Dominion lay convenient for a conjunction with Normandy) Son and Heir of Foulk,
King of Jerusalem, and of Eremburga, Daughter of Helias, Williel. Gemmet. p.
310 b. Robert of Gloucester, p. 213 b.
Earl of Man's His first Wife) called Plantagenet (id est, Planta Genestae) or
Broom Plonte, as Robert of Gloucester has it, because he wore in his Cap or
Bonnet, a Sprig of Broom) to whom He remarried Her at Man's, upon the Third day
of April, An. 1127. Which Nuptials, with their Issue, are thus recorded by the
same Robert in these Rhimes.

And after the Xxvii year of his Kingdom. Ibidem, p. 217 b.

He yat her to Geffray, Earl of Angeo,
Whose Sustur, William his Sone, spoused er tho
That dreynt was in the Sea, as to fore is told.
And between the Emperor and Molde no fruit was,
For when the Emperor was deed of full age The Emperor was not of age.
heo nas.
Henry King loved hur much, and well the more ich guess,
Because she was heir, and also Empress,
Of these Geffrey and Molde came ich understand
Henry Fitz-Empress, King of England.
Earl Geoffrey Plantagenet, Chronica Norman. p. 984 a.
after the death of his Father-in-Law, King Henry, set on foot his Wives title
against King Stephen, but was by him forced to a pecuniary composition, and not
long after died upon the VII. of the Ides of September, An. 1150. Who although
no King Himself, yet was he both the Son of one, and the immediate Ancestor of
that Royal House, from him called Plantagenet, which by a direct and
uninterrupted Male Line, swayed Englands Scepter down to King Richard the
Second; and then branching it self into the Families of Lancaster and York,
ended in Richard the Third, the XIV King of that House, after it had ruled the
English Scepter 330 years. This Geoffrey was a Man of great Justice and
Charity, his death much lamented, and is noted to be the first Person that ever
was admitted to a Burial place within the Walls of Man's; where he was interred
in the Church of S. Julian before the Crucifix, with this Distick.

Huic Deus aeternum tribuat conscendere regnum, Rbidem.

Quatenus Angelicis turmis conregnet in aevum.
The Empress Maud (Her Husband, Earl Geoffrey, being dead) undertakes Her own
quarrel against King Stephen (managed by Her Half-Brother, Robert Earl of
Gloucester, and Milo, Earl of Hereford, Her two Principal Cheiftains, with
various success; in several passages whereof, She her self was present) and at
last takes King Stephen prisoner at the Battle of Lincoln, which in all
likelihood might have put an end to the business; but that the Empress upon
this Victory, by Her high and neglective carriage, so lost the hearts of Her
party; but more especially of the Londoners, whose Request She had denied, that
Stephen came to be set at liberty by exchange for Her Base Brother, Robert,
Earl of Gloucester (taken prisoner also not long after at the Battle of
Winchester) and the Empress finding London too hot for Her, was forced to fly
privately to Oxford; and being twice worsted, makes Her escape by a wile. The
first time at the said Battle of Winchester, by being carried away on Horsback,
in form of a Dead Corpse: And a second time from Oxford Castle, in a great Snow;
when in the night, She, and some few others, clothing themselves all over in
white, made their escape unseen by the Guards of the Besiegers. But this
deliverance out of Her Enemies hands, could not free Her from those fears that
attended Her afterward, and forced Her to quit the prosecution of the War,
which Henry, Duke of Normandy, Her Son, was now happily grown up to continue,
who Landing in England with fresh Supplies, and with His Army confronting that
of King Stephen, the intended Battle ended in a composition, by which Stephen
held the Kingdom, during life, and Henry was proclaimed His Heir, which had so
real an effect, That after the death of that King, the Empress lived to see Her
Son in possession of the Kingdom of England, and other large acquisitions, who
is not so much as mentioned by Historians after this accommodation, Sir Rich.
Baker in his Chronicle of the Kings of England.
till the time of Her death, which is much to be wondered at, especially, that
She being so stirring a Woman, as She was, should be so quiet upon a sudden,
as not to have one word spoken of Her, in all the long time She lived after.
And if she placed Her contentment so wholly in Her Son, that in respect of Him,
She regarded not Her self at all, it deserves, at least, the encomium of such a
Motherly Love, as is very unusual, and not always safe. But however it was, we
must leave it as a Gordian Knot, which no Writer helps us to untie.

She was Earl Geoffreys Wife 23 years, Chronica Normanniae, p. 1001 d. Chronica
S. Stephani Codomensis, p. 1019 d. Gabriel du Moulin en son Histoire Generale
de Normandy, p. 387.
and his Widow 17. And being aged about 64 years ended Her life in the City of
Roan, on the IV of the Ides ( viz. the Tenth day) of September, An. 1167. in
the Thirteenth year of the Reign of Her Son, King Henry the Second, and was
buried in the Abbey of Bec, in Normandy, with Funeral Pomp. But Gabriel du
Moulin tells us, That She had Her Interment in the Church of Nostre Dame du
Pre, in the Suburbs of Roan; and that for Her, Arnulph Bishop of Lisieux,
composed this Epitaph.

Regia progenies, stirps regia, Caesaris uxor,
Hic est magna brevi, clausa MATILDA loco,
Virtutum titulis humani culmen honoris
Excessit mulier, nil mulieris habens.
Septembris decima regno post regna recepto
Creditur aeternum, continuasse diem.
A Parallel has been made betwixt this great Princess and Agripina, who was
the Daughter of an Emperor, Ibidem, p. 387.
the Wife of an Emperor, and the Mother of an Emperor; and our Empress Maud was
the Daughter of King Henry the First, the Wife of Henry the Fourth, Emperor of
Almaine, and the Mother of King Henry the Second: Which relation of Her to
these Three Royal Henry's, is most emphatically expressed in this short, yet
significant Memorial, Thus Englished in Speed, p. 470.
engraven on Her Tomb, Matthew Paris, p. 143. number. 56.
mentioned by a Faithful Historian.

Ortu magna, Here HENRY's Mother, Daughter, Wife, does rest. By Birth much,
more by Spouse; By Child most blessed.
viro major, sed maxima partu,
Hic jacet HENRICI filia, sponsa, parens.
And now it were critical to imagine, that in memory of these Three Henry's,
She was the charitable Foundress of the Three Monasteries, viz. Of Vieu, in the
County of Caux; of Cherbourg; and of S. Andrew, in the Forest of Gouffer. She
also for the public good of the Normans, bestowed much Money in laying the
Foundation, and building the Bridge of Roan.

The Empress (in Her Grant of the Earldom of Hereford to Milo Fitz-Walter)
styles Her self, Vincent, p. 504 b.
Matilda Imperatrix Henrici Regis filia, and Anglorum Domina; and in the
circumference of Her Great Seal, Mathildis Dei Gratia Romanorum Regina. The
Figure of which Seal, I have exhibited in the Front of this First Book.

Children of MAUD the Empress, by GEOFFREY, Earl of ANJOU, Her Second Husband.
4. HENRY FITZ-EMPRESS, Eldest Son and Heir of his Father and Mother, succeeded
King Stephen in the Kingdom of England, by the name of HENRY II. Whose History
follows in the First Chapter of the Second Book.

4. GEOFFREY, Earl of Nants, surnamed Martell, second Son of Maud the Empress,
to whom his Father left the Earldom of Anjou, so soon as his Brother Henry
should come to be King of England; and to that purpose made His Lords swear,
not to suffer His Body to be Buried, until His Son Henry had taken his Oath to
perform it: Which Oath Henry afterward, in reference to his Fathers Body, did
take; but as he took it unwillingly, so he willingly brake it, and presently
sent to Adrian the then Pope, for a Dispensation of his Oath. Which granted, he
enters Anjou with an Army, and takes from his Brother GEOFFREY (being not able
to make resistance) not only the Earldom of Anjou, but some Cities also, which
his Father had absolutely given him for his maintenance. Chronica Normanniae,
p. 992 b. and 994 a.
But out of Brotherly kindness in the year 1155. makes an agreement with him,
by which he was to pay him yearly, a Thousand pounds English, and 2000 Livres
of Anjou, which was so unkindly taken by his Brother Geoffrey, that it brake
his heart. He received the Honor of Knighthood from Theobald, Ibidem, p. 984 d.
Ibid. a.
Earl of Blois, An. 1150. was Earl of Nants in Britain, and deceased in the
Month of July, and year 1157.

4. WILLIAM, Williel. Gemmet. p. 304 b.
Third Son of Maud the Empress, and Earl Geoffrey, whom Ralph Brook, York
Herald, and John Speed, call Earl of Poicton; but I find him not otherways
mentioned then (Willielmus frater Regis Henrici) William, King Henry's Brother.
He departed this World at Roan, upon the III of the Kalends of February ( viz.
the 30 day of January) in the year of our Lord 1163. Chron. Norman. p. 999 c.
And was Interred in the Church of our Lady in the said City.

4. N --. A Daughter of Geoffrey Plantagenet, Rogerus Hoveden, f. 323 b. numb.
30.
and Maud the Empress, is mentioned by Roger Hoveden, to be the Wife of David,
the Son of Owayn, Prince of North Wales. But I do not find her noted by any
other Author.

3. STEPHEN, An. Dom. 1135.
King of ENGLAND.
CHAP. VI.
THe Male-Line of the Normans being extinct in King Henry the First, Several
are the Opinions concerning the Arms of King Stephen, some attributing to him
the Two Lions of King Henry II. His Predecessor. Nich. Upton in his Book De
Militari Officio ( Lib. 4. p. 129.) says, That King Stephen having entered upon
the Government of England, in the Month of December, the Sun being then in the
Celestial Sign Sagittarius, Stephen in memory thereof, Scutum portavit rubitum,
in quo rabuit trium Leonum peditantium corpora usque ad collum, cum corporibus
humanis superius, ad modum Signi Sagittarii, de auro, did bear in a Shield,
Gules, the Bodies of Three Lions Passant to the Neck, with Men's Bodies, Or, in
Form of the Sign Sagittarius. And both Mills and Brook in their Catalogues of
Honor, attribute to King Stephen for Arms, Gules, a Sagittarius, Or, but
without any cited Authority. And some again tell us, that these were not His
Arms, but His Device. Repair we therefore to His Seals, two of which I have
seen, both having the same Circumscription, disagreeing only in the Reverses
or Counterseals; upon one of which (being in my custody) and also exhibited in
Speeds Chronicle, Page 455. The King is represented on Horsback in His Coat of
Mail, in His Right Hand He holds His Sword; and on His Left Hand hangs His
Shield, half the Unequal side of which is to be seen, without any Device
thereon. Upon the Counterseal of the other, which I have represented to your
view in the beginning of this First Book; and of which, I have seen Two
Originals (one in the Registry of Westminster, and the other in the Chamber of
the Duchy of Lancaster) you have the Figure of a Man on Horsback, with a
Blanck Shield also; but in His Right Hand in the place of His Sword, He bears a
Lance, with a Streamer on the top thereof, Slit in Form of a Standard, with a
Cross thereon. The same Standard you have also upon the Coin of King Stephen,
exhibited in Mr. Speed, Page 455.
and His Daughter Maud, An. Dom. 1135. December. 2.
the Empress, only left, and She married to a stranger. This Stephen,
Ordericus Vitalis, p. 374 b.
Earl of Bologne and Mortaign, Third Son of Stephen, Earl of Blois, by Alice
Fourth Daughter of the Conqueror, hasting into England, notwithstanding his
former Oath to Maud (by the procurement of his Brother Henry, Williel. Gemmet.
p. 313 b.
Bishop of Winchester, the Popes Legate, and Roger, Bishop of Salisbury; two,
the most powerful Men at that time in the State, partly by Reasons, but more
indeed by Force) was by the State received for King; and upon the 26 of
December, being S. Stephens day, in the year 1135. about Twenty four days after
the decease of his Uncle King Henry, Crowned at Westminster by William Corbell,
Archbishop of Canterbury, in the presence of but three Bishops, few of the
Nobility, and not one Abbot.

There were not wanting those that urged the Oath of the Nobles to the Empress
to be salved, Matthew. Paris, p. 74. number. 20, 30, 40.
because no president could be found, that ever the Crown of England had been
set on the Head of a Woman; and moreover, that that Oath being taken on
condition, that Maud should marry at home; the condition being broken, the
Obligation was null. But that which seemed most to color King Stephens
Usurpation, was, the Testimony of Hugh Bigot, who took a voluntary Oath before
the Lords, that being with King Henry immediately before his death, he adopted,
and chose Earl Stephen to be his Heir, because the Empress his Daughter had at
that time highly offended Him; for had Stephen pretended any Title by Blood,
then must Theobald, Earl of Blois, his elder Brother have been preferred before
him; and also Henry Fitz-Empress (if they refused his Mother) was nearer to the
right Stem.

Stephen had also made fair promises to obtain the Crown, which he was resolved
to establish by performances, and therefore he pleased the people by easing
them of Impositions; the Clergy by forbearing the detention of Bishoprics and
Abbeys, he obliged the Nobility by giving them liberty to hunt his Deer in
their own Woods, and besides, by advancing many of them in honor. And to secure
himself abroad as well as at home, he stopped his Brother Theobalds Title with
a yearly grant of 2000 Marks, and married his Son Eustace to Constance,
Daughter of the King of France. Add to all this the vast Treasure of his
Predecessor amounting to 100000 Pounds in Money, besides Jewels of very great
value: All which he seized into his own hands, and expended not in Luxury, but
in procuring Friends, and levying Soldiers out of Britany and Flanders.

The Crown was scarce set on His Head, Matthew. Paris, p. 75. number. 10, 20.
when He was forced to take the Sword in His Hand, for David King of Scots,
engaging in the quarrel of His Niece Maud, enters Northumberland, and possesses
Himself of the Towns of Carlisle and Newcastle, where King Stephen coming
against Him, rather bought His victory, then won it: For to recover Newcastle
out of His Hands, He was forced to let King David hold Cumberland, and His Son
Henry the Earldom of Huntington. The King returning home, found some defection
in His Barons, that entertained Him a while; after which, He fell into so
dangerous a fit of sickness, that it was reported He was dead. This created
several doubts and suspicions in His Friends, and encouraged Geoffrey, Earl of
Anjou, to surprise several Pieces in Normandy, to prepare for the recovery of
his Wife Maud her Right; but to make the World see he was alive again, Ibidem,
number. 32.
Stephen passed into Normandy, overcame Anjou in Battle, and after makes peace
with him; and upon the renouncing his Wives claim, Stephen is to pay him 5000
Marks per annum.

He was but newly returned out of Normandy, Chronica Normanniae, p. 977 a, b.
and 978 a.
when David, King of Scots, encouraged by His former successes, invades the
North parts a second time, in the year 1139. But notwithstanding the Active
Valor of Himself and His Son, He was defeated with the loss of 11000 of his
Soldiers, by Thurstan, Archbishop of York, and the Northern Lords; upon which,
David begs a Peace, For the confirmation of which, his Son Henry was sent
hostage to King Stephen. The quickness of whose success, making him presume
more of himself, caused him to fall upon those Rocks that dashed in pieces his
future grandeur.

Not long after, Stephen calls a Council at Oxford, where occasion was given to
put him out with his faithfullest Friends, the Clergy; For the Bishops, upon
liberty given to build Castles, so outwent the Lords, in magnificence,
strength, and number of Erections, and especially the Bishop of Salisbury, that
their greatness was much envied by them, who to be revenged, put the King in
Head, That all those Castles were built to no other intent, but for the
entertainment of Maud, and her Accomplices; whereupon Stephen after a long
dispute with the Bishops, takes them into his own hands.

In this juncture of time, the Empress accompanied with Robert, Earl of
Gloucester, arrives in England with a small party but is quickly strengthened by
the wonderful access of many of the English, and of Ranulph, Earl of Chester;
with a number of valiant Welshmen. Whereupon King Stephen raising an Army,
engages the Empress near Lincoln, An. 1141. doubtful it was for a long time,
whose Head the Laurels of Victory would crown, till at last the Empress had the
day, Orderich Vitalis, p. 992 a, b.
and King Stephen (notwithstanding His Herculean laying about Him with His
Battle Ax) was taken captive, and committed Prisoner to Bristol Castle; while
the Empress possesses the Kingdom, and as a Conqueress enters London in
Triumph. Upon which, Matilda, King Stephens Wife, implores the Empress, that
She might live a private life with Her Husband; and the Londoners press Her for
the restoration of S. Edwards Laws; but She grants neither. Queen Matilda not
enduring this denial, calls Her Son Eustace out of Kent with a company of
choice Soldiers, who joining with the Citizens (incensed, that their request
was denied) force the Empress to quit Her station in London, and to fly
privately to Oxford, where She gives order, that King Stephen should be put
into Fetters, and sends to Her Uncle, King David, to repair with all speed to
Her assistance; upon whose arrival, they besiege Winchester, which Queen
Matilda, and Her Son Eustace, with the Londoners, came to relieve. A fierce
Battle was here fought, Gesta Siephani Regis, Ang p. 957 a.
in which the Empress being worsted, was (to make Her escape) laid on Horsback,
in form of a dead corpse, and so conveyed to Gloucester; Robert, Earl of
Gloucester was there made prisoner (disdaining ignoble flight) upon whom Queen
Matilda retaliated the hard usage to the King Her Husband.

His Marriage. The Arms of Bologne, are, Or, 3 Torteaux, which I have seen upon
a Seal of Ida, Countels of Bologne (Granddaughter to this Queen Matilda) on
which Her Effigies is represented in the habit of that time, and on Her left
hand a Dove, circumscribed thus, Sigillum I Would Comitisse Bolonie; and on the
Counterseal which is round, in an antic Shield, are the 3 Roundels, and in the
Circle these words, Secretum meum michi. Olivarius Uredius in Genealogia Commit.
Flandriae, p. 30 and 31. Also in a Charter (in my custody) of this Queen Maud,
wherein She grants Her Hospital, near the Tower, to the Church of the Holy
Trinity, London; She writes Her Self, Mathildis Dei Gratia Regina Angliae. Her
Figure with a Royal Crown, being represented on Her Seal, with a Scepter in Her
Right Hand, and a Dove on Her Lest; but without any Reverse, Arms or Devise.
E'Bibliothec^ Cottoniana.
This Matilda (that you may the better know her) was the Daughter and Heir of
Eustace, Williel. Malm^^h. fol. 107 b Henricus Huntington, fol. 214 a. number. 40.
Earl of Bologne (Brother of Geoffrey and Baldwine, Kings of Jerusalem) married
to Stephen, by the procurement of King Henry the First his Uncle. A Woman
(says my Author) molded for the proprotion of both Fortunes, acting Her
Husbands part for Him, when He could not act it for Himself, not expecting that
Fortune should fall into Her Lap, but rather industrious to procure it. Her
Mother was Mary, Sister to Maud, Queen of England, Wife of King Henry the
First. So that both She, and Stephen Her Husband, were Cosin-Germans to Maud
the Empress. She was crowned at Westminster upon the 22 of March, being Easter
day, in the First year of King Stephen, and of our Lord 1136. She founded S.
Katherines Hospital, near the Tower of London. And having been Queen Fifteen
years, deceased at Heveningham Castle in Essex, the Third day of May, An. 1151.
and was buried at Feversham in Kent. Weever, p. 278. I. Bib. Cottoniant.
This Epitaph has been found for Her in a nameless Manuscript.

Anno Milleno C. quinquagenoque prinio:
Quo sua non minuit, sed sibi nostra tulit.
MATHILDIS felix conjux STEPHANI quoque Regis
Occidit, insignis moribus and titulis;
Cultrix vera Dei, cultrix and pauperibus,
Hic subnixa Deo quo frueretur eo.
Femina si qua Polos conscendere queque meretur,
Angelicis manibus diva hec Regina tenetur.
After some fruitless Proposals in order to an Agreement, whether by connivance
of their Keepers, but more probably by consent, both King Stephen, and Earl
Robert, got to be at Liberty, and the Empress not long after is besieged by the
King in Oxford; from whence She makes Her second escape. Nevertheless the
present fear left such an impression upon Her, that She never afterward had
any mind to appear upon the Stage of War, but left it to Her Son, Duke Henry,
who being grown up and able to bear Arms, did fortunately supply the places of
Robert Earl of Gloucester his Uncle, and Milo Earl of Hereford, another of his
Mothers Captains, both lately deceased. Into England Henry comes with fresh
supplies, and besieges Malmsbury, to give Stephen a diverosin at that time with
an Army before Wallingford; who resolving to put the business to the trial of a
Battle, brings an Army far superior to that of Duke Henry; Chronica Normanniae,
p. 989 b, c.
but Floods and Storms kept them so long asunder, till an agreement was made by
the Bishops, especially by the Mediation of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
at Winchester was concluded upon these Conditions. viz. That King Stephen,
during His Natural Life, should remain King of England, and Henry enjoy the
Dukedom of Normandy, and be proclaimed Heir Apparent to the Kingdom of England.
The Partisans of both, to enjoy their Ancient Rights and Titles. Things to be
as they stood before Stephen was King; and all Castles built in His Reign, to
be demolished.

After this Pacification, Henry returns into Normandy, and Stephen having
attained (that which he never had before) Peace (which yet he enjoyed not two
years) makes Progresses through most parts of the Kingdom, to reform those
mischeifs that had grown up under the Sword, and then calls a Parliament at
London: After which, having had a conference with Theodorick, Earl of Flanders,
who met Him at Dover; He no sooner had dismissed Him, but He was suddenly taken
with the Iliake Passion, mixed with His old disease, Henry. Hunting. fol. 228
a. number. 50. Chronica Normanniae, p. 990 b.
the Emrods, whereof He died in the Monastery there, upon the 25 day of
October, 1154. Eight days before the Feast of All Saints, when He had ruled
Eighteen years, and almost Eleven months, and was Interred in the Monastery of
Feversham in Kent, which He and His Queen had founded, with the said Queen His
Wife, and Prince Eustace His Son, who deceased but a short time before him.
There His Body remained in quiet until the dissolution of the Abbeys, when for
so small a gain, as the Lead Coffin, wherein it was wrapped, it was taken up,
and thrown into the next Water.

He was (as a Modern Author renders Him) a Man so continually in Motion, that
we cannot take His dimensions, but only in passing, and that only on the side
of War; on the other, we never saw but a glance on Him, which yet for the most
part was such as showed Him to be a very worthy Prince, and an expert Soldier,
wanting nothing to make Him an excellent King, but a good Title. Those that
read His Circumscriptions upon His Great Seal, may admire why He that only
styled Himself in His Charters, STEPHANVS DEI GRATIA REX ANGLORVM, should
(having no Title, nor any Possession of Normandy) on the reverse thereof, write
Himself also STEPHANVS DEI GRATIA DVX NORMANORVM. But it may be answered, That
His Right to both was much alike; and having an usurped Kingdom in Possession,
He might better make bold with the Title of Duke of Normandy, to complete that
Reverse which His Predecessors had made use of before Him.

He kept His word with the State concerning the relievement of Tributes, and
never had Subsidy that we find: But which is more remarkable, having His Sword
continually out, and so many rebellions against Him, He never put any great Man
to death. Moreover it is observed, That notwithstanding all these Miseries of
War, there were more Abbeys erected in His Reign, then had been in an hundred
years before; which shows, that though the times were bad, they were not
impious.

Children of King STEPHEN, by Queen MAUD of Bologne His Wife.
4. BALDWIN, Eldest Son of King Stephen (bearing the name of Baldwin, King of
Jerusalem, His Mothers Uncle) was born in the Reign of King Henry the First,
His Fathers Uncle, and died in his Infancy, during the same Kings Reign. His
Burial place was in the Priory of the Trinity within Aldgate in London; which
was a House of Black Stows Survey of London.
Canons of the Augustinian Order, founded by Queen Maud, first Wife of the said
King Henry. The first Canon Regular in England being of this place, An. 1108.
And the Prior thereof Alderman of London.

4. EVSTACE, Earl of Bologne, Second Son of King Stephen and Queen Maud, so
named from Eustace Earl of Bologne, Stevoa and Lovis de Sam. March, p.
his Grandfather, was Heir-Apparent to his Father, and also to his Mother, in
whose Right (when Stephen came to be King) he was created Earl of Bologne. His
Marriage.
He married Constance, Sister of Lewis the Seventh, King of France, and
Daughter of King Lewis the Gross; but dying without Issue, She was after
remarried to Raymond, the Third Earl of Tholosa, or S. Giles. This Eustace was
a Prince, more then of Hope; for he lived to the blossoming of much Valor,
though it came not to maturity, being cut off at the age of Eighteen years:
Some say by drowning, but others (upon better ground) by a stranger accident,
which was, That being exasperated at the Agreement made betwixt his Father, and
Henry Duke of Normandy (by which he was excluded from all hopes of Succession
to the Crown) he in a fury went to the Abbey of Bury in Suffolk, and demanded
Money of the Monks, to set forward his heady designs; which being denied him,
he presently in a rage went forth, and set on fire the Corn Fields belonging to
the Monastery; but afterward sitting down to dinner, Chronica Normanniae, p.
989 b.
at the first morsel of Bread he put in his Mouth, he fell into a fit of
madness, and in that fit died upon the Tenth day of August, in the Seventeenth
year of his Fathers Reign, An. Dom. 1152.

This Prince was so beloved of his Father, that he had a purpose to have joined
him with himself in the Kingdom; Hen. Huntington, fol. 227 b. number. 40.
but that the Pope upon complaint made to him of it by the Bishops, diverted
him from it. However, being dead, he was buried in the Abbey of Feversham,
where his Mother was Interred about Fifteen Months before him.

4. WILLIAM, Mills, p. 93.
Earl of Mortaigne and Bologne, Lord of the Honors of Eagle, and of Pevensey,
Third and youngest Son of King Stephen, who in the right of Issabel his Wife;
was the Fourth Earl Warren and Surrey; she being the only Daughter and Heir of
William, the Third Earl Warren and Surrey. This William after the death of his
Father, restored to King Henry the Second, the Honor of Pevensey and Norwich,
and all his Estate in England and Normandy, whereof he was possessed by gift
from his Father, King Stephen. In exchange for which, King Henry gave unto him
whatsoever King Stephen enjoyed before he was made King of England, Roger.
Hoveden, fol. 281 b. number. 40.
and also Knighted him at the City of Carlisle. He deceased accompanying the
said King at the siege of Tholosa in the year 1159. (as Hoveden has it.) But
Sigebertus, p. 216. Rob. de Monte, p. 640.
others An. 1160. without Issue, leaving his Sister Mary to be his Heir.

4. MAVD, the Elder Daughter of King Stephen, and Queen Maud, was born before
her Father was King, in the Reign of King Henry the First, her Uncle; in whose
time she also deceased, Stows Survey, p. 105.
being young (though some report she was Wife to the Earl of Millan) and was
Interred at London with her Brother Baldwine, in the Priory of the Trinity
within Aldgate, then commonly called Christ Church, and lately named
Dukes-Place, because it came to the Duke of Norfolk by marriage with the
Daughter and Heir of Thomas Lord Audley of Walden.

4. MARY Younger, but only Daughter living of King Stephen, first became Nun
and Abbess of the Nunnery of Ramsey in Hampshire; Vincent. p. 710.
and after being secretly taken from thence, was married to Matthew of
Flanders, the younger Son of Theodorick of Alsatia, Earl of Flanders; who after
the death of William her Brother, was Countess of Bologne and Mortaigne, and
bare to her said Husband two Daughters, Ida and Maud. Which Mary, the Countess,
having professed Chastity, Belleforrest, p. 445.
by the censure of the Church, was separated from her said Husband, and
remitted back into her Monastery; yet her children were legitimated by
Parliament, An. 1189. and left the Earldom of Bologne to her daughters. Ida the
Eldest married to Reginald de Try, Earl of Dammartin, and in right of his
Wife, Earl of Bologne, who bare unto him one daughter, by name Maud, married to
Philip, Uncle to S. Lewis, King of France, in May, An. 1210. who by her became
Earl of Bologne.

Maud, the other daughter of Mary, and sister of Ida, Sammarth, p. 91.
Olivarius Ure dius in Genealogia Com. Fland. in probationibus Tabulae VII. M.
was the Wife of Henry the First, Duke of Brabant, Father of Henry the Second,
Duke of Brabant, etc.

Natural Issue of King STEPHEN.
4. WILLIAM, Ralph Brook, York Herald.
is mistaken of some to be the same William that was Earl of Bologn; others who
knew that William Earl of Bologne was lawfully born, do think his Father had no
other Son named William, but himself; wherein, let William Earl of Bologne be a
lawful witness of himself; who having best cause to know it, does best prove
it. And in an ancient Charter of his, being written in those days, and extantin
these, does name him for a witness, and calls him his Brother.

4. GERVAIS, another Natural Son of King Stephen, Reges, Reginae, Nobiles, and
alii in Ecclesia Collegiata, B. Petri West-monasterii Sepulti, p. 80. in
Claustris.
begotten on a Gentlewoman named Dameta, and born in Normandy, was brought into
England by his Father, in the Fifth year of his Reign, An. 1140. And (by his
procurement also) in the same year, made Abbot of Westminster, and so continued
for the space of Twenty years. He deceased there the Twenty sixth day of
August, in the Sixth year of the Reign of King Henry the Second, The Year of
Grace, 1160. and lies buried in the South part of the Cloister, within the
said Monastery, under a Stone of Black Marble, which yet remains. The Epitaph
is almost wholly defaced, which was this Distick in Saxon Characters, viz.

DE REGUM GENERE PATER DIC GERV ASIVS ECCE, Camdens Remains, p. 356.
MONSRAT DEFUNCTUS, MORS RAPIT OMNE GENUS. 3. ROBERT, Consul, or Earl of
GLOUCESTER, Surnamed of CANE.
CHAP. VII.
AMong the Natural Children of King Henry the First, Ordcricus Vitalis, p. 920
b.
this Robert (surnamed (de Cadomo) of Cane, Gules, 3 Rests, Or. are the Arms
attributed to this Robert Earl of Gloucester, and were anciently depicted upon
the covering of a Tomb in the Abbey of Tewk shury, wherein was interred the
Body of Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester, deriving his descent from the Heir
General of this Robert. In several places of which Church are the Arms assigned
to Robert Fitz-Hamon, the Father of Mabel, this Roberts Wife, viz. Azure, a
Lion Rampant Guardant, Or. The said Robert being also interred in the same
Church with this Epitaph, In ista Capella jacet Dominus Robertus filius Hamonis
hujus Loci Fundator. Lib. in Officio Arm. L. 17. fol. 202 b.
the place of his Birth) held the prime place, not only in respect of his
being the first of that number, but also because his Mother was the most Noble
of all his Fathers Concubines, Ralph Brook, York-Herald.
viz. Nesta, Daughter of Rhees ap Tewdor, Prince of South Wales, (afterward
married to Gerald of Windsors Constable of Pembroke Castle, and Ancestor of the
Earls of Kildare in Ireland) whom King Henry having begotten in his lust, yet
to make amends to the Mother, thought it love, Williel. Gemmet. p. 306 c.
and charity to provide for; and therefore bestows upon Robert an ample
Inheritance in England and Normandy, and moreover procures a match for him,
with Mabel the rich Daughter and Heir of Robert Fitz-Hamon, Lord of Corboil in
Normandy, Cardiff in South Wales, and Tewskbury in England, by Matilda (some
name her Sibilla) his Wife, Daughter of Roger de Montgomery. The Monk of
Gloucester expresses King Henry's courting the Lady Mabel for His Son Robert in
these Rhimes, and her refusal of him at first, for want of a Surname.

Sir shed said well ich wot your heart upon me is
More for mine heritage, Robert of Gloucester, fol. 218 a.
than for me self I wis
And such heritage as ich have, That Surnames were not in use in England
before the Conquest, we maobserve in thy Charters ofe Edward the Confessor, one
of which is thus witnessed Ego Haraldus Dux consensi. Ego Tostius Comes
consensi. Ego Girth Comes consensi. Ego Edwinus Comes consensi. Ego Morker,
etc. and several others without other addition, but only of their Titles. But
in Doomsday Book, in the Enchequer, Surnames (so termed by the French, because
they were superadded to the Christian name) are first found, and brought then
into England by the Normans, who not long before took them. Many of which were
noted with de, such a place of their Habitation; as Albericus de Vere, Walterus
de Vernon, Gislebertus de Venables: Or, with filius, as Guilelmus filius
Osberni, Richardus filius Gisleberts; and Robertus filius Hamonis (the Father
of this Mabel, who being Frenchified, looked upon it as a high disgrace to take
a Husband without his two names) several also took Surnames from their Offices,
as Eudo Dapifer, Guilelmus Camerarius, Hervens Legatus, Radulphus Venator. The
Welsh used mab, and ap, as David ap Harry, Merruddeth ap Blethin; and the
Irish, mac, as Mac Mahon, Mac Morrough, Mac William, which is the same with
Filius or Fitz.
hit were to me great shame
To take a Lord but he had any surname.
Sir Robert le Fitz-Hayme my Faders name was, etc.
And thuike might not be hit that of his kynne nas.
Therefore Sir for Gods love let me no man owe
But he have a surname, whethy to be know.
Damseill quoth the King thou seist well in this cas
Sir Robert Fiz-Hayme thy Fader name was
And as fair name he shall have if me may by see
Sir Robert Fiz-Roy shall his name be.
Sir quoth this Maid, tho this is a fair name
As ho seith all his life, and of great fame.
But what should his sone hete, if one of him come,
So might he not hot nemeth thereof gome.
The King understood so she said non vtrage,
And that Gloucester was chief of hur heritage.
Damsele he seide tho; thy Lord shall have a name
For him and for his heirs fair without blame.
For Robert Earl of Gloucester, his name shall be and is,
He shall be Earl of Gloucester, and his heirs I wys.
In this form quoth head ich wole, that all my thing be his.
Thus was an Erie of Gloucester first I maked there,
After the Conquest of all that there were.
This was xi. c. yet, and it yet a plight,
Afther that our sweet Lord her on herthe Light,
And of the Kings coronement in the it yet
That this Earl of Gloucester maked thus was there.
Here we find this Robert to complete his greatness, Williet. Gemmet. p. 306. d.
created Earl of Gloucester, An. 1109. in the Ninth year of King Henry the
First. And well did he requite this bounty of his Father, in the faithful
assertion of his Sister Maud the Empress, in her Wars against King Stephen, to
whom he proved a continual terror, and laid the groundwork of those successes
that afterward were completed in her son Henry Fitz Empress. He was indeed,
Williel. Malmsb. fol. 108 a. number 20.
the most valiant Captain of that age; and if we would know the true value
which those of that time had of him, we must weigh him in the balance against
Stephen, that Martial Prince, Gesta Stephen. Regis, page 957 d.
who thought not that his enemies did undervalue him, nor that his friends did
him any advantage, when (being both taken Captives) Robert was made his
exchange. Nor could that conclusion have been grounded upon any other person so
justly as himself: That a King for an Earl, and an Earl for a King, should set
one the other at liberty.

He built the Castles of Bristol, and Cardiff in South Wales, and the Monastery
of S. James at Bristol, and deceased on the last day of October, in the Twelfth
year of King Stephen, An. 1147. and was interred in the midst of the Chore of
the said Monastery of S. James.

To him William of Malmsbury dedicated his Book, entitled, Historia Novella.

Children of ROBERT Earl of Gloucester, by MABEL FITZ-HAMON his Wife.
4. WILLIAM Eldest Son of Robert Earl of Gloucester, was after his Fathers
death, Earl of Gloucester, and Lord of Glamorgan. Vide Chap. 8. being the next
following.

4. ROGER Second Son of Robert, Godwin. de Praesulibus Angliae Commentarius, p.
510. Chro. M.S. in Bibl. Cotton. f. 17. a Ordericus Vitalis, p. 897 a.
Consul of Gloucester, was consecrated Bishop of Worcester, An. 1164. He died at
Tours in France on the Ninth day of August, in the year of our Lord, 1179.

4. RICHARD Third Son was Bishop of Bayon in Normandy, consecrated by Hugh,
Archbishop of Roan, at the Commandment of Pope Innocent, about the year 1133.

4. HAMON Fourth Son of Robert Earl of Gloucester, Ibidem, p. 900 b.
was slain at Toulouse with William King Stephens Son, in the year of our
Salvation 1160. Or according to some, An. 1159. I find him witness to a Charter
of Earl William his Brother.

Ralph Brook, York-Herald.
4. MABEL Elder Daughter of Earl Robert was married to Aubrey de Vere.

I have seen an Original Charter of this Ranulph, in which he confirms the gift
of William de Roumara made to the Canons of Derham, the Seal Appendant
thereunto, is of Green Wax, the Form round, circumscribed SIGILLUM RANULPHI
COMITIS CESTRIE. In the Shield which is of a very ancient Figure, there is a
Lion Rampant with his Tail erected, and turned backward. In Camera Ducatus
Lancastria. This Coat of Arms is thus Emblazoned, Or, a Lion Rampant, with his
Tail erected, Gutes.
4. MATILDA Younger Daughter, Williel. Gemmet. p. 313 c. Ordericus Vitalis, p.
921 c.
was the Wife of Ranulph of Ranulph Gernoniis Earl of Chester; by whom she had
issue, Hugh the Fifth Earl Palatine of Chester, and Richard. This Ranulph was
poisoned by the practice of this Maud his Wife, and William Peverell Lord of
Nottingham, in the year 1155. For which act, Peverell was disinherited by King
Henry the Second.

4. WILLIAM, Consul, or Earl of GLOUCESTER, and Lord of GLAMORGAN.
CHAP. VIII.
I have in my custody, an Instrument of this William, who is written therein
WILLELMUS CONSUL, but the Seal is lost. In an other Charter (of which I have
seen a Copy) I find him styled WILLELMUS COMES GLOCESTRIE. The Figure of the
Seal being Circular, and near three inches broad, contains a Lion Passant
Guardant toward the Sinister sider of the Roundel; the words in the Circle are
obliterated, and the Counterseal, which is a very small Oval much defaced.
Penes Hen. S. George Arm. Foecialem nom. Richmond. Lib. A. 27. fol. 144 a. Its
probable he gave this Lion in memory of his Grandfather Robert Fitz-Hamon, who
(if we believe the Escocheons in Tewksbury Church Windows to be his) did bear a
Lion Rampant Guardant; this William only altering the Lion, by bearing him
Passant Guardant. But yet after what I have here said, the Arms attributed to
this William, and quartered for him by his Descendants, are the Arms of Earl
Robert his Father, viz. Gules 3 Rests, Or.
THis William was the Eldest Son and Heir of Robert Consul of Gloucester (for
Comes and Consul, Williel^ Gemmet^ p. 306 c.
were the same Title in that time) whom he succeeded in that Earldom, Gesta
Step. Regit Ang. p. 974. c.
and was also Lord of Glamorgan in the right of his Mother, Mabell, Daughter
and Heir of Robert Fitz-Hamon, who won the said Lordship from Justin ap Gurgan,
Lord of Glamorgan, in the time of King William Rufus, and made his abode in the
Castle of Cardiff, where he kept his Courts Monthly, and used therein Jura
Regalia, having his Twelve Knights to attend him the first day, they having
several Lodgings given them and their Heirs for ever, within the said Castle.

This William built the Abbey of Keynsham, and confirmed the Chartae in Officie
Armerum.
Grant of Hugh de Gondevile to the Monks of Bordesley. He married Hawis, or
Hadewise, Daughter of Robert Bossu Earl of Leicester, and departed this World
in the year of our Lord 1183.

Children of WILLIAM Earl of Gloucester, by the Countess HAWIS his Wife.
5. ROBERT the only Son of Earl William, Glover apud Milles, page 360.
was untimely taken away by Death in the year 1166. in memory of whom, his
Father built the Monastery of Keinsham.

5. MABELL, Countess of Evereux, Rogerm Hoveden, fol. 316 a. number. 50.
the Eldest Daughter of William Earl of Gloucester, was married to Almerick
Montfort Earl of Evereux, in Normandy; to which, Mabell, King Henry the Second
gave an Hundred pounds in Portion, because that William her Father had bestowed
the Earldom of Gloucester upon John his youngest Son, with Issabell her younger
Sister. This Mabell and Almerick had issue Almerick Montford Earl of Evereux,
who after the Divorce of his Aunt Issabell, from the above said John, the Kings
Son, was the next Earl of Gloucester, in the right of his said Mother Mabell, in
the second year of King John. merick Montfort Earl of Gloucester married
Milicent, the Daughter of Hugh Gourney; and deceasing without issue, was buried
in the Monastery of Keynsham.

I have seen a Deed of this Richard, who wrote himself Ricardus de Clara Comes
Herdford. His Seal of Green Wax is appendant thereto, the Circumscription is
defaced, but the Figure of the Earl on Horsback, is plainly to be seen, having
on his long Triangular Shield, Three Cheverons. Ex. Gartis Dom. Henrici Com. de
Peterborough.
5. AMITIA, Reger. Hoveden. fol. 316 a number. 50.
Countess Clare, Gloucester, and Hertford, Second Daughter of Earl William, was
the Wife of Richard Earl of Clare and Hertford, to her likewise King Henry gave
an Hundred pounds upon the same consideration with her Sister Mabell; but her
youngest Sister Issabell dying without issue, by her three Husbands, this
Richard Earl of Clare and Hertford, had also the Earldom of Gloucester, and his
Posterity after him in the right of this Amitia.

This John, when he was Lord of Ireland, and Earl of Moriton, did bear for
Arms, Two Lions Passant, as appears by his Seal, exhibited in its proper
place.
5. ISSABELL, Rogerus Hoveden. f. 316 a. number. 50. and 373 b. number. 30. Matthew.
Westminster. p. 257. number. 10. Pat. 15. R. Johannis, p. 1. m. 4.
Countess of Gloucester, etc. the Third and Youngest Daughter of William Earl of
Gloucester, was married to John Youngest Son of King Henry the Second, to whom
with Her, Her Father gave the Earldom of Gloucester, An. 1176. with this
Caution, that the Popes License and Dispensation might be obtained, which
served this John after he had usurped the Crown, to Divorce Her upon pretenses,
as well for that She was Barren, as that they were within the degrees of
Consanguinity; who a while after (reserving to himself the Castle of Bristol)
passed Her over to Geoffrey de Magna-Villa, or Mandevile Earl of Essex for
20000 Marks, who thus over-marrying himself was very much impoverished, and
shortly after died, to make way for Her third Husband Hubert de Burgo Earl of
Kent; but She died at last without issue.

3. REGINALD, Earl of CORNWALL, Surnamed de DVNSTANVILE.
CHAP. IX.
The Arms attributed to this Reginald by several Writers of Genealogy, were,
Gules, two Lions Passant Guardant, Or, a Batun Azure. But I have not as yet met
with any Seal of this Reginald, or other Author of the time to justify the
same, being assured, That it will be difficult to find the distinction of a
Bendlet or Batun to difference the younger, or Natural Sons of the Royal Family
(or any other) of so early a date. When the first Bend which I find used, was
that of Henry of Lancaster, Lord of Monmouth, (and afterward Earl of
Lancaster) second Son of Edmond Earl of Lancaster) above 130 years after the
death of this Earl Reginald.
HE was the Third of the Natural Children of King Henry the First, Ordericus
Vitalis, p. 915 d.
Vitalis gives him the Surname de Dunstanvilla, I suppose because he was borne
at that place. His Mothers name was Sibill, Vincents Discovery of Errors, p.
113.
Daughter of Sir Robert Corbet of Alcester, in the County of Warwick, to whom,
King Henry in favor of Her, gave that Lordship.

This Sibill was afterward married to Henry Fitz-Herbert His Chamberlain, who
by Her was Ancestor of a numerous Offspring. viz. The Fitz-Herberts of
Derbishire, the Progers of Gwernddy in Monmouthshire, the Gwinns of Lansannor,
in the County of Glamorgan, the Williams of Lincolnshire, and the Joneses of
Treowen.

As also the Herberts, Earls of Pembroke and Huntington, Ex M. S. Penes Dom.
Edw. Baronem Herbert de Chirbury, etc.
the Earl of Winchelsey Baron Fitz-Herbert, and the Herberts of Colebrook. The
Barons Herbert of Chirbury and Powis, and several other Families; to which, I
add the Morgans of Arkeston, Weston, and Lannihangell, and the Joneses of
Lansonfreed. Several of which Houses according to the Welsh custom changed
their names every descent, the Fathers Christen-name supplying the place of the
Sons surname, as, William ap Thomas, Thomas ap William, Guillim ap Jenkin, etc.
For surnames were not in use among the Welsh, till by Act of Parliament in the
reign of Henry the Eight, the Principality of Wales was incorporated with
England.

This Reynald was made Earl of Cornwall, Malmsbury, p. 106. a.
and Baron of Castlecomb, in the Fifth year of King Stephen, An. 1140. and
married N -- Daughter of William Fitz-Richard, Gesta Stophani Regis, p. 950. a,
b.
a man of an illustrious descent, and a plentiful Fortune, who revolting from
King Stephen, received Reginald into his Castle, and with his said Daughter,
bestowed on him an ample Inheritance in that County. By which acquisition he
was more capable of asserting the Interest of his Half-sister the Empress, who
ever found a faithful friend of him, and besides other trusts reposed in him,
Cronica Normanniae, p. 985 b. Gesta Stephani Regis, p. 953 b.
employed this Reynald in the Negotiation of the Marriage of Henry Fitz-Empress
her Son, with Eleanor of Aquitaine, the repudiated Wife of Lewis the Seventh,
King of France. King Stephen outed him of his estate, and gave it to Earl Alan;
but Stephen, being afterward taken prisoner, and brought to terms, Alan was
forced to a full restitution.

This Reginald departed this World at Chersey, in the year of our Redemption
1176. Rob. de Monte, p. 659. number. 20. Hoveden. p. 313. number. 40. Matthew. Paris,
p. 126. number. 20.
As Montensis has it (but Paris and Hoveden mention his death, An. 1175,) and
was buried in the Abbey of Reading, leaving (besides Natural Issue) these Four
Daughters His Heirs, viz.

Richard de Ripariis Earl of Devon did bear Gules a Griffon Sergreant Or. Which
Griffon I have seen upon several of his Seals. Ex Cartis Edw. Walker Eq. Aurat.
Prin. Regis Armorum.
4. HAWIS or AVICE, Countess of Devon, Eldest Daughter, was the Wife of Richard
de Ripariis, or Rivers Earl of Devon, and Lord of the Isle of Wight, who died
An. 1162. leaving by her two Sons, Baldwin and Richard; both which were Earls
of that County successively, and deceased without issue.

4. MAVD, Countess of Melent, Second Daughter of Reginald Earl of Cornwall, was
married to Robert Earl of Melent.

4. VRSVLA, M. S. in Officio Armarum Sign. E. 2.118. and 119.
Baroness of Castlecomb, The Arms belonging to the Dunstanviles, Barons of
Castlecomb, were, Argent, A Fret Gules, on a Canton of the Second, a Lion
Passant, Or. But I find that January de Dunstanvile descended from a Second
Brother, gave for his distinction, a Border Ingrayled Sable. Which Coat was
quartered by the late Earl of Southampton, Lord Treasurer of England. Lib. in
Officio Armorum, Annot. L. 10, fol. 62, 63.
Third Daughter was the Wife of Walter Dunstanvile, Baron of Castlecomb, by
whom she had issue Walter Dunstanvile, Baron of Castlecomb, Father of Walter
and John.

Walter had issue Petronilla his Daughter and Heir, married to Sir Robert
Montford Knight, and by him had issue William Montford, who by Fine sold his
Lands to Bartholomew Badelsmere, An. 3 Edw. 2.

John de Dunstanvile, Second Son of Walter, was Father of Nicholas, Father of
Robert, Father of another Nicholas, who had issue Henry, Father of January;
whose sole Daughter and Heir Barbara, was the Wife of John Wriothesley alias
Garter King of Arms; and they had issue William Wriothesley, York Herald,
Father of Thomas Wriothesley, Earl of Southampton, and Lord Chancellor of
England, Ancestor of Thomas, Fourth and last Earl of Southampton; and also
Treasurer of England. Who deceased on the Sixteenth day of May 1667. without
Issue-male.

4. SARAH, Vicountess of Lemoges, the Fourth and youngest Daughter, was given
in marriage to the Viscount of Lemoges.

Natural Children of REYNOLD Earl of CORNWALL.
Vincents Discovery of Errors, p. 130.
HENRY FITZ-CONTE (filius Comitis,) the first mentioned Natural Son of Reginald
(begotten by the most famous of his Concubines Beatrix de Vannes, afterward
married to William Lord Breewer of Torbay) to whom King Henry the Third, in the
Month of February, and first year of His Reign, An. 1216. gave the Earldom of
Cornwall. But he enjoyed this new honor not long, not full four years: For as he
had it bestowed upon him in the First year of His Reign, Pat. An. 4 Hen. 3. p.
1. m. 6.
so in the fourth, in regard this Henry retired Himself from the Court without
the Kings leave or knowledge, He sent him his discharge; whereupon Henry (as it
should seem) afterward stood in Contestation with the King for the said
Earldom; but by the Mediation of the Bishops of Norwich, Winchester, and
Exeter, Pat. An. 4 Hen. 3. p. 2. m. 3. in dorso.
of Hubert de Burgo, Chief Justice of England, and others, it was concluded,
That Henry Fitz-Conte should restore to the King, the said Earldom of Cornwall,
with all Homages, Services, and Appurtenances, as John King of England enjoyed
the same before the War betwixt Him and the Barons, Penes Williel. Dugdale,
Arm. Norroy Reg. Arm. Lib. AAI. p. 117.
with a Salvo to the Right and Claim of the said Henry, when the King should
come to age. But the death of this Henry put an end to this dispute about two
years after, viz. An. 6 Hen. 3. in the year of our Lord 1221.

4. JOHN, Pat. An. 6. Johannis Regin.
the Earls Son (Johannes filius Comitis) was another Base Son of Earl Reginald.
He was Parson of Benburg, and Christened, as it seems, by King John; for he
calls him (Filiolum) his Godson.

4. NICHOLAS, Chart: Antiq. B. number. 2.
another Natural Son of Reynald Earl of Cornwall, was a witness to his Fathers
Grant of the Manor of Penhel, and other Lands in Widemue, in the County of
Cornwall, to William Botterel, Son of Alice Corbet, his Grand-mothers Sister.

BOOK II. Plantagenets Undivided.

CONTAINING A Genealogical History OF THE KINGS OF ENGLAND, etc. From HENRY II.
to EDWARD I.

From the Year 1154. to the Year 1272.

HENRICUS DVX NORMANORVM ET COMES ANDEOGAVORVM


HEN. D. NORM.

HENRICUS DVX NORMANORVM ET COMES ANDEGAVORVM


HENRICUS DEI GRATIA REX ANGLORVM


HEN. II.

HENRICUS NORMANNOR ET AQITANNO R ET COMES ANDEGAVOR


Generosissimo Viro. Domino IOHANNI BABER Equiti Aurato. Sigillorum hanc
Tabulam H.D. FS.



HENRICUS REX ANGLORV^ DVX NOR^ANNOR ET COMES SAVDEGAVOR


blazon or coat of arms VIGILANDO ET AGENDO


RICARDVS DEI GRACI REX ANGLORVM


RICH. I.

RICARDVS DVX NORMANNORVMM ET AQVITANORVM ET COMES ANDEGAVORVM


RICARDVS DEI GRATIA REX ANGLORVM


RICH. I.

RICHARDVS DVX NORMANORVM ET AQVITANORVM ET COMES ANDEGAVORVM


Generosissimo Praclaroque viro Dno IOHANNI WALPOOL Equiti Aurato, nec non
Serenissing Dn.o Regi CAROLO 11do Sti: patorum Nobisiumo Vexillario. Sigillorum
hanc Tabulam. H.D. F S.



SIGILVM IOHANNIS FILII REGIS ANGLIE DOMINI HIB^NIE
SECRETVM IOHANNIS


blazon or coat of arms

JOHANNES DEI GRATIA REX ANGLIE DOMINVS HIBERNIE


K. JOHN.

IOHS DVX NORMANNIE ET AQITANNIE COMES ANDEGAVIE


Generosissimo Viro Dno THOMAEBOND Baroneted, nec non Sereniss: Dnae Regm^e
Angliae etc. Dotariae Hospity Contrarotulatori. Sigillorion hanc Tabida^ HD.
FS.



HENRICUS DEI GRATIA REX ANGLIE DOMINVS HIBERNIE


HEN. III.

HENRICUS DVX NORMANNIE ET AQVITANNIE COMES ANDEGAVIE


blazon or coat of arms

HENRICUS DEI GRACIA REX ANGLIE DOMINVS HYBERNIE DUX AQVITANNIE


HEN. III.

HENRICUS DEI GRACIA REX ANGLIE DOMINVS HYBERNIE DVX AQVITANNIE


SIGILLVM ELE COMITISSE SARESBERIE


ALIANORA DEI GRACIA REGINA ANGLIE ET DOMINA HYBERNIE


ALIANORA DEI GRACIA REGINA ANGLIE


Generosissimo Viro Dno: STEPHANO FOX Equiti Aurato. ad Sereniss: Dom: Regem
CAROLUM II Computi Clerico: Sigillorum hanc Tubulam. HD. FS.



blazon or coat of arms

SECRETV^ ELE COMITISSE SARESBERIE


ALIANORA DVCISSA NORMANIE ET AQVITANIE COMITISSA ANDEGAVIE


ALIANORA DEI GRACIA DOMINA HIBERNIE ET DVCISSA AQVITANNIE


SIGILLVM WILLELMI LVNGESPE


S ELE LVNGESPEYE COMITISSE WARWIC


S ELE LVNGESPEYE COMITISSE WARWIC


^IGILVM RICARDI DE VAREN


SECRETVM WILLELMI LVNGESPE


A GENEALOGICAL TABLE Of the Second BOOK.
4. HENRY II. of the Name, King of England, Duke of Normandy and Aquitaine, and
Earl of Anjou, surnamed Fitz-Empress, p. 59. ELIANOR of Aquitaine, p. 60. 5.
WILLIAM Duke of Normandy, Ob. S. P. p. 65. HENRY crowned King, Ob. S. P. p. 66.
RICHARD I. King of England, Duke of Normandy and Aquitain, and Earl of Anjou,
p. 73. BERENGARIA of Navarre, p. 76. GEOFFREY Duke of Britain, p. 67. CONSTANCE
of Britain, p. ibid. 6. ARTHUR Duke of Britain, p. 68. ELIANOR. of Britain, p.
69.
JOHN King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Normandy and Aquitain, and Earl
of Anjou, p. 81. ISABEL of Engolesme, fol. 83. a. HENRY III. King of England,
Lord of Ireland, and Duke of Aquitain, fol. 87. b. ELIANOR of Provence fol. 87.
7. EDWARD I. King of England, etc. vide Book III. Chap. I. EDMOND Earl of
Lancaster, p. 103. BLANCH Queen of Navarre, p. 105. 8. THOMAS Earl of
Lancaster, p. 107. ALICE LACIE. HENRY Earl of Lancaster, p. 109. MAUD CHAWORTH.
9. HENRY Duke of Lancaster, p. 112. ISSABEL Beaumont, p. 113. 10. MAUD Duchess
of Bavaria, Ob. S. P. p. 113. BLANCH married to John of Gaunt, Duke of
Lancaster, etc. p. 113.
BLANCH Lady Wake, p. 110. MAUD Countess of Ulster, p. 110. JOANE Lady Mowbray,
p. 110. ISSABEL Abbess of Ambresbury, p. 110. ELIANOR Lady Beaumont and
Countess of Arundel, p. 111. MARY Lady Percy, p. 111.
JOHN of Lancaster, Lord of Beaufort, p. 107.
RICHARD JOHN WILLIAM, fol. 92. b. HENRY fol. 93. a. MARGARET Queen of Scots,
fol. 93. a. BEATRIX Duchess of Britain, fol. 93. a.
RICHARD Earl of Cornwall and King of the Romans, p. 95. SANCHIA of Provence,
p. 97. EDMOND Earl of Cornwall, p. 101. MARGARET de CLARE. Ibidem.
JOANE Queen of Scots, fol. 85. b. ELIANOR, first Countess of Pembroke,
afterward of Leicester, fol. 86. a. ISABEL Empress of Germany, fol. 86. b.
MAUD Duchess of Saxony, p. 69. ELIANOR Queen of Castille, p. 70. JOANE first
Queen of Sicily, afterward Countess of Tholouz. p. 70. Natural Issue of King
HENRY II. Viz.
WILLIAM Longespee Earl of Salisbury Ela de Evereaux, p. 114. WILLIAM Longespee
Earl of Sarum, p. 117. Idonia de Camvile. WILLIAM Longespee, p. 118. MAUD
CLIFFORD, p. Ibidem. MARGARET Longespee Wife of HEN. de Lacy, Earl of Lincoln.
ALICE Lacy married to Thomas Earl of Lancaster, p. 118.


RICHARD, STEPHEN, Nicholas, ISSABEL. ELA. p. 116. IDA ELA, p. 117.
GEOFFREY Archbishop of York, p. 71. MORGAN Provost of Beverly, p. 72.


portrait of Henry II K HENRY II
portrait of Richard I K RICHARD I
portrait of King John KING JOHN
portrait of Henry III K HENRY III
4. An. Dom. 1154.
HENRY II. King of ENGLAND, Duke of NORMANDY, and AQVITAINE, and Earl of ANJOV,
SURNAMED FITZS-EMPRESS.
CHAP. I.
NAtures last debt being paid by the Usurper King Stephen, I have exhibited (in
this Second Book, page 54.) the Figures of two Seals of this Henry; one of
which he made use of when he was Duke of Normandy, and Aquitaine, and Earl of
Anjou, for so he is styled in a Grant made to the Church of S. Mary of Sopwell,
etc. Ex Cartis Gulielm. Piereponte Arm. The other is His Royal or Great Seal
after He came to be King, in both which, the Concave sides of their Shields
only, are obvious: So that if there were any charge thereon, its not
discoverable. Therefore for the Arms of this King Henry the Second, we have no
other Proof then for those of the Norman Line His Predecessors, except we take
the opinion of Modern Genealogists, who say, That this Henry, before His
Marriage with Eleanor of Aquitaine, did bear Gules, 2 Lions Passant Guardant,
Or. and that the Arms of Aquitaine, being also A Lion, Or, in a field Gules,
did add the same in His Shield to His other Two Lions. The Arms upon His
Monument at Fout Euraud, are on a Shield of a Modern Form; the same Monument
being also adorned with Escocheons in which are both Empalements and
Quarterings, which were not used till above an hundred years after.
this Henry (called Fitz-Empress from His Mother, Rogerus Hoveden. f. 281 a.
number. 20. Gesta Steph. Regis, etc. p. 973 a.
or Court-Mantle, because He was the first that brought the fashion of short
Cloaks out of Anjou) the Undoubted Heir to the Crown, ascended the Throne (as
being Eldest Son and Heir of Maud the Empress, only Child living of King Henry
the First, by another Maud His Wife, Daughter of Malcolm the Third, King of
Scots, and Margaret His Wife, Daughter of Edward, Son of King Edmund surnamed
Ironside) in whom the Blood of the Saxon Kings was restored.

He was born at Ments in Normandy, An. 1133. in the 3 year of His Grandfather
King Henry's Reign, Ordericus Vitalis, p. 763 b.
to whom His Birth was so welcome, that it seemed to make amends for His Son
Duke Williams death, lost by Shipwreck not long before. His Childhood was spent
with His Parents, till being Nine years old,. He was brought into England, and
at Bristol (by one Matthew his Schoolmaster) instructed in Learning; from
whence being sent into Scotland, to His great Uncle King David, Roger. Hoveden.
f. 280 b.
He was by Him initiated in the Principles of State; and having now arrived to
the Sixteenth year of His age, was by that King Knighted at Carlisle, An. 1148.
When scarce able to bear Arms, He had also a taste of War under the Discipline
of that famous Soldier Robert Earl of Gloucester His Uncle, who (not long after
deceasing) left Him capable of supplying His conduct, and sent Him into Anjou
to Earl Geoffrey His Father, who perhaps overjoyed in His presence, shortly
after died, and left Him in possession of that County, being now Nineteen years
old; about which time ( viz. An. 1150.) He also did His Chron. Norman. p. 985
a. Ibidem, p. 985 b.
homage to Lewis King of France for the Dukedom of Normandy.

His Marriage.
In the next year followed Henry's Marriage with Eleanor of Aquitaine or Guyen
(Eldest Daughter and Heir of William, Scevole and Lovis de Saint Marthe, p.
333 c.
Fifth of that Name, but Ninth Duke of Aquitaine in Succession, by Eleanor of
Chastelleraut His Wife) the repudiated Wife of Lewis the Seventh, called The
Younger, King of France, but separated from Him by the Authority of Pope
Eugenius the Third, at a Council held at Baugency upon the River Loire, at
which, Lewis and Eleanor were with joint consent divorced; for consanguinity in
the third or fourth degree. There are who report, that Lewis carrying this
Eleanor into the Holy Land, She there behaved Her Self licentiously, and
entertained familiarity with a Turk, which the King taking notice of, yet
dissembled till he came home, and then waved the cause under color of nearness
of Blood. But this report was certainly nothing else but a Slander; for after
Her Marriage with Duke Henry, She ever led a modest and sober life, without
scandal or sensure. Others more judicious affirm, that the cause of this
separation was, because Eleanor brought the King no Male-issue, which he
earnestly longed for, but only two Daughters, Saiacte Marthe, p. 338 b, c, d.
and p. 339 a, b.
which (being yet judged legitimate by the Church) were married; Mary of France
the Elder, to Henry the First, Count Palatine of Troys in Campaigne, and of
Brie, etc. And Alix of France, the younger daughter, was Wife of Theobald,
called The Good, Earl of Chartres and Blois, and Great Steward of France.

She was the prime cause of those Bloody Wars, which long after continued as
Hereditary betwixt England and France, and the fomenter of that unnatural
discord betwixt Her Husband, and His Sons. She so long over-lived King Henry
Her Husband, Scevole and Lovis de Sancte Marthe, p. 334 b.
as to see three of Her Sons in possession of the Crown, and two of them in
their Graves; Her Death.
and departed this World in the Castle of Mirabell in Anjou, the Twenty sixth
day of June, in the year 1202. And was interred in the Monastery of Font
Euraud, where Her Figure in Royal Robes, with Her Crown on Her Head, carved in
Grey-Marble, is at this day to be seen, lying by Her Husband King Henry in that
stately Monument, erected by the late Lady Abbess. Her Effigies is marked with
the Letter B. and the Tomb is exhibited in Sculpture at the later end of the
Reign of the said King. Duke Henry about two years after the Death of His
Father, came again for England, where after some velitations with King Stephen,
they were at last Chron. Norman. p. 989 b, c. An. 1152. Vii Ides of Nov.
reconciled, and His succession to the Crown of England, ratified by Act of
Parliament; not long after which, he returned into Normandy, and laid siege to
a Castle detained from Him by the King of France; where news was brought Him
that King Stephen was dead, notwithstanding which, Henry (who had no competitor
to fear) continued before it six weeks, until it was surrendered, and then came
for England, and was Anointed, and solemnly Crowned at Westminster, Ibidem, p.
990 c.
by Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury upon the Fourteenth of the Kalends of
January, viz. the Nineteenth day of December, in the year of our Lord 1153.

He began His Reign with singular Prudence, making choice of the wisest men He
could get for Counselors, He expelled those strangers brought in by King
Stephen, and demolished the Castles, the Nobility had built by His allowance
(often proving Nurseries of Rebellion) and the Crown Lands alienated by that
King, He reassumed, judging it safer to offend a few, then disobliege many: And
for the furtherance of Justice (in the One and twentieth year of His Reign) He
divided His whole Realm into six several Circuits, appointing in every Circuit
Three Judges, who twice a year rode together to administer Justice; and to
hear, and determine causes betwixt party and party.

His War with Owen Prince of Northwales, was rather accounted an exercise to
keep Him in motion, then to disturb His rest, yet notwithstanding, Owen was not
so easily reduced, but that Henry de Essex the Kings Standard Bearer, being
oppressed by the Welsh, let fall the Royal Standard in Battle; for which he was
cashiered for cowardice, shorn a Monk, and had his Lands seized into the Kings
hands.

After which, Himself and Queen Eleanor His Wife were solemnly Crowned at
Worcester upon Christmas Day, where they at the Offertory laid their Diadems
upon the Altar, Vowing never to wear them after. This being the third time, at
which, in three several places, Westminster, Lincoln, and this City, he had
been crowned. To make His Dominions more entire, He seized into His hands the
Earldom of Anjou, left by His Fathers Will to His Brother Geoffrey, allowing
him in lieu thereof an annual pension; and also divested David, King of Scots,
of the Earldoms of Cumberland and Huntington, pieces granted him by King
Stephen, and of Northumberland, the gift of his Mother the Empress, leaving
David only that of Huntington, with the condition of doing him homage for the
same. Sancte Marthe. Tom. 1. p. 339 and 341.
He married his second Son (but Eldest living) Henry, to Margaret Daughter of
Lewis the Seventh, King of France, and affied his third Son Richard, to Alice
another Daughter of the same King; and also, in the Thirteenth year of his
Reign, matched his fourth son Geoffrey, to Constance, the Daughter and Heir of
Conan Earl of Little Britain, who dying not long after, left them that County.

If King Henry had hitherto managed his affairs with much Wisdom and Prudence,
he now shows as much weakness and infirmity, in causing his son Henry to be
made Copartner with him, in the Kingdom, and to be twice Crowned; the Robert of
Gloucester, p. 237 b.
first time by Roger Archbishop of York, and a second time with Margaret his
Wife, by the desire of her Father King Lewis, in the City of Winchester, by
Rotrock of Warwick, Archbishop of Roan, where the Father descended so low, as
to serve as a Sewer at the Table of his ambitious son, and made the Barons
swear him Allegiance; which act proceeded partly from Indulgence to him, but
more (it is believed) to ensure his Succession to the Crown, finding by
experience, that Oaths for Succession are often evaded, but Oaths for present
Allegiance, seldom are eluded. And now Henry the young King is blamed by his
Father-in-Law, for that having entered upon the Government, and being Crowned,
he would yet permit his Father to rival him in the Kingdom, and content himself
with being a Titular King only, which easily enflamed the youth with unjust
desires: So that breaking out into open hate, many quarrels arose betwixt the
two Henry's, which were at length desided by sharp and bloody Wars: In all
which, most unnaturally his sons, and most undutifully, Robert Earl of
Leicester, and Hugh Earl of Chester, together with William, then King of Scots,
taking part with the King of France, were continually overcome by King Henry,
forced to an Agreement, and all their Accomplices upon submission pardoned.

Long was the contention betwixt King Henry and Thomas Becket Archbishop of
Canterbury, which though no equal match, yet it is hard to distinguish which
had the Victory: The difference was, the King would have it ordained, that
Malefactors of the Clergy should be tried before the Secular Magistrate, as
Laymen were. This Becket opposed, urging it to be against the Liberty of the
Church, and therefore against Gods honor, many Bishops sided with the King,
some few with the Archbishop; at last Becket signs the Ordinance, yet with a
Salvo ordine suo, which not being satisfactory to the King, he then signs
absolute, without reservation, but immediately recants, and has his
Temporalities seized on; upon which he flies the Realm, and his Kindred are
banished. Becket in this misery continued Seven years, till by the Popes
threatenings of Excommunication, or by the Mediation of the King of France, he
was restored to his Archbishopric, who still continuing his Pride, and
interdicting those Bishops that had offended him, so much incensed King Henry,
that it forced some rash expressions from him; which being noted by four
Knights there present, viz. Reynold Fitz-Vrse, Hugh Morvile, Thomas Tracy, and
Richard Britton, who thinking they should do an acceptable service to the King,
by ridding him out of the way, came shortly afterward for England, and
murdered the Archbishop in his own Cathedral, upon the Thirtieth day of
December, An. 1172. Which assassinates being ever afterward abhorred of the
King, died miserably; and the King himself being accused of his death by the
Pope, purges himself by Oath; but yet is forced to do penance, and afterward
to Foot it three miles on his bloody bare Feet, to visit the Shrine of this
Unruly-Saint; and further, suffered himself to be beaten with Rods by every
Monk in the Cloister. By which he is said to have appeased Beckets ghost (say
some Authors) and to become victorious, not only in his Wars in England and
France, but also immediately thereupon made his Conquest of Ireland, begun by
Robert Fitz-Stephen and Maurice Fitzgerald, prosecuted by Richard Strongbow
Earl of Striguile, of the Family of Clare, in behalf of Dermot (Son of Mac
Murgh, King of Lemster) whose Daughter Eva, Strongbow took to Wife, and was
adopted his Heir; whom they made promise, to establish in his almost lost
Kingdom against Roderick King of Connaught, designing the Universal Monarchy of
Ireland. To Strongbows victorious progress, King Henry puts a stop; and least
he should have the glory of a total reduction of that Kingdom, sails thither
with a mighty Army, An. 1173. Chron. Norman. p. 1020 a.
And keeping his Christmas in the City of Dublin, takes homage of the several
Princes and Bishops, who by the consent of Pope Adrian receive him and his
Heirs to be their King, Rogerus H^veden, sot. 301 b. number. 50.
Rotherick only excepted, who keeping himself in the Woods and Bogs, was yet
after four years resistance constrained to submit as the rest; and afterward
John, the Kings youngest Son, was sent into Ireland in the Thirtieth year of
his Fathers Reign, to whom he gave that Dominion.

And now was King Henry possessed of the Kingdom of England, and Dukedom of
Normandy, in his Mothers right, He succeeded his Fathers in the Earldoms of
Anjou, Touraine, and Maine, and had also by his Wife, the Duchy of Aquitaine,
and County of Poictou, with a Title to the Earldom of Toloza, and also by
Conquest, Ireland: All which being united in his person, swelled his Empire, to
a larger extent, then was at that time possessed by any Christian King; having
also offer made to him of the Kingdom of Jerusalem, by Heraclius the Patriarch;
as being son of Geoffrey, Novedent
and Grandson of Foulk, King of Jerusalem. In the Reign of King Stephen he
wrote in his Style, and upon his Seal and Reverse Vincent, p. 663. Charta in
Custodia Roberti Cotton, Militis and Baronetti. See His Great Seals, p. 54
HENRICUS DUX NORMANORUM ET AQUITANORUM; and when he came to be king HENRICUS
DEI GRATIA REX ANGLORUM; and on the Reverse, HENRICUS DUX NORMANORUM ET
AQUITANORUM ET COMES ANDEGAVORUM. Under these Heads comprehending all his
Dominions, except Ireland, which he bestowed on his youngest Son John, Surnamed
Sansterre, being the first King of England that styled Himself Dominus
Hiberniae.

Not long after King Henry's return out of Ireland, happened the death of His Son
Henry the young King, when Richard upon pretext that his Father detained his
Wife Alice (and instigated by Queen Eleanor his Mother, who continually vexed
the King, by reason of his Unlawful Love to the fair Rosamond, his Paramore)
Confederates with Philip King of France, and raises a new broil, which ended in
an Agreement betwixt the two Kings; and Queen Eleanor that had lately put
Rosamond to death, was imprisoned and remained in durance till her son Richard
coming to the Crown, set her at liberty. But this defection, together with the
Rebellion of his other Children, moved such a Passion in King Henry's perplexed
mind, as it suddenly struck him into a Fever. Matthew. Paris, p. 151. number, 37.
So that not being able to support the Wounds of his Spirit, coming to Chinon
he fell there mortally sick, and feeling the approach of death, caused himself
to be born into the Church before the Altar, where after humble Confession and
Sorrow for his Sins, His Death.
he breathed out his last upon the Nones ( viz. the seventh day) of July, An.
1189. Chronica Normanniae, p. 1004 d. Chronica Sancti Stephani Cadomensis, page
1020 a. Matthew. Paris, p. 151. numd 41,
in the Fifty seventh year of his age, when he had Reigned Thirty four Years,
Eight Months, and about Thirteen days, his Obsequies being performed by the
Archbishops of Tours and Trier. He was Interred in the Abbey of Fout-Euraud in
Anjou, the manner of whose Burial was thus. He was Clothed in Royal Robes, his
Crown upon his Head, white Gloves on his Hands, Boots of Gold upon his Legs,
Gilt Spurs upon his Heels, a great rich Ring upon his Finger, his Scepter in
his Hand, his Sword by his side, and his Face uncovered, and all bare. As he
was carried to be Buried, his Son Richard ran in great have to see him, who no
sooner approached the Body, but suddenly the Corpse bled at the Nostrils a
fresh; which though it were in Duke Richard no good sign of Innocence, yet his
breaking instantly into Tears upon the seeing it, was a good sign of
Repentance: He was honored with this Distick while he lived, containing his
Kingly Virtues.

Nec laudem, nec munus amat, nec honor superbit, ^^^mdens Remains, p. 356.

Nec laesus laedit, nec dominando premit.
And because in his life time he was wont to say, That the whole World was not
sufficient to satisfy the desires of a Courageous Prince, He had this Epitaph
engraven on his rich Sepulcher.

Rex HENRICHS eram, mihi plurima Regna subegi, Hieronimus Henninges. Tom. 2. p.
93. Matthew Paris, p. 151. number. 54.

Multiplicique modo, Duxque Comesque fui
Cui satis ad votum non essent omnia terrae
Climata, terra modo sufficit octo pedum.
Qui legis haec pensa discrimina mortis, and in me
Humanae speculum conditionis habe.
Sufficit hic Tumulus, cui non suffecerat orbis,
Res brevis ampla mihi, cui fuit ampla brevis.
The Effigies of this King Henry noted with the Letter A. I ow the procurement
of this Tomb, and many other obligations to the Favor and Interest of Dr.
Durell, one of the Prebends of His Majesty's Chapel Royal of Windsor. Nor must
I omit a grateful acknowledgment to F. Pavillon a Monk of Fout-Euraud, for
communicating to me several Epitaphs of the Royal Family of England there
Interred.
and also that of Queen Eleanor his Wife, being removed from the station in the
Church, where they had been first fixed, were placed in that stately Monument
erected An. Dom. 1638. by the late Lady Abbess, Madam Jeane Baptiste de Bourbon
Daughter of King Henry the Great, out of a high respect to the memory of our
Kings and Queens, Interred in the Church of the said Monastery of Fout-Euraud.
I have inserted the Figure of this Monument (affixed to the North Wall of the
Chore) here betwixt the 64 and 65 Pages of this Second Book, sent to me by the
said Lady Abbess, about three years before her death, and delineated by her own
Scenographer. Unto which I refer my Reader.

In fine, the Story of this Kings Reign approves him to have been Wife,
Learned, and Valiant (except his indulgence to his Graceless Children) and what
not a little adds to his commendations, was, That albeit he was almost
continually engaged in Foreign and Domestic Troubles, yet he never imposed
upon his Subjects any extraordinary Tax whatsoever, yet left he unto his Third
Son and Successor Richard, more then 900000 pounds in ready Coin, besides
Plate, Jewels, Household Stuff, and ample Provision for the War. And
notwithstanding, in most things Prosperity made him happy; yet in three things
he was unfortunate.

First, In the Rebellion of the Fruit of his own Loins.

Secondly, In his unquenchable Lust to his unseparable Concubine, the Beauteous
Rosamond, who being admirably fair and taking, too much estranged his love from
Eleanor his Renowned Queen. And

Thirdly, In that irreconcilable dissension betwixt him and the ungrateful
Archbishop of Canterbury; yet had King Henry a singular esteem for the Church,
and left proofs of his Piety in the Augmentation of the Monastery of S.
Augustine at Bristol, Founded by Robert Fitz-Harding (and by King Henry the
Eight erected into a Cathedral;) and also the Foundations of the Priories of
Dover, Basingwork, and Stonely; and several other charitable and necessary
Works.

Children of King HENRY the Second, by Queen ELEANOR of AQVITAINE, His Wife.
5. WILLIAM (so named in remembrance of the Earls of Poictou, and Dukes of
Aquitaine, His Mothers Ancestors, Five of which had the appellation of William)
the eldest Son of King Henry the Second, Chronica Normanniae page 989 b.
was born before his Father was King, being then but Duke of Normandy, in
August, the Seventeenth year of King Stephens Reign, An. 1152. And about four
years after (his Father being then King, in the second year of His Reign) the
Nobility of England swear unto Him their Fealty at Wallingford in Berkshire,
Ibidem, p. 991 a.
as to the Heir-apparent of the Crown; but he deceased in the year following,
Ibidem, p. 992 b.
being the third of his Fathers Reign, and the fifth of his own age An. 1156.
and was Interred in the Monastery of Reading, at the Feet of his Great
Grandfather King Henry the First.

5. The Figure of this Henry's Royal Seal (without a Reverse) is depicted in
the 54 Page of this Second Book, in which the said King is represented in Royal
Robes, with His Crown on His Head, in His Right Hand He holds a Globe with a
Cross on the top thereof, and in His left a Scepter. By which I observe, that
although King Henry His Father admitted Him Partner with Him in His Crown,
Kingdom and Scepter, yet He kept the Sword in His own Hand, to defend Him from
the ambitious encroachments of this Royal Rival.
HENRY Crowned KING (so called after His Fathers name) the Second Son of King
Henry and Qu. Eleanor, Robert of Gloucester, fol. 246 a. Chron. Norman. p. 991
a. Chron. S. Stephani Cadom. p. 1019 c. Chron. Norman. p. 997 b. Et Ibid. p.
1003 b, c. Robert of Gloucester, p. 234 a. Ibidem, 237 a.
born at London the 28 day of February, An. 1155, was their Heir-apparent,
after the decease of his Brother William. In the year 1159. (at Newborrow) He
was affianced to Margaret the only Daughter of Lewis the Seventh, King of
France, surnamed The Younger (by Constance his Second Wife, Daughter of Alfonso
the Eighth, King of Spain) to which King he did his homage for the Dukedom of
Normandy; as also ( An. 1168.) for the Earldoms of Anjou and Maine; at which
time he had given him by his said Father-in-Law, the Seneschalcy or Stewardship
of France, as a Fief of the County of Anjou, and upon the Second day of
February, in the same year, being at Paris, Henry did serve at the Table of
King Lewis as Great Steward of France, or Major of the Palace; which Office had
been formerly granted to Geoffrey Grisogonella, Count of Anjou, by Robert King
of France, as a reward for his assistance against Otho, Emperor of Almaine.

Not long after ( viz. the Fifteenth day of July, An. 1170. Chronica Norman. p.
1003 d. Scevole and Levis de Sancte Marthe. Tom. 1. Livre VI. p. 339 and 304.
) this Henry was by the command of His Father Crowned King of England at
Westminster, by Roger Archbishop of York, and in the year 1173. His Marriage
with Margaret His betrothed Wife was consummated; with whom he had the County
of Vexin. After which He was a second time Crowned with the said Margaret at
Winchester by Rotrock Archbishop of Roan, at the instance of Her Father-in-Law
King Lewis, where King Henry voluntarily condescended to serve as a Sewer at
His Sons Table. This Margaret outlived Her Husband, Roger. Hoveden. fol. 360
a. number. 30. Ibidem, fol. 440 a. number. 40.
returned to Her Father, and was remarried to Bela the Third of the Name, King
of Hungary, and surviving Him also, undertook a Pilgrimage to the Holy Land,
Her Death.
and died there in the City of Acres, in the year of our Lord 1198.

The Kingdom being thus divided betwixt the two Henry's, the Son among other
Ensigns of Royalty, caused His Great Seal to be made upon which he entitled
Himself thus, viz.

HENRICUS REX ANGLORUM, See His Great Seal, page 54.
DUX NORMANORUM, ET COMES ANDEGAVORUM.

monument blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
MVTARE VEL TIMERE SPERO Illustrissimo et Potent Principi HENRICO Marchioni et
Comiti de WORCESTER Baroni HERBERT de Raglano, Chepstow, et de Gorver,
Principalitatis. WALLIAE Praesidi, Comitatum Glocestriae, Herefordiae, et
Monemuthiae, Locum-tenenti, e Secretioribus Consilijs Nobilissimique Ordinis
Garterij Eguiti andct. Saenotaphij hane Heureill Ricardil Angliae Regum
Regirtarumque, Alianorae et Issabollae Figura^ H.D.F.S.



And yet not content to equal his Father in Power (for Empire admits not a
Rival) He resolved, either to be absolute in the Crown, or loose the Scepter;
in which (being supported by a potent faction) he grew so insolent, that seeing
he could not obtain a Surrender from his Father by fair words, he brake into an
open Rebellion: So that after along contention, that which the Sword could not
decide, Death put an end to by an extraordinary Judgment of God upon the young
King, who falling into a violent Fever, past hope of recovery, and touched
with a lively Repentance and Sorrow for his fault, sent to his Father to crave
his pardon; with which, King Henry being moved to Compassion, as a remark of
his Clemency and Forgiveness, caused one of His Rings to be sent him: The
which, the young King affectionately kissing, after humble contrition for his
sins, rendered up his Soul in the presence of the Archbishop of Bourges, Chron.
Norman. ^004 d.
at the Castle of Martell, in the Vicounty of Turenne, His Death.
upon the Eleventh day ( viz. the Third of the Ides) of June, An. Dom. 1182.

As he had been twice Crowned, Rob. of Gloucester. p. 245 b.
so was he twice Buried, and not without trouble; as if the Factions, of which
he was the cause in his life, did by a kind of fate not forsake him being dead;
Ibidem, p. 246 b. and 247.
for the Citizens of Man's having Interred his Corpse in the Church of S. Julian,
near to his Grandfather Earl Geoffrey, they of Roan (to whom the young King had
bequeathed his Body) without Menaces, Chron. Norman. p. 10^4 d.
and the Fathers express Commandment could not obtain it: Which thereupon was
taken up again, and (on the Shoulders of several of the Cenomanian Lords)
carried four days journey to Roan, and buried in the Cathedral Church of that
City, on the right side of the High Altar.

So that whatsoever this Princes Life was, his Death certainly was not
inglorious (but worthy to be set out in Tables as a Pattern to Disobedient
Children) the manner of which being related to his Father, he fell upon the
Earth weeping bitterly, and (like another David for his Absalom) would not of a
long time be comforted.

5. RICHARD, Third Son of King Henry the Second, succeeded his Father in His
Royalties, by the name of King Richard the First, of whom mention is made in
the next Chapter.

The Arms assigned to this Geoffrey by our Modern Genealogists, are, Gules, 3
Lions Passant Guardant Or, a Labell of 9 Points, Argent. But I cannot find as
yet any Authority to justify the same; nor do I believe, that the filial
distinction of the Label was then used, it being many years after, that the
Three Lions came to be the Successive Arms of the Kings of England.
5. GEOFFREY Duke or Earl of Britain, Chron, Norman. p. 994 b. Rob. of
Giocester, p. 233 a. Ibidem, p. 235 b.
and Earl of Richmond, the Fourth Son of King Henry the Second, and Queen
Eleanor, was born upon the Ninth of the Kalends of October, ( viz. the Twenty
third day of September) in the Fourth year of his Fathers Reign, An. 1158. He
took to Wife Constance, the Daughter and Heir of Conan, surnamed Le Petit, Earl
of Britain, with whom Her said Father gave unto Him the Counties of Britain and
Richmond, Robert of Gloucester, p. 237 a.
and did his homage to King Henry his Father for the same, and received also
the Fealties of the Barons of Britain, An. 1168. Rogerus Hoveden, f. 331 a.
number. 40.
About Ten years after ( viz. An. 1178.) Earl Geoffrey was Knighted by his
Father at Woodstock, and by His command employed in the War against his Brother
Richard Duke of Aquitaine; in which he behaved himself so perfidiously, that he
acquired the appellation of, The Child of Perdition: Ibidem, p. 360.
Nor are some Authors backward in telling us, That it was the revenge of his
Disobedience, that pursued him to an untimely end. For being in a Tournament at
Paris, he was trodden to death under his Horses feet, Matthew. Paris, p. 559.
number. 10.
upon the Fourteenth of the Kalends of September (viz. the Ninteenth day of
August,) An. 1186. in the Two and thirtieth year of the Reign of King Henry the
Second, and buried before the High Altar, in the Church of our Lady, in the
same City.

Constance his Widow was afterward married to Ranulph Blandevile, Earl
Palatine of Chester; Book of Richmond. Vincent, p. 62 and 63.
from whom being divorced for Incontinency, she took to her third Husband Guy
Viscount of Thovars, and had issue by him two Daughters, Alice and Katherine.
Ex Chronicis Cestrioe M. S. In Ypodig. Neustriae. ad Annum 1203. Hoveden. fol.
822.
Alice was married to Peter de Dreux (surnamed Mauclere) who in her right was
Duke of Britain; and Katherine was the Wife of Andrew de Vitre in Britain.

The Countess Constance departed this life in the year 1201 leaving also issue
by this Earl Geoffrey her first Husband, a Son named Arthur, who succeeded him
in the Dukedom of Britain, and a Daughter, called Eleanor the Damsel of Britain.

This Arthur is said to have borne the Arms assigned to his Father Earl
Geoffrey.
6. ARTHVR Duke of Britain, Ypodig, Neustriae. p. 452. number. 30. Matthew. Paris,
p. 138. number. 10. Hoveden, fol. 361 b. number. 10.
and Earl of Richmond (the posthumus and only Son of Earl Geoffrey aforesaid,
and Constance his Wife the Heir of Britain) was born upon Easter Day in the
year 1186.

King Richard the First his Uncle, when he undertook his Crossiade to the Holy
Land, declared this Arthur his Heir, in case He should die without issue, as
being the Son of Duke John's Elder Brother. And also forced Tancred King of
Sicily to promise his Daughter to him in marriage, and to pay a good part of
her Portion down in ready money: So that after King Richards death, this Arthur
was Proclaimed King of England, and Duke of Normandy; and being aided by Philip
Augustus King of France, (who made him Knight, Rigord. fol. 202.
An. 1199. and affianced him to his Daughter Mary at Paris) he made War against
King John his Fathers younger Brother; Chronica Norman. p. 1005 d.
but being taken prisoner at Mirabell in Normandy in the same year, he was
carried to Roan Castle, where leaping from the Wall thereof, with intent to
escape (say some) he was drowned in the Ditch; but others relate, that he was
made away by his said Uncle John in the year 1200. leaving not any Issue.

6. ELEANOR (commonly called The Damsel of Britain) sole Daughter of Geoffrey
Earl of Britain, Robert of Gloucester, p. 230.
and only Sister and Heir of Earl Arthur, was sent into England by her Uncle
King John, and imprisoned in Bristol Castle, for no other crime then her title
to the Crown; but that was sufficient to make her liberty both suspected and
dangerous. Roger Hoveden, fol. 414. a. number. 50. And fol. 425 b. number. 40.
In durance there she prolonged her miserable life, until the year of our Lord
1241. which was the Twenty fifth of King Henry the Third, at which time she
died a Virgin, and lies buried in the Church of the Nunnery at Ambresbury;
unto which Monastery she gave the Manor of Melkesham, with its Appurtenances.

5. JOHN (surnamed Sans-Terre) the Fifth and youngest Son of King Henry the
Second, and Queen Eleanor, succeed his Brother King Richard in the Kingdom of
England, etc. Of whom see more in the Third Chapter of this Second Book.

The Arms of this Henry the Fifth, Duke of Saxony were, Barry of Eight Pieces,
Or, and Sable. For the Augmentation of the Chaplet was added by the Emperor
Frederick Barbarossa, at what time he confirmed Bernard of Anhalt (this Henry's
Successor) in the Dukedom of Saxony: For Bernard desiring of the Emperor to
have some difference added to the Ducal Coat, to distinguish him, and his, and
his Successors from those of the former House; the Emperor took a Chaplet of
Rue which he had then on his head, and threw it cross his Shield or Eschocheon
of Arms, which was immediately Painted on the same. Elias Reusnerus, p. 435.
5. MAVD, Duchess of SAXONY and BAVARIA, Eldest Daughter of King Henry the
Second, and Queen Eleanor, was born in the Third year of her said Fathers
Reign, An. 1156/7. Chronica Normaniae, page 1000 a. Rogerus Hoveden, fol. 282
a. number. 40. And fol. 351 b. number. 50. Chronica Normaniae, page 1002 a.
Her Espousals with Henry the Fifth, surnamed The Lion, Duke of Saxony and
Bavaria (Son of Henry, called The Proud, Duke of Bavaria and Saxony, and of
Gertrude Daughter of Lothaire the Emperor) were concluded at Roan, by Reginald
Archbishop of Cullen, and others, Ambassadors employed for that affair by the
Emperor Frederick. And afterward, viz. An. 1167. this MAVD was sent into
Germany with a rich Dower, and a Splendid Train, where her marriage was
consummated.

She had issue by Duke Henry, Elias Reusnerus, p. 408 and 409. Rogerus Hoveden.
fol. 390. a. number. 40.
Henry the Sixth Duke of Saxony and Bavaria, (who by Agnes his Wife, Daughter
and Heir of Courade, Count Palatine of the Rhine) was Father of Henry that died
young. Agnes married to Otho, Count Palatine of the Rhine, in her right Duke of
Bavaria, and Ixmengarde Wife of Herman, Marquess of Baden,) Otho the Fourth
Emperor of Germany, who had formerly been Earl of York, and afterward of
Poictiers, by the gift of King Richard the First and William (born at
Winchester) Duke of Lunenburgh and Brunswick (Ancestor of the present Duke of
Brunswick) who, as Tradition goes, did bear for his Coat Armor, Two Lious
Passant Guardant, Or, in a Field Gules, as King Henry the Second his
Grandfather is said to have borne them, before his Marriage with Eleanor of
Aquitaine. The Duchess MAVD had also issue two daughters, viz. Ingeburge Wife
of Waldemar the Second, King of Denmark; and Maud married to Earl Geoffrey the
Son of Rotrock Earl of Perch; Rogerus Hoveden. fol. 373 a. number. 10.
and deceasing in the first year of the Reign of King Richard the First, her
Brother, she was buried in the Church of S. Blase in Brunswick, near to the
Sepulcher of Duke HENRY her Husband.

5. The Arms of Castile are Gules, a Castile, Or, which were first quartered
with those of Leon, viz. Argent a Lion Rampant Purpure by Ferdinand the Third,
King of Castile and Leon.
ELEANOR (Queen of CASTILE) Second Daughter of King Henry the Second, Rogerus
Hoveden. fol. 317 a. number. 50.
so named in memory of her Mother Queen Eleanor, took her first breath in the
City of Roan, upon the Thirteenth day of October, in the year of our Salvation
1162. she was married to ALPHONSO the Eighth, King of Castile, An. 1177. and
was by Him the Mother of Three Sons, Sancheo, Ferdinand, and Henry; all which
died without Issue; and of Four Daughters, viz. Berengaria, Blanch, Vracca, and
Eleanor. Berengaria was espoused to Alphonso the Ninth, King of Leon, in whose
Right He had also the Kingdom of Castile; and by Her Issue, Ferdinand the
Third, King of Castile and Leon, who by Beatrix His First Wife, Daughter of
Philip of Swenia, Emperor Elect, was Father of Alphonso the Tenth, King of
Castile and Leon: And by Joan Countess of Poutive, His second Wife, He had
issue Queen Eleanor, the Beloved Wife of Edward, First of the Name, King of
England. Blanch was the Wife of Lewis the Eighth, King of France, and from them
are issued the succeeding Kings of France; and Charles Earl of Anjou, and
afterward King of Sicily, etc. Vracca was married to Alphonso the Second, King
of Portugal; and from them the Royal House of Portugal deriveth its self. And
Eleanor had to Her Husband James the First, King of Aragon.

The Arms used by this William the Second, King of Sicily, I cannot yet learn.
For the Escocheon, Or, Four Paletts Gules was the Arms of Peter King of Aragon,
who added thereto the Two Flaunches Argent, charged with as many Eagletts
Sable, (in the Right of Constance his Wife, the Daughter and Heir of Manfrey,
King of Naples and Sicily, Natural Son of the Emperor Frederick the Second) by
these Eaglets, showing His Wives descent from the Imperial Line: The Escocheons
Painted and Engraven within the Arch of the Tomb at Fout-Euraud for this Queen
Joan, and Demidiated with those of King William Her Husband, are of a later
date, being Or, Four Paletts Gules, on Two Flaunches Argent, as many Eaglets
Suble. There are also on the same Monument, the Arms of Her second Husband,
Raymond Earl of Toulouse, viz. Gules, a Cross Buttony voided, Or, Marshalled
with them of Queen Joan in the same manner.
5. JOAN, Queen of SICILIE, afterward Countess of TOULOUSE, the Third and
youngest Daughter of King Henry the Second, and Queen Eleanor, Chronica
Normanniae, page 1000 b. Rogerus Hoveden. fol. 315 a. number. 20.
was born in the City of Angiers in France, in October, An. 1164. At Twelve
years old she was Married to William the Second, King of Sicily, Duke of
Apulia, and Prince of Capua, upon Sunday the Thirteen of February in the year
1176. and Crowned Queen upon the same day in the City of Palermo. Issue She had
by Him one Son, whom at his Christning His Father nominated Duke of Apulia; but
that Child first deceased, and then the Father, and left not any Issue. Queen
JOAN being left a Widow, Her Dower was detained from Her by King Tancred Her
Husbands Successor, which King Richard Her Brother (touching upon Sicily in His
voyage to the Holy Land) forced Tancred to compound with Her for Twenty
thousand Ounces of Gold in ready pay. She accompanied King Richard and Queen
Berengaria to Palestine; and returning from thence into France, had to Her
second Husband Raymond of S. Giles the Sixth of the Name, Earl of Toulouse, by
whom she had Issue two Sons, viz. Raymond the last Earl of his Family, and
Bertrand of Toulouse; also Mary a Daughter married to Berald of Elbine, Prince
of Orange. The Princess JOAN being sensible of the approaches of death, took
the habit of a Nun in the Abbey of Fout-Euraud, Memorials in the Abbey of
Fout-Euraud.
and deceased upon the Fourth day of September, in the year of our Lord 1195.
and was buried in the Church of that Monastery, under a Marble, upon which Her
Effigies was carved. In the same Church was also Interred Her Son Earl Raymond,
under another Tomb of the same Matter, upon which his Portraiture was also
embossed.

These Monuments were by Her Highness, the late Lady M. Jeanne Batists de
Bourbon D. of K Henry the Great.
Abbess removed to enlarge the Chore of the Church; but to perpetuate the
memory of these Benefactors, she has caused their Figures to be Carved in
White Marble, both in a kneeling posture, and placed in that stately Mausoleum
rebuilt by Her, An. 1638. That of the Countess JOAN at the Head of King Henry
the Second Her Father, marked with the Letter E. And that of Count Raymond at
his Grandfathers Feet, striking his Breast with his Right Hand, as he had
ordained by his Will, noted with this Charracter F. Which Images are lively
represented in the said Monument inserted betwixt the 64 and 65 Pages of this
Second Book.

Natural Children of King HENRY the Second.
5. WILLIAM surnamed LONGESPEE, Natural Son of King Henry the Second, by the
Lady Rosamond, to whom King Richard the First, his Half-Brother gave the
Earldom of Salisbury, with Ela the Daughter and Heir of William Fitz-Patrick
Earl of that place. See more of this William in the Eleventh Chapter of this
Second Book.

5. GEOFFREY, Archbishop of York, another base son of King Henry the Second,
was born of the Lady Rosamond aforesaid. As his Brother William had been raised
by the business of the Sword, so was this Geoffrey by the Church; for being
inclineable to an Ecclesiastical Life, he was in his tender years made
Archdeacon of Lincoln, Rogerus Hoveden, fol. 307 b. 348 b. number. 40.
and after Bishop of that See, which he held about seven years without
Consecration; and then making a Resignation thereof An. 1181. into the hands of
his Father, and Richard Archbishop of Canterbury, he was made Chancellor of
England, and afterward by his Half-Brother King Richard, was advanced to the
Archbishopric of York (being consecrated at Tours in France in the year 1191.
Ibidem, fol. 373 b. number. 40. fol. 468 a.
) which See he governed with singular approbation. But in the Reign of K. John
also his Half-Brother, he under-went many difficulties, by opposing the
purposes of that King, who therefore made seizure of his whole estate: Godwin
Catalogue of Bishops page 461 and 462.
Whereupon he departed the Realm, and lived in banishment five years, even
until he was called to his long home by death, His Death.
which was in the year 1213. So he continued Archbishop somewhat more then One
and twenty years.

5. MORGAN, Provost of Beverley, Mr. Ferrers.
another Natural son of King Henry the Second, is thought by some to have been
of no long life, and to be born in Wales, Rogerus Hoveden, fol. 468. a.
where that Christen name is most commonly used, and whither this King did upon
occasions often resort. But others (upon good ground) report that he was
begotten on the Lady of one Sir Ralph Blower or Blewet a Knight, and lived both
to be Provost of Beverly, and to be elected to the Bishopric of Durham. Godwin
Catalogue of Bishops p. 515.
Exceptions being taken against this Morgan, for that he was a Bastard, and so
by the Canons not capable of Ecclesiastical Preferment without special
Dispensation; which the Pope being loath to grant, John Stow in the life of
King John.
advised him to call himself Blewet, and to allege, that he was born in lawful
wedlock. But he answered, that for any worldly preferment whatsoever, he would
not renounce his Father, or deny himself to be of Royal Blood. By which
resolute answer, he not only lost his Bishopric, but (for ought we find) never
afterward obtained other preferment.

5. An. Dom. 1189.
RICHARD I. King of ENGLAND, Duke of NORMANDY, and AQVITAINE, and Earl of
ANJOV, Surnamed COEUR de LION.
CHAP. II.
For Proof of the Royal Arms from William the Conqueror, to this present, Sir
Hen, Spelman in his Aspilogy, refers us to Authors of the Time, their
Monuments, Coyns, and Seals; but having had no resolves from the three first,
we must now observe what satisfaction the Seals of this King Richard the First
can afford us (for He had two, both exhibited in the 55 Page of this Second
Book) the Reverse of both having Shields, and those Shields being charged with
Arms. The first of these Two Seals he made use of, before His expedition into
the Holy Land, being the first Proof for the Posture of the Lions (although its
not to be doubted, but that the Kings of England did before this time bear
Lions; as I have proved in my Observations upon the Arms of King Henry the
First, ( Book 1. Page 24. in the Margin.) Upon this Counterseal Richard is
represented on Horsback, the dexter part of His Shield only visible, and that
charged with a Lion Rampant Senister, some would have another Lion Rampant
imagined to be on the Senister half of the Eschocheon, and then His Arms were
Two Lions Cumbatant; and of this opinion is the said Sir Henry Spelman, in
Aspilogia, page 46. But whether His Royal Shield consisted of One, or Two
Lions, certain we are, that Richard in his Fathers life time, being then only
Earl of Poictou, did bear a Plurality of Lions, as you may observe by these
Verses of Guil. Brit. Armoricanus in Philippeidos, Lib. 3. uttered in the
person of Monsieur William de Bar, ready to encounter him. Ecce comes Pictavus
agro nos provocat, ecce
Nes ad bella vocat, rictus agnosco Leonum,
Illius in Clypeo, stat ibi quasi ferrea turris,
Francorum nomen blasphemans ore protervo.
Under His other Great Seal, He confirmed many Grants and Charters, after His
return from Jerusalem, and His chargable Captivity in Austria and Germany; by
which means He refurnished His exhausted Exchequer; upon which, King Richard is
represented on Horsback in His Coat of Mall. His Helmet is adorned with the
Planta Genestae, or Broom Stalk, and on His Shield are plainly represented, The
Three Lions Passant Guardant; which from this time became the Hereditary Arms
of His Successors the Kings of England; from which age, Arms seem to have taken
their rise and original in this Kingdom, and by little and little to become
Hereditary, it being accounted most honorable to carry those Arms, which had
been displayed in the Holy Land, in that service, against the professed Enemies
of Christianity; but became not fully established, until the later end of the
Reign of King Henry the Third.


THis Prince, Robert of Gloucester, fol. 233 a. Chronica Normanniae, p. 993 b.
Robert of Clocester, p. 233 b. Sancte Marthe. Tom. 1. p. 341. Chron. Norman. p.
1003 b.
the Third Son (but Eldest living) of King Henry the Second, and Queen Eleanor;
was born in the Kings Mannor-House at Oxford (since the White Friars) in
September, An. 1157. in the Third year of his Fathers Reign. He proved a Prince
of great Valor, and therefore had the French surname of Coeur de Lion, in
English, Lions Heart. In his Infancy he was contracted to a Daughter of
Raymond, Count of Barcelona; and being grown up, was affianced to Adela or
Alice, Daughter of Lewis the Seventh, King of France, but took to Wife neither.
His Father created him Earl of Poictou, and in the year 1168. he did homage to
the King of France, for the Duchy of Aquitaine. Alice his affianced Wife,
being put into his Fathers hands, till she should be of age sit for marriage,
was then demanded by Richard, but by King Henry detained; its believed, because
the King loved her Himself, and had made her unfit for his Son; and if Richard
for this cause fell into a defection, he was not so faulty as his Brethren,
seeing that the Bonds of Love and Affection are much stronger then those of
Duty. Afterward when he might have had her, he slighted her, but sent her home
with a sum of Money. And if for this our Richard were distastful to his Father,
yet did he usher in his Government with duty to his Mother; Matthew. Paris, p.
152. number. 27.
whom he released after Twelve years imprisonment (a Penance she had suffered
for Rosamonds Death) and raised to as high Authority, as if she had been left
Queen Regent: In which condition she managed affairs with wonderful Moderation,
Integrity, and Judgment, until King Richard having settled His Estate in
Normandy, came home, and was upon the Third day of September, Rogerus Hoveden.
fol. 374 a.
in the year 1189. His Coronation.
Anointed and Crowned at Westminster, by Baldwin Archbishop of Canterbury; the
manner of which Coronation was as follows.

First, The Archbishops of Canterbury, Roan, Triers, and Dublin, with all the
other Bishops, etc. apparrelled in rich Copes, and having the Cross, Holy Water
and Censers carried before them; came to fetch the King at the door of His
Privy Chamber; and there receiving Him, they led Him to the Church of
Westminster, till they came before the High Altar, with a solemn Procession. In
the middle of the Bishops and Clergy, went Four Barons bearing Candlesticks
with Tapers; after whom came Geoffry de Lucy bearing the Cap of Maintenance,
and John Marshall next to him, bearing a Massive Pair of Spurs of Gold; then
followed William Marshall Earl of Pembroke, who bare the Royal Scepter, in the
top whereof, was set a Cross of Gold; and William Fitz-Patrick Earl of
Salisbury, going next him, bare the Warder or Rod, having on the top thereof a
Dove; Then came three other Earls, viz. David, Brother to the King of Scots,
Earl of Huntington, John Earl of Mortaign the Kings Brother, and Robert Earl of
Leicester, each of them bearing a Sword upright in his hand, with the Scabbards
richly adorned with Gold; the Earl of Mortaign went in the midst betwixt the
other two. After them followed six Earls and Barons bearing a Checker Table,
upon which the Regalia were placed; and then followed William de Mandevile Earl
of Albemarle, bearing a Crown of Gold before the King, who followed, having the
Bishop of Durham on His right hand, and Reynold Bishop of Bath on His left;
over whom a Canopy was borne; and in this order He came into the Church at
Westminster, where before the High Altar, in the presence of the Clergy and the
People, laying His hand upon the Holy Evangelists, and the Relics of certain
Saints, He took His Solemn Oath; which done, He put off all His Garments from
His middle upwards, but only His Shirt, which was open on the Shoulders, that
He might be Anointed; then the Archbishop of Canterbury Anointed Him in three
places, on the Head, on the Shoulder, and on the right Arm, with Prayers in
such case accustomed. After this He covered His Head with a Linen Cloth
hallowed, and set His Cap thereon; and then after He had put on His Royal
Garments, and His uppermost Robe, the Archbishop delivered Him the Sword, with
which He should beat down the Enemies of the Church; which done, two Earls put
His Shoes upon His Feet, and having His Mantle put on Him, the Archbishop for
bad Him on the behalf of Almighty God, not to presume to take upon Him this
Dignity, except He faithfully meant to do those things He had sworn to perform;
whereunto the King made answer, That by Gods Grace He would perform them. Then
the King took the Crown beside the Altar, and delivered it to the Archbishop,
which be set upon the Kings Head, delivering Him the Scepter to hold in His
Right Hand, and the Rod-Royal in His Left Hand. And thus being Crowned, He was
brought back by the Bishops and Barons, with the Cross and Candlesticks, and
Three Swords, passing forth before Him to His Seat. When the Bishop that sung
the Mass came to the Offertory, the two Bishops that brought Him to the Church,
led Him to the Altar, and brought him back again; the Mass ended, He was
brought with solemn Procession into His Chamber. And this was the Form of the
Kings Coronation, which solemnity was hancelled with the Blood of many Jews,
(though utterly against the Kings will) who pressing into the Abbey to see His
Coronation, were in a tumult furiously murdered.

No sooner was He Crowned, but (by the instigation of the Pope) He was engaged
with Philip King of France, Leopold Duke of Austria, and many other Christian
Princes in the famous Crosiade for the winning of Jerusalem, at that time
possessed by the Souldan Saladine; therefore for the raising of Money for this
intended Pilgrimage, He rather chose to furnish Himself out of His own Estate,
then to burden His People; which He did by selling Privileges, Deameans,
Immunities, and Cities; among which, He sold Berwick Castle and Roxborrow, to
the King of Scots for Ten thousand Pounds; and the Earldom of Northumberland,
to Hugh Pudsey Bishop of Durham, for much Money, (at whose Creation King
Richard told the standers by, That he was a good Craftsman, that had made a new
Earl of an old Bishop) and also did protest, That for the performing of so just
and honorable a Service, He was not unwilling to sell His City of London its
self (if any there were able to purchase it) rather then to be chargeable to
others.

As for Men and Soldiers, the Clergy that undertook the cause, had stirred up
innumerable; but the only main danger of the State, was His Brother John,
whose aspiring mind he endeavored to moderate by making it appear, how much
the bounty of a Brother did exceed the hardness of a Father; for he conferred
on him the-Earldoms of Cornwall, Lancaster, and Dorset; and by the Marriage with
Isabell, one of the Daughters and Heirs of William Consul of Gloucester, he had
that Earldom also; many other pieces likewise he enjoyed, in all amounting to
Four thousand Marks yearly: But having made him thus powerful, Richard yet
takes away that opportunity which might put him upon the Usurpation of the
Crown, by leaving others in trust with the Government in His absence, and by
confining John to live in Normandy till His return; but for the last, their
Mother, Queen Eleanor, became John's surety. So that the Kingdom being left to
the Government of several Men of Power, Wisdom, and Loyalry; of which, William
Longchamp Bishop of Ely, and Chancellor of England, was chief, and Robert Earl
of Leicester set over Normandy. King Richard appoints His Nephew Arthur to be
His Successor, in case He should fail in this Expedition.

Chronica Sancti Stephani Cadom. p. 1020 a, b.
And now having prepared an Army of Thirty thousand Foot, and Five thousand
Horse, and appointed to meet Philip King of France in Sicily; at the end of
June, An. 1190. sets forward him self by Land to Marseilles, and there stays
the coming about of his Ships; but his Navy being driven by Tempest to other
parts, the King that brooked not delay, shipped himself and his Army, and
passed forward to Messina in Sicily, where also arrived Lewis King of France,
and not long after his own Fleet. Here Richard affronted by the Messinians,
assaults their City, and Tancred King of Sicily that detained the Dower of
Richards Sister Joan, Widow of William King of Sicily his Predecessor, was by
him forced to pay it, and also to promise to marry his Daughter to King
Richards Nephew, Arthur Earl of Little Britain, and to give a good part of the
Portion in hand. King Philip not well pleased with these conditions, in the
Spring sails with his Army for Ptolema is (or Acon) which the Christians had
long besieged, and with them he joins, while King Richard taking with him his
Sister Joan, and Berengaria the King of Navars Daughter, puts to Sea for the
same Port, but is by Tempest thrown upon the Coast of Cyprus; Ibidem, p. 1020 b.
where being refused Landing by the Islanders, he subdues it, and these old
Rhimes will tell you with what Weapon.

This King Richard I understand, Matthias Prideaux, M. A. p. 320.

Yet he went out of England,
Let make an Are for the nones,
Therewith to cleave the Saracens bones.
The head in South was wrought full We Will,
Thereon ware twenty pound of Steel.
And when he came in Ciprus land,
This ilkon Are he took in hond.
The King of Ciprus is also taken prisoner, who made it his request to King
Richard, that he might not be put into Irons; this Richard grants, but lays him
in Silver Fetters. Elias Reusnerus, p. 347.
And in this Island he solemnised his Marriage with the beforenamed Berengaria.
His Marriage.
She was the Daughter of Sanche, Fourth of the name King of Navarre, Rob. of
Gloucester p. 260 b.
and Beatrix his Wife, Daughter of Alphonso the Seventh, surnamed The Wise,
King of Castile, a match procured by his Mother, Queen Eleanor. The King
neglected her company for a while, yet upon more settled thoughts, he afterward
retained her to his affection; for she was a Royal, Eloquent, and Beauteous
Lady, and for love of him had adventured through many dangers, both by Sea and
Land. What became of her after her return into Sicily in order to her voyage
for England, is not known, more then that meeting King John at Chinon, Rogenis
Hoveden. p. 819.
An. 1201. He there satisfied her her Dower, upon the Testimony of Philip
Bishop of Durham, and others, who were present at, and witnessed her Marriage;
and that King Henry the Third, Pat. An. 4 Hen. 3.
in the Fourth year of His Reign, compounded with her for the same, until which
time, its certain she lived. She died without issue, and the place of her
burial is not known.

Robert of Gloucester, fol.
Ciprus being left in good hands, Richard puts to Sea, and in his passage for
Ptolemais, boards a Saracen Dromond, where he lays about him, with almost
incredible valor takes her, and puts the Turks well nigh all to the Sword;
after which, he arrives at Ptolemais, besieged by the Christians, and defended
by Saladine, who fearing the increase of the Christian Army, propounds
conditions, which being accepted, it is delivered in August, An. 1192.

And here fell out an accident, which though it was an Honor to King Richard,
yet proved afterward both troublesome and chargable: For Leopold Duke of
Austria, having first set up his Colors upon the Wall of Ptolemais, King
Richard caused them to be pulled down, and his own to be set up in their place;
which drew upon him Leopolds hatred, and King Lewis his valiant Acts, being
darkened by those more valiant Actions of King Richard, under pretense that the
Air agreed not with his Constitution, withdrew himself by consent, and returned
home. So that Souldan Saladine who had dismantled all the adjacent Fortresses,
and was upon the point of surrendering Jerusalem its self; when he saw the King
of France was departed, not doubting but the rest would soon follow, grew more
confident then before.

At this time Guy of Lusignan was possessed of the City of Tire, and with it of
the right of the City of Jerusalem, with whom King Richard makes an exchange
for the Kingdom of Ciprus, and then prepares for the sacking of Jerusalem, and
had certainly taken it; but that by ill counsel, and the backwardness of Odo
Duke of Burgundy, General of the French Forces, who envied that King Richard
should have the Honor of so great a prise; he was diverted, until that
Saladines Army being encouraged with the division of the Commanders, and the
continual decay of the Christian Army, concludes a Peace with Richard, upon
terms not very honorable for the Christians; which King Richard was forced to
do, to defend his Estate at home, embroiled by the pride of Longchampe Bishop
of Ely, and his Brother John, and his Duchy of Normandy, invaded by Philip
King of France, contrary to his oath.

Order being therefore taken for the transporting of his Army, with his Wife
and Sister for Sicily, and so for England; himself, with few in his company, go
by the way of Thrace, and were by Tempest driven into Dalmatia: From whence,
being to pass through Germany, and particularly through Duke Leopolds Country,
remembering the old grudge, he disguised himself. Chronica Sancti Stephani
Cadom. p. 1020 b.
No sooner 0204 02 came he to Vienna, but being discovered, he was by the Duke
seized and imprisoned, An. 1192. The Emperor Henry the Sixth informed thereof,
desires the Royal Prisoner, Rogerus Hoveden. fol. 410 b.
under pretense of safer custody, but indeed really to share in his ransom;
which by severe imprisonment was raised to the sum of One hundred thousand
Pounds. King Richard, besides the affront to Duke Leopold was charged with the
Murder of Conrade Marquess of Tire, whose innocence, though it appeared by the
Testimony of Limboldus, Author of that Murder, yet the pretense served to
detain him in prison till Eighty thousand pound was paid in hand, whereof the
Emperor had two parts, and the Duke one; and for the rest, Hostages were given;
but the Emperor outlived this purchase very little, so that his Successor not
having the Conscience to take the remaining Money, discharged the Security, and
the Duke of Austria falling from his Horse in a Tourment, brake his Leg, and
was forced to save his life by turning Cripple. King Richard being released on
these hard terms, returns for England Four years elder then he went out; and
thus ended his journey to the Holy Land.

Being come home, he thanks his Lords and People for their fidelity to him in
his absence, and their great love to him (appearing by the value of their
Supply for his Ransom, and the difficulties they underwent to procure it) and
then according to his vow at the Shrine of S. Edmond he offers up the rich
Standard of Cursar King of Ciprus, which he took among the spoils of the
Griffons Camp; but for his Brother John, both Ungrateful and Ambitious, he
deprives him of all those Possessions he had before given him; and now upon the
Seventeenth day of April, Rogerus Hoveden. f. 420 b.
An. 1194. at Winchester, causing himself to be Crowned a second time (least
the People should forget they had a King, who had been so long without one) he
obtains a Subsidy, and then in all haste sets sail for Normandy, to find out
his old enemy the King of France, who then lay with his Army before Vernoil;
but not daring to stay King Richards coming, raised his fiege in have, and with
dishonor left the Field.

Much time was afterward spent betwixt them in skirmishes, taking of Towns and
Prisoners (nor were there wanting Conferences betwixt the two Kings in order to
Peace, moved by such as religiously tendered the effusion of Christian Blood.)
Among which actions, the Battle of Gysorz is not to be forgotten, where Richard
in his own person did wonders, Ex Veteri Codice M. S. Penes Gervasium Holles
Armig. page 23 and 24.
and made it appear that he was as expert at the Lance as the Battel-Ax; for
therewith he threw to the Earth Matthew de Montmorency, Alan de Rucy, and
Philip de Guillarvale, Three valiant Knights, and took them Prisoners, The
Motto of DIEU ET MON DROIT is attributed to him, ascribing this victory he had
at Gizors, not to Himself but to God, and His Might; He was afterward
reconciled to his Brother John, who had expiated his fault by several Signal
services; and not long after received his deaths wound by an Arrow in his Arm,
shot at him at the siege of Chalons or Chaluz in Limosin, by one Bertrand de
Guerdon, in revenge of his Father, and Brethren, whom the King had slain; which
Bertrand resolutely avowing before the King, the King not only pardoned him,
but is said to have ordered him a considerable reward in Money; nevertheless
after the Kings death, one Merchades getting him into his hands, first caused
his skin to be fleaed over his ears, and then hanged him alive upon a Gibbet.

Rogerum Hoveden, fol. 449 b. number. 20. Ibidem, fol. 450 a.
King Richard by violence of sickness (increased by the anguish of his
incurable would) departed this life, without issue, His Death.
upon the Sixth day of April, in the year of our Lord, An. 1199. when he had
lived Forty three years, Reigned nine and about nine Months, and had his Body
buried at the Feet of His Father, in the Abbey of the Nuns at Fout-Euraud in
the County of Anjou; His Heart at Roan, in remembrance of the Hearty-love that
City had always borne him; and His Bowels at Chaluz, for a disgrace of their
unthankfulness. Matthew. Paris, p. 196.
Wherefore an English Poet imitating the Epitaph made of Pompey, and his
Children, whose Bodies were buried in diverse Countries, made these Verses
following of the Glory of this One King, divided in these three places by His
Funeral.

The Poitevin and Land of Chalus keep
The Bowels of this Great Victorious Prince:
His Body at Fout-Euraud does sleep;
His Heart at Roan, buried long time since.
Three places thus, are sharers of His fall.
Too little, one, for such a Funeral.
Pictavus exta Ducis sepelit, Mills, page: 120.
tellusque Chalutis
Corpus dat claudi sub marmore Foutis Ebraudi
Neustria tu tegis cor inexpugnabile Regis,
Sic loca per trina se sparsit tanta ruina.
Nec fuit hoc funus, cui sufficeret locus unus.
Camdens Remains, p. 358.
At Fout-Euraud also where his Body was Interred with a Gilt Image (e^^hibited
to your view in the 6 Page of this Second Book marked with the Letter C.) were
these six excellent Verses written in Golden Letters, containing his greatest
and most glorious atchievments: As his victory against the Sicilians, his
conquering of Ciprus, the sinking the great Galeass of the Saracens, the taking
of their Convoy, and the defending of Joppe in the Holy Land against them.

Scribitur hoc tumulo Rex auree, Ibidem.
laus tua, tota
Aurea, materiae conveniente nota.
Laus tua prima fuit Siculi, Cyprus altera, Dromo
Tertia, Carvana quarta, suprema Joppe.
Suppressi Siculi, Cyprus pessundata, Dromo.
Mersus, Carvana capta, retenta Joppe.
On both His Great Seals (for He had Two) He wrote Himself See His Great Seals,
p. 55.
RICARDUS DEI GRATIA REX ANGLORUM. And on the Reverse, See His Two Great Seals
in the 55 Page of this Second Book.
RICARDUS DUX NORMANORUM ET AQUITANORUM ET COMES ANDEGAVORUM.

Natural Issue of King RICHARD the First.
6. PHILIP, a Natural Son of King Richard (mentioned by Roger Hoveden) to whom
His Father gave the Castle and Honor of Cuinac; Rogeru^ Hoveden. fol. 452 b.
number. 30.
but I find not any thing else Recorded of Him, or any other Issue of this
King, either by His Wife or Concubines, except we reckon as Fulco, a Priest in
Normandy did, who told King Richard He had three Daughters; and the King
marvelling who they should be, seeing He knew of none He had: Yes (said the
Priest) you have three Daughters, Pride, Coveteousness, and Lechery: Which the
King taking merrily, called to the company about him, and said; I am told by a
Priest here, that I have three Daughters, and desire you to be witnesses, how I
would have them bestowed. My Daughter Pride I give to the Templers, for they
are as proud as Lucifer; my Covetousness to the White Monks of the Cistercian
Order, for they covet the Devil and all; but for my Lechery, I cannot bestow it
better then on the Priests and Prelates of our time; for therein have they
their most Felicity. Doubtless those Marriages have proved so fruitful, that
their Issues have over-spred the whole Earth.

5. An. Dom. 1199.
JOHN, King of ENGLAND, Lord of IRELAND, Duke of NORMANDY and AQVITAINE, and
Earl of ANJOV, Surnamed SANS-TERRE.
CHAP. III.
QUeen Eleanor, Robert of Gloucester, p. 276 b.
not long after Her return out of Normandy, I have seen Three Grants of this
John, in which He is styled COMES MORITONIE; Two of these are in the Chamber of
the Duchy of Lancaster; and the Third in Sir John Cottons Library. To these
three the Impress of the same Seal is Appendant, in which He is represented on
Horsback, in His Right Hand He holds a Sword, and about His Neck hangs His
Shield, upon which are Two Lions Passant, evidently apparent. The Seal is
circumscribed SIGILLUM JOHANNIS FILII REGIS ANGLIE DOMINI HIBERNIE; and the
Counterseal being a small Oval, represents you with a Mans-head, with this word
or motto SECRETUM JOHANNIS, which are the first Arms I have seen upon any Seal
of the Royal Family, being in the Reign of King Henry the Second. This Seal is
falfly depicted in Mr. Speeds Chronicle, for the Lions in that are Passant
Guardant, and John's Horse is Caparisoned, a thing not in use in the Kingly
Family, till the time of Edward the First. When He came to be King, He did bear
the Arms of His Brother King Richard, viz. Gules, Three Lions Passant Guardant,
Or; for which, vide His Great Seal, Page 56. And the Arms Painted for Queen
Isabell His Wife on the Tomb at Fout-Eurand are Lozengey, Or, and Gules.
in the year 1166. was delivered in the Kings Mannor-House at Oxford of this
JOHN, Her Fifth and youngest Son, upon Christmas Eve, in the Thirteenth year of
the Reign of King Henry the Second Her Husband, who was wont jestingly to call
Him Sans-Terre or Lack-Land, large Provisions having been made for His
Brethren, and nothing seeming to be left for Him.

He was much beloved of His Father, Matthew Paris, p. 127. number. 6.
and was not above seven years old, when to supply this want, the King assured
Him certain Lands in England and Normandy; and in the year 1173. and Month of
February, a Marriage was agreed upon for Him at Montferrant in Averne, with
Alice the Elder of the two Daughters and Coheirs of Humbert the Second, Earl of
Maurienne, now called Savoy (whose Mother Clemence was the Daughter of Berold
the Fourth of the Name, Duke of Leringen, the divorced Wife of Henry the Lion,
Duke of Saxony) He should have en joyed with Her, Her Fathers Dominions, but
all altered by Her untimely death, and the remarriage of Her Father, from whom
the Dukes of Saxony are derived.

In camera Ducatus Lanc. and in Bibliotheca Cottoniana.
He was afterward Earl of Mortaigne in Normandy, as I find by several of His
Charters, in which He is styled JOHANNES COMES MORITONIE. And King Henry His
Father in a Parliament at Oxford, granted Him also the Kingdom of Ireland,
having obtained from Pope Urban the Third a Grant, That it should be lawful to
Crown which of His Sons He pleased, King of Ireland, who sent him also a Crown
of Feathers interwoven with Gold (in his Grant (as other Popes had done before)
reserving to himself the Peter Pence) whereupon the King conferring upon Earl
John the Order of Knighthood at Windsor, sent him with speed into Ireland,
where he was received by the Archbishop of Dublin and the State; but having
wasted, through ill Government, the better half of his Army, he returned home
without effecting much; Carta in Bibliotheca Cottoniana.
who though Hoveden give him the Title of King of Ireland, yet was he never
Crowned, nor used other style in his Seal then SIGILLUM JOHANNIS FILII REGIS
ANGLIE DOMINI HIBERNIE.

What John was possessed of, at the death of his Father, was rather Titular
then Real; but his Brother King Richard taking the Scepter, bestowed on him the
Counties of Cornwall, Dorset, Rogerus Hoveden, fol. 373 b. Matthew. Westminster. p. 257.
number. 10. Matthew. Paris, p. 152. number. 55.
and Somerset, Nottingham, Derby, and Lancaster; the Castles of Marlborough and
Lutgarshal; and the Towns of Wallingford and Tickhill; and several other Lands,
having had the Earldom of Gloucester, His Second Marriage.
in the Right of Isabel his Wife, the Third and youngest Daughter and Coheir of
William Earl of Gloucester, Son of Robert Consul, Natural Son of King Henry the
First (from whom he was afterward divorced when he came to be King, upon
pretense of Consanguinity) by which bounty he seemed to make this his Brother
John a sharer with him in his Kingdom, which yet satisfied not his aspiring
mind, but rather enabled him to attempt the Sovereignty, which he endeavored in
his absence in the Holy War, and Captivity in Austria and Germany.

But notwithstanding this, King Richard before his death became reconciled to
him, and some say appointed him to be his Heir. After whose decease, the
Faction of the Clergy cast the Crown upon this JOHN by Election (whereas Arthur
the Son of Geoffrey his elder Brother was the right Heir; Matthew. Paris, p. 197.
number. 11.
) so that he was Crowned at Westminster upon Ascension-day, viz. His Coronation.
The Sixth of the Kalends of June, An. 1199. by Hubert Archbishop of
Canterbury, with more solemnity then joy.

Several were the Moral advantages which this John had of his Nephew Arthur;
but yet he well knowing the Title at last would come to be judged by the Sword,
Ibidem, p. 196. number. 34.
employed all his endeavors to fortify himself with Arms; and therefore
hasting unto Chinon, he seized upon the Treasure which his Brother had left in
those parts; He is created Duke of Normandy.
and also used such means, that Walter Archbishop of Roan girt him with the
Ducal Sword of Normandy, Ibidem, p. 196. number. 53.
and Crowned him with a Coronet of Golden Roses. This Ceremony being performed
in the Cathedral of that City.

His two great Antagonists, were Pope Innocent the Third, and Philip King of
France; but the first tempest was depending from his Nephew Arthur, whose
Kingdom he had not only deprived him of, but also seized upon his Dukedom of
Normandy, leaving only to Arthur the Duchy of Anjou; wherefore his Mother
Constance craves aid of Philip II. surnamed Augustus, King of France, who
received the young Prince into his protection, raises an Army, with which he
makes good Anjou to Arthur, and then invades Normandy. Upon this, King John
takes a Journey into Normandy, and upbraids King Philip for breaking the Truce
made with his Brother King Richard for five years, yet for all this they fall
not presently to blows, but agree on fifty days Cessation of Arms: Du Ches.
in add. ad Mais. de Guines. fol. 678.
Philip Earl of Flanders being utterly against it, forsakes King Philip, makes
Peace with the English, and takes Counsel how to wage War with France.

But King John being now (as he conceived) free from the care of War, An, 1200.
strikes hands with the King of France, Matthew. Paris, p. 199. n. 48.
upon unjust Terms, which the Earl of Flanders took so ill, that he once more
joined with the French, and restored the War of Jerusalem; nor are the Barons
better pleased with the King at His return into England, conceiving themselves,
dishonored by these base Conditions. The Emperor Otho IV. also, upon a like
disgust (by His two Brothers) makes demand of the City of Evereux and County of
Poicton, which his Uncle King Richard had granted unto him, in Exchange for the
Earldom of York.

Matthew. Paris, p. 200. n. 23. Matt. Westmonast. p. 263. number. 31. Hoveden ad
annum 1200. fol. 830. Hippod. Neust. ad annum 1200.
And having been lately Divorsed from his second Wife Isabell aforesaid (she is
also called Hadewise) the Daughter and Coheir of William Earl of Gloucester,
for consanguinity in the third degree) King John, in the year 1200 took to Wife
Issabell, His Third Marriage.
the Daughter and Heir of Aymer, Earl of Engolesme, (by Alice Daughter of Peter
Lord of Courtenay, The Arms of Queen Issabell of Engolesme, are Enamelled in
several places upon the Tomb of William de Valence, Earl of Pembrook, her Son
(half-Brother to King Henry III.) in the the Chapel of St. Edmond in the Abbey
of Westminster, being Lozengy, Or, and Gules.
Fifth Son of Lewis le Gross King of France) she was Crowned at Westminster by
Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury on the VIII. of the Ides of October ( Matthew
Paris says on the Sunday next before the Feast of St. Dionise, ( An. 5 H. 3.)
in the same year, and surviving him, was Rob. of Gloucester, p. 289. b.
Remarried to Hugh Brun Earl of March, and Lord of Lusignan and Valence in
Poictou, to whom she was pre contracted, and it seems continued her
after-affection to him, by him having also diverse Children, highly advanced by
King Henry the III. their half-Brother, and as much Maligned by His Subjects.
This Issabel also outlived her Second Husband, and taking upon her a Religious
Habit in the Monastery of Fount-Euraud in Anjou, deceased there, and was
Interred in the Church of that Abbey, her Figure Marked with the Letter D.
being placed in that stately Monument (on the left side of that of King Richard
I. her Brother-in-Law) represented in Sculpture betwixt the 64 and 65 Pages of
this Second Book. The Body of this Queen Issabell having been buried in the
Churchyard of Fount-Eurard, Matthew. Paris, p. 898. n. 25.
was by her Son King Henry III. removed into the Church, and deposited in a
Monument there, An. 1254.

King John, after this Marriage, imposes also Three Shillings upon every
Plough-Land, to raise 30000 Marks, which he was to give with His Niece Blanch
of Castile, Daughter of His Sister Eleanor, to the Dolphin, in pursuance of the
late Peace. The Collection whereof is opposed by Geoffery Archbishop of York,
and the Sheriff by him Excommunicated; but, by the Mediation of Four Bishops,
and as many Barons, the matter was afterward accommodated: Anno 1201.
And the King Summons the Barons to be ready with Horse and Armor to attend
Him the Whitsontide following beyond the Seas, Matthew. Paris, p. 206. n. 6.
which they totally refuse till Confirmation of their Privileges; Whereupon he
seizes their Castles, and notwithstanding goes over himself, and is with His
Queen Magnificently entertained by King Philip at Paris; Where, Mat. West. p.
163. n. 53.
at instance of the Popes Legate, both Kings grant a 40 part for one year of
all their Subjects Revenues, toward the succor of the Holy Land: Whilst Hugh
le Brun, to revenge the Rapture of his Wife, conspires with Prince Arthur
against King John, whose quarrel is also favored by the King of France,
Ibidem. p. 164. n. 26. Matthew. Paris, p. 27. n. 30.40.
and His Daughter Mary given him in Marriage; upon advice whereof, King John
comes into Normandy, Anno 1202.
defeates the Confederates, takes Arthur, Hugh Earl of March, and 200 Knights
prisoners, which are disposed into several Holds in Normandy and England;
Prince Arthur is murdered in Prison, and several of the Hostages and Prisoners
barbarously Executed; Anno 1203.
which so exasperated the Nobility of Bretaigne, Anjou and Poictou, that they
unanimously Arm, and the next year after he became deprived of all his
Possessions in those parts.

Then over He comes into England, Fines the Barons a Seventh part of their
Goods for not Aiding Him, and spares neither Church nor Commons. Archbishop
Hubert is Collector for the Clergy, Matthew. West. p. 265. n. 26.
and Geoffery Fitz Piers for the Laity: but this not sufficient for His Ends,
Anno 1204.
a Council is called at Oxford, wherein is granted two Marks and an half of
every Knights Fee, and equivalent of the Clergy, with which He goes to War
again into France, but forced to a Truce for two years, and to come into
England for fresh supplies, and to lay an other Imposition upon all Movables
and other Goods, both of the Clergy and Laity, which is again opposed by the
Archbishop of York, who Solemnly Curses the Receivers thereof, and then
secretly conveys Himself out of the Kingdom.

Hence arose a miserable breach between the King and His People; The Contention
not ceasing till the Great Charter was obtained of the King, to be the Standard
of the Sovereign Prerogative, Anno 1205.
and the Subjects Privilege. Matthew. West. p. 266. n. 11.
But that which completed these Misfortunes was a Clandestine Election of one
Reginald the Sub-Prior ( Hubert the Archbishop being lately dead) to the Sea
of Canterbury: which Design not taking as was expected, the King was Petitioned
for a Conge d'Eslire, in which the King nominated John Gray Bishop of Norwich,
Anno 1206.
who is also chosen: Matthew. Paris, p. 213. n. 32. p. 214. n. 1.
And Helias de Branfield, sent by the King to Rome for a Confirmation of the
latter Election, whilst the Monks endeavor to promote the former: Anno 1207.
So that neither agreeing upon any one person, both Elections were declared
void; and Stephen de Langhton a Cardinal (but born in England) greatly to the
Kings dissatisfaction advanced to the Chair, which the King expostulates
briskly with the Pope, and sends Fulk de Cantelup, and Henry de Cornhill, to
expel all the Monks the Kingdom, and to seize their Goods. The Pope, he
injoynes the Suffragans upon their Obedience, to receive this Stephen for their
Pastor: with a Mandate to the Bishops of London, Ely and Worcester, to
endeavor the Reforming of the King, or otherwise to Interdict His whole
Kingdom, which accordingly is done.

In return whereof, all Prelates with their Servants are banished, Anno 1208.
the Bishoprics, Ibidem, p. 226.
Abbeys and Priories deputed into the hands of Laymen, all their Goods seized;
and, least these Proceedings should cause a Revolt of the Nobility, Hostages
are taken of them, Matthew. Paris, p. 230. n. 22. Matthew. Westmonast. p. 268. n.
53.
and they which refused severely punished, as was the Lady of William de
Breause and her Children. Having also distaste against the Londoners, He removes
His Exchequer to Northampton, Anno 1209.
and Marches with an Army toward Scotland: but, the Peace is concluded upon
the King of Scots paying 11000 Marks, and giving His two Daughters Hostages
for His performance.

The Interdiction having now continued two whole years, and the King not at all
Reformed, the Pope Excommunicates His Person; upon which, one Geoffery
Archdeacon of Norwich, conceiving it not safe to live in the Obedience of an
Excommunicated King, retires home, but is apprehended by William Talbot, clapped
into Prison, put into a Sheet of Lead and starved to death: and,
notwithstanding all this, most of the Nobility and Chief Officers adhere still
to the King; Matthew. Paris, p. 230.
who, Anno 1210.
supplying Himself out of the Jews purses, upon notice of some Revolt in
Ireland, Anno 1211.
makes an Expedition thither, reduces the Country, and there establishes the
Laws and Customs of England, setting John Gray Bishop of Norwich Justicior:
and, after three Months stay, returns Himself into England, and at London
Condemns the Clergy in a Mulct of 100000 l. Sterling, and Two Marks of every
Knights Fee, that attended Him not in the War; with which He subdues Wales
that had Rebelled, takes 28 of the Chiefest Men's Children Pledges, which, poor
Innocents, upon an Insurrection of some inconsiderable persons upon the
Borders, the King caused to be Hanged in His presence at Nottingham, Matthew.
Paris, p. 230. n. 43.
before He would sit down to Dinner.

The King is now pleased to receive Pandulphus and Durandus the Popes Agents,
for a Mediation between Him and the Clergy; who, condescends to their return,
but, not to make any Restitution: wherefore, all His Subjects are Absolved
their Allegiance, forbid His Council and Conferences. And now, Absolute
Deposition is Pronounced by the Pope: And, the King of France, with the
assistance of other Princes, Commanded to expel King John, and possess His
Dominions for himself, Anno 1212.
and his heirs for ever; who, to that end, against the Spring, makes great
Levies for an Invasion: and King John, for His defense, at Dover, Feversham,
Ipswich, etc. by Easter has an Army of 60000 Men, besides a Navy far
exceeding that of France. But two Knights Templars, sent out of France by
Pandulphus, prevail with the King to descend to a Treaty with him, Mat. Paris,
p. 236. 237. and 247. n. 10.
who no sooner had notice thereof, Anno 1213.
but he hastened to the King, and wrought so effectually with Him, that He not
only grants entire Restitution and Indemnity to the Archbishop and Clergy, but
also lays down His Crown, Scepter, Mantle, Sword and Ring (the Ensigns of His
Royalty) at the Feet of the Legate, and submits Himself to the Judgment and
Mercy of the Church: after two days (some say six) he received the Crown from
Pandulphus, with condition, that he and his Successors should hold the Kingdom
of England and Lordship of Ireland from the Sea of Rome, Ibidem, p. 237.
Tributary at 1000 Marks Silver, which he confirmed by his Charter at a House
of the Templars near Dover. But the Interdiction still continued, and his
Absolution deferred, till full Satisfaction should be made to the Clergy. And
hereupon the King of France being unexpectedly Commanded to desist, turns his
Fury upon Ferdinand of Portugal Earl of Flanders, for refusing him his
assistance: Ferdinand craves Aid of King John, who dispatches 500 Sail, with
700 Knights into Flanders, under the Conduct of His Base Brother William
Longespee Earl of Salisbury, Richard Earl of Boleyne, etc. who utterly defeated
the French Forces both by Sea and Land. This success incourages him to renew
his attempt upon France, but is denied Aid by the Barons, and by reason
thereof, himself and his Allies discomfited; for the which, intending to
Chastise them at his return, he is by the Menaces of Excommunication of the
Archbishop diverted: upon which, he is necessitated to call home the Exiled
Clergy; and at Winchester is, by Pandulphus, with great Penitence Absolved,
upon promise of restoring King Edwards Laws.

Anno 1214.
This respites things whilst he Bribes the Pope, Mat. West-monasteriensis, p.
172. n. 40.
and so his Interdiction is also taken off, and he at liberty to renew his
former designs upon France: which He, the Emperor, and the Earl of Flanders
accordingly do, but without success: and the Barons still pressing their
Privileges, to avoid their Importunities He takes upon Him the Cross, whilst
they seize several of his Castles, and are received with great Triumph at
London.

Anno 1215.
The King abandoned by all, Ibidem, o. 273. n. 49.
holds a Parley with them in Running Meade (which is between Windsor and
Stains) wherein an Agreement is made, but not long observed; for, Matthew.
Paris, p. 255. n. 26. and p. 264. n. 47.
the King having now good correspondence with the Pope, retires into the Isle
of Wight, and there procures his late Articles to be vacated, the Barons to be
Excommunicated, and a supply of Foreigners; Ibidem, p. 270. n. 37. and 281. n.
45.
with which, in half a years time, He recovers all His Holds, and forces the
Barons to call in the King of France, Anno 1216.
whose Son Prince Lewis (afterward King Lewis VIII.) understanding the Popes
Prohibition and Excommunication, arrives at Sandwich with 600 Ships, and at
London receives Homage of the Barons, but nothing considerable was done on
either side.

Upon this King John Marches with his Army Northwards, and coming to Walpool,
he and some few others passed the Washes; But, His Army, Carriages and Treasure
hurrying on, Anno 1213.
and missing the Foords, were wholly immerged; with grief of which disaster,
Matthew. Paris, p. 288.
and perhaps distempered in His body before, he fell into a Fever, and was let
blood at Swineshead-Abbey, where Surfeiting upon green Peaches and new Ale
(some report He was Poisoned with a Dish of Pears by a Monk of that Convent) He
fell into a Looseness, and grew so weak, that there was much ado to get Him to
Newarke; where, receiving the Eucharist, and taking what Order He could for the
Succession of His Son Henry (which was facilitated by the return of several of
the Barons to their Allegiance) He departed this life on the 19th day of
October, His Death.
An. 1216. having Reigned 17 years, 6 Months, and 13 days, aged about 50
years. His Bowels were buried at Croxton-Abbey, and in monument Illustrissimo
Domino Dno. GULIELMO Comiti de CRAVEN. Vicecomiti Craven de Vffington et Baroni
Craven de Hamsted. Marshall Serenissimique Dom: Regis Caroli 2di. a
Secretioribus Consilijs, Tumuli hanc IOHANNIS Regis Imaginem. H. D. F. S.

VIRTUES ACTION CONSISTI
pursuance of His Will, His Body was Interred in the Cathedral Church of
Worcester, betwixt the Holy Bishops St. Oswald and St. Wulstan. His Tomb of
Gray Marble is placed between the Choire and the High Altar; the Figure of the
King as big as the Life, and the two Bishops at his head, in little, with their
Censors in their hands, are carved in one Stone, which seems to be as ancient
as the time of Henry III. But, the Altar-Tombe on which it is placed, is of a
Modern Fabric. The Representation of which Monument is exhibited in the
precedent Page, upon which there is no Inscription, but in Matt. Paris I find
this Epitaph, P. 288.
Hoc in Sarcophago sepelitur Regis imago,
Qui moriens multum sedavit in orb tumultum,
Et cui connexa dum vixit probra manebant.
Hunc mala post mortem timor est ne fata sequantur.
Qui legis haec metuens dum cernis te moriturum,
Dicito quid rerum pariat tibi meta dierum.


The Figure of His Great Seal is exhibited in the 56 Page of this Second Book,
upon which He is styled, JOHANNES DEI GRATIA REX ANGLIE DOMINUS HIBERNIE (being
the first King of England that had the Title of Lord of Ireland) and, on the
Counter-Seal, JOHANNES DUX NORMANNIE ET AQUITANNIE COMES ANDEGAVIE.

And now, if we look upon King John in relation to his Works, he will in them
appear a worthy Prince, having transcended all his Subjects of his time in Acts
of Charity; for, he Founded the Abbey of Bowley in the New Forest in
Hampshire, also an Abbey of Black Monks in the City of Winchester, the
Monastery of Farendon, and the Abbey of Hales-Owen in Shropshire: He also
re-edified Godstow, and Wroxel, and enlarged the Chapel of Knaresborrow: But
as to his Actions, He neither came to the Crown by Justice, nor held it with
Honor, nor left it in Peace. Yet, having had many good parts, and especially
His Royal Posterity continued to this day, we cannot do less than Honor His
Memory.

Children of King JOHN by Queen ISSABEL of ENGOLESME, his third Wife.
6. HENRY, The Eldest Son of King John succeed his Father in the Kingdom of
England, and his other Dominions, by the name of King Henry III. whose History
follows in the Fourth Chapter of this Second Book.

6. RICHARD, Second Son of King John, by Issabel of Engolesme, was King of the
Romans and of Almain, and Earl of Poictiers and Cornwall, Alexander II. King of
Scots, did bear Or, a Lion Rampant Gules, within a double Tressure Flowery
Counter-Flowery of the Second.
of whom see more in the Fifth Chapter of this Second Book.

6. JOANE, Queen of Scots, Matthew. Paris, p. 313. n. 13.
Eldest Daughter of King John and Queen Issabell, was the first Wife of
Alexander II. King of Scots, Married to him at the City of York in the presence
of King Henry III. her Brother, upon the 25th day of June, Pat. An. 4 and 5 H.
3.
An. 1221. in the fifth year of his Reign, whom, many years after coming into
England to Visit, she deceased at London without issue, Matthew. Paris, p. 468.
n. 34.
upon the fourth day of March Anno 1238. and was interred at Tarente (in
Dorcetshire) a Nunnery Founded by Richard II. Bishop of Durham.

6. ELIANOR, Countess of Penbrooke and Leicester, The Arms of this William
Marshall Earl of Penbrook, are Painted in a Glass-window in the Chapter House
of Salisbury, viz. Party per pale Or and Vert, a Lion Rampant Gules.
second Daughter of King John, Pat. An. 10 H. 3. n. (...). a Tergo.
was Married to William Marshall the younger Earl of Penbrooke, in the tenth
year of King Henry III. her Brother, who was at first much displeased with the
Earl about this Match with his Sister, but afterward became reconciled unto
him, who deceasing without issue An. 1231. The King (after seven years
Widdowhood) gave her with his own hand to Simon Montfort Earl of Leicester and
Steward of England (Son of Simon Earl of Montfort in France, Matthew. Paris, p.
455. n. 41.
by Amitia Daughter and Coheir of Robert Blanchmains Earl of Leicester) to
whom she was Re-marryed in St. Stephens Chapel in the Kings Palace at
Westminster, Claus. 19 H. 3. m. 1.
upon the seventh day of January 1238. Her Second Husband Simon Montfort Earl
of Leicester did bear Gules a Lion rampant queave forche Argent, which Arms
are Carved in Stone, and Painted upon the North-wall in the Abbey of
Westminster.
Anno 22 H. 3. and had a Dower se^led upon her by Earl Simon, out of his Estate
in Ireland, Pat. an. 28 H. 3.
Anno 28 H. 3. in the 45 year of whose Reign, this Simon Earl of Leicester and
Elianor his Wife, Pat. an. 45 H. 3.20 Julii, n. 17.
fell into the displeasure of the King her Brother, by Heading the Barons
against Him, which (though the Queen of France was chosen Umpire to decide the
quarrel) never had end, till the Battle of Evesham finished both the dispute
and this Earls life in the year 1265. ( An. 49 H. 3.) after whose death the
Countess Elianor and her Children were enforced to forsake England, so that she
died in the Nunnery of Montarges in France.

Henry Montfort their Eldest Son, Matthew. Paris, 998. n 26. Ralph Brook
Yorke-Herald.
was slain with his Father at Evesham. Simon, Second Son, was Earl of Bigore,
and Ancestor of a Family of Montforts in that part of France. Almaricke her
Third Son, was first a Priest, and Treasurer of the Cathedral Church of York,
and afterward a Knight, and a valiant Servitor in several Wars beyond Sea.
Guy, the Fourth Son, was Earl of Angleria in Italy, and Progenitor of the
Montforts in Tuscany: and of the Earl of Campobachi in the Kingdom of Naples.
Richard, the Fifth Son, remained privately in England, and changing his Name
from Montfort to Welesborne, was Ancestor of the Welesbornes in England. She
had also a Daughter named Elianor, born in England, educated in France, and
married into Wales, to Prince Ll'ewellen ap Gruffith.

6. ISSABEL, Matthew. Paris, p. 414. n. 80.415, 416 and 417.
Empress of Germany, Third Daughter of King John, born An. 1214. was, in the
one and twentieth year of her age, with great splendour sent into Germany with
the Bishop of Exeter and the Archbishop of Cullen, who pronouneed her Empress,
as Proxy from the Emperor Frederick II. to whom she was married in the City of
Worms, upon the XIII of the Kalends of August ( viz. the 20th day of July) in
the year 1235. Frederick II. Emperor of Almain did bear, Or, an Eagle displayed
Sable, which Arms are carved in stone, and painted upon the wall of the
North-Isle in the Abbey of Westminster.
with a Portion of 30000 Marks, a rich Imperial Crown imbellished with
precious Stones, and many other Jewels. She had issue by Him Henry, appointed
to be King of Sicilie, Matthew. Paris, p. 889. n. 46. Matthew. Paris, p. 578. n. 15.
who dyed in the Month of May, An. 1254. and Margaret, Wife of Albert
Lantgrave of Thuringen; she was his Wife six years, and then, to the great
grief of the Emperor, died in Childbed, on the first day of December, An. 1241.
The Triumphs both in her Journey, and at the Solemnization of her Nuptials are
particularly recited by my Author Matthew Paris: As also the Letter at large
sent from the Emperor Frederick II. Mat. West. p. 306. n. 43.
to his Brother King Henry III. to condole with him after her death, highly
expressing his grief and sadness for the loss of so excellent a Consort.

Natural Issue of King JOHN.
6. RICHARD, Who Married Rohesia, Tho. Milles p. 134. Matthew. Paris, p. 298. n.
47.
the Daughter and Heir of Fulbert de Dover, who built Chilham-Castle in Kent,
and by her had that Castle and a fair Inheritance, and likewise two Daughters
and Coheirs, viz. Lora, Wife of William Marmion of Polesworth in Warwickshire,
from whom are descended the Dimocks of Scriuelby in the County of Lincoln, the
Ferrers of Tamworth and Baddesley, the Willonghbyes of Wollaton, and the Astons
of Staffordshire. Issabel, their Second Daughter and Co-heire, was Married to
David de Strabolgy Earl of Athol, who by her had Chilham in Kent, whose heirs
general were the Lord Burgh, and the Zouches of Codnor.

E Bibliatheca Cottoniana.
Ricardus filius Regis Johannis (I suppose this Richard) so styled in his
Confirmation of the Lands of Hugh de Byre in Chappellangere, to the Church of
our Lady de Cleue, has his Seal of Green-Wax affixed thereunto, in which are
Two Lions passant guardant, and circumscribed SIGILLVM RICARDI DE VAREN... The
Figure of which is in the 57 Page of this Second Book.

6. GEOFREY FITZ-ROY, another Natural Son, who, Thomas Milles p. 134.
when his Father King John was not permitted by Hubert Archbishop of
Canterbury, to transport His Army at Portsmouth into France, was sent over with
the same Army to Rochell, and there died.

6. SIR JOHN COVRCY (these are the words of Robert the Monk of Gloucester) was
King John's Son Bastard, Rob. f Glocest. p. 247. b.
and nourished at the Priory of If not Stoke Garsey.
Stegurcy in Somersetshire in youth, was made Earl of Vlvester in Ireland the
first of English-Tongue, and after him the kindred of the Burghes.

6. OSBERT GIFFORD, Claus. 17 Johannis. pars 2. m. 16. 21. Novembris.
Another base Son of King John, to whom, His said Father in the Seventeenth
year of His Reign, commanded the Sheriff of Oxfordshire to deliver 30 l Land of
the Estate of Thomas de Ardern in that County.

6. OLIVER, Claus. 1. H. 3. p. 2. m. 23. Claus. 2. Hen. 3. p. 1. m. 9. Mat.
Westminster, p. 278. n. 46. Thomas Milles, p. 134.
A Natural Son of King John (called Olivarius frater Regis Henrici tertii)
mentioned in Records in the Reign of King Henry the Third. He was at the Siege
of Damieta with Saher de Quincy Earl of Winchester, and William de Albaney Earl
of Arundell, and several other Noblemen of England.

6. JOANE, A Natural Daughter of King John, was Married to Llewellen the Great,
Prince of North Wales, to whom her Father with her gave the Lordship of
Ellesmere in the Marches of North Wales, Pat. An. 13 H. 3.
she had issue by him David, who did homage to King Henry III. at Westminster,
upon the 13th day of October, An. Pat. an. 16 H. 3.
1229. in the 16th year of whose Reign this Joane had safe conduct to come to
the Town of Salop.

She had issue also by Prince Llewellen two Daughters, W. 174.
viz. Wentelina (called also Joane) Married to Sir Reginald de Brewes,
Genealegia in Officie Arm^rum.
and Margaret the Wife of John de Brewes (Son of the aforesaid Reginald) by
whom she had issue William de Brewes Lord of Gower, etc. from whom many Noble
Families derive their descent.

6. HENRY III. An. Dom. 1216.
KING of ENGLAND, LORD of IRELAND, DUKE of NORMANDY and AQVITAINE, and EARL of
ANJOV surnamed of WINCHESTER.
CHAP. IV.
King Henry the III. did bear the Arms of his Father, viz. Gules, 3 Lions
passant guardant, or, which are yet standing in several Windows in the Abbey
of Westminster, and also Carved, Painted and Gilt on the Wall of the South-Isle
in the said Abbey. And the Shields on both his Seals represented in the 56 Page
of this Second Book are charged with the same Arms. Upon which counter-Seals
the King is represented on Horseback, according to the Custom of His
Predecessors, but with the addition of a Crown upon his Helmet in both of them:
Upon what occasion he assumed it in his first Seal I cannot guess, but when He
abridg'd His Style, He wrote Himself King of England on His Counter-Seal also,
and therefore might add a Diadem to His Figure on Horseback. The Seals of
Queen Elianor of Provence His Wife, page 57. are charged on the Reverses with
Shields of King Henrics Arms only (for Impalements were not then in use) but
in the Windows of the said Abbey there remain entire Escocheons of Her Arms,
being Or, four Paletts Gules. And also the like Shield is Embossed, Painted and
Gilt in the South-Isle of Westminster-Abbey, and superscribed RAIMUNDUS COMES
PROVINCIE; for her Father, who, being a Branch of the Royal House of Arragon,
did bear the Arms of that Kingdom, transmitted to them from Geaffery the
Hairy Count of Barcelona, who fighting valiantly for the Emperor Lewis le
Debonnaire against the Normans, and after the Battle coming to the Emperor all
covered with Blood, which ran out of his wounds, he dipped his four Fingers
therein, and drew them down the Earls Shield of Gold, which afterward came to
be the Arms of Arragon, and are so continued to our time, among the
Quarterings of the King of Spain, for that Kingdom being as I said before, Or,
four Paletts gutes.


IN this Distraction of the Kingdom, Prince Henry (the Eldest Son of King John
and Queen Issabel of Engolesm His Third Wife, Robert of Gloucester, p. 284. a.
born at Winchester upon the Feast of St. Remigius, being the First day of
October, in the Eighth year of His Fathers Reign, An. 1206.) a Child of about
Nine years old, is Crowned with great Solemnity at Gloucester, Ibidem, p. 288. b.
upon the V. of the Kalends of November, ( viz. the 28 Day of October.) An.
1216. by the Bishops of Winchester and Bathe; And the Administration of the
Government, with the tuition of His Person, Matthew. Paris, p. 289. n. 12. Matthew.
West. p. 277. n. 5
committed to William Marshal the valiant Earl of Penbrook; who, with Guallo
the Popes Legate, and the Bishops of Winchester, Bath and Worcester, use all
means for the return of the Barons to their Natural Prince, from Prince Lewis
this Excommunicated stranger, who still held London and the parts adjacent, and
their endeavors (the confession of the Viscount Melun a Frenchman, Ibidem, p.
Ibidem, n. 28.
of Prince Lewis his design, utterly to extinguish the English Nation,
contributing) had such effect, that first William Earl of Salisbury, with many
others by his example, left him, and Swore Fealty to King Henry, who keeps
about Bristol, Worcester and Gloucester, till opportunity was found of drawing
the Enemy from the Head into the Body of the Kingdom, for the relief of the
Castles of Mountsorrill and Lincoln, which City the French being Masters of,
Matthew Paris, p. 294. n. 30.
was by the Earl of Penbrook and his Son William, the Bishops of Winchester and
Salisbury, the Earls of Chester, Salisbury, Ferrers and Albemarle, and many
other Barons, with all the power of the young King assaulted and taken, with
many prisoners of note, the Earl of Perch killed, and the French Forces utterly
defeated; whereupon Lewis sends for fresh Succors out of France, which also
being overthrown at Sea by Philip d'Aubeny, Hubert de Burgo, and the Forces of
the Cinque Ports: An. 1218.
On the Eleventh of September he comes to an accord, to take 15000. Marks for
his Voyage, Abjure his Claim, and endeavor to dispose his Father to the
Restitution of our Claims in France, which, when himself came to be King, he
promised freely to do. Whereupon about the Michaelmas following he is
honorably attended to Dover, a General Pardon granted; the Legate and the
Protector on the young Kings behalf undertaking to the Barons for all their
Privileges.

And, as well to keep them in Action whom the War had bred, as to unburthen the
Country of strangers, Ranulph Blundevile Earl of Chester, Matthew. Westminster. p. 278.
n. 42.
Sear de Quincy Earl of Winchester, and William de Albeney Earl of Arundel, are
sent out with great Forces to the Holy Land; when, to the great regret of the
Kingdom, William Marshall Earl of Pembroke dies, and his Charge is conferred on
the Bishop of Winchester, with other great Counselors.

The young King is again Crowned, Matthew. Paris, p. 309. n. 36.
and an Escuage of Two Marks upon every Knights Fee granted Him by Parliament;
Anno 1219.
and being encouraged from Poicton and Guyen to some design upon France,
Ibidem, p. 313. n. 14.
to strengthen his Alliance at home, Anno 1220.
he Contracts his Sister Joane to Alexander King of Scots, who gives his Sister
Margaret to Hubert de Burgh, lately made Chief Justiciar of England. Anno 1222.
The King in a Parliament at London is now by the Archbishop of Canterbury put
in mind what had been promised for Him upon the Peace with Prince Lewis, as to
the restoring the Peoples Rights, which was then again by Him promised, but by
the Artifice of some deferred, which causes the Earls of Chester and Albemarle
at Leicester to design the removal of Hubert de Burgo and others the supposed
obstructors, Matthew. Westminster. p. 283. n. 3.
but by the interposition of the Archbishop of Canterburies Spiritual power,
Anno 1223.
they submit.

And two years after, in a Parliament held at Westminster, Anno 1225.
a Fifteenth of all Movables of the Clergy and Laity is demanded for recovery
of his Possessions in France witheld by Lewis (now King) contrary to his
Promises in England; which Subsidy, upon the Confirmation of their Privileges
and Disforestations (both grateful things to the Subject) is likewise granted:
But, this happy state lasted not above two years, for in a Parliament at
Oxford, as much to their dissatisfaction, the King (being now at age) abrogates
the Charter of Forests, as granted in his Nonage; and, by Proclamation causes
all Grants to be renewed under His Great Seal, for which Arbitrary Fees are
extorted by Hubert de Burgh, which begets a new Insurrection, for the Barons
taking advantage of the difference between the King and his Brother Richard
Earl of Cornwall about the Castle of Berkhamsted, gain him to their party, who
at Marleborough meets William Marshall the younger Earl of Pembrook, Matthew.
Paris, p. 337. n. 11.
and afterward at Stamford with the Earls of Chester, Anno 1226.
Gloucester, Warren, Herefore, Ferrers and Warwick, where they permeptorily
require right to be done to His Brother, the Restitution of the Charter of
Forests, etc. or otherwise they would right themselves by their Swords; This
the King is forced to condescend unto, by a Parliament at Northampton, and to
give His Brother his Castle, Anno 1227.
and all His Mother had in Dower, with the Estates of the Earls of Bretagne
and Bologne.

King Lewis being lately dead, and an Infant King, and the Queen Regent having
disobliged the Nobility, King Henry is by Hugh le Brun his Father-in-Law
encouraged in this juncture to Invade France, but returns without honor or
advantage, and presently upon his arrival in England a Marriage is proposed to
Him with the King of Scots Sister, but the motion is altogether dissiked, since
Hubert de Burgo his Chief Justiciar had Married the Elder. And having now no
other expedient to reward the Poictavins for their aid in His sat War upon
France, Anno 1232.
he Fines and displaces the said Hubert, with several of His Chief Officers,
Matthew. Paris, p. 376. n. 35.
to make way for their Preferment, which so exasperates the Nobility, that
Richard Marshall Earl of Pembrook, with many Barons, contrive for the public
defense; And the King to suppress them sends for vast numbers of Poictavins,
and calls a Parliament at Oxford, whither the Barons, notwithstanding three
several Summons, refuse to repair; or to that at Westminster, till the Bishop
of Winchester and the Poictavins were removed from the Court, which causes the
King to take Pledges of the Nobility, and commands all that held by
Knights-service to repair to him at Gloucester by a certain day, which Marshall
and his party refusing to do, they are declared Outlaws, their Lands seized
and given to Poictavins; The Earls of Chester and Lincoln are bought off from
Marshall, who hereupon withdrawes himself into Wales, Matthew. Paris, p. 388. n.
13.
and makes a League with Llewellin, and there Hubert de Burgo (escaping out of
the Vize-Castle, Anno 1233.
where he had been Prisoner since his removal from his place) joins them. The
King Marches with an Army against them, is worsted and returns to Gloucester;
but the War rages still all over the borders to Shrewsbury: And, since by all
means possible they could not reclaim Marshall, means are found out to draw
him into Ireland, to defend his Estate there seized by Authority under the
Kings Hand and Seal, where by treachery he lost this life, to so great a regret
both of his Friends and Enemies, as the King Himself disownes the Commission.

These Miseries continued two whole years, Anno 1234.
when in a Parliament at Westminster, the Bishops admonish the King by His
Fathers Example and His own Experience, to be at Union with His People,
otherwise they must proceed against Him and His Counselors by Ecclesiastical
Censure; who, seeing no other remedy, calls home the Lords out of Wales,
removes the strangers, and restores them to their places and possessions.

Things being now in pretty good order, Anno 1236.
He bestows His Sister Issabel upon the Emperor Frederick II. with a Dowry of
30000 Marks, but this Alliance answers not the aims of either Prince, nor
does His own Marriage prove more advantageous to Him with Elianor, His Marriage.
the Second Daughter and coheir of Raymond Berengar Earl of Provence and
Forcalquier, son of Earl Alphonso, Vide, the Claims of the Great Officers at
Her Coronation, Mat. Paris. p. 420 421. and l: 15, fol. 55. a. Miscellania in
Officio Arm.
son of Alphonso II. King of Aragon; which notwithstanding is Solemnized with
great State at Canterbury, Matthew. Paris, p. 419, and 420.
upon the XIX of the Kalends of February, ( viz. the 14th day of January) An.
1236, in the 20th year of His Reign, by Edmond Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Crowned at Westminster on the 19th day of the same Month by the said
Archbishop. Her Mother was Beatrice Daughter of Thomas Earl of Savoy, Sister to
the Earls Amides and Peter, and Bonniface Archbishop of Canterbury. Her three
Sisters were also Queens, Margaret the eldest being Wife of St. Lewis, St.
March p 386.
the IX. of the Name, King of France (this Elianor was the second Daughter.)
Sanchia the third Daughter was Married to Richard King of the Romans, King
Henry's Brother; and Beatrix the fourth and youngest was the Wife of Charles
King of Sicilie, Hypodig. Neustrie, fol. 476.
Brother to the said St. Lewis. This Queen Elianor was His Wife 37 years, His
Widow 19, Her Death.
and dyed a Nun at Ambresbury upon the 25th day of June, in the Twentieth year
of the Reign of Her Son, K. Edward I. An. 1291 and was buried in Her Monastery
the 11th of September following.

She made use of two Seals, Ex Registerio Westmonast. An. 3. H. 3. E Camera
Ducat. Lanc. An. 55 H. 3.
and in Her last abridg'd Her Titles, as did King Henry Her Husband, as you may
observe in the Page of this Second Book, where the Figures of them are
represented, having on the Counter-Seales the Arms of England ( viz. 3 Lions
passant guardant) in Triangular Escocheons hanging upon Trees.

In another Parliament at London, by reason of the Expense of His Sisters
Marriage, Anno 1237.
a 30th part of all Movables both of the Clergy and Laity is required, Mat.
West minster, p. 296, 297.
which, after much ado, upon the Kings Promising to remove the Strangers, and
to use the Council of the Naturalls, and to preserve to them their Liberties,
is granted, so it be Collected by Four Knights of every Shire, and put into the
respective Castles and Abbeys till some great necessity, but nothing of all
this is performed on the Kings part; and, to the farther vexation of the
Subjects, the Leavies are made with great extremity. The Earl of Provence is
sent for to participate of this Treasure, and William de Valence becomes the
only Mignion of the King; Matthew. Paris, p. 465. n. 41.
Queen Blanch of France also entertains Simon de Montford a Frenchman, Anno:
1238.
and secretly Marries him to Elianor the Kings Sister, who is, in right of his
Mother, Daughter to Blanchmains, made Earl of Leicester. These concurrences of
Disgusts and Oppressions so incense the Nobility, and other Subjects in
general, that it begets a new Confederation, into which Earl Richard the Kings
Brother is drawn, whom, as being Heir to the Crown it is argued to eoncerne,
and he is sent to King Henry to reprove Him for the vast profusion of His
Estate, His Indulgence to Strangers, and neglect of the Natives. The King
fearing the consequence, and finding the Londoners favor them, by advice of
the Legate calls a Parliament at London, Anno 1239.
whether the Lords come Armed; but, Montford, making his Peace with the Kings
Brother and the Earl of Lincoln, the business cooled, and the Miseries of the
Kingdom continue.

Besides the great Exactions of the King, the Pope is not wanting in his, who
requires 300 Italians to be Preferred to the first Vacancies in England, which
forces the Archbishop of Canterbury to an Exile in the Abbey of Pontiniac, and
the rest of the Clergy to a Submission. Anno 1241.
And the King in the mean time makes an Expedition into Wales, which being at
discord within its self, with the show only of His Army obtaines Prince David's
Submission and Fealty, and is now again Courted by the Poictavins into France,
which Matter and Supplies to that end is moved in Parliament, but no Money
given; however, by Loans and otherwise he procures 30 Barrels of Silver, and
with that (leaving the Archbishop of York Governor) he goes into France, Mat.
Paris, p. 583. n. 35.588 and 589.
but is forced to a dishonorable Peace.

Upon occasion of a Revolt in Wales and Scotland, Anno 1244.
He Marches first into that Kingdom, with the Officious Aid of the Earl of
Flanders, which is also ill taken of the Barons, but a fair Peace is concluded:
and then Money must be had for an Expedition against Wales, and to pay His
Debts, which, with one Voice was refused in this Parliament, Anno 1246.
which put the King upon other courses: London is Amerc'd 5000 Marks, and
great Fines exacted of the possessors of Inforrestations, or else to be sold to
others. This gives occasion to enquire into the Popes yearly Exactions, which
were found to be 60000 Marks (more then the Revenue of the Crown of England)
which being Complained of in a General Council then held at Lions, the King
forbids, under a Penalty, any further Contributions, but wanted Resolution to
continue it.

His necessities now cause another Parliament, wherein, Matthew. Paris, p. 743.
n. 45.
notwithstanding He ruffles with them, they boldly Tax Him with the Breach of
all His Promises, and will not be brought to grant any thing, Anno 1248.
so that He is constrained to sell His Land and Jewels, pawn Gascoyne, and the
Ornaments of St. Edwards Shrine, and give over Housekeeping, to wring out of
the Londoners 20000 l. and beg of the Clergy some small sums; Anno 1249.
The Barons urge still his Promises concerning the Election of Officers, but
obtain nothing.

The Marriage is now Solemnized at York betwixt Margaret the Kings Sister and
the King of Scots, to which that Archbishop is extravagantly generous. And the
Pope sollicites the King to take the Cross, for which he grants a Tenth of the
Layety and Clergy, which in a Parliament called to that purpose is absolutely
denied. But in the next, Anno 1252.
the Charters being once again Ratified, Matthew. Paris, p. 866.
and Sentence of Excommunication Solemnly Pronounced against the Infringers, a
Tenth of the Clergy for the Holy War, and Scutage, and three Marks upon every
Knights Fee is granted. Gascogny complaining of Earl Richards Government, to
quiet them, the King revokes His Grant thereof to Him, and gives it to His Son
Edward, sending the Earl of Leicester thither as Governor, with whom they are
no better pleased, Matthew. Paris, p. 832. n. 34.
and he is sent for over, who, in Council, disputes it very undutifully with
the King, but returns nevertheless to his Charge, which he executes now with
more rigor then ever; wherefore the Gascoignes put themselves under the
Protection of the King of Spain, and King Henry is forced to take a voyage
thither in stead of the Holy Land. Leicesters Commission is nulled by
Proclamation, who thereupon comes into England, and the King, after He had
quieted Gascogne (to take off the King of Spain, Matthew. Paris, p. 890. n. 16.
who pretends likewise to Aquitaine) concludes a Marriage for His Son Edward,
Anno 1254.
with Elianor that Kings Sister, who thereupon quits his Claim to both, and
arriving in England Fines the Londoners and Jews for not aiding Him.

In Easter-Terme another Parliament is called, but yields no returns but those
of Grievances; and the Pope, to support His Wars against the Emperor, demands
a Tenth of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the better to dispose the King
thereunto, Absolves Him of His Oath for the Holy Land, invests Edmond His
second Son in the Kingdom of Sicilie, and in consideration of that Promotion of
His Nephew, desires to borrow 500 Marks of the Earl of Cornwall, but his
Answer was, He would not lend them Money on whom he could not distraine.

At Winchester the Gascogne Merchants, by the Prince their Patron, complain of
the taking their Goods without pay, which is ill resented by the King; and the
Princes Servants commit so many outrages in Wales (of which he had now the
Government) that it revolts, for the quieting whereof Prince Edward requires
Money of his Father, but He is so far from that, that to supply His own
necessities, He commands every Sheriff, and other Officers to bring in their
Money by a precise day, upon severe penalties, and daily, upon one quarrel or
another gets Money out of the Londoners; Matthew. Paris, p. 939. n. 48.952. n. 32.
when, great hopes of Honor and Advantage is conceived to accrue to His Crown,
Anno 1257.
by the Election of Richard Earl of Cornwall to be King of the Romans, and the
Archbishop of Cologne is sent to conduct him over, who has a Present of 500
Marks, and a rich Mitre, and Richard is accordingly Crowned at Aquisgrave,
Ibidem, p. 979. n. 45.
much to the dissatisfaction of France and Spain. The King, to sound the
affections of the People, as to the Election of His Son Edmond to the Kingdom
of Sicilie, in a Parliament then Summoned, brings him clad in Apulian Habit,
and declares His Obligation of 140000 Marks for obtaining the said Kingdom,
toward which he declares a Tenth and First Fruits of the Clergy were granted
Him by the Pope, and therefore hopes they will not be backward; but, nothing
will be done but upon the usual Condition of Magna Charta; and then they
promise 52000, which satisfies not: For, the next year, in a Parliament at
London, declaring His Engagements to the Pope, and His disappointment of the
Kingdom of Sicilie, Matthew. Westminster. p. 364.
He is plainly denied, and the Parliament Adjourned to Oxford till
Barnabas-day; Anno 1258.
in which time the Earls of Leicester, Gloucester and Hereford resolve the
effecting of their Designs by force, which puts the King to His shifts for
Money, and when the Parliament meet again they come thither Armed, and force
the new Confirmation of their Privileges, and Twelve Conservators to Govern
the Kingdom.

And now Leicester, Gloucester, and l'Despenser enforce the King to call a
Parliament at London, wherein the Authority of the 24 is delivered unto them,
and they absolved from their Allegiance if these things were not made good;
Matthew. Paris, p. 983. n. 50.
when Richard King of the Romans comes over into England, Anno 1259.
but could not by the Barons be permitted to Land, till he had condescended to
take an Oath not to alter the Government of the Kingdom as then established.
Notwithstanding the King uses all means to revoke this, and recover His Power,
and in order thereunto seeks to be absolved from Rome, has Aides out of
Scotland, and, to be secure from France, for 300000 l. resigns His whole
Interest to Normandy, Anno 1259.
Anjou, Nangius de Gest. S. Lud. Fran. Reg. Matthew. Paris, p. 989. n. 13
Poictou, Tourain and Main (does homage for Guien, Limosin and Quercy) and
thenceforth abridg'd His Style, and changed His Seal, using a Scepter in place
of a Sword, whereupon these Monkish Verses were written.

MCCLIX God grant
Firm Peace thou fix,
Poictou, Anjou, Normans
To France range you,
New Seals are made,
Old Styles forsaken,
Down laid the Blade,
Scepters up taken.
Est MCCLIX utinam concordia foelix, Johannes Tilius.

Andegavis, Pictavis, Neustria, gente relicta
Anglorum, dantur tibi France, Sigilla novantur,
Nomina tolluntur, fugit Ensis, Sceptra geruntur.
The Figures of both His Great Seals being delineated in the 56 Page of this
Second Book, will more particularly satisfy the Reader in this Alteration; in
the first of which He is styled HENRICUS DEI GRATIA REX ANGLIE DOMINUS
HIBERNIE; and on the Counter-Seal HENRICUS DUX NORMANNIE ET AQUITANNIE COMES
ANDEGAVIE, on which he is Figured sitting on His Throne, with a Sword in His
Right hand, and a Globe in His Left. But, in His Second Seal He omits Normandy
and Anjou, using on both sides of His Seal this Circumscription, viz. HENRICUS
DEI GRATIA REX ANGLIE DOMINUS HIBERNIE DUX AQUITANNIE; and in place of the
Sword in His Right Hand, He holds the Scepter of St. Edward, or the Dove.

The Barons on the other side use all arts to strengthen their association, and
France is made Arbiter of the Quarrel, Matthew. Paris, p. 992. n. 4.
who condemns the Provisions of Oxford, but allows the confirmation of King
John's Charter, An. 1263.
upon which Henry Son to the Earl of Cornwall, Roger de Clifford, Roger de
Leyborne, Hamon l'Estrange, and many others depart from the Barons. The Earl of
Leicester shortly after having combined with Llewellin Prince of Wales, Matthew.
Westminster. p. 382. n. 18.
invades Mortimers Lands in those parts, who is aided by the Prince, whilst
Leicester recovers the Castle and Town of Gloucester, Matthew. Paris, p. 992. n.
52.
makes the Citizens to Redeem themselves with 1000 l. and subduing Worcester;
Anno 1264.
Shrewsbury, and the Isle of Ely, begins to grow very considerable; which, the
King fearing, calls a Parliament, and a Peace is concluded, upon Condition,
That all the Kings Castles should be put into the Barons hands; The Provisions
of Oxford observed; And, all the Strangers to depart the Kingdom: But, the
Prince still holding out Windsor-Castle, it is besieged and taken by the Earl
of Leicester. Ibidem. p. 993. n.


The King calls another Parliament, and therein gains several Lords to His
Party, and with them (the Prince, Richard Earl of Cornwall, Henry his Son, and
William de Valence) Marches to Oxford, whither many Scottish and Northern
Nobility repair to Him, Mat. Paris, p. 385. n. 29.
and thence with all His Forces to Northampton, where young Montford the Earl
of Leicesters Son, with fourteen of the Principal of the Faction are made
Prisoners; thence to Nottingham, making spoil of all the Barons Possessions in
those parts. In the mean while Leicester draws toward London, and offers
30000 Marks to the King for Damages done in the Wars, so that the Statutes of
Oxford might be observed; which, not being accepted, Battle of Jews. The King
in this battle had a Dragon carried before Him for His Royal Ensign, and Simon
Montfort, to signify the justness of His Quarrel, caused his Soldiers to put
white Crosses upon their Armor.
the Earl is constrained to put it to the hazard of a Battle near Jews in
Sussex, Matthew. Paris, p. 995. and 996. Matthew. Paris, p. 387. n. 6.
where, by a Stratagem he gains the day, 5000 are slain upon the place, the
King, Prince, Earl of Cornwall, and his son Henry, the Earls of Arundel and
Hereford, and all the Scottish Lords taken prisoners, Valence and Marshall save
themselves by flight. Leicester carries the King along with him a whole year
and a half to countenance his Actions, in which time he takes in most of the
Strong Holds of the Kingdom, only the Prince escaping out of Hereford Castle
gathers some Forces, and gaining the Earl of Gloucester, brought many more hands
to him, with several places of strength both in England and Wales, Matthew.
Paris, p. 997. and 998.
and with them in a Plain near Evesham gives Battle to Simon Montfort Earl of
Leicester; who, Battle of Evesham.
finding himself not able to withstand Prince Edwards Forces, said, An. 1265.
Let us commit our Souls to God, for our Bodies are theirs; and so undertaking
the weight of the Battle, like another Cateline, fell there, accompanied in his
death by his son Henry and eleven other Barons.

The Captive King thus freed by His victorious Son, Anno 1266.
calls a Parliament at Winchester, wherein all the Barons of Leicesters party
(who still maintain several strong Holds in the Kingdom) are disinherited, and
the King Marches against them, and at Northampton two of Leicesters sons
submit; but, they that escape the Battle at Evesham, Matthew. Westminster. p. 398. n.
20.
make good the Isle of Ely, where the Prince goes to reduce them, causes
Bridges to be made of Boats, enters the Island in several places, and
constraines them to yield. Then revenge must be taken upon Llewellin for
succoring Montfort and Gloucester, Matthew. Paris, p. 1004. n. 47.
but he redeemes Himself with 32000 l. Sterling.

The next year Prince Edward undertakes the Holy War, and for supplies Pawnes
Gascoigne to France for 30000 Marks, and two years after, Anno. 1269.
with His Wife (then as it proved) young with Child, sets forward, with great
resolution, Matthew. Paris, p. 1006 n. 36.
toward the Holy Land, but effects no great matter. And, whilst this
preparation is in hand, King Henry labors to establish the Peace of the
Kingdom, and to reform the excesses which the War had bred, and the same year
Assembles His last Parliament at Marleborough, where the Statutes of that Title
were Enacted; from whence not long after He went to Norwich, where He punished
several of the Citizens for a Riot committed upon the Monks of that place, Anno
1271.
and burning their Church; and, returning by St. Edmondsbury, and doing His
Devotions at St. Edmonds Shrine, He there fell somewhat ill, from whence
hastening to London His sickness so much increased upon Him, that calling before
Him His Lords, and especially Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester, He Exhorted
them to be true and faithful to His Son Prince Edward, who was at that time
far from home, and therefore had the more need of their care, which consisted
chiefly in their agreement one with another, and within few days after He
departed this Life in His Palace at Westminster, His Death. Anno 1272.
upon the 16th day of November, Matthew. West. p. 401. n. 41. Ibidem, n. 44.
An. 1272. having lived 65 years, and held the Scepter 56 years and twenty
seven days.

Upon the 20th day of the same Month, being the Feast of St. Edmond, King
Henry was Interred in the Abbey of Westminster (before the High-Altar) which he
rebuilt from the ground, and laid the first Stone, having ordained by His Will,
that His Heart should be buried at Font-Eurand, which to that end was delivered
to the Abbess of that Monastery by the Abbot of Westminster, in the presence of
many of the Nobility, upon the Monday next before the Feast of S. Luce the
Virgin, Pat. An. 20 Ed. 1. n. 3.
An. 20 E. 1. had been also the Founder of a Church in London for Converted
Jews, an Hospital at Oxford for Passengers and Diseased Persons, Matthew. Paris,
p. 572. n. 34.
and caused a Chest of Gold to be made for the laying up the Relics of K.
Edward the Confessor in the said Church of Westminster.

Upon the North-side of which Saints Shrine, in the Chapel of the Kings, King
Edward His Son erected for Him a Magnificent and Elevated Sepulcher of Mosaic
Work of Gray Marble, Chequered with Gaspers and Opalls, and other rare Stones,
and inlaid with large Tabets of Porphire and Serpentine, which He brought out
of France in His return from the Holy Land: Upon the Superficies of which,
being Copper Guilt, (and Carved Lozenge, every Lozenge containing a Lion
passant Guardant) lies the Figure of the King in his Royal Robes, with his
Crown on his head, and his feet placed upon two Lions all of the same Metal
(but by Sacrilegious hands dispoiled of his Globe and Scepter) as you may
observe more exactly by this Representation. About the Verge of which Tomb I
find this Inscription in Saxon Capitals embossed, beginning on the South Side
at the head, monument Illustrissimo Domino Dno RICARDO Comiti de DORSET, et
Baroni (Sackoile) de Buckhurst, hanc Tumuli Regis Henrici tertij Figuram,
humilime D.D.D.F.S.

ICI: GIST: DENRI: IADIS: REY: DE: ENGLETERE: SEYGNVR DE: DIR LAUNDE: DUC: DE:
AQUITAYNE: LE: FILZ: LI: REY JOHAN: IADIS: REY: DE: ENGLETERE: A: KI: DEU: FACE
MERCY: AMEN.

And upon the North-side of the said Monument this Memorial in Gilt Characters.

TERTIUS HENRICUS EST TEMPLI CONDITOR HUJUS. 1273 DULCE BELLUM INEXPERTIS.

Also upon a Tablet hanging on a Pillar, near the Tomb of King Henry III. Thus
Englished on the same Tablet.


The Friend of Piety and Almes-deed:
Henry the Third whilome of England King,
Who this Church brake, and after his meed
Again renewed into this fair building:
Now refleth here, which did so great a thing.
He yield His meed that Lord of Deity,
That as one God raigns in Persons Three.
Tertius Henricus jacet hic pietatis amicus,
Ecclesiam stravit istam, quam post renovavit
Reddet si munus qui regnat trinus et unus.
Children of King HENRY the Third, by Queen ELIANOR of Provence, His Wife.
7. EDWARD, The eldest Son of Henry the III. was King of England, after His
Fathers decease, by the Name of Edward I. and continued the Succession, Vide
Book III. Chap. 1.

7. EDMOND, Second Son of King Henry III. by Queen Elianor of Provence, was
Earl of Lancaster, etc. from whom the Earls and Dukes of that House derive
their Descent, as you may see in the VII. Chapter of this II. Book.

7. RICHARD, Third Son, Brook, fol.
bearing the Name of his Uncle Richard, King of the Romans and Almain, deceased
in his youth, and lies buried at Westminster, on the South Side of the Choire.

7. JOHN, Fourth Son, deceased in his Infancy, Milles, p. 145.
and was Interred in the Abbey of Westminster.

7. WILLIAM, The Fifth Son of King Henry III. dyed also young, Milles, p. 145.
Weever, Fun. Mo. p. 443.
and was buried at the New- Temple in London about the year 1256.

7. HENRY, The Sixth Son of King Henry the Third and of Queen Elianor of
Provence his Wife, departed this World also in his Infancy.

7. MARGARET Queen of Scots, Matthew. Paris p. 829. n. 36. Pat. An. 36 H. 3.
eldest Daughter of King Henry III. and Queen Elianor, The Seal of King
Alexander III. is exhibited by Olivarius Vredius in Genealogia Comitum
Flandriae; p. 15. upon both sides of which he is styled, ALEXANDER DEO RECTORE
REX SCOTTORUM, On the Reverse he is figured on Horsback with his Shield on his
left Arm, and Caparisons upon his Horse, upon which The Lion of Scotland within
the Tressure is embossed. In the South Isle of the Abbey of Westminster, his
Shield also is carved in stone upon the Wall (next to that of his Father in law
King Henry III.) which is Or (...) Lion rampant within a Tressure flowery;
counter-flowry Gules; and is over-written, ALEXANDER TERTIUS REX SCOTORUM.
born in the year 1241 ( Anno 26 H 3.) was the first Wife of Alexander II. King
of Scots, a youth of nine years old, being married to him at the City of York
upon St. Stephens day Anno 36. of his Reign, and year of our Lord 1251. who was
there also knighted by her said Father King Henry III. and did him homage for
the Kingdom of Scotland. Matthew. West. p. 550. n. 48.


Their Nuptials were celebrated with all splendour and magnificence imaginable,
both the Kings being present thereat, with many of their Nobility, a thousand
Knights of England and six hundred of Scotland, Matthew. Paris, p. 830. n. 19.
attired in rich habit, besides a multitude of people; all which were notably
feasted; for besides other provisions, the Archbishop of York contributed 600
Oxen toward this grand Entertainment.

Queen Margaret had issue by Alexander III. two Sons, In Arch. Flandriae.
Hector Boethius fol. 99. b. and 301. b.
Alexander and David, and a Daughter called Margaret; Alexander took to Wife
Margaret Daughter of Guydo Earl of Flanders and Marquess of Namur, and deceased
without issue in the life time of his Father King Alexander, David also died
Childless; and Margaret their Daughter was the Wife of Erick King of Norway, by
whom she had issue Margaret the Heir of Scotland and Norway, that died
unmarried. She was Queen of Scotland 22. years, lived 33. and deceased before
her Husband in the 23th. year of his Reign, and the first of her Brother
Edward's in England, and was interred in the Abbey of Dunfermling in Scotland.

7. BEATRICE Duchess of Britain (so named after her Grandmother Beatrice of
Savoy, Matthew. Paris, p. 594. n. 28. Matthew. Westminster. p. 308. n. 49. Pat. An. 37 H.
3. (...) tergo.
Countess of Provence) was the second Daughter of King Henry III. I have in my
Custody a Confirmation of this Duke John (of a Charter of Mary Lady of Medelham
Widow to Robert the Son of Sir Robers de Nevill) dated in February Anno 1287,
in which he is styled, JOHANNES DUX BRITANNIE COMES RICHMUNDIE; to which, a
large Seal of Green Wax is appendant. On the one side of which is the
Portraiture of the Duke in his Coat of Mail, his Surcoat, Shield, and the
Caparisons of his Horse are charged with his Arms: which were Chequie, Or and
Azure, a Border Gules (being the Arms of the Counts of Dreux, of which Family
he was) over all a Canton Ermine, the Coat Armor of the Earls and Dukes of
Britain. His Border is plain, not charged with Lions, as Mr. Vincent makes it
to be, p. 66. nor was he dead in the 13th. year of the Reign of Edw. 1. 1284,
or 85, (as he would prove by an Esceatr. of that date; against the authority of
Heuninges, Albitius, the Book of Richmond (by him cited against himself) and
many other authentic Authors; who truly say that this Duke John died Anno
13^5.) but lived to seal this Inspeximus above-recited in February 1287. which
was two years after; and Anno 16 of Edw. 1. so that it appears much more
unlikely that this Duke should seala Grant two years after his death, then that
he should survive it 18. years, to die Anno 1305, as all those Authors do aver.
She was born at Bourdeaux in Gaseoigne ( in Crastino Nativitatis Sancti
Johannis Baptistoe, viz.) upon the 25th. day of June in the year 1242. Anno 26
H. 3. in the 37th. year of whose Reign there were Proposals of a Marriage
betwixt this Beatrice and the Eldest Son of the King of Arragon, which took not
effect. But she was afterward ( Anno 44. of her Fathers Reign, Matthew. Westminster.
p. 371. n. 29. Henninges p. 65. Albicius fol. 4.
and of our Lord 1260.) married to John de Dreux Duke of Britain in France and
Earl of Richmond in England, slain at Lions by the fall of a Wall Anno 1305. at
the Inauguration of Pope Clement V. one of the Reins of whose Horse he held;
and interred in the Church of the Carmelites of Ploermel, which he had founded.
By this Duke John she had issue

Arthur their Eldest Son, Scevole and Louis de Sante Mar the in Commit. and
Ducibus Britanniae.
Duke of Britain after the death of his Father, who marrying two Wives, had
issue by the first of them ( viz. Beatrice Vicountess of Lymoges) John Duke of
Britain, who notwithstanding his triple marriage, died issueless; and Guy Earl
of Ponthieure. This Arthur by his second Wife Yoland Daughter and Heir of
Almerick Earl of Mount-fort, had also issue another John surnamed Breno, after
the death of his Brother John, Duke of Britain and Earl of Montfort, who taking
part with King Edward the Third against the French King, had those Honors
seized; whereupon the said King Edward gave him the Earldom of Richmond. He was
the Father of John Mountfort, surnamed The Valiant, Duke of Britain and Earl of
Richmond, deposed from that Earldom by Act of Parliament, Anno 19th. of Richard
the Second, who by marriage with the Daughter of Philip of Evereux, had issue
Richard of Britain, Count of Estampes, who by Margaret of Orleance his Wife had
issue Francis Duke of Britain, who married Margaret of Foix, and had also issue
Anne the Heir of Britain, Wife of Lewis the Twelfth, by which Marriage that
Dukedom immerged in the Crown of France.

Peter and Henry, the second and third Sons of John de Dreux Duke of Britain,
and Beatrice Daughter of King Henry III. died young.

John de Dreux, fourth Son of John Duke of Britain and Duchess Beatrice of
England, was by King Edward I. made Earl of Richmond. He died Anno 1330. having
been a Noble Benefactor to the Gray Friars within Newgate in London, to whom he
gave Three hundred pounds toward the rebuilding of their Church, and glasing
their Windows, in which (on the North side the Church) stood his Arms painted
in Glass, being Chequie Or and Azure, a Border Gules charged with 8. Lions
passant guardant of the first, over all a Canton Ermine. The same Escocheon of
Arms is painted on the North Wall of the Abbey of Westminster, with this
Superscription, JOHANNES DE BRITANNIA COMES RICHMUNDIE. In both which Shields
his Border is charged with Lions of England, not only as a distinction from his
Elder Brother Duke Arthur, who did bear a Plain Border Gules, but also to show
his descent from a Daughter of the King of England.

Alice their Eldest Daughter, was Lady Abbess of Font-Eurand.

Mary their Second Daughter was married to Guy Earl of St. Paul, and Blanch of
Britain their youngest Daughter, was the Wife of Philip Seigneur de Conches and
Damfront, (Son and Heir of Robert Earl of Artois) who had issue (besides other
Children) Robert of Artois, Earl of Beaumont le Roger, Pair of France, Ibidem.
Lord of Conches and Mehun, and Earl of Richmond in England, who first moved
King Edward III. to set on foot his Title and Claim to the Crown of France.

The Duchess Beatrice when she had been Duke John's Wife 12 years, and lived
about 30. died in Britany in the first year of the Reign of King Edward I. her
Brother; and her Corpse being brought into England, received a Depository in the
Choir of the Gray Friars Church within Newgate, in the City of London.

7. KATHERINE Third and youngest Daughter of King Henry III. and of Queen
Elianor of Provence, Matthew. Paris p. 879. n. 18.
was born at London on St. Katherines day, being the 25th. day of November (the
Name of which Saint was given her at the Font by Boniface Archbishop of
Canterbury) her Great Uncle and Godfather, Anno 1253. in the 38th. year of her
Fathers Reign; she deceased young (not five years of Age) and in the Abbey of
Westminster, her bones lie interred, with two of her Brethren, in the space
betwixt the Chapels of St. Edmond and St. Bennet.

SIGILLVM RICARDI COMITIS CORNVBIE


RICH E. OF CORN

SIGILLVM RICARDI COMITIS CORNVBIE


RICH K. OF ROMANS

RICARDUS DEI GRATIA ROMANORVM REX SEMPER AVGVSTUS


S EADMUNDI DE ALEMANIA COMITIS CORNUBIE


EDM. E. OF CORN

S EADMUNDI DE ALEMANNIA COMITIS CORNVBIE


blazon or coat of arms

S EADMVNDI COMITES CORNVBIE


Generosissimo Viro EDWARDO KYNASTON de Ottley in agro Salopiensi Armigero
(...) Sigillorum hanc Tabulam. D.D. E.S.



E DE ^^A CO CO


6. RICHARD, King of the ROMANS, and of ALMAIN, and Earl of POICTIERS and
CORNWALL.
CHAP. V.
This Richard being Earl of Poictou and Cornwall, did not bear the Arms of King
John his Father with a Label or Border, as the younger Sons of the Kings of
England afterward did, but took the Arms of Poictou, being Argent a Lion
Rampant Gules, Crowned Or, within a Border of the Ancient Earls of Cornwall,
which were Sable Bezanty, by which he included the Ensigns of both his Earldoms
in one Escocheon, as you may observe in his Seal exhibited in the 94 Page of
this Second Book, the Reverse of which contains a large Shield of those Arms
before mentioned. The like examples were (much about that time) in the Royal
Family of France: For Hugh the Great, Earl of Vermaudois, Third Son of Henry
the First, King of France, taking to Wife Alice the Heir of that County, did
bear Chequy Or and Azure. Robert of France Earl of Dreux, Fourth Son of King
Lewis the Gross, gave for Arms also Eschequy Or and Azure a Border Gules. And
Peter of France, Fifth Son of the said King, Marrying Isabel Lady of Courtenay
and Montargis gave the Arms of Regnand de Courtenay her Father, viz. Or three
Torteaux, and called himself by that Surname. This Richard being afterward
Elected King of the Romans, gave Or an Eagle displayed Sable, which is Carved
on the Wall of the North Isle in Westminster Abbey; and also over the Gate of
the Abbey of Ruley near Oxford, Founded by the said Richard.
KIng John had Issue only Two Sons, Henry that succeeded Him in His Kingdom,
etc. by the Name of King Henry the Third. And this RICHARD, his second Son
(both by Isabell of Engolesm his third Wife.) Robert of Gloucester, p. 284 a.
Lib. Theokesburiae M. S. Vincent, p. 135.
) He was born in the year 1209. the Tenth of His Fathers Reign, who when He
died, left him very young, not eight years old.

Afterward this RICHARD was by King Henry the Third, his Brother Matthew. Paris,
p. 311. number. 50.
made Knight on Candlemas-day, An. 1225. And in the same year ( viz. The Ninth
of Henry the Third) Ibidem, p. 312. number. 10.
created Earl of Poictiers and Cornwall; by which Titles he wrote himself in a
Ex Cartis Edv. Walker Militis Gart. Prin. Regis Armorum.
Grant, whereunto his own Seal is annexed: Dederat ei Rex (as Paris recites it)
antequam illum miserat ad parts transmarinas Cornubiae Comitatum cum tota
Pictavia, unde ab omnibus Comes Pictavensis vocabatur. In the Twelfth year of
whose Reign the said King gave him all the Lands in England, belonging to
Reginald Dampmartin Earl of Bollogne, and after the death of William Earl of
Holland, Emperor of the West. This RICHARD was elected King of the Romans, Lib.
Theokesburiae M. S. Pat. An. 41 Hen. 3. a tergo. Rob. of Gloucester. p. 293 a.
Ibidem, p. 295 b.
An. 1256. and the next year ( viz. 1257.) he went into Germany with a Noble
Train, and was upon the Twenty seventh day of May, being Ascension-day, Crowned
King of the Romans and of Almain, at Aquisgrave in Germany, by Conrade
Archbishop of Cullen. In a Letter to Simon de Montford and Gilbert de Clare, he
wrote himself RICHARD By the Grace of God King of the Romans, ever Augustus

To give you His Charater, He was a Prince both skilful and valiant in the time
of War: so prudent in His Councils, that what Fortune denied him in Battle, He
supplied by his Wisdom and Advice. And though it was feared, that those
unkindnesses which he received from King Henry his Brother in the beginning of
his Reign, might have inclined him to take part with the Barons: Yet came they
to so timely a good understanding, that he ever after faithfully adhered to him
in all the changes of his Fortune, being taken prisoner with the said King at
the Battle of Jews, Pat. An. 55 Hen. 3. number. 23. and a tergo.
and having with others been twice constituted Governor of England, during the
Kings absence, and employed in several other Commands both abroad and at home.

He got much Money by Farming the Mint, and the Jews of the King; and had so
great an Estate in England, that he is reported to be able to dispend Four
hundred Marks per diem during Ten years, being indeed as well furnished with
Wealth, as his Brother was needy: Whereupon, as if Money had made the way to
his New Kingdom, this Verse was common in every ones Mouth.

Nummus ait pro me, nubit Cornubia Romae.

For me my Money says this,
Cornwall to Rome now wedded is.
Or thus.

Money says, that for her sake,
Rome did Cornwall to wife take.
But now as he who pays dear for an Office, expects that it should repay him
again; so Earl Richard having given infinitely to compass his advancement,
looked to re-emburse himself by the place; and this, and the desire he had to
revenge himself upon those that had opposed his Election, put him upon such
violent courses, that he came soon to be dispossessed, forsaken, and forced to
return into England, a poorer King, then he went out an Earl.

Of Wives this RICHARD had a Pair Royal, His First Marriage.
Three; the first of which, Rob. of Gloucester, p. 290 b.
was Isabel the Third Daughter of William Marshal Earl of Pembroke (Sister and
Coheir of Anselm Marshal Earl of Pembroke, Marshal did bear Party Per Pale, Or,
and Verse, a Lion Rampant, Gules. Which Arms are Painted in the Chapter House of
the Cathedral at Salisbury.
Brother to William, Richard, and Gilbert; and Brother and Heir to Walter, all
Earls of Pembroke successively) Widow of Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester,
whom he took to Wife in the year 1230. An. 14 Hen. 3. Milles, p? 553. Vincent.
p. 135. In the Margin.
She wrote herself Countess of Cornwall and Gloucester, and deceasing, her Body
was buried at Bellumlocum or Belleland, but her Heart she ordained to be sent
in a Silver Cup to her Brother, the Abbot of Theokesbury, to be there Interred
before the High Altar, which was accordingly done. Upon which, these following
Verses were composed.

Postremo voto legavit Cor Comitissa,
Pars melior toto fuit hic pro corpore missa, Lib. M. S. in Officio Armorum
Notat. L. 15. p. 2.

Haec and dimisit Dominum recolendo Priorent
Huc Cor quod misit verum testatur amoreni.
His Second Marriage.
His Second Wife was Sanchia, Cart. 36 Hen. 3. part 1. m. 10. Robert of
Gloucester, p. 290 b. Matthew. Paris, p. 587. Milles, p. 553.
Third Daughter and one of the Heirs of Raymond Berengar Earl of Provence
(Sister to Queen Eleanor, Wife of his Brother King Henry) married to him An.
The Arms of Raymond Earl of Provence, were, Or, Four Palets Gules, which are
Carved in the South Isle of Westminster Abbey, and Painted in the Chapter House
Windows, and several other Windows in the said Abbey.
1243. Being one of those Four Daughters of an Earl, that by Marriage came to
be exalted to the Thrones of so many Kings; an Example not to be paralelled in
any History. She was Crowned with her husband, and died at Berkhamsted on the
Fifth of the Ides of November, An. 1261. and was buried at Hayles.

His Third Marriage.
A Third Wife he had called Beatrice, married to him An. 1267. (Niece to
Conrade Archbishop of Cullen, that Crowned King Richard at Aquisgrave) who
survived him, as appears by good Authority; Escaetr. 4 Edw. number. 44. a Matthew.
Paris, p. 975. number. 50. Matthew. Westminster. p. 401. number. 30. Vincent, p. 136.
for after her husbands death, there grew some question betwixt Edmond Earl of
Cornwall her Son in Law, and her self for the Manor of Weldon in
Northamptonshire, and other Lands wherein she claimed her Dower.

Lastly, For thea Death of RICHARD King of the Romans it bears date An. 1271.
at his Castle at Berkhamsted in Hertfordshire, whose Epitaph I find thus
written. Thus Englished in Milles, p. 552.


Richard Plantagenet lies here entombed,
That Brother was to Henry, England's King,
Of Poictou and of Cornwall, he was Earl,
Whose Mind did always such contentment bring,
As he was never found Ambitious.
Th'Electors made him King of Almaine, where
His Noble Mind procured, both Love and Fear.
At length with Charles his Crown was Royaliz'd,
By which the Eagle in his Shield he wore,
(Excelling other Kings in Wealth and State)
And scorned the Lion, which he bare before
But Kings and Kingdoms have this certain Fate.
That though their Reign on Earth be just and even,
Yet Time says they must die to live in Heaven.
Hic jacet in Tumulo RICHARDUS Theutonicorum
Rex, vivens propria contentus sort bonorum
Anglorum Regis Germanus, Pictaviensis
Ante Comes dictus, sed tandem Cornubiensis,
Demum Theutonicis tribuens amplissima dona,
Insignitus erat Caroli rutilante Corona.
Hinc Aquilam gessit clipeo, sprevitque Leonem
Regibus omnigenis praecellens per rationem.
Dives opum mundi, sapiens conviva modestus
Alloquio, gestu, dum vixit semper honestus,
Jam Regnum Regno Commutans pro meliore
Regi Coelorum summo conregnet honor.
The Body of King RICHARD being removed from the Castle of Berkhamsted,
received Burial at his Monastery of Hayles in Glocestershire of the Cistercian
Order, Robert of Gloucester, p. 300 a. Ibidem. Rossus Warwicensis.
which he Founded in the year 1246. But his Heart at Oxford in Reuly Abbey of
the Order of Friars Minors, also of his Foundation, under a Pyramid of
admirable Work; of which there is not at present any Remains. In his Grants he
styled himself Ricardus Comes Pictavie and Cornubie; and the Seal of his
Earldom was charged with these words, SIGILLUM RICARDI COMITIS CORNUBIE. But
his Royal Seal was Circumscribed thus, RICARDUS DEI GRATIA ROMANORUM REX SEMPER
AUGUSTUS. Both which Seals are exhibited in this Second Book, Page 94.

Children of RICHARD Earl of Cornwall, (afterward King of the Romans) by ISABEL
MARSHAL His first Wife.
7. JOHN the Eldest Son died young An. 1232. Milles, p. 553.
and it seems was buried at Reading in Barkshire, near to King Henry the
First.

7. HENRY, Lib. Theokesbury M. S.
Second Son of Earl Richard was born in the year 1235. upon the Fourth of the
Nones of November; and Knighted on the day of his Fathers Coronation: Matthew
Paris, p. 922.
With whom he was taken prisoner by Simon Montfort Earl of Leicester, at the
Battle of Jews in Sussex. Pat. An. 53 Hen. 3. number. 45.
There was a Treaty of Marriage betwixt him and Constance the Daughter of
Gastion Viscount of Bearn, at Westminster, the Sixth day of March, An. 53 Hen.
3. King Henry the Third his Uncle, Pat. An. 50 Hen 3. number. 73.
gave him the Manor of Norton in Northamptonshire, upon the forfeiture of
William Marshal Earl of Pembroke the Kings enemy. An. 50 H. 3.

This Henry afterward undertook the Crosiade for Siria, and being in Italy on
his return from that voyage, was murdered (at his devotion in the Church of S.
Laurence in Viterbium) by Guy and Simon, Sons of Simon Montford Earl of
Leicester, Robert of Gloucester, page 300 a.
in Revenge of their said Fathers Death, slain in the Barons Wars in England,
(as Rishanger says) An. 1271. Rishanger in Continuatione, Matthew. Paris, p. 975.
number. 30.
in the Five and fiftieth year of Henry the Third. Another delivers it An.
1272. Which if so, he outlived his Father, and consequently was Earl of
Cornwall, for Earl Richard his Father died, An. 1271. Whereupon those of
Viterbium, in memory of this HENRY de Alemannia thus assassinated, caused the
manner thereof to be depicted upon the Wall of the said Church, which one
beholding, versified upon, as you may observe in Vincent, page 135. To whom I
refer my Reader.

7. RICHARD, Third Son of Richard Earl of Cornwall, and Isabel his first Wife,
died without issue.

7. NICHOLAS (the Fourth and youngest Son of Earl Richard and Countess Isabel)
was Christened in have; Matthew. Paris, p. 505. number. 40.
for my Author tells me, That his said Mother being dangerously sick of the
Jaundis, and great with Child, fell in Travail; Vincent, p. 136.
and in the end, with some difficulty, was delivered, who together with her
little Babe, Adhuc vivo, sed non vivido, and idcirco statim Baptizato, cui
nonien Nicholaus aptatum est, migravit ad dominum. Within a small time died.

7. Lib. Theokesburiae
ISABEL of Cornwall, Only Daughter, born in the year of our Lord One thousand
two hundred thirty and three. Died the next year about the Feast of S. Faith,
and was buried at Reading near to her Brother John.

Children of RICHARD King of the Romans by SANCHIA of Provence his Second Wife.
7. EDMOND Earl of Cornwall Fifth Son, and at length Heir of Richard King of the
Romans, whose History follows in the next Chapter.

7. RICHARD Sixth Son of Richard King of the Romans, but Second by Queen
Sanchia his Second Wife, was slain at the Siege of Barwick with an Iron-shot in
his head, An. Dom. 1296.

Natural Children of RICHARD King of the Romans.
7. This Family of Cornwall does bear for Arms, Ermine a Lion Rampant Gules,
Crowned Or, within a Border Ingrailed Sable, Bezanty. Their Pedigree tells us,
That Sir Geoffrey Cornwall Knight. (who married a Daughter and Coheir of Hugh
Mortimer, Lord of Richards Castle and Burford) having taken prisoner the Duke
of Britain, had given him in reward, The Field Ermine; being the Arms of
Britain, whereas before he did bear his Lion in a Field Argent.
RICHARD de Cornwall, Chart. An. 5 Edw. 3. number. 70. B. 197.
One of the Natural Sons of Richard King of the Romans, was Ancestor of the
Knightly Families of the Cornwals, commonly called Barons of Burford, in
Shropshire; and of those of Berington in the County of Hereford.

7. WALTER de Cornwall, another Base Son of Richard Earl of Cornwall, and King of
the Romans; to whom Edmond Earl of Cornwall Granted 18. Pat: An. 28 Ed. 1. B.
197.
Libratas Terrae in his Manor of Branel, by the name of Waltero de Cornubia
fratri suo. These two Brethren ( viz. Richard and Walter) Nothi erant (says my
Authority) and will you know his Reason. Nam Rex fuit Consanguineus and Haeres
propinquior dicti Comitis, Meaning Earl Edmond their Brother; which if they had
been lawfully begotten, they had had a right of Succession in the Earldom of
Cornwall: But it seems the King was by all Inquisitions, after the decease of
Earl Edmond, found to be his Heir.

7. ISABEL de Cornwall, Vincent, page 136.
a Natural Daughter of Richard King of the Romans, whom King Henry the Third,
called his Niece. She was the Wife of Maurice, Lord Berkley, from whom all
those flourishing Families of the Berkleys now, and formerly (except those of
Dursley) derive their descents. It seems she was in the end driven to some
want; for the said King by Warrant dated at S. Paul's on the Tenth of August, in
the Eight and fortieth year of his Reign, commanded the Sheriff of Kent to
deliver the Manors of Herietesham and Trottesclive in the said County.
Isabellae uxori Mauritii de Berkele nepti nostrae, cujus paupertati non
mediocriter compatimur, ad sustentationem suam, and liberorum suorum; which
fell into the Kings hands, by reason of the Minority of Stephen de Cressies
Heir.

7. EDMOND Of ALMAINE, Earl of CORNWALL.
CHAP. VI.
THis Edmond was the Fifth Son of Richard Earl of Cornwall, This Edmond Earl of
Cornwall did bear the Arms of his Father, viz. Argent a Lion Rampant Gules
Crowned Or, within a Border Sable Bezanty, with the addition of the Roman Eagle
to show his descent from his Father, as King of the Romans, which Eagle is
represented on his Counter-seal, holding the Escocheon of Cornwall in his Beak.
Vide page 94. in which Seal he also styles himself EADMUNDUS DE ALEMANNIA. I
have seen two Deeds of this Edmond with the said Seal annexed, The first bears
date at Ashrugge the fifth day of March. An. 11 Ed. 1. And is in the Registry
of the Abbey of Westminster; and the other is dated at Berkley in the One and
twentieth year of the said Kings Reign. Penes Eliam Ashmole Ar. Fecialem nomine
Windsor. Edward Bysshe Esquire (now Sir Edw. Bysshe Knight, Clarenceaux King of
Arms) in his Notes upon De Bado Aureo, p. 92. has exhibited the Figure of the
Seal of Margaret de Clare, this Edmonds Wife, in which their Arms are
demidiated, or impaled in the same Escocheon; hers being Or, three Cheverons
Gules. Which is thus, Both Escocheons being Parted by a Perpendicular Line, Or
per Pale, the Dexter side of the Husbands Shield is joined to the Senister side
of the Wives. This sort of bearing for Women was much in use in this time (
viz. Temp. Edw. 1.) and of more Antiquity, then the Impalement or Conjunction
of both the entire Arms. Isabella de Fortibus Countess of Albemarle and Devon,
and Lady of the Isle of Wight, (An. Regni Regis Edwardi filii Regis Henrici --)
being Sister and Heir of Baldwin de Rivers V. and last Earl of Devon of that
Surname, Penes Edv. Walker Eq. aurat Garterum Princ. Regem Armorum.
has her Seal circumscribed with this Pentameter, very much to the purpose NON
CARET EFFECTH QUOD VOLUERE DUO,

In which her Arms are demidiated with those of her Husband William de Fortibus
Earl of Albemarle, according to the fashion of that time; for I cannot find as
yet, that Arms of Women were joined in one Escocheon with those of their
Husbands, of a more ancient date. I could exhibit several other Examples, but
let these two suffice.


(but Eldest by his Second Wife Queen Sanchia) and after the Death of his
Brethren John, Henry, Richard, and Nicholas, Sons of his said Father by the
first Venture, came to succeed him in his Earldom of Cornwall. He with Gilbert de
Clare Earl of Gloucester, his Brother in Law, had the Government of England, in
the absence of King Edward the First, beyond the Seas; and also, when that King
went to meet Philip King of France. Pat. An. 7 Edw. 1
This Edmond with the Bishops of Worcester and Hereford, and Henry de Lacy Earl
of Lincoln, were also appointed the said Kings Lieutenants, during his abode in
France. He espoused Margaret the Daughter of Richard de Clare. Earl of
Gloucester and Hertford, and had not any Issue, she was divorced from him in the
Two and twentieth year of King Edward the First, Pat. An. 22 Ed. 1.2. page 235.
and compelled before the Bishop of Rochester (Vitam vivere coelibem) to live a
single life. After which, I find not that Earl Edmond did ever marry, but
deceased without Issue at Ashrugge in Buckinghamshire, where he had built an
Abbey of the Order of Bonhomes, Inq. An. 28 Ed. 1. number. 44. Inquis. post mortem
Edmundi Comitis Cornubiae, An. 28 Edw. 1. number. 44. Rutland, etc. Rex est
proximus Haeres dicti Edmundi Comitis, etc.
(the Inquisitions after his death say) in the Twenty eighth year of King
Edward the First (who is in all of them found to be his Cousin, and next Heir)
and was buried by his Father in the Abbey of Hayles. He wrote himself, Nos
Eadmundus Clare memory Ricardi Regis Alemannie filius, and Comes Cornubie. And
upon his Seal used this Circumscription, S. EADMUNDI DE ALEMANNIA COMITIS
CORNUBIE, as you may see in the 94 Page of this Second Book.

S EADMVNDI FILII REGIS ANGLIE


EADMVNDVS FILIVS REGIS ANGLIE DNS MONEMVT


G COMITIS CASTRI


SIGILLVM THOME COMITIS LANDASTRIE ET LEYDES TRY SENESCHALL ANGLIE


blazon or coat of arms

Generosisimo Viro Domino NICHOLAO SLANNING de Morestoro in agro Devoniae,
Militi Balnei et Baronetto sigillorum hanc Tabulam. HD. FS.



blazon or coat of arms

blazon or coat of arms

SIGILLVM THOME COMITIS LANCASTRIE ET LEYDESRIE SENESCHALLI ANGLIE


SGILLVM HENRICI DVCIS LANCASTRIE


EADMUNDUS DEI GRACIA SICILIE REX


7. EDMOND, Earl of LANCASTER, LEICESTER, DERBY, and CAMPAIGNE, Lord of
MONMOUTH, and Steward of ENGLAND, Surnamed CROUCH-BACK.
CHAP. VII.
KIng Henry the Third had Issue by Queen Eleanor His Wife, There are in the
Office of Arms two Deeds of this Edmond Earl of Lancaster with Seals of Green
Wax Appendant thereto, the Figures of which, are exhibited in the 102 P. of
this Second Book, in the first dated the Seventeenth day of April, An. 1273. (
viz. An. 1 Ed. 1.) he has no other addition then Eadmundus illustris Regis
Anglie filius. The Seal of which being a Roundel, is Circumscribed thus,
SIGILLUM EADMUNDI FILII REGIS ANGLIE, and has within the Circle the Bodies of
Three Lions concentering in one Head. In the other Charter he is styled Dominus
Edmundus inclite Recordationis Henrici Regis filius, and in the Circumference
of his Seal, EADMUNDUS FILIUS REGIS ANGLIE DOMINUS MONEMUT: In which, there is
an Escocheon charged with Three Lions Passant Guardant, on a Label of Three
Points, Nine Flowers de Lize. Upon his Monument at Westminster he is figured on
Horsback in his Coat of Mail, having upon his Surcoat, and the Caparisons of
his Horse, his Arms Embossed and Depicted, viz. Gules Three Lions Passant
Guardant Or, a Label of Five Points Azure, each charged with Three Flowers de
Lize Or. Sometimes using the Label of Three Points, and sometimes that of Five
Points, as his Seals, and other places, would most conveniently receive them.
Second Daughter and Coheir of Raymond Earl of Provence, two Sons, Edward that
succeeded Him in His Kingdom, by the Title of Edward the First; and this
EDMOND, His Second Son, Matthew. Paris, p. 635.
born on the Feast day of S. Marcellus the Pope, being the Sixteenth day of
January, An. 1245. in the Thirtieth year of his Fathers Reign.

He was Surnamed Crouch-back, from the bowing of his Back; others say he was so
denominated from his wearing the Cross (anciently called A Crouch) upon his
Back, which was usually worn of such as vowed Voyages to Jerusalem, Pat. An. 54
Hen. 3. number. 8.
as he had done An. 54 Hen. 3. grounding their conceits upon the word Crouch
(the Wooden-supporter of Impotent and Lame Men, made like a Cross at the top,)
further confirming their opinions, from the name of Crouched Friars, that wore
a Cross upon their Garments, and bore the Cross for the Badge and Arms of their
House.

Upon the Twenty fifth day of October, Pat. An. 49 Hen. 3. m. 2. number. 7. Chart.
An. 49 Hen. 3. m. 1.
in the Forty ninth year of his Fathers Reign, An. 1264. (upon the forfeiture
of Simon Montford Earl of Leicester, who was slain at the Battle of Evesham in
Worcestershire) he obtained the Earldom of Leicester, and the Seneschalcy or
Stewardship of England.

Then in the One and fiftieth year of King Henry the Third, Chart. An. 51 Hen.
3. m. 4.
he had given him the Earldom of Lancaster; and afterward, when Robert de
Ferrers Earl of Derby, in the Civil Wars lost his Titles, monument
Honoratissimo. Viro Dn.o THOMAE CLIFFORD Equiti Aurato, ad Hospitium Dn. Regis
CAROLI Secundi, Thesaurario: et e Secreti oribus Majestatis ejusdem Consiliis.
Tumuli hanc AVELINAE, Comitissae LANCASTRIAE Figuram, H.D.F.S.

and a great estate also by forfeiture; they were likewise added to this Earl
Edmonds, Pat. An. 7 Edw. 1. m. 22. Pat. An. 8 Edw. 1.
together with that of Campaigne; on whose person was originally founded the
great contention betwixt the two Royal Houses of Lancaster and York.

This Edmond was prevented of the Kingdoms of Sicilia and Apulia; Pageant of
Popes. Lib. 6. p. 118.
into which, Pope Alexander the Fourth had invested him in vain ( Conradus King
thereof being still alive,) by sending unto him a Ring, not without ridiculous
disgrace to our English Nation, and caused in honor of him (the better to scrue
himself into the good opinion of this Ambitious, although but Titulary-King)
certain Pieces of Gold to be stamped with this Inscription, Aimundus Rex
Siciliae, having first in this regard sucked a great mass of Money from him.

His First Marriage. Fortibus did bear, Gules a Cross Flowery Vair; which is
Embossed and Painted on the Monument of Earl Edmond her Husband in Westminster
Abbey.
Earl Edmond was twice married; the first of his Wives being Aveline the
Daughter and Heir of William de Fortibus Earl of Albemarle; Robert of
Gloucester, p. 299 a. Pat. An. 53 Hen. 3. m. 16. Robert of Gloucester, p. 299 a.
by Isabel Daughter of Baldwine, Sister and Heir to Baldwine de Ripariis (or
Rivers) Earl of Devon, married to him in the Three and fiftieth year of King
Henry the Third, upon the Sixth of the Ides of April, An. 1269. by whom Edmond
had a right to the Earldom of Devonshire, and the Isle of Wight. But it seems
she deceased without Issue in the same year of our Lord 1269. and was interred
in Westminster Abbey, in a Monument of Gray Marble (with her Figure thereon,
Painted and Gilt) on the North side (and in the next Arch to that where her
Husband was afterward buried, Weever, p. 478.
parallel with the High Altar) contiguous to the Tomb of Aymer de Valence Earl
of Pembroke; the form of which I have represented in the precedent Page, copied
from the Original now in being An. 1671.

His Second Marriage. The Arms of Robert Earl of Artois, were Azure, Seem of
Flowers de Lize Or, a Label of Three Points, Gules, each charged with as many
Castles of the Second. Which Castles he did bear to show his descent from the
Kings of Castile, his Mother being a Daughter of that King. The aforesaid Arms
are depicted for Qeen Blanch upon the said Monument in the Abbey of Westminster.
In the Fourth year of King Edward the First, Pat. An. 4 Edw. 1. Vincent, p.
293. Mr. Vincent page 660. in a Pedigree under his own hand, writes her name
Blanch.
I find this Edmond married to his Second Wife Blanch, Queen of Navarre,
Countess Palatine of Campaigne and Brye, Daughter of Robert Earl of Artois,
(Brother to S. Lewis King of France) Widow of Henry of Campaigne, King of
Navarre, unto whom she bare Joan, married to Philip the Fair, King of France)
and by her had Issue Three Sons. Vincent, against the Authority of Reusnerus,
Heninges, Albitius, Favianus, and others, would prove this Queen of Navarres
name to be Eleanor, only depending upon the Authority of one Record for the
same; but with the current of so many Authors, I have seen above half a douzen
Records, that plainly prove her name to be Blanch, and not Eleanor.

This Earl of Lancaster, Tho. Walsingham in Ypodig. Neustr. 483. number. 13.
Matthew. Westminster. p. 428. number. 40. Hol. Vol. 3. p. 296.
being sent with an Army into Gascoign, performed notable service, which he
survived not two Months; for in the year 1296. he deceased at Bayon, was
brought over into England, and Interred in the Abbey of Westminster, on the
North side of the High Altar. The Figure of his Monument is represented in the
following Page, being of Gray Marble, having in the Niches on the sides
thereof, several Statues of the Kings and Queens of England, and others of his
Relations and Kindred, and adorned with Escocheons of their Arms in proper
Colors. monument Illustri^^imo et Potenti Domino In CAROLO Comiti de CARLISLE,
vicecomiti HOWARD de ^MORPETH Baroni DACRES de Grilleland, Sereniss: Regis
CAROLI IF in Comitatibus Cumbriae et Westmorlandis Locumtenanti, et o
Secretioribus Regis ejusdem Concilijs; hanc Tumuli Edmundi Comi^hs Lan^asstri^^
figuram, Humile D.D.F.S.

Chap. 8.
The Tomb is inlaid with colored Glass, and neatly Painted and Gilt. Thomas E.
of Lancaster


Children of EDMOND Earl of Lancaster, by BLANCH Queen of Navarre his second
Wife.
8. THOMAS of Lancaster Eldest Son succeeded his Father in his Honors and
Estate, and was afterward beheaded at Pontefract without Issue. Vide the next
Chapter.

8. HENRY of Lancaster Second Son, was Lord of Monmouth, and after the death of
his Brother Thomas, had the Earldom of Lancaster, etc. of whom you may see more
at large in the Ninth Chapter of this Second Book.

8. JOHN of Lancaster, Third Son of Edmond Earl of Lancaster, died in France
with Queen Joan his Half-Sister, being unmarried. He was Lord of Beaufort, and
of Nogent-Lartauld in France.

8. THOMAS, Earl of LANCASTER, LEICESTER, DERBY, and LINCOLN, and Steward of
ENGLAND.
CHAP. VIII.
I have exhibited the Figures of Two several Seals of this Thomas Earl of
Lancaster, page 102. The one is in the Office of Arms affixed to a Charter
dated An. 14 Edw. 2. The other is in Sir John Cottons Library (a very large
one) upon which Earl which Earl Thomas is represented on Horsback in his Coat
of Mail, and Surcoat of his Arnis. Upon his Helmet stands a Wivern or Dragon,
and from his Crest his Lambrequin or Ancient Mantling extends its self; which
is the first Crest and Mantle that I have observed in the Kingly Family. His
Horse is Caparisoned also with his Arms, viz. Gules Three Lions Passant
Guardant Or, a Label of Three Points Azure, each charged with as many Flowers
de Lize, Or. The Wivern also being fixed upon his Horses Head. The Great Shield
on his Counterseal is charged with a Label of Five Points.
THis Thomas was the Eldest Son and Heir of Edmond, Surnamed Crouch-back Earl of
Lancaster, (by Blanch of Artois his Second Wife) after whose death he possessed
all his Honors.

He sided with the Barons against King Edward the First, in hatred of Pieres
Gaveston, for whose death he had a pardon, upon the 16th day of October, Pati
An. 7 Ed. 2. p. 1. m. 15. in Schedula Pendente.
An. 7 Edw. 2. Which King Granted and Confirmed unto him several Privileges
and Lands in the same year. A second time also he took up Arms for the
expelling and banishing of Hugh le Despencer the younger, another Favorite of
that King, whom he, with the Barons, prosecuted to death. But afterward, the
Army of Earl Thomas, and his Confederates, being defeated by the Kings Forces,
he was taken prisoner at Borrough-Bridge, by the treachery of Robert Holand and
Andrew of Herkeley ( An. 15 Edw. 2.) And within few days afterward beheaded at
his Castle of Pontefract, Pat. An. 15 Ed. 2. p. 1. m. 25.
on the Monday after our Lady Day in Lent. His death was followed by the
execution of several of his Confederates, whose Blood the King sacrificed to
his Beloved Gaveston, and the Spencers. After this Thomas had lost his Head,
the common people (honoring him as a Canonised Man) made great resort to his
Picture hung up in S. Paul's Church, attributing great things to him; of which,
the King being informed, knowing him to have been an open enemy to the State,
sharply reprehended Stephen then Bishop of London for suffering the same;
Claus. 16 Edw. 2. m. 2. in dorso.
and withal, charged him upon his Allegiance, to restrain them, and not to
suffer any such Adoration. The King it seems grew afterward sensible of the
loss of this great Man, which he discovered upon this occasion; some about him
making earnest suit for a pardon for one of this Earls followers, and pressing
the King hard to it, he fell into a great passion, exclaiming against them as
unjust and wicked Counselors, Bakers Chron. p. 160 d.
who would urge him to save the life of a notorious Varlet, and would not speak
one word for his near Kinsman, the Earl of Lancaster; Who (said he) had he
lived, might have been useful to me, and the whole Kingdom; but this fellow,
the longer he lives, the more mischief he will do: And therefore, By the Soul
of God, he should die the death he had deserved.

His Marriage.
There had been ( An. 18 Edw. 1. Pat: An. 18 Ed. 1.
) some Proposals for a Marriage between this Thomas (in his Fathers life time)
and one Beatrice, the Daughter of Hugh, In Pale, Gules Three Lions Passant
Guardant Or, a Label of Three Points Azure, each charged with as many Flowers
de Lize Or, and Or a Lion Rampant Purpure, are the Arms of this Alice Lacy.
Vide Lib. D. 4. fol. 43 b. in Officio Armorum.
a Son of the Duke of Burgundy, but it came to nothing. And he afterward took
to Wife Alice, the Daughter and Heir of Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, by Margaret
Daughter and Heir of William Longespee, and Granddaughter of William Longespee
Earl of Salisbury, in her right he was Earl of Lincoln, but by her had not any
issue. So that his Inheritance came to his Brother Henry Lord of Monmouth.

This Alice had to her second Husband Ebulo Lord Strange, Fines An. 9 Edw. 3.
number. 42.
who in her right obtained the Title also of Earl of Lincoln, he deceased An. 9
Edw. 3. in Scotland. Fines An. 10 Ed. 3.8 July.
She was thirdly married to Hugh de Frenes, who usurped the Title of Earl of
Lincoln in her right. Which Alice having no Issue by her Four Husbands (if we
may call that match of hers with Richard de S. Martin, in the life time of her
first Husband, a marriage; for indeed she was of very light behavior, which was
no small stain to her good name) her large inheritance divolved upon Heury of
Lancaster, Son of her first Husbands Brother. She deceased in the Two and
twentieth year of King Edward the Third, upon the Thursday next after the Feast
of S. Michael. Fines An. 22 Ed. 3. Term. Mich. An. 22 Ed. 3.
Upon the Seal of this Thomas (full as large as those of King Edward the first
or second) is this Circumscription, SIGILLUM THOME COMITIS LANCASTRIE ET
LEICESTRIE SENESCALLI ANGLIE. See an exact copy of it in the 102 page of this
Second Book.

8. HENRY, Earl of LANCASTER, LEICESTER DERBY, and PROVENCE, Lord of MONMOUTH,
and Steward of ENGLAND.
CHAP. IX.
This Henry did bear Gules Three Lions Passant Guardant Or, a Beadlet Azure.
Which Arms are Painted upon the Tomb of Earl Edmond his Father in the Abbey of
Westminster. The same Arms are upon His Seal (the Figure of which is exhibited
in the 102 Page of this Second Book) annexed to a Grant dated 34 Ed. 1. in
which he is styled Henri de Lancaster Seigneur de Monemuth.
AFter the death of Thomas Earl of Lancaster (beheaded at Pontefract as
aforesaid) this Henry of Lancaster, Lord of Monmouth, his younger Brother, came
to be Heir to him; and also to their Father Edmond. For upon the Tenth day of
May, Fines An. 17 Ed. 2.
An. 17 Edw. 2. it was agreed at Westminster by that King and his Council
(says the Record) that Henry de Lancaster, (Brother and Heir of Thomas de
Lancaster, and Son and Heir of Edmond Earl of Lancaster) who did his Homage,
and had Livery, etc. the Nine and twentieth day of March last past, should have
the Name and Honor of Earl of Leicester, and that in the Kings Court, and other
places, he should be written unto, by the Title of Earl.

He took part with Queen Isabel afterward for the setting up of her Son Prince
Edward, against his Father the said King Edward the Second; who being taken
prisoner, was put into this Earl Henry's custody, and used no worse then was
fit for a Captive King; although he could not forget that that King had taken
off the Head of his Brother Thomas. The Queen finding Earl Henry no fit
Instrument for the execution of Her wicked intentions, took the King Her
Husband out of his hands, under pretense that he gave him too much Liberty, and
by the advice of the wicked Bishop of Hereford caused him to be murdered.

He girt King Edward the Third with the Sword of Knighthood immediately before
His Coronation; Pat. An. 1 Edw. 3. Pars 2. in. 13.
and in the first year of His Reign, had the Stewardship of England granted to
him and the Heirs of His Body, as belonging to the Earldom of Leicester. And
King Edward the Third also in the Ninth year of His Reign, Pat. 9. Ed. 3. Pars
1.
confirmed to this HENRY the County of Provence, being the Inheritance of Queen
Eleanor, Wise of King Henry the Third, and had been granted by the said Eleanor
to Thomas de Lancaster, The Arms of Chaworth, are Barry of Ten pieces Argent
and Gules, an Orle of Martlets Sable.
and this Henry Her Grandchildren.

He married Mauld the Daughter and Heir of Sir Patrick ( de Cadurcis or)
Chaworth Knight, Lord of Kidwelly and Ogmore in Wales; 2. page 220.
and by her having several Children, deceased at Leicester in the year One
thousand three hundred forty and five, and was there buried in the Monastery of
the Canons.

Children of HENRY Earl of Lancaster, by MAULD CHAWORTH his Wife.
9. HENRY of Lancaster, Earl of Derby, only Son, succeeded his Father in his
Honors, and was afterward created Duke of Lancaster; of whom you may read more
in the next Chapter.

9. The Arms of This Blanch are upon her Seal in the 102 Page of this Second
Book, impaled with those of Thomas Lord Wake her Husband, viz. Or, Two Bars
Gules, in cheis Three Torteaux.
BLANCH of Lancaster Lady Wake, Eldest Daughter of Henry Earl of Lancaster,
was married unto Thomas Lord Wake of Lydell, who died without Issue upon the
Fourth day of July, An. 1349. leaving his Sister Margaret Wake his Heir, Wife
of Edmond of Woodstock Earl of Kent, Sixth Son of King Edward the First. In the
102 Page of this Second Book, you have the Figure of her Ex Gartis Domin^ Hen.
Comitis de Peterberough.
Seal, which is of Red Wax, to a Deed dated the Fourth day of June, An. 24 Edw.
3. in which she styles her self, Blanch Wake, Dame de Lydell.

9. The Arms of Ulster are Or, a Cross Gules, which I have seen upon the Figure
of a Seal of William Earl of Ulster.
MAVD of Lancaster Countess of Vlster, Second Daughter, was twice married. Her
first Husband being William de Burgh Earl of Vlster (son of John de Burgh, who
died in the life time of his Father; and of Elizabeth his Wife, third Sister
and Coheir of Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Gloucester and Hertford) by him she had
Issue her only Daughter and Heir Elizabeth Burgh, Wife of Lionell of Antwerp,
Duke of Clarence, Third Son of King Edward the Third.

The second Husband of this Maud, Inq. 21 Edw. 3. number. 59^.
was Sir Ralph Stafford Knight, a Son of Ralph Earl of Stafford.

9. Now bray did bear Gules a Lion Rampant Argent.
JOAN of Lancaster Lady Mowbray, third Daughter, c. p. 256. Lib. in Custodia
Gulielmi Dugdale Arm. Norroy Regis Armorum.
was the Wife of John Lord Mowbray of Axholme, by whom she had issue John Lord
Mowbray, that married Elizabeth the Daughter and Heir of John Lord Seagrave, by
Margaret Duchess of Norfolk his Wife, Daughter (and at length Heir) of Thomas
of Brotherton, Earl of Norfolk, Fifth Son of King Edward the First.

From this Marriage are descended all the Dukes of Norfolk, and Earls of
Nottingham, of the surname of Mowbray and Howard, the Earls of Suffolk,
Berkshire, and Peterborough, the Viscounts Stafford and Mordaunt; and the
Barons Howard of Escrick, and Castlerising, and several other Noble Families.

9. IS ABEL of Lancaster, Fourth Daughter of Henry Earl of Lancaster, was
Abbess of Ambresbury.

9. ELEANOR of Lancaster, c. page 256. Ibidem.
Lady Beaumont, The Portraiture of this Eleanor, Countess of Arundel, is
curiously Painted in the great Window of the Chancel in Arundel Church in
Sussex, her Mantle being adorned with the Arms of Earl Richard her Husband,
viz. Quarterly Gules, a Lion Rampant Or, and Chequie Or, and Azure; and upon
her Kirtle, Gules, Three Lions Passant Guardant Or, a Labell of Three Points
Azure, each charged with as many Flowers de Lize Or, being her own Arms. In the
same Window is also the Essigies of her Husband Richard Fitz-Alan Earl of
Arundel, in his Surcoat of Arms aforesaid. Vide C. 27. Page 153 and 154 in
Officio Armorum.
and afterward Countess of Arundel, Fifth Daughter of Henry Earl of Lancaster,
was first married to John (Son and heir of Henry de Bellomonte, (or Beaumont)
Earl of Boughan in Scotland) who deceased, An. 36 Edw. 3. And from them did
descend the Viscount Beaumont, and Lord Bardolph, attainted in the fist year of
King Edward the Fourth; and also the Beaumonts of Cole-Orton and Gracedieu in
the County of Leicester.

This Eleanor was afterward the second Wise of Richard Fitz-Alan Earl. of
Arundel, third of that Surname (who died An. 49 Edw. 3.) in Arundel Castle, and
was buried in the Priory of Lewis in Sussex.) And from them all the succeeding
Earls of Arundel, both of the Family of Fitz-Alan and Howard, the Earls of
Linsey, and Lords Willoughby of Parham, and others, are derived.

And lastly, Inq. An. 49 Ed. 3. number. 3.
the Countess Eleanor departed this world in the Nine and fortieth year of the
Reign of King Edward the Third.

9. Henry Lord Piercy did bear Or a Lion Rampant Azure which Arms are set up in
Painted Glass in several Windows in the Cathedral Church at Tork.
MARY of Lancaster, Vincent. p. 611.
Lady Percy, Sixth and youngest Daughter of Henry Earl of Lancaster, was
espoused to Henry Lord Percy of Alnwick, and had issue Henry Lord Percy, First
Earl of Northumberland, and Sir Thomas Percy Earl of Worcester, beheaded at
Shrewsbury without issue. But Earl Henry his elder Brother, by Margaret his
first Wise, Daughter of Ralph Lord Nevil, had issue Henry Lord Percy Surnamed
Hotspurre, Ancestor of the late Earl of Northumberland, and Sir Thomas Percy
the younger, who took to Wise Elizabeth eldest Daughter, and Coheir of the last
David de Strabolgy Earl of Athole, and by her had issue Sir Henry Percy of
Athole Knight, and afterward died in Spain.

Which Sir Henry by Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter of Sir Matthew Bruce of Gower
Knight, was Father of Two Daughters his Heirs, viz.

Elizabeth Percy, married to Thomas Burgh Esquire, by her Ancestor of the late
Lord Burgh, etc. And

Margaret Percy, first espoused to Henry Lord Gray of Codnor (by whom she had
not any Child;) and then after his death, she was the Wife of Sir Richard Vere
Knight.

9. HENRY, Duke of LANCASTER, Earl of DERBY, LINCOLN, and LEICESTER; Steward
of ENGLAND, and Lord of BRVGGIRACK and BEAVFORT, Surnamed GRISMOND or TORT-COL.
CHAP. X.
THis Henry Surnamed Grismond, To a Charter of this Henry Duke of Lancaster,
bearing date the first day of June, An. 33. Ed. 3. (in which he is styled, Duc
de Lancastre Count de Derby and de Leycestre and Seneschal d'Angleterre) his
Seal of Red Wax is Appendant, upon which is his Atchieument, Viz. On a Shield
Three Lions Passant Gaurdant, a Label of Three Points charged each with as many
Flowers de Lize. And for his Crest upon a Chapeau turned up Ermine, A Lion
Passant Guardant, crowned, and gorged with a Label of Three Points, each
charged with as many Flowers de Lize. Vide, the Figure of this Seal, Page 102.
The Original being in the Office of Arms.
from the place of his Birth, being Grismond Castle in the County of Monmouth
or Castrum de Grosso Monte; and also Tort-col (or with the Wry Neck) was the
only Son of Henry Earl of Lancaster, Second son of Edmond also Earl of
Lancaster, the Second son of K. Henry the Third.

He was created Earl of Derby to him and his Heirs (upon the Sixteenth day of
March, An. 11 Edw. 3. Chart. An. 11 Ed. 3. number. 50 and 68.
) his Father being yet alive; after whose death he had the Earldoms of
Lancaster, and Leicester, and the Stewardship of England. Upon the Twentieth
day of August, An. 23 Edw. 3. he was created Earl of Lincoln; Claus. An. 23 Ed.
3. pars 2. m. 5. Pat. An. 25 Ed. 3. p. 1. m. 18.
and at a Parliament held at Westminster, the Sixth day of March, An. 25. of
the said Kings Reign, he was created into the Dignity of Duke of Lancaster; it
being the second Dukedom that had been erected in England since the Norman
Conquest, the Duchy of Cornwall (granted to Edward the Black Prince) being the
First.

This HENRY when he was only Earl of Derby, had the command of Twelve hundred
Men at Arms, Two thousand Archers, and Three thousand other Foot, with which he
took in most of the Towns of Xaintoigne and Pictou, and also besieged and
sacked Poictiers, returning triumphant with his spoils to Bourdeaux. He
performed many other signal services in France, and when a Peace was concluded
betwixt that Crown, and this of England. Duke Henry for some disgraceful words,
supposed to be spoken by him against the Duke of Brunswick, was by the said
Duke challenged to a single combat, before John King of France, which this
Henry willingly accepted of, and at the appointed time, they being both
provided, entered the Lists with much courage for the trial of their Fortune;
but King John reconciled them, to the great satisfaction of the Duke of
Lancaster. He was a great favorer of the Person of John Wickliff a Divine, and
an extoller of his Doctrine, and Integrity of Life; insomuch, that by his
adherence to him, there grew so high a distaste betwixt the Duke, and the
Bishop of London, that the City of London never favored him afterward.

His Marriage.
He took to Wife Isabel the Daughter of Henry Lord Beaumont (Consin-German to
Queen Isabel Wife of King Edward the Second) by whom he had two Daughters his
Heirs. Beaumont did bear Azure, a Lion Rampant and Seem of Flowers de Lize, Or.


In his Will made at Leicester Castle, Out of the Book of Wills, called I slip.
Vide also Z. 220.
upon the Fifteenth day of March, An. 1360. he is styled, Henry Duke of
Lancaster, Earl of Derby, Lincoln, Leicester, Steward of England, Lord of
Bruggirack and Beaufort: In which Will also, he desires to be Buried in the
Collegiate Church of our Lady at Leicester (where his Father is Interred) which
was accordingly performed, he dying of the Plague in the Five and thirtieth
year of the Reign of Edward the Third.

Children of HENRY Duke of Lancaster, by ISABEL BEAUMONT his Wife.
10. The Arms of the Duke of Bavaria, Embossed and Depicted upon the South side
of the Tomb of Q. Philippa, Wife of King Edward the Third in the Abbey of
Westminster, Being, Paly, Beudy, Lozeugy, Argent and Azure, in the First and
Fourth Quarter: and Quarterly Or, a Lion Rampant Sable; and Or, a Lion Rampant,
Gules, in the Second and Third Quarter.
MAVD of Lancaster Duchess of Bavaria, Pat. An. 35 Ed. 3. m. 17. Inq. An. 35.
Ed. 3.
Elder Daughter and Coheir of Henry Duke of Lancaster, Two and twenty years old
at the death of her Father, was married to William the Fifth of the Name, Duke
of Bavaria, Earl of Henault, Holand, Zealand, and Friezland, but died without
Issue soon after her marriage, leaving her younger Sister Blanch her Heir.

10. On the same Monument on the North side are also the Arms of Blanch of
Lancaster, Viz. Gules, Three Lious Passaut Guardant, Or, a Label of Three
Points Azure, each charged with as many Flowers de Lize of the Second, Impaled
with the Arms of John Duke of Lancaster her Husband, Being quarterly Azure,
Seem of Flowers de Lize, Or, and Gules, Three Lions Passant Guardant, Or; over
all a Label of Three Points Ermine.
BLANCH of Lancaster Duchess of Lancaster Inq. An. 35 Ed. 3. Orig. An. 36 Ed.
3. Rot. 6. Vide V. 115.
younger Daughter, Fourteen years old at her Fathers death, was the Wife of
John of Gaunt, Earl of Lancaster and Richmond (afterward Duke of Lancaster)
she was Coheir to her Father, and Soleheir to her Sister; and from this Match
are descended the Kings of England of the Royal House of Lancaster; the Kings
of Spain and Portugal, and many of the Nobility of this Kingdom.

5. WILLIAM, Earl of SALISBVRY and ROSMAR (a Natural Son of King HENRY the
Second) Surnamed LONGESPEE.
CHAP. XI.
Azure Six Lions Rampant Three, two, and one, Or, were the Arms of this William
Longespee Earl of Sarum, which are Painted on his Tomb, and Embossed upon his
Shield in the Cathedral Church of Salisbury. Having married Ela the Daughter
and Heir of William Fitz-Patrick Earl of Salisbury, he took the Arms of his
said Father-in-Law; for in the Cathedral Church of Man's in the County of Main,
the Figure of William d'Evereux or Fitz-Patrick is Enammelled upon a
Copper-Plate, affixed to a Pillar in the South-Isle, near the Cross of the said
Church, being about a Foot and half high, Armed in Mail, and with his Left-arm
leaning upon his long Triangular Shield, upon which are the Six Lions; but by
reason of the Embowing thereof, only Four of the Lions are obvious to your
sight. Sir Edward Walker Knight, Garter, Principal King of Arms, being in those
Parts, upon his view of the said Cathedral, made this observation, An. 1647.
BEfore we come to speak of this William the Son, Rob. of Gloucester, p. 290. b.
(Surnamed Longespee, from a Long-Sword which he usually wore) it will not be
impertinent to mention something of his Mother, Rosamond the Beautiful Daughter
of Walter Lord Clifford, and the most Beloved-Concubine of King Henry the
Second. Baker his Chronicle.
Her the King kept at Woodstock in Lodgings so cunningly contrived, that no
stranger could find the way in, yet Queen Eleanor did, being guided by a Thread.
So much is the Eye of Jealousy quicker in finding out, then the Eye of Care is
in hiding. What the Queen did to Rosamond, when she came in unto her, is
uncertain, (some report she poisoned her) but it is most true, that Rosamond
outlived this visit but a short time; and deceasing, lies buried at Godstow
near Oxford, with this Epitaph,

Rose of, not to the
World, here Rosamond lies,
Sweet onec she was,
But now it is otherwise.
Hic jacet in Tumbo Rosamundi, non Rosamunda,
Non redolet, sed olet, quae redolere solet.
His Marriage.
By this Rosamond, King Henry the Second had Issue this William, Robert of
Gloucester, p. 290. b.
who marrying Ela (born An. 1196. The Figure of the Seal of this Ela Countess
of Salisbury is represented in the 57 Page of this Second Book. Having upon the
Counter seal, an Escocheon charged with The Six Lions inscribed about the
Border with these words, SECRETUM ELE COMITISSE SARESBERIE. Ex Cart. Edw.
Walker Eq. Aur. Gart. Prin. Regis Arm.
) the Daughter and Heir of William Fitz-Patrick Earl of Salisbury. King Richard
the First his Half-Brother gave with her to him, the Earldom or Salisbury, and
restored unto her the Earldom of Rosmar in Normandy, which belonged also to the
said Ela, by Right of Succession, as being descended from Edward de Saresbury,
Son of Walter d'Evereux Earl of Rosmar.

This Countess Ela for her Souls health, Lib. Lacock, fol. 19.
as also of her Husband, and of all her Ancestors, Founded two Monasteries in
one day. The one was Lacock, Founded the Sixteenth of the Kalends of May, in
the Morning, An. 1232. The other was the Priory of Henton, of the Carthusian
Order, whose Foundation bears date on the Evening of the same day; the
Foundress at that time being in the Forty fifth year of her age. She outlived
her Husband seven years, and died in her Widowhood about the year M. CC. XXXIII.

Brooks Casalogue of Honor.
This William Longespee Earl of Salisbury, was Constable of Dover Castle, and
sailing with Richard Earl of Cornwall his Nephew, and Philip de Albaney, into
Gascoign ( An. 10 Hen. 3.) recovered Poictiers, which was before lost by King
John; and in their return into England, hardly escaped shipwreck, being
strangly cast upon the Cornish shoars.

He departed this life (he was poisoned (as is reported) by Hubert de Burgo
Earl of Kent, Matthew. Paris, p. 317. number. 10.
and Chief Justice of England) in the Nones of March, An. 1226. and his Body
was buried at Old Sa^^^. monument Honoratissimo et Nobilissimo Domino Dno.
IOHANNI Baroni FRESCHEVILLE, de Staucly, WILLELMI Comitis SARVM cognomine
Longespe, hanc Tumuli Figuram. H.D.D.D.F.S.



From thence his Corpse was removed and brought to the New City, I Copied this
Tomb from the Original.
and Interred in a Monument on the North side the Chapel of our Lady, in the
Cathedral Church, in a Tomb of Wood richly Painted, Diapred, and Gilt; his
Effigies lies thereon of Grey-Marble, in his Coat of Mail; his Sword by his
side, and upon his Antic Shield are Six Lions Rampant Embossed; the like
number of Lions are Painted also upon his Surcoat, which by reason of the many
Foldings thereof, are not easily perceived. The Figure in the precedent Page
exactly represents the said Tomb, which is now in being An. 1670. Matthew Paris
gives him this Epitaph, In Speed, page 513. thus Englished.
alluding to his name.

Royal born William,
Flower of Earls lies here.
A Sheath thus short,
Does Longsword serve to bear.
Flos Comitum Willielmus obit, Stirps Regia, Matthew. Paris, p. 317. number. 10.
Longus
Ensis vaginam caepit habere brevem.
Children of WILLIAM LONGESPEE Earl of Salisbury, and of ELA his Wife.
6. WILLIAM Longespee, Eldest Son and Heir succeeded his Father in the Earldom
of Salisbury; of whom see more in the next Chapter.

6. RICHARD Longespee, Lib. Lacock, p. 19. M. S. Penes Ed. Walker Eq. Auratum,
Garterum, etc.
Second Son of William the first Earl of Salisbury, was a Canon of Salisbury.
He witnessed a Grant of his Elder Brother William made to Stephen Longespee his
younger Brother, of the Manor of Bamberge with the Appurtenances. He lies
Interred at Lacock.

6. STEPHEN Longespee Third Son, Lib. Lacock, page 19. M. S.
was appointed Chief Justice of Ireland, by King Henry the Third. He took to
Wife Emelina Countess of Vlster, in whose right he was Earl of Vlster, and by
her had issue his only child Ela Longespee, married to Roger de la Zouche, by
whom she had issue Alane de la Zouche, Father of two Daughters his Heirs, Elena
de la Zouche, first married to Nicholas S. Maur; and secondly, to Alan
Charleton, Father of John Charleton; and Matilda de la Zouche Wife of Robert
Holand.

The Body of this Stephen Longespee was Interred at Lacock, but his Heart
received Burial at Bradenstock.

6. NICHOLAS Longespee Fourth Son of William Earl of Salisbury, was consecrated
Bishop of Salisbury, An. 1291. Robert of Gloucester, p. 290 b. Godwin in
Presulibus Sarum, p. 280.
whose Body lies Intombed in our Ladies Chapel in the Cathedral Church under a
large Marble Stone, sometime Inlaid with Brass, and Adorned with the Arms of
their House. His Heart was Interred at Lacock, and his Bowels at Ramesbury. He
deceased in the year of our Lord 1297.

6. ISALEL Logespee Lady Vescy, Pat. 10 H. 3. Claus. 10 H. 3. m. 17.
Eldest Daughter of William Earl of Salisbury, was the first Wife of William
Lord Vescy.

6. ELA Longespee Countess of Warwick, Lib. Lacock. M. S.
Second Daughter was first married to Thomas the Seventh Earl of Warwick; after
whose decease, in her Widowhood she Grants in Frank Almain for the health of
her Soul, and of the Souls of her Ancestors, all her Lands and Tenements in the
Town of Dodington; Ex Cartis Ed. Walker Equitis aurati. Garteri Principalis
Regis Armorum.
to which Deed is annexed her Seal (of Yellow Wax) having on the one side her
Picture, and on the Counter seal a Shield with Six Lions Rampant thereon,
Circumscribed on both sides thus. S. ELE LUNGESPEYE COMITISSE WARWIC. The
Figure of which Seal is exhibited in the 57 Page of this Second Book.

Her Second Husband was that worthy Gentleman Philip Basset, Milles, p. 793.
the Son of William Basset Chief Justice of England, as it appreareth by a
Charter of the said Philip and Ela, bearing date the Forty seventh year of King
Henry the Third. She died the Eighth of the Ides of February, An. 1297. in the
Twenty sixth year of King Edward the First, on a Sunday, and was buried at
Osney, near Oxford, without issue.

6. IDA Longespee, called also Camvile, Third Daughter of William Earl of
Salisbury, was the Wife of Walter Fitz-Robert, by whom she had issue Katherine
and Lorica, who took upon them the habit of Nuns at Lacock.

6. ELA Longespee the younger, Fourth Daughter, mentioned also in the Book of
Lacock, was married to William d'Odingselles, by whom he had issue Robert, etc.

6. WILLIAM LONGESPEE, Second of the Name, Earl of SALISBVRY.
CHAP. XII.
HE was the Eldest Son and Heir of William Longespee the First, and of Ela his
Wife aforesaid; See his Arms upon his Seal P. 57. being Azure Six Lions Rampant
Or, Three, two and one.
after whose death he was seized of the Castle and Town of old Sarum, and the
Sheriffwick of Wiltshire. But this William afterward presuming to go out of
the Kingdom, without the Kings License first had and obtained, Matthew. Paris, p.
709. number. 50.
King Henry the Third made seizure of the said Castle, Town, and Office, and
detained them in his own hands.

By the name of William Longespee (without any other Addition or Title) he gave
to Stephen Longespee his Brother, Penes Edwardum Walker Eq. Auratum,
Principalem Regem Armorum, Titulo Garteri.
of Sutton near Banneburgh, with the Hundred thereunto belonging. To this Grant
his Seal of Arms (in Yellow Wax) is annexed. On the one side of which is his
Shield, with the Six Lions; and on the Reverse, his Sword (having reference to
his Name) with this Circumscription, SECRETUM WILLELMI LUNGESPE. Vide, the form
thereof in the 57 Page of this Second Book.

He took to Wife Idonia the Daughter and Heir of Richard de Camvile, Fines, 17
Reg. Johan. m. 3. Claus. 10 Hen. 3. m. 4.12, 17. Fines, 12 Hen. 3. m. 4.
and of Eustace his Wife Daughter of Gilbert Basset, by whom he had issue a
Son, and a Daughter, and afterward was slain in the Holy Land, manfully
fighting against the Infidels, in the year of our Salvation M.CC.XLIX.

Children of WILLIAM LONGESPEE Earl of Salisbury, by IDONEA de CAMVILE his Wife.
7. WILLIAM Longespee Third of the name, Elder Son, of whom see more in the
next Chapter.

7. EDMUND Longespee Second Son of William Earl of Sarum.

7. Audley, Gules Fretty, Or.
ELA Longespee, Lady Audley, Claus. 17 H. 3. m. 8. Vincent, p. 447.
only Daughter of William the Second Earl of Salisbury. By Idonea de Camvile
his Wife, was married to James Lord Audley of Heleigh, from whom the Lords
Audley, and Earls of Castlehaven are derived.

7. WILLIAM LONGESPEE Third of the Name.
CHAP. XIII.
Longespee, Azure Six Lions Rampant Or, Three, two, and one.
THis William Longespee Third of the Name, Lib. Lacock. page 19.
only Son and Heir of William Longespee Second of the Name (whom King Henry
the Third deprived of the Earldom of Salisbury) by Idonea Daughter and Heir of
Richard de Camvile) espoused Maud the Daughter of Walter Lord Clifford, Inq.
An. 27 Ed. 1. number. 55. V. page 11.
(afterward the Wife of John Lord Gifford, Baron of Brimmesfield in
Glocestershire) by whom he had issue his only Daughter named Margaret
Longespee, married to the Illustrious Man (says my Author) Lord Henry de Lacy
Earl of Lincoln; and by her the said Henry had issue, Edmond Lacy drowned in a
Well in Denby Castle, in the life time of his Father, Vide W. p. 129.
John de Lacy, who also deceased before his Father, and Alice Lacy his only
Daughter and Heir, married to Thomas Earl of Lancaster, by whom she had no
issue. So that her inheritance divolved upon Henry of Lancaster, Son and Heir
of her Husbands Brother.

BOOK III. Plantagenets Undivided.

CONTAINING A Genealogical History OF THE KINGS OF ENGLAND, etc. From EDWARD I.
to HENRY IV.

From the Year 1272. to the Year 1400.

REGIS ANGLIE * EDWARDVS


Genero sissimo Viro Dno RICARDO GRAHME de Netherby in Com Cumbrioe Baronetto.
Sigillorum hanc Tabulam H. D. F. S.



SIGILLVM EDWARDI FILII HENRICI REGIS ANGLIE *


blazon or coat of arms

EDWARDVS DEI GRACIS REX ANGLIE DOMINVS HYBERNIE DVX AQVITANIE


EDW I.

EDWARDVS DEI GRACIA REX ANGLIE DNS HYBERNIE DVX AQVITANIE


blazon or coat of arms

ALIANORA DEI GRATIA REGINA ANGLIE


ALIANORA DEI GRA DN AQVITANNIE


seal

blazon or coat of arms

S ELISABET COMITISSE HOLLANDIE ZELANDIE Z DNE FRICIE


blazon or coat of arms

EDWARDVS DEI GRACIA REX ANGLIE DOMINVS HYBERNIE DVX AQVITANIE


EDW II.

EDWARDVS DEI GRACIA REX ANGLIE DNS HYBERNIE DVX AQVITANIE


Generosissimo Viri Dno. THOMAE PLAYER Equiti auraw Civilatis LONDINI Cole
berrima Came rario D. THOMAE, PLAYER Eq^^t^^ aurati, Camerarij Civitatis
Ejusdem primogonito. Sigillorum hanc Tabulam H. D. F. S



blazon or coat of arms

seal

seal

EDWARDVS DEI GRACIA REX AG^LIE DOMINVS HIBERNIE ET DVX AQVITANNIE


EDW III.

EDWARDVS DEI GRATIA REX ANGLIE DNS HIBERNIE ET DVX AQVITANNIE




sigillum margarete comitisse norfolehte et domine de segraue


Generosissimo Vir^ Domino ROBERTO ATKINS Equiti Aurato, primogenito Dn^Roberts
Atkins Militis Balnei Sigillorum hanc Tabulam. H. D. F. S.



blazon or coat of arms

EDWARDVS PRIMOGENITUS REGIS ANGLIE DVX AQVITANIE COMITIS CESTRIE PONTIVI ET
MONTISSTRO^^


S EDWARDI PRIMOGENIT REGIS ANGLIE DVCIS AQVITANNIE COMITIS CESTRIE PONTIUI ET
MONTISSTROLLI


EDWARDVS DEI GRACIA REX ANGLIE DNS HYBERNIE DVX AQVITANIE


EDW III.

EDWARDVS DEI GRACIA REX ANGLIE DNS HYBERNIE DVX AQWITANIE


Generosissimo Viro Dno: ROBERTO CLAYTON Eqi^iti aurato, nec non Civita it is
LONDINI cele^ berrimoe, Senatori Sigillorum hanc Tabulam H. D. F. S



blazon or coat of arms

sigilum s.e. Fon. comitis huntington


sigillum anne regine francie et anglie et domine hibernie


EDWARDVS DEI GRACIA REX FRANCIE ET ANGLIE ET DOMINVS HIBERNIE


EDW III.

EDWARDVS DEI GRACIA REX FRANCIE ET ANGLIE ET DOMINVS HIBERNIE


sigillum thome de holand comitis kantil


SECRET PHILIPPE DE HANONIA REGINE ANGLIE


Ornatissimo Consultsimog^ Viro D^IOSFPHO WILLIAMSON Equiti Aurato. In Supremis
Reqiti^s Comitijs Senatori Regioe Ma. ab Archivis Status 'et Sanctiori Consilio
a Secretis Sigillorum hanc Tabulam L. M. D. F. S



blazon or coat of arms

S EDVARDI PRIMOGENTI REGIS ANGLI PN^CIPIS AQVITANNIE ET WALLIE DVCIS CORNV ET
COMITIS CESTRIE


EDW PR WALL

S EDVARDI PRIMOGANITI REGIS ANGL PN^CIPIS AQVITANNIE ET WALLIE DVCIS CORNVBIE
ET COMITIS CESTRIE


S edwardi primogeniti regis angt franc principis ^^all ducis canu^ A commit
cestr


Angletere le seal s du roy duc de gloucestrie


le seal alianore duchess gloucestrie countess de


s thome ducis glocestrie


Sig^ thome filij regis anglie ducis gloucestrie comitesse et buk ar
constabularii anglie


Clarissimo Gener osissimog^^ Viro. Dno: EDWARDO DERINGE de Surrenden Deringe
in agro Kantiano Baronetto; Sigillorum hanc Tabulam H. D. F. S.



blazon or coat of arms

A GENEALOGICAL TABLE Of the Third BOOK.
7. ELIANOR of Castile first Wife, p. 129.
8. JOHN, HENRY, ALPHONSO, 138. EDWARD II. King of England, Lord of Ireland,
and Duke of Aquitaine, p. 145. ISSABEL of France page Ibidem. 9. EDWARD III.
King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland, p. 158. PHILIPE of HENAULT,
page 158. 10. EDWARD Prince of Aquitaine and Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl
of Chester, p. 181. JOANE Countess of Kent, 184. and 215. 11. EDWARD of
Engolesme, p. 189. RICHARD II. King of England and France and Lord of Ireland,
p. 191. ANNE of Bohemia, p. 193. ISSABEL of France, p. 192.
WILLIAM of Hatfield, p. 177. LIONEL of Antwerp Duke of Clarence, p. 219.
ELIZAB. Burgh. page 219. PHILIPE wife of Edmond Mortimer Earl of March, p. 221.
12. ROGER Mortimer Earl of March, p. 224. ELIANOR Holand, p. 224. 13. EDMOND
Mortimer Earl of March. p. 225. ROGER Mortimer dyed young, p. 225. ANNE
Mortimer Wife of Richard Earl of Cambridg. p. 225. ELEANOR Countess of Devon.
ob. s. p. page 226.
Sir EDMOND Mortimer, p. 222. Sir JOHN Mortimer, p. 222. ELIZABETH Lady Percy,
p. 223. PHILIPE Countess of Pembroke and Arundel, p. 223.

JOHN of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, Book IV. Chapter I. EDMOND of Langley Duke of
York-Book V. Chap. 1. WILLIAM of Windfor, p. 178. THOMAS of Woodstock Duke of
Gloucester p. 227. ELIANOR Bohun, p. 227. HUMPHREY Earl of Buckingham, ob. s. p.
p. 231. EDMOND Earl Stafford first Husband, p. 232.
HUMPHREY Stafford Duke of Buckingham, p. 232.
ANNE eldest daughter, p. 232. WILLIAM Bourchier Earl of Eu second Husband, p.
233.
HENRY Bourchier Earl of Essex, p. 233.
JOANE Lady Talbot, p. 234. ISSABEL p. 234. PHILIPE p. 234.
ISSABEL Duchess of Bedford, p. 178. JOANE de la Tour, p. 179. BLANCH de la
Tour, p. 179. MARY Duchess of Britain, p. 179. MARG. Count. of Pembroke p. 179.
JOHN of Eltham Earl of Cornwall, p. 153. JOANE Queen of Scots, p. 155. ELIANOR
Duchess of Geldres, p. 155.
ELIANOR Countess of Bar, p. 139. JOANE of Acres Countess of Gloucester and
Hertford p. 139. MARGARET Duchess of Brabant, p. 143. PERENGAR, p. 143. ALICE,
p. 143. MARY, p. 143. ELIZA. Countess of Holand and Hereford, p. 143. BEATRIX,
p. 144. BLANCH p. 144.
EDWARD I. of the Name, King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of
Aquitaine, p. 127. MARGARET of France second Wife, p. 133.
THOMAS Earl of Norfolk, p. 205. ALICE HALYS p. 206. EDWARD died, fi. prole,
p. 206. JOHN Lord Segrave first Husb. p. 207. ELIZABETH Segrave wife of John
Lord Mowbray, p. 208. JOHN Mowbray E. of Nottingham, ob. s. p. 208. THOMAS
Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, and Earl Marshal of England, p. 210. THOMAS Mowbray
Earl Marshal dyed, s. p. 211. JOHN Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, p. 211. JOHN
Mowbray Duke of Norf ^ke, father of John Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, Father of
Anne Mowbray, wife of Richard of Shrew, bury, second Son of Ed. 4. who dyed s.
p. p. 212.
MARGARET Lady Howard, p. 212. ISSABEL, Lady Berkley, p. 212.

ANNE Segrave Abbess of Barking, p. 208.
MARGARET Duchess of Norfolk, p. 207. Sir WALTER Manny second Husb. p. 207.
THOMAS Manny, ob. s. p. 208. ANNE Manny, Countess of Pembroke, p. 208. JOHN
Hastings Earl of Pembroke, ob. s. p. p. 209.

ALICE, Wife of Edward Montague, p. 208.
EDMOND Earl of Kent, p. 213. MARGARET Wake page 213. EDMOND E. of Kent, ob. s.
p. JOHN Earl of Kent, ob. s. p. page 214. JOANE Countess of Kent, and Princess
of Wales, p. 215.
ELEANOR, p. 144.

portrait of Edward I K EDWARD I
portrait of Edward II K EDWARD II
portrait of Edward III K EDWARD III
portrait of Richard II RICHARD II
An. Dom. 1272 November 16.
7. EDWARD I. KING of ENGLAND, LORD of IRELAND, and DUKE of AQVITAINE, Surnamed
LONGSHANKS.
CHAP. 1.
THis Prince Edward (from the talness of His Stature called Longshanks) Eldest
Son of King Henry III. and Queen Elianor of Provence, This Edward in a Charter
dated at Bristol upon the 9th day of December, in the 52 year of the Reign of
K. Henry 3d. His Father, ( An. 1267.) is styled Edwardus illustris Regis Anglie
primogenitus. (Ex cartis Dom. Henrici Com. Peterborow) His Seal (of Green Wax)
is appendant thereto, the representation of which you have in the 120 Page of
this Third Book: On the one side whereof He is delineated on Horseback, in His
Maile and Surcoat, a Sword in His Right Hand, and a Shield in His Left charged
with the 3 Lions of England, and differenced by a File of 3 Points: and upon
the Counter-seal in a large Triangular Escocheon are also 3 Lions, and a File
of 5 Lambeaux contiguous to the Chief thereof, and interwoven with the Tail of
the uppermost Lion; which is the first addition or distinction that I find to
be born in the Kingly Family. Writers differ in the signification of these
Labels, for Honorius reports that one of the 3 Points betokens the Father
of the Bearer, the other His Mother, and the middlemost Himself. And Leigh
says, that the File of Five Lambeaux is the difference of the Heir whilst the
Grandfather lives; but, His Grandfather being deceased, then He leaves this,
and takes that of Three, which was His Fathers difference. But here I find,
that this Edward (Eldest Son of King Henry III.) did in one, and the same Seal
and Reverse bear a Label both of 3 and of 5 points, and yet had no Grandfather
living. The like Labels of three and five Lambeaux are upon the Seals and
Counter-Seales of the two succeeding Edwards His Son and Grandson, in the
lifetime of their Fathers Kings of England, as appears in those exhibited in
the 122 and 123 Pages of this Third Book. The Seal also, and Reverse of Robert
Count of Nevers, eldest Son of the Earl of Flanders ( An. 1272.) is charged
with a Label of 3 Points, and another of 5. Olivarius Vredius in Sigilla Com.
Flandriae, p. 50. And as this Edward was the first Son of a King of England
that differenced His Atmes with a File, so was He the first King of England
that bare His Arms upon the Caparizons of His Horse, as you may observe in His
Royal Seal exhibited also in the 120 Page of this Third Book.


born at Westminster upon the XV. of the Kalends of July, Matthew. Westminst. p.
300. n. 39. Matthew. Paris. p. 488. n. 38.
( viz. the 17th day of June) An. 1239. was within four days after Christened
by Otho the Legate, and Confirmed by Edmond Archbishop of Canterbury, by the
Name of Edward. Which Name He had given Him in Memory of the Glorious King and
Confessor St. Edward, whose Corpse lie Magnificently deposited in the Abbey of
St. Peter in the City of Westminster, whom King Henry III. ever honored as His
Tutular Saint, at whose decease viz. An. 1272. our Prince Edward His Son was in
Palestine; and though the Estates of England knew not whether He were then
living or dead, they Proclaim Him King, Ibidem, p. 401. n. 55.
cause a New Seal to be made, and appoint fit Persons for the Custody of His
Treasure and His Peace; who, having fortified Acon which He went to Relieve, He
returns homewards, is received with great Honor by all the Princes through
whose Territories He passed, and at the foot of the Alps is met by many of the
Nobility of England. Two years more He spends in settling His Affairs in
Aquitaine and those parts, which being ended, Matthew. Westminster. p. 407. n. 32.
He is with Elianor His Queen Crowned at Westminster by Robert Archbishop of
Canterbury upon the XIV. of the Kalends of September (viz. the 19th day of
August) An. Dom. 1274. at which Solemnity were present Alexander King of Scots,
and John Duke of Britain the Kings Brothers-in-Law, who dying not long after,
turned the Joy of this Coronation into Mourning.

And now whilst King Edward had the Opinion and Reputation of His Subjects, He
though it His fittest time to pursue His Designs of abating the Power
Ecclesiastical; to which end He takes away the Return of Writs from the Abbot
and Convent of Westminster, Matthew. Westminster, p. 409. n. 7.
abridges the Liberties of many other famous Monasteries of England; and
lastly, causes the Enacting of the Statute of Mort-Maine, to hinder the
increase of their Temporal Possessions for the future.

The Subduing of Wales, which had ever strugled for Liberty, and the rule of a
Native Governor, is His next enterprise, and the quarrel grounded upon this
occasion: Prince Leoline having refused to come to His Coronation or
Parliament, the King Marches against Him with a powerful Army; and besides the
Fine of 50000 l. Sterling, and payment of 1000 l. per Annum for what He held,
which was only for his life, He forces him to accept a Peace upon such
conditions, that made his Principality differ but little from the tenure of a
Subject; but this his haughty spirit could not brook long, for within three
years Llewellin, and with him his brother David (on whom the King, besides many
other graces, had conferred the Order of Knighthood) makes a Revolt, and a Roll
of their Grievances (as the cause thereof) is sent to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, who endeavors to persuade them to a Submission, but could not
prevail, so strong was the conceit of a Prophecy of Merlin (that Ginn of
Error) That Llewellin should one day possess the Diadem of Brute. The King
thereupon sets forth from the Vizes in Wilts with great Forces against him,
Llewellin is slain in Battle, his Head cut off by a private Soldier, and
presented to the King, An. 1283.
who causes it to be Crowned with Ivy, and placed upon the Tower of London,
David is afterward taken, Matthew. Westminster, p. 411. n. 33.
drawn at a Horsetaile through the streets of Shrewsbury, and then beheaded,
his quarters set up at the four great Towns of York, Bristol, Winchester and
Northampton, and his Head sent to accompany that of his Brother. After whose
death, Edward, the Kings Eldest Son then living, by His appointment, born at
Caernarvon in North- Wales, was, in regard of the place of His Nativity, with
consent of the Welsh, made Prince of Wales, being the first of the Sons and
Heirs apparent of the Kings of England that bare that Title, which afterward
became ordinary to most of the rest.

Having effected His Work here, He goes over into France, An. 1286
to confirm such conditions as His State required in those parts, with the new
King Philip IV. Entitled Le Bell: where He Reconciles the Kings of Sicily and
Aragon; and paying 30000 l. for His Ransom, Redeemes Charles Prince of Achaia
Prisoner in Aragon: and after three years and a half being abroad He returns
into England, where, upon Complaint of the ill Administration of Justice in His
absence, He Fines 13 of His Chiefest Officers in above 100000. Marks, and the
next year to the no less ease of the People He Banishes the Jews, for which
the Kingdom very willingly granted Him a Fifteenth, they had before offered a
Fifth, but then the Jews out-bid them. The King Confiscates all their
Immovable Tallies and Obligations to an infinite value, making thus His last
Commodity of this miserable People, never under other Protection than the Will
of their Prince, and made to serve their turns upon all occasions.

The Crown of Scotland (upon the death of King Alexander III.) is now in
controversy, and had Six Competitors; but Two especially betwixt whom the
Right lay, John Baliol Lord of Galloway, and Robert Bruce Earl of Anandale; all
the best Civilians of France are consulted in this Affair, and King Edward
makes Himself Arbitrator, who, Placita coram Rege and Consilio suo ad Parl. 21
Ed. 1. Rot. 2. in dorso. Matthew. Westminster. p. 414. n. 28.
the better to sway the business with His presence, takes His Journey
Northward, but by the way, An. 1290.
in the House of one Richard de Weston at Herdeby in Lincolnshire, upon the V.
of the Kalends of December (viz. the 27th day of November,) An. 1290. in the
19th year of His Reign, The death of Queen Elianor.
dyed Queen Elianor that Honor of Womanhood, who sucked the Poison out of the
Wounds given Him by an Assassin in the Holy Land, when no other means could
preserve His life, Q. Elianor did bear Quarterly, Gules, a Castle Or, and
Argent, a Lion Rampant purple, the Third as the Second, the Fourth as the
First, which were the Arms of Ferdinand IIL. King of Castile, and Leon Her
Father, and Quartered by Him, when both those Kingdoms were united in His
Person, and are noted to be the First two Coats that were borne Quarterly in
one Shield, which our King Edward III. next imitated, when He Quartered France
and England. I have seen these Arms standing in a Glass Window on the
West Side of the North-Cross in Westminster-Abbey, which (with those of Her
Mother the Countess of Pontiue, viz. Or, 3 Bendlets Azure within a Border
Gules) are Carved in Stone in several places upon the Cross (Erected to Her
Memory) near Northampton, and also on both sides of Her Tomb in the Abbey of
Westminster. The Figure of Her Seal (of Green-Wax) is represented in the 120
Page of this Third Book, annexed to a Charter dated the second day of February,
An. 9th. Edw. 1. in which She is styled Alianora Regina Anglie Domina Hibernie
and Ducissa Aquitannie, on the one side of which Seal is the Effigies of the
Queen, standing betwixt a Castle and a Lion on her right hand, and a Lion and a
Castle on Her left, demonstrating Her to be of the Royal House of Castile, etc.
And upon the Counter-Seal, in a large Escocheon hanging upon a Tree, are the
Arms of Her Husband K. Edward I. viz. 3 Lions passant guardant. Penes E.
Ashmole Ar. Fae. nom. Windsor.


and He in extreme grief returns with Her Corpse to Westminster, where it was
Interred upon the XVI. of the Kalends of January next following, Erecting
goodly Crosses at Stamford, Northampton, Waltham, Cheapside, Charing, and in
all other places where Her Body rested, to Her grateful Memory. She was Sister
to Alphonso King of Castile, Daughter of Ferdinand III. and only Child by Joane
His second Wife, Daughter and Heir of John Earl of Pontiue. She was Married to
Prince Edward at Bures in Spain, An. 39 of King Henry III. His Father, in the
year of our Lord 1254. was Crowned with Him, and lived His Wife (in lovely
participation of all His Troubles and long Voyages) 36 years. Her Bowels were
buried in our Ladies Chapel in the Cathedral Church at Lincoln, where King
Edward erected a Cenotaph for Her, upon which is placed Her Figure, of Gilt
Copper, on the Verge whereof you may read this Inscription in Saxon Capitals.

HIC: SUNT: SEPULTA: VICERA: ALIANORE: QUANDAM: REGINE: ANGLIE: UXORIS: REGIS:
EDWARDI: FILII: REGIS: HENRICI: CUJUS: ANIME: PROPITIETUR: DEUS: AMEN: PATER:
NOSTER.

King Edward also Erected for Her (in the Chapel Royal in the Abbey of
Westminster, at the feet of His Father King Henry III.) a goodly Tomb of Gray
Marble (the Figure of which I have represented in the following Page) having
upon the North-side the Arms of England, Castile and Leon quarterly, and
Pontiue, curiously carved in Shields hanging upon Oake-Trees and Vines, on the
Superficies of the Monument (engraven with the Arms of Castile and Leon in
Lozenge) lies the Figure of Queen Elianor as large as the Life, of Copper
guilt: about which Tomb this Epitaph is Circumscribed, and Embossed also in
Saxon Letters.

ICI: GIST: ALIANOR: JADIS: REYNE: DE: ENGLETERE: FEE: AL: REY: EDWARD: FIZ:
LE: REY -- -- VNTIF: DEL: ALE: DE: LI: DEV: PVR: SA: PITE: EVT: ERCI: AEN.

And on a Tablet of Wood hanging in an Iron Chain near to Her Tomb, these old
Verses are written in Latin and English, viz.

Queen Elenor is here Interred,
A worthy Noble Dame,
Sister unto the Spanish King,
Of Royal blood and fame.
King Edwards Wife, first of that Name,
And Prince of Wales by Right:
Whose Father Henry just the Third,
Was sure an English wight,
Who craved Her Wife unto His Son,
The Prince Himself did go
On that Embassage luckily
As chief with many more.
This Knot of Linked Marriage
Her Brother Alphonse liked;
And so 'tween Sister and this Prince,
The Marriage was up-strik'd.
The Dowry rich and royal was,
For such a Prince most meet:
For Pontiue was the Marriage Gift,
A Dowry rich and great;
A Woman both in Counsel wife,
Religious, Fruitful, Meek,
Who did increase Her Husbands friends
And larg'd His Honor eke.
LEARN TO DIE.

Nobilis hispani jacet hic soror inclita Regis
Erimii Consors Aleanora thori,
Edwardi primi Wallorum principis uxor
Cui pater Henricus tertius Anglus erat.
Hanc illa uxorem gnato petit: omine princeps
Legati munus suscipit ipse bono:
Alphonso fratri placuit felix Hymeneus,
Germanam Edwardo nec sine dote dedit,
Dos preclara fuit, nec tali indigna marito,
Pontiuo Princeps munere dives erat.
Femina consilio prudens, pia, prole beata,
Aurit amicitiis, aurit honor virum.
Disce mori.

monument Illurtrissimo et Potentiss: imo Domino Dno MOVNTAGV BERTY Comiti de
LINDSEY Baroni WILLOUGHBY et BEC de ERESBIE Magno Camerario Angliae, et
serenissimo Reoi CAROLO IN a secretioribus Consilijs. Nobilissimique Ordinis
Garterij Equiti hanc Tumuli Reginae ELIANORAE Vxoris and Regis EDWARDI Primi
Figuram humilime DDD. F.S.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
LOYAVLTE^^^ OBLIGE

The Funeral of Queen Elianor being Solemnized, King Edward returns back to
His Scottish business, to Bruce, who had the weaker Title, An. 1292.
but the more Friends, to him He offers the Crown if he would yield him fealty
and homage, but Bruce refuses, the like offer is made to Baliol, An. 9312.
which he accepts, and accordingly at Newcastle upon Tyne (where King Edward
then lay) all the Chief of the Nobility (except Bruce) do him homage; Matthew.
Westminster, p. 419. n. 4. Tho. Walsingham, p. 56. n. 31. p. 59. n. 46.
but an Appeal from the Sentence of K. Baliol to the Court of England, being
made by the Brother of the Earl of Fife, which Earl had been slain by the
Family of Abernerth, Baliol appears in the Parliament of England, but being
denied to Answer by a Procurator, is forced in the ordinary place to defend his
Cause himself, with which indignity he is so disgusted, that he thereupon makes
a League with France (glad to embrace any thing to the prejudice of England)
and defies King Edward, who counter-leagues with other Princes, proposes his
Son Edward to the Daughter of Guy Earl of Flanders, Marries one of his
Daughters to Henry Earl of Bar, and another to John Duke of Brabant, and buys
the Emperors Alliance for 15000 l. Sterling: An. 1297.
having made these Confederates, Tho. Walsingham, p. 65. n. 13.
Edmond Earl of Lancaster, the Earls of Lincoln and Richmond, with 28 Banners,
700 men at Arms, and a Navy of 36 Sail are sent into France.

In the mean time King Edward sets upon Baliol, Ibidem, p. 66. n. 9.
wins Barwick with the death of 15000 Scots: the Castles of Dunbar, Roxborough,
Edinburgh, Sterling, St. John's Town are Surrendered, King John Baliol submits
himself, and again takes his Oath of Fealty, but notwithstanding is sent
Prisoner into England; Ibidem, p. 68. n. 8. and n. 36.
Then a Parliament for Scotland is held at Barwick wherein all the Nobility
(except William Douglass) do homage, and confirm it under their Seals; John
Warren Earl of Surry and Sussex is made Warden of Scotland, Hugh Cressingham
Treasurer, and Ormesley Chief Justice, with Commission to take the Fealty of
all that held of that Crown.

And now the French business is wholly intended, for which in a Parliament at
Bury an Eighth part of the Goods of the Citizens and Burgesses of Great Towns,
and a Twelfth of the Lesser is granted, but the Clergy upon a Prohibition of
Pope Boniface, procured by themselves, refuse to give any thing, and are
thereupon put out of the Kings Protection (a Strain of State beyond any of his
Predecessors) and were thereby to have no Justice in any of his Courts, which
so amazes them, that for their Peace the Archbishop of York, the Bishops of
Durham, Ely, Salisbury and Lincoln yield a Fifth of their Goods, which the
Archbishop of Canterbury refusing, had all his Seized, and all the Monasteries
within his Diocese and part of Lincoln taken into the Kings hands, only
necessaries allowed to the Monks, but the rest to the Kings use.

The King of France having notice of our Alliance with Flanders, invites that
Earl to Paris, and there makes him and his Daughter Prisoners. He by great
Mediation is released, but She remains still in durance, who therefore
(presuming upon the strength of his Confederates) defies the King of France,
who comes against him with 60000 Men; and King Edward, notwithstanding the
revolt of Scotland, and the coffeehouse of His own People, goes with 500
Sail and 18000 men at Arms for his relief; but finding Flanders distracted
with popular Factions, after he had obtained a further supply of a 9th Penny of
the Layety, and a 10th of the Clergy of the Province of Canterbury, and of York
a 5th in a Parliament held there by the Prince in His absence, upon the
Confirmation of the great Charter, and Indemnity to all that attended Him not
in this Journey, of which Humphrey de Bohun Earl of Hereford, High Constable of
England, Roger Bigot Earl of Norfolk, Lord Marshal, were Chief: He concludes a
Truce with France for two years, and so returns into England to reduce
Scotland once again to obedience, which by the encouragement of one William
Wallice a private Gentleman, Tho. Walsingham, p. 73. n. 15.
had beaten His Officers and People almost out of the Kingdom, killed
Cressingham, with 6000 English, recovered Barwick and many Castles; The King,
to bring His work the nearer together, Removes His Exchequer and Courts of
Justice to York, and at Roxborough Musters 7000 Horse, and an Army of Foot
proportionable; the Earls of Hereford, Norfolk and Lincoln, Ibidem, p. 75.
n. 50.
(notwithstanding their former contempt) lead His Vaunt-guard, and won the
famous Battle of Fonkirke, An. 1299.
wherein were slain 30000 Scots, 260 Knights; but Wallice escaping was
afterward betrayed and sent Prisoner into England, where he suffered as for
Treason, though he would never own the Jurisdiction of England, alleging, he
never Swore Fealty to that King. The Titles and Estates of the Scottish Lords
that stood out, were given to the English: And in another Parliament for
Scotland held at Saint Andrews, all the Nobles Swear Fealty again to King
Edward, who carried away Captive all such as had the least possibility of
stirring, Establishes the English Laws, brings away their Regalia and
Antiquities, and sends to Westminster the Stone, wherein as the vulgar were
persuaded, the Fate of the Kingdom consisted, according to the old Distich.
Camdens Remains, p. 19.


Ni fallat fatum, Scoti quocunque locatum
Inveniunt Lapidem, regnare tenentur ibidem.
By the Mediation of Pope Boniface a peace is concluded with the King of
France, Matthew. Westminster. p. 432. n. 17.
and King Baliol permited to live a private life in that Kindom. His Second
Marriage.
At which time also King Edward takes to His Second Wife Margaret, Ibidem,
Walsingham, fol. 94.
Sister to Philip IV. Surnamed the Fair King of France, eldest Daughter of
Philip the Hardy, Son of St. Lewis, who was Married to Him at Canterbury upon
Thursday the VIII. The Seal of Queen Margaret (of Red-Wax) represented in the
120 Page of this Third Book, is affixed to a Pardon Granted to Johan de
Daylyngrigg, dated at London upon the 14th day of November, An. 9th of King
Edw. II. Her Son in Law. She is styled therein Margarite par la Grace de Dieu
Royne d'Engleterre: and on the said Seal Her Arms (viz. Seem of Flowers de
Lize) are demidiated with King Edwards, being the first Queen of England that
did Bear Her Arms with Her Husbands in one Escocheon; which kind of bearing
is more ancient then the impaleing of the entire Coats of Arms, as you may
observe in my Annotations, Book 2. Page 101.
day of September, in the 27th year of His Reign, An. Dom. 1299. after almost
Eight years Marriage, surviving Him, She remained a Widow Ten years, and
departing this life in the 10th of Edward II. Reign, An. 1317. was Interred in
the Gray-Fryars in London, in the Choire before the Altar, which Monastery Her
Self had Built.

Besides this Marriage of King Edward with Margaret of France, he had
Contracted the Prince his Son to that Kings Daughter, upon which the French
King made Restitution of all he had usurped in Gascoigne. Bordeaux returns to
the obedience of the King of England, and had 150000 l. paid them for his
Brother Edmonds Expenses in the late Wars.

The Scots being excluded in this Peace, send their lamentable Complaint to
Pope Boniface of the King of Englands Usurpation upon them, but have no
redress: for, in a Parliament at Lincoln (upon a Confirmation of their
Charters) a Fifteenth is granted, with which King Edward makes a Fourth
Expedition and a Fourth Conquest of Scotland, after which He removes His
Exchequer from York, Feasts His Nobility at Lincoln; And being received with
great Solemnity at London, there He renders Thanks to God and St. Edward for
His Victory. Then he began to show his Resentment of the Stubborness of his
Nobility in times past, and so terrifies them, that the Lord Marshall makes him
heir of all his Lands, though he had a Brother living. Hereford escapes by
death, the rest redeem themselves with great Sums: the Archbishop of
Canterbury is sent over to Pope Clement (who succeeded Boniface) to be crushed
by him, who being a Native of Bordeaux, and having received a great present
from the King, gratifies his desire in this, and also absolves him from all his
Covenants made to his Subjects in the three last Parliaments. But all this was
quashed by the appearing of a new King in Scotland, Robert Bruce Earl of
Carrickt, Son to the Competitor with Baliol, who escaping out of England where
he was a Pentioner, becomes the head of that distracted People, and is Crowned
their King, of which advice being given to King Edward, by John Comin, Bruce
his Cousin German, a titler also himself, he is violently pursued by Bruce, and
by him Murdered in Dunfrayes Church.

The King vows to revenge Comyns death, and himself upon the perjured Scots,
adjuring his Son and the Nobility, if he dyed in the attempt, to carry his
Corpse about Scotland, and not to bury it, till the Usurper and Country were
subbu^d. Aimer de Valence Earl of Pembroke, the Lords Clifford and Percy are
sent with a strong power to relieve his Wardens of Scotland, retired since this
revolt into Barwick, whilst himself prepares to follow, 300 young Gentlemen,
the Sons of Earls and Barons, at the Feast of Pentecost, receive with great
Solemnity the honor of Knighthood from the Prince at Westminster, and
presently after with a great Army, and these honorable Attendants he sets
forward, but before he arrives in Scotland, the Earl of Pembrook with the Aid
of the Family of Common, in a Battle near St. Johns-Town, had routed the whole
Army of the new King, who escaped very hardly in a disguise. His Brother Nigel
Bruce and two Priests were Executed as Traitors at Barwick; the King
notwithstanding to terrify the Scots, and to show them His power, passes all
over Scotland with his Army, making strait inquisition for the Abettors of the
Murder of Common, of which he spared neither Sex, Age, nor Quality. The Earl of
Atholl, though of the Blood Royal, found no other favor then to be Hanged on a
Gallows higher then the rest; the Wife of Robert Bruce is sent Prisoner to
London, and her Daughter to a Monastery in Linsey, the Countess of Boughan put
into a Wooden Cage, and hung out for a spectacle over the Walls of Barwick:
King Robert Bruce shifts privily from place to place, attended only by the
Earl of Lenox and Gilbert Hay, who never forsook him in any of his fortunes.

The King spends this Summer in Scotland, An. 1307.
and Winters in Carlisle, to be ready against the next Spring, Matthew.
Westminster. p. 458. n. 8.
about which time appears the hidden King, surprises the Earl of Pembrook, and
gives him a great Overthrow, forces the Earl of Gloucester into Air Castle, and
there besieges him, till the Castle being relieved by the Kings Forces, he was
again driven to his former Retirements.

King Edward hereupon commands all that held by Knights-Service, by Midsummer
to attend Him at Carlisle, and sending the Prince to London about his Marriage,
in July following, although he found himself not well, with a fresh Army he
enters Scotland, but finding His distemper (which was a Dysentery or
Bloody-Flix) increase upon him, he returned to Carlisle, where he sent for the
Prince his Son, whom, besides many Admonitions to Piety, He Commanded three
things especially; That He should carry His Bones about with him through
Scotland till he had subdued it: That he should send his Heart to the Holy
Land, with Sevenscore Knights to that War, and the 32000 l. he had provided to
that purpose: And that he should never recall Piers Gaveston from Banishment.
And soon after he dyed at Borrough upon the Sands on the VII. day of July,
Ypodigme Ncustriae, p. 499. Matthew. Westminster, p. 458. ^. 18.
in the year 1307, His Death.
when he had ruled the Scepter 34 years and 8 Months wanting nine days, and
lived 68 years.

Being dead, his Corpse was brought to Waltham, and there remained the space of
sixteen weeks, and after on Simon and Jude''s day (viz. 280 October) was buried
in the Abbey of Westminster, at the head of King Henry III. his Father, on the
North-side of the Shrine of St. Edward. His Sepulcher (the Figure of which is
represented in the following Page) is composed of 5 gray Marbles, two compose
the sides, two the ends, and a fifth covers it (a plain Monument for so great
and glorious a King) upon the Northside whereof are pencill'd these words,
EDWARDUS PRIMUS SCOTORUM MALLEUS HIC EST. 1308. PACTUM SERVA.

monument EDWARDVS (...) SCOT^^^^ MALEVS HIC EST^^^^ (...)

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
POST TOT NAV FRAGIA PORTVM Illustrissimo Domino Dn:o EDWARDO Comiti SANDWICI,
vicecomiti Hinchinbroke, et Baroin Mountagu de St. Neots; regiae Classis
Vicepraefecto; Magnae Garderobae Custodi; Dn.o Regi Car: 2do. a Secretioribus
Consilijs; Nobilissimique Ordanis Garterij Equiti; hanc Tumuli Regis EDWARDI
Primi Figuram; Humil:inc D.D.D.F.S.



And upon a Tablet this Epitaph in Latin and English.

Death is too doleful which does join
The highest Estate full low:
Which coupleth greatest things with least,
And last with first also.
No man has been in World alive,
Nor any may there be
Which can escape the dint of Death,
Needs hence depart must we.
O Noble and victorious Man,
Trust not unto thy strength;
For all are subject unto death,
And all must hence at length.
Most cruel fate from worldly stage
Has wrest a worthy wight;
For whom all England mourned loud
To see his doleful plight:
Edward is dead, which was adorned
With diverse graces here,
A King or fragrant Nardus height,
A gracious Princely Peer.
In heart the which was Lybard-like,
Right puissant void of fear:
Most slow to strife, discreet and wise,
And gracious every where.
In Arms a Giant fierce and fell,
Attempting famous facts,
Most prudent, did subdue the proud
By feate of Martial acts:
In Flanders fortune gave to him
By lot right good success:
In Wales he wan: the Scottish rout
With Arms he did suppress.
This King without His like alive;
Did firmly guide His Land:
And what good nature could conceive
He had it plight at hand.
He was in Justice, and in Peace,
Excelling: Laws took place,
Desire to chase all wicked works
Did hold this Kings good grace.
He now does lie Intombed here
Which furthered each good thing:
Now naught He is but dust and bones,
Which was a worthy King.
The very Son of God whom erst
This King did love right dear,
Has given to Him immortal bliss,
For his good living here.
Whilst lived this King by Him all things
Were in most goodly plight:
Fraud lay hid, great peace was kept
And honesty had might.
Mors est moesta nimis, magnos que jungit in imis,
Maxima mors minimis, conjungens ultima primis;
Nullus in orb fuit homo vivens nec valet esse
Qui non morte ruit; est hinc exire necesse.
Nobilis and fortis, tibi tu confidere noli,
Omnia sunt mortis, sibi subdit singula soli,
De mundi medio magnum mors impia movit,
Anglia pre tedio satis anxia plangere novit:
Corruit EDWARDUS vario veneratus honor,
Rex nuper ut Nardus fragrans virtutis odore,
Cord Leopardus, invictus and absque pavore,
Ad rixam tardus, discretus and eucharis ore,
Viribus armorum quasi gigas ardua gessit,
Colla superborum prudens per prelia pressit,
Inter Flandrenses fortuna sibi been favit,
Ut quoque Wallenses and Scotos suppeditavit,
Rex bonus absque pari strenue sua regna regebat:
Quod natura dare potuit bonitatis habebat,
Actio justitie, par regni, sanctio legis,
Et fuga nequitie premunt precordia Regis:
Gloria tota ruit, Regem capit hec modo fossa,
Rex quandoque fuit, nunc nil nisi pulvis and ossa:
Filius ipse Dei quem cord colebat, and ore,
Gaudia fecit ei nullo permista dolor.
Dum vixit Rex and valuit sua magna potestas,
Fraus latuit, pax magna fuit, regnavit honestas.
The Seal of King Edward I. (the Figure of which is exhibited in the 120 Page
of this Third Book, and also that of Queen Elianor his Wife) is annexed to a
Confirmation of the Great Charter of King Henry III. his Father, dated upon the
28th day of March, Penes Eliaus. Ashmole Arm. Faecialem nom. Windsor:
An. 28 Ed. I. Circumscribed on both sides, EDWARDUS: DEI: GRACIA: REX: ANGLIE:
DOMINUS: HYBERNIE: DUX: AQUITANIE: Upon the Counter-seal the King is figured on
Horseback, in his Coat of Maile and Surcoat, his Shield is Charged with the
Three Lions of England, and the same Arms are Embossed on the Caparizons of
his Horse.

Also in a Grant of the Marriage of Duncan, son and heir of Duncan Earl of Fyf,
to Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester and Hertford, Dated at Barwick upon Tweed
the xxv. day of June, in the 20th year of his Reign, he is styled Edwardus Dei
gracia Rex Anglie Dominus Hybernie and Dux Aquitanie, and Superior Dominus
Regni Scotie, etc. In cujus rei testimonium has literas patentes Sigillo
regimini Regni Scotie deputato fecimus sigillari. The Circumscription of which
Seal is obliterated, but the Figure of the Crucifixion of St. Andrew on the one
side, and the Arms of Scotland (viz. a Lion Rampant within a double Tressure
Flowery) on the reverse are apparent.

Children of King EDWARD I. by Queen ELIANOR of CASTILE his First Wife.
8. JOHN, The eldest Son of King Edward and Queen Elianor, Walsingham, fol. 94.
Ypodigmae neustriae, p. 499. n. 25.
was born at Windsor in the Reign of King Henry III. his Grandfather, before
His Fathers voyage into Syria; He was committed to the Charge of Richard King
of the Romans, and dyed in his youth.

8. HENRY, The Second Son of King Edward, Ibidem, p. 499. n. 25.
etc. deceased also being a Child.

8. ALPHONSO, Third Son, Walsingham, fol. 94. Ypodig. Neustr. p. 499. n. 25.
Matthew. Westminster, p. 411. n. 54.
was Borne at Maine in Gascoigne: As his Father and Mother returned into
England from Jerusalem, he offered up a Golden Coronet of Llewellen Prince of
Wales, and other Jewels at the Tomb of St. Edward at Westminster, which
remained there to Adorn his Shrine, and dyed in the Eleventh year of his age,
upon the XIV. of the Kalends of September (viz. the 19th. day of August) in the
year of Grace 1284, and his Body was buried in the Abbey of Westminster, on the
Southside the Shrine of the before-named Confessor Saint Edward, among his
brothers and Sisters that lie there Interred.

8. EDWARD, Walsingham, f. 94. Ypodig. Neustr. p, 499. n. 25.
Fourth Son of King Edward I. and Queen Elianor of Castile his first Wife,
borne at Caernarvon, was the First Prince of Wales of the Royal House of
England, and after the death of his Father, succeeded him in his Kingdom, and
his other Dominions, by the Name of Edward II. whose history follows in the
II. Chapter of this III. Book.

8. Henry Earl of Bar did bear Azure 2 Barbels hauriant endorsed, and some
crusuly fitched or. I have seen an Acquittance in French of Joane de Bar
Countess of Surrey his Daughter (in the custody of Thomas Lee Esquire, Chester.
Herald) bearing date en la feste de noel l'an du Roy Edward tirs apres la
Conquest de son Regue d'Engleterre vint and primier and de France oytiesme,
under her Seal of Red-Wax, in the Center of which are the Arms (in Lozenge) of
her Husband John Earl Warren, and of Surrey, viz. Chequie, Or and Azure betwixt
4 Lozenges of the Arms of England and Bar in Cross, and 2 Lions and 2 Castles
in Saltire, So that although the Diameter of the Seal be not above an Inche and
a half, yet it comprehends the Arms of her Father, her Mother, her Husband,
and her self; the Figure of which is delineated in p. 122.


ELIANOR Countess of Bar, Eldest Daughter of King Edward I. was born at
Windsor in the 50th year of the Reign of King Henry III. her Grandfather: She
was Espoused by Proxy to Alphonso King of Aragon, who deceased before the
solemnization of their Marriage. And afterward, An. 1294. this Elianor was
Married at Bristol, Pat. an. 22 Ed. 1. Walsingham, full. 60 and 94. Ypodig.
Neustr. p. 499. n. 26.
to Henry Earl of Bar in France, and by him had issue Edward Earl of Bar,
from whom the Dukes and Earls of that Country are descended. And Joane de Bar
Countess of Surrey, the Wife of John Plantagenet, Earl Warren and of Surrey and
Sussex, who dyed An. 1347. by whom she had no issue. The said Countess Elianor
was the Wife of Henry Earl of Bar five years, and deceased in the year of our
Lord 1298.

8. JOANE of Acres, or Acon, Countess of Gloucester and Hertford, Walsingham,
fol. 94. Ypodig. Neustriae, p. 499. n. 27.
second Daughter, she was born at a City in the Holy Land called Acon (but
formerly Ptolomais) in the year 1272. where her Mother remained during the Wars
her Father had with the Sarazins. I have here exhibited the figure of Gilbert
de Clares Seal, which I copied from an Original in the hands of the Honorable
William Pierepont Esquire, on the one side of which he is represented on
Horseback as Earl of Hertford; both his Shield and the Caparisons of his Horse
being charged with the 3 Cheveronells, and on the reverse as Earl of Gloucester,
with the same Arms on his Shield, but without Caparisons upon his Horse.
She was the second Wife of Gilbert de SIGILL GILEBERTI DE CLARE COMITIS
HERTFORDIE
SIGILL GILEBERTI DE CLARE COMITIS GLOVERNIE
Clare, surnamed the Red, Earl of Gloucester and Hertford, who had lost the
favor of the King her Father, in refusing to go beyond Sea with him, to the
aid of Guy Earl of Flanders, against the King of France, Leland, Col. vol. 1.
p. 663.
for which cause King Edward seized all his Lands; But, the breach was made up
in this Marriage, consummated at Westminster on the second day of May, An.
1290. in the 18th year of her age, without any Dower on the Kings part; which
done, King Edward I. re-granted all the Lands so seized, confirming them to the
said Gilbert and Joane his Wife, and the issue begotten of their two bodies, in
Fee-farme. This Earl Gilbert dyed in the Castle of Monmouth the VII. of the
Ides of December, An. 1295. Pat. An. 18 Ed. 1. Pat. an. 19 Ed. 1. Leland, Col.
vol. 1. p. 182.
and was buried in the Priory of Tewkesbury by his Father, leaving his Wife a
Widow (she was afterward Married to Ralph de Mounthermer) and also issue by
her a Son named Gilbert, and three Daughters, Elianor, Margaret and Elizabeth.

9. GILBERT DE CLARE Earl of Gloucester and Hertford, He did bear the Arms of
his Father, viz. Or 3 Cheveronells Gules. These were painted upon his Surcoat,
which he had forgot to put on at the Battle of Striueling, where he lost his
life. The Family of Clare was so Great and Eminent in the Reign of K. Henry.
III. that the Arms of Richard de Clare Earl of Gloucester, stand embossed and
painted on the North-Wall of Westminster Abbey, next to those of St. Lewis K.
of France. There being few Cathedrals or Religious Houses in England, in the
Reigns also of the Kings Edward I. and II. the Windows' of which were not
adorned with the 3 Cheveronels Gules in a Field Or, so vast were the Revenues
of this Illustrious Family of Clare.
their only Son, to whom his Father-in-Law Ralph de Mounthermer surrendered the
said Earldomes (who had enjoyed them during this Gilberts Minority) in the
first year of King Edward II. An. 1307. In which year young Gilbert being at
age, was admitted to his Lands and Honors, and sat in Parliament always
after as Earl of Gloucester and Hertford. He Married Matilda Daughter of John de
Burgh, son and heir of Richard Earl of Vlster in Ireland, and had issue a son
named John, which dyed in his infancy, and was buried at Tewkesbury.

This Gilbert being with King Edward II. Leland. Col. vol. 1. p. 785. Ibidem p.
292. Tho. de la Moore, p. 594. n. 32.
in Scotland to raise the Siege of Strivelyn, was at Bannoksborrow near the
same place slain (with near 300 Barons and Knights) upon the 24th day of June,
An. 1314. when the Scots would gladly have saved him for ransom; but, he had
that day neglected to put on his Sur-Coat of Arms over his Armor. King Robert
Bruce caused the bodies of this Earl Gilbert, and Sir Robert Clifford, to be
sent to King Edward, being then at Barwick, to be buried at his pleasure,
demanding no reward for the same. He was born at Tewkesbury in the year 1291.
and was there buried near to his Father, Grandfather, and Great Grandfather,
leaving his Inheritance to be divided betwixt his three Sisters his heirs,
which Partition was made in the 10th year of the Reign of the said King Edward
II.

9. ELIANOR DE CLARE, Lady Le Despenser, Eldest Daughter of Gilbert, Quarterly,
Argent, and Gules a Frett or, over all a Bendlet Sable, were the Arms of Hugh
le Despenser, which are carved in Stone on two several Tombs in the Abbey of
Tewkesbury, and also on a Key Stone in an Arch of the Cloister of
Westminster-Abbey.
and Sister and coheir of Gilbert, Earls of Gloucester, etc. was Married to
Lord Hugh le Despenser the younger, son of Hugh Earl of Winchester, who in the
15th year of Edward II. was adjudged to be dishinherited, and exiled out of the
Realm for ever. This Elianor by Lord Hugh her husband, had issue Edward le
Despenser, Father of another Edward, Father of Thomas Lord le Despenser,
Created Earl of Gloucester in the Feast of St. Michael, An. 22 Rich. II. Rot.
Parl. An. 21 R. 2.
but being deposed from his Earldome by Act of Parliament, An. 1 Henry IV. was
beheaded at Bristol in the year 1400. This Thomas le Despenser Earl of
Gloucester, Married Constance daughter of Edmond of Langley Duke of York, by
whom he had issue Richard, that dyed the Kings Ward; Elizabeth that deceased
also young; and Issabelle Despenser first Married to Richard Beauchamp Earl of
Worcester, by whom she had Issue Elizabeth, etc. and secondly to Richard
Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, and had issue also by him Richard Beauchamp Duke of
Warwick, and Anne Beauchamp, etc. Of the Descendents of this Issabel see more
in the History of Edmond of Langley Duke of York.

9. The Arms of Gaveston were Vert 6 Eaglets Or, 3, 2, and one, which stand
painted in the fourth Window, on the South Side the body of the Cathedral
Church at York. And although in his Seal exhibited by Edward Byshe Esquire in his
Notes upon Upton, present you only with 3 Eaglets, it was because there wanted
room for three more. The like example I find in a Seal of Humphrey de Bohun.
Earl of Hereford, who wanting place therein for his 6 Lions, did bear his bend
and Cotires between two Lions supplying a greater, by a lesser number.
MARGARET DE CLARE Countess of Cornwall and Gloucester, second sister and coheir
of Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester, was the Wife of Piers Gaveston (a
Gascoigne born) created Earl of Cornwall, An. 3 Ed. 2. who received this
stranger into so high favor (notwithstanding the commands of King Edward I.
his Father to the contrary) that he thereby highly disobliged His Nobility, and
through his ill Counsel was carried away into many unkingly actions. This Piers
Gaveston (having been twice Banished) was upon his return into England taken by
Guy Beauchampe Earl of Warwick (whom he had formerly in a jearing way called,
Rob. of Gloucester, p. 312. b.
the Black Hound of Arden) and Beheaded near Warwick, at a place called
Gravershithe (or Blacklow) and buried in the Friars at Laughtey, Pat. an. 5 Ed.
2. p 2. m. 19. Claus. 10. Ed. 2. m. 8. in dorso.
leaving issue by Countess Margaret a daughter called Joane Gaveston, whom her
Father intended to have Married to Thomas the son of John Wake; but, he taking
another Wife without the License of King Edward II. was fined to pay 1000
Marks to Thomas de Moulton of Egremond, which Thomas by Indenture (bearing
date the 25th day of May, An. 10 Edw. 2.) betwixt him and the said King, had
engaged to Marry this Joane to his son John, as soon as they should come to
age. But this newborn Joane dyed young, Chart. an. 11 Edw. 3. m. 14. n. 34.
Inq. an. 16 Edw. 3. n. 36. Esceat. an. 21 Ed. 3. n. 59.
and was buried at Malmesbury.

The Second Husband of Margaret Countess of Cornwall, was Hugh de Audley (after
her Brothers death) created Earl of Gloucester (at a Parliament holden at
Westminster) upon the 16th day of March, An. 11 Ed. 3. in the year 1336. Hugh
de Audley Earl of Gloucester did bear Gules a Frett or, and a Border argent.
This Countess Margaret deceased An. 16 E. 3. and was buried at Tunbridge. And
Hugh Earl of Gloucester outliving her about five years, departed this World upon
the 10th day of November, An. 1347. and was Interred in the same place with his
Wife, leaving Issue their only Daughter and Heir Margaret Audley, 18 years old
at the death of her Mother, and at the same time Wife of Ralph Baron of
Stafford, afterward created Earl of Stafford, March 5th, An. 25 Ed. 3. in the
year 1350. and from this Marriage all the Earls of Stafford, Dukes of
Buckingham of that Surname did descend, and the Viscountess Stafford now in
being is derived.

9. ELIZABETH DE CLARE Lady Burgh, third Daughter of Joane of Acres, In her
Grant (in my Custody) dated upon the 24 day of April, An. 29 Ed. 3. This
Elizabeth is styled La tres honorable Dame Elizabeth de Bourg Dame de Clare. In
her Seal are the Arms of Clare, impaleing Bourgh (viz. 3 Cheveronels and a
Cross) within a Border gutte, which since have been, and are the Arms of
Clare-Hall in Cambridge of her Foundation.
by Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester, and Sister and coheir of Earl Gilbert,
was Married three several times. Her first Husband being John de Burgh that
dyed (in the lifetime of his Father Richard Earl of Vlster) in the year 1313.
and by him she had issue William de Burgh Earl of Vlster, who Married Maud,
Sister to Henry Duke of Lancaster, and one of the Daughters of Henry Earl of
Lancaster; and left issue Elizabeth their only daughter and heir, wife of
Lionel of Antwerpe, Duke of Clarence, third Son of King Edward the Third.

This Elizabeth de Clare had to her 2d. Husband Theobald, Lord Verdon; after
whose decease she was the third time Married to Sir Roger Damory Baron of Armoy
in Ireland. She Founded Clare Hall in Cambridge, and lies buried by the same
Sir Roger in the Church at Ware, with this Epitaph, Hic jacent Rogerus Damory
Baro tempore Edwardi secundi, Weever, p. 544.
and Elizabetha tertia filia Gilberti Clare Comitis Glocestrie and Johanne
uxoris ejus filie Edwardi primi vocate Johann. de Acris...

Edw. Bysshe Esquire (now Sir Edward Bysshe Knight, Clarenceaux King of Arms)
in Nicholaum Upton Notae, p. 63. represents you with the Seal of this Ralph de
Monthermer Earl of Gloucester, etc. (much like that of Thomas Earl of Lancaster,
exhibited in Page 102. of this 2 Book) on the one side of which he is
represented on Horseback in his Coat of Maile and Surcoat. His Shield and the
Caparisons of his Horse are charged with an Eagle (his Arms being Or, an Eagle
displayed, vert) and upon his Horses head, and his Helmet is placed the like
Eagle (from which issues his Mantleing or Lambrequin) On his Counter-seal is a
large Escocheon of the Eagle hanging on a Tree, betwixt two collateral Wivernes
in the place of Supporters. Which Seal is Circumscribed on both Sides with
these words, S. RADVLPHI: DE: MONTE: HERMER II: EOM: GLOV^RE: ET: HERTFORD:
comprehending all those parts which make an Achievement complete, viz Coat of
Arms, Healme. Creast, Mantling and Supporters.
Which said Joane de Acres, after the death of Gilbert de Clare Earl of
Gloucester her first Husband, was Married to a Servant of his named Ralph de
Mountehermer, in the year 1296. which being done without the knowledge of her
Father King Edward I. Ypodigmae Neustriae, p. 499. n. 28.
this Ralph was committed to Prison in the Castle of Bristol, and all those
Lands and Castles formerly made over to Earl Gilbert and Countess Joane, seized
into the Kings hands. But by the Mediation of Anthony Bec Bishop of Durham,
Peace was made betwixt the King and His Daughter, Pat. An. 6 Ed. 2. p. 1.
and her new Husband, and her Lands restored with advantage, and not long after
Ralph summoned to Parliament by the Title of Earl of Gloucester and Hertford,
which he enjoyed till his Son in Law, Earl Gilbert de Clare came of Age, and
had the same Honors; and afterward in all Parliaments was summoned and sat
as Lord Mounthermer, who by the said Joane of Acon or Acres had Issue two Sons
Thomas and Edward de Mounthermer, Pat. An. 4 Edw. 2. pars prima
to whom King Edward II. granted the Manor of Warblington in general tail:
Sir Thomas de Mounthermer Knight had issue his only Child Margaret, Married to
John Mountague, by whom he had issue John Mountague Earl of Salisbury, from
whom the Earls of Manchester and Sandwich, and Baron Mountague of Boughton
derive their original. The Countess Joane lived 38 years, and deceased on the
10th day of May, An. 1305. in the first year of Her Brother King Edward II.
Reign, and was buried in the Church of the Augustine Friars at Clare, Weever,
p. 734. usq ad 739.
in a Chapel of her Foundation. At whose Tomb that Dialogue in Latin and
English, betwixt a Secular Priest and a Friar is fancied to be spoken
(exhibited in Weevers Funeral Monuments) containing the Lyneal descent of the
Lords of the Honor of Clare.

The Arms of Brabant, are Sable, a Lion Rampant, Or.
8. MARGARET Duchess of Brahant, Walsingham, fol. 94. Ypodig. Neustriae, p.
499. n. 29.
third Daughter of King Edward I. and Queen Elianor his first Wife, was born at
Windsor in the third year of her Fathers Reign, An. 1275. when she came to be
15 years of age she was Married at Westminster, upon the 9th of July, Anno
1290. in the 18th year of her said Fathers Reign, Pat. An. 18 Edw. 1.
to John II. Duke of Brabant, and had a Dower of 3000 pounds per Annum, and
issue by him John III. Duke of Brabant, Father of Margaret, Wife to Lewis of
Mechlin Earl of Flanders, and Mother of the Lady Margaret the Heir of Brabant
and Flanders, who was Married to Philip Duke of Burgundy.

8. BERENGER, Fourth Daughter, dyed an Infant.

8 ALICE, Fifth Daughter, deceased in her Childhood.

Walsingham, fol. 94.
8. MARY, Sixth Daughter of K. Edward I. by Queen Elianor, was born at Windsor
the 22th day of April, in the 7th year of her Fathers Reign, and of Salvation
1279. and at ten years of age, An. 1289. she took a Religious Habit in the
Monastery of Ambresbury in Wiltshire, Pat. An. 20 Ed. 1.
and An. 20 Edward I. I find her to be a Nun in the Abbey of Font-Euraud in
Anjou.

8. Thomas Walsingham, fo. 94. Ypodig. Neustr. p. 499. n. 31.
ELIZABETH, Countess of Holland and Hereford, In the 121 Page of this 3 Book is
the Figure of this Countess Elizabeth's Seal, Coppied out of Olivarius Uredius
his Genealogia Flandrica, p. 80. in which her Portraiture stands betwixt 2
Collateral Escocheons. That on her right hand is charged with a Lion Rampant,
(the Arms of Holland being Or, a Lion Rampant Gules) and that on her left with
the 3 Lions of England. The Seal being thus Circumscribed,
S.ELISABET.COMITISSE: HOLLANDIE: ZELANDIE: ET: DOMINE: FRICIE. The Arms of
Humphrey de Bohun Earl of Hereford, etc. were Azure, a Bend Argent, inter 2
Cotises, and 6 Lions Rampant, Or.
seventh daughter of King Edward I. by Queen Elianor his first Wife, was born
at the Castle of Ruthland in Flintshire, in the 13 year of her Fathers Reign,
An. 1284. In the 14th year of her age she was Married at London to John, first
of the name, Earl of Holland, Zealand, and Lord of Friesland (and had a Dower
of 8000 l. per an.) who deceased within two years without issue, and made way
for her second Husband Humphrey de Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex, Ibidem.
Lord of Brecknock and Constable of England, (who had no other Portion with her
but the Kings favor, which he before had lost by refusing to go with him into
Flanders) by whom she had issue John and Humphrey, both Earls after their
Father, and dyed without issue. Edward and William Twins, Parliament, An. 3 H.
6. M. 1. and 2. art. 12. and sequent. vincent, p. 241.
and two Daughters, Margaret de Bohun married to Hugh Courtney Earl of Devon,
from whom did descend the Archbishop of Canterbury of that Surname, the
Courtneys Earls of Devonshire, and Marquesses of Exeter, and the Courtneys of
Haccombe and Powderham: And Elianor de Bohun the Wife of James Butler (Pincerna
Hiberniae) Earl of Ormond, from whom the present Duke, Marquess and Earl of
Ormond, and several of the Nobility of the Kingdom of Ireland, derive their
descent.

William de Bohun, fourth Son of Humphrey Earl of Hereford, Chart. an. 11 Edw.
3. m. 24. n. 49. Claus. an. 14 Ed. 3; p. 2. m. 8.
etc. by Elizabeth aforesaid, Daughter of King Edward I. was created Earl of
Northampton upon the 16th day of March, An. 11 Edw. 3. and taking to Wife
Elizabeth Daughter of Bartholomew de Badelismere Lord of Leeds Castle in Kent,
had issue by her Humphrey de Bohun the last of that Surname, Earl of
Northampton after the death of his Father, and Nephew and Heir of Humphrey de
Bohun, Earl of Hereford and Essex, and Constable of England, whom he succeeded
in all his Honors, and by his Wife Joan daughter of Richard Fitz-Alan Earl of
Arundel left two Daughters his Coheires married into the Royal Family, Elianor
de Bohun the Elder espoused to Thomas of Woodstock Duke of Gloucester, and Mary
de Bohun the younger was the Wife of Henry of Bullingbroke Earl of Derby (who
in her right was created Duke of Hereford) afterward King of England, by the
name of Henry IV.

Of King Ed. I. and Qu. Elianor dyed in their Childhood. 8. BEATRIX, the eighth
daughter 8. BLANCH, the ninth daughter.



Children of King EDWARD I. by Queen MARGARET of France his second Wife.
8. THOMAS of Brotherton, the Fifth Son of King Edward the First, and eldest by
Queen Margaret, was Earl of Norfolk and Marshal of England, of whom see more in
the VI. Chapter of this III. Book.

8. EDMOND of Woodstock, the Sixth Son of King Edward I. and second by Queen
Margaret of France, was Earl of Kent, whose History follows in the VIII.
Chapter of this III. Book.

8. ELEANOR the Tenth daughter, and sixteenth Child of King Edward I. and only
daughter of Queen Margaret, deceased in her Childhood.

8. EDWARD II. An. 1307. July 7.
KING of ENGLAND, LORD of IRELAND, and DUKE of AQVITAINE, Surnamed of
CAERNARVON.
CHAP. II.
AFter the death of John, Ypodigmae Neustriae, p. 499. n. 25.
Henry, and Alphonso, The Arms of this Edward, when he was Prince of Wales,
are Embossed upon his Seal (delineated in the 122. Page of this third Book)
upon one side of which He is represented on Horseback, His Shield and the
Caparisons of His Horse being charged with 3 Lions passant guardant, and a file
of 3 points. And upon the reverse on a large Escocheon, are also 3 Lions, with
a Label of 5 Lambeaux. Charta in Officio Armorum. Vide His Royal Seal in the
same Page, differing from that of his Father only by the addition of 2 Castles,
one on each side his Throne. The Arms of Issabel His Queen were Azure seem of
Flowers de Lize Or, which are demidiated with those of her Husband in one of
her Seals, p. 121. and in her other Seal (there also exhibited) her Effigies
is placed betwixt an Escocheon of the Arms of England on her right hand, and
on her left a Shield, containing the Arms of France, impaleing Navarre, Queen
Joane her Mother being the Daughter and Heir of Henry the First, King of
Navarre.
the three eldest Sons of K. Edward I. and Queen Elianor of Castile his first
Wife; this Edward their Fourth Son succeeded Him in the Kingdom by the Name of
EDWARD II. He had His Surname from Caernarvon in North Wales, the place of His
Birth, where, by the appointment of His Father, Queen Elianor was delivered of
Him, (upon St. Marks Day, viz. the 25th of April, An. 1284.) who in his
Charter upon the 24th day of March, Matthew. West. p. 411. n. 52. Charta in
Officio Armorum.
dated in the 33th year of his Fathers Reign, is styled Edwardus illustris
Regis Anglie filius, Princeps Wallie, Comes Cestrie Pontini and Montistrolli.

Never came Prince to the Crown with a more general applause of the Nobility
and People, and not without reason; for He had seen the excellent Government of
His Father, been initiated in the Principles of State, left Governor of the
Kingdom, and presided in Parliament in His Fathers absence, and now succeeded
to His Crown at 23 years old, a fit age for bearing the weight of a Scepter:
These indeed were rare advantages, but soon lost He this good opinion, when by
His Management of Affairs, He seemed to do nothing less then either to imitate
His Father, or to perform those three positive Commands He had enjoined Him by
His Will; Ypodigmae Neustriae, p. 499. n. 47. Walsingham, p. 95. n. 41.
for, in opposition thereunto, Gaveston is recalled from banishment, and
gratified with the 32000 l. designed for the Holy War, and Walter de Langton,
Bishop of Chester, the then Lord Treasurer, who was busy in preparing for the
Burial of the deceased King (for an old Grudg) Imprisoned at Wallingford.

His Fathers Funerals performed, Thomas Walsingham, p. 95 and 96.
over He passes with His Ganimed to Boloigne, where His Marriage with Issabel
the daughter of Philip IV. of the Name, surnamed Le Bell, King of France
(Sister to the Lewis Hutin Philip le Long, and Charles le Bell also Kings of
France) a Lady of 12 years old, Ibidem. Tho. de la Moore, p. 593. n. 4. Ibidem.
was solemnized in the Church of our Lady, upon the V. of the Kalends of
February ( viz. the 28th day of January) 1307. and graced with the presence of
4 Kings and 3 Queens, besides the Bride, who having been His Wife twenty years,
and His Widow thirty, deceased in her great Climaterical year ( viz. 63.) at
Risings near London, the 22th day of August (an Inquisition Records it, upon
Wednesday before the Feast of St. Bartholomew) in the 31 year of the Reign of
Her Son King Edw. III. An. 1357. and was buried in the midst of the Choire of
the Gray Friars Church in London the 27th of September following. At this Grand
Solemnity Gaveston exceeds all the Company in Bravery and Richness of Attire,
which vanity of his, together with his filling the Court with Buffoons and
Parasites, so stings the Nobility, Escheatr. An. 32 E. 3. n. 43.
that at the instant the King and Queen were to be Crowned, they require
Gaveston might be removed from the Court and Kingdom, otherwise they would
hinder His Coronation at that time; to avoid which disgrace He was forced to
promise that what they desired should be performed the next Parliament,
Walsingham, p. 96. n. 42. Tho. de la Moore, p. 593. n. 5.
and so on the VII. of the Kalends of March ( viz. the 23 day of February) An.
1307. He and His Queen were Crowned at Westminster, by the hands of Henry
Bishop of Winchester (by Commission from Robert Archbishop of Canterbury,
Walsingham, p. 95. n. 25.
being then in Exile) and the Solemnity performed with great have, but little
reverence, wherein Gaveston carrying St. Edwards Crown before the King,
aggravates the hatred already conceived against him.

And accordingly in the next Parliament the Clergy and Nobility procure his
Banishment, An. 1309.
and away he is sent into Ireland, Ibidem. p. 98. n. 2. and n. 12. Thomas de la
Moore, p. 593. n. 27. Thomas de la Moore. p. 593. n. 9.
where he lived not as an Exile, but as Lieutenant of the Country; yet the King
never left working till He had recalled him again, and matched him with His
Niece Margaret, the Daughter of Joane de Acres, and Sister to Gilbert de Clare
Earl of Gloucester, a man highly esteemed of the Nobility, hoping he might
thereby find the more favor; but, such was his insolency, and the Kings
immoderate bounty to him, that the Barons sent plain word to the King, that
unless He put Gaveston from Him, they would rise against Him as a Perjured
Prince, so that He is again forced to condescend to his second banishment, and
in Flanders he lives a while, Walsingham, p. 98. n. 45.
but in great danger, and finding no where any security, back he returns into
the Kings bosom, by whom he is received with as great joy as ever, and to be
the further out of the eye of Envy, An. 1311.
is carried with Him into the North parts: But the Barons with great Forces
under the command of Thomas Earl of Lancaster follow Him, beseeching the King,
either to deliver Gaveston into their hands, or send him and his Trayn out of
England. An. 1312.
The King withdrawes to Newcastle, but having notice of the strength of the
Lords, Ibidem, p. 100. n. 59. and p. 101. n. 9.
embarquing Himself there, lands at Scarborrow Castle, whereinto He puts
Gaveston with the best Forces He could provide for his defense. The Earls of
Pembrooke and Warren lay Siege to the Castle, which he surrenders, and begs he
might once more speak with the King, Chap. 2.
which Pembrook undertakes for; Edward II.
but as he was going under Guard of some of the Earls servants, he is taken
from them by the Earl of Warwick, committed to his Castle, and there
notwithstanding the Kings earnest Solicitation for his life, Walsingham, p. 101
n. 50. etc.
Beheaded.

The Barons having had their desires in this, with great Forces, as far as
Dunstable on their way toward London, An. 1313.
where the King then lay, urge the Confirmation of the Articles formerly
granted; the great Prelates of the Kingdom, the Earl of Gloucester, with two
Cardinals (sent expressly from the Pope to that purpose) labor a
Reconciliation, which the King consenting unto, they yield to Him such Horses,
Treasures and Jewels as they had taken from Gaveston. And although the King in
the next Parliament complains of the stubborness of His Barons, yet by the
Mediation of the Queen, the Prelates, and the Earl of Gloucester, they are not
only brought to a Submission, and thereupon received into favor, but
particularly pardoned for the death of His dear favorite Gaveston.

Walsingham, p. 103 n. 59. Thomas de la Moore, p. 594. n. 3.
Whilst the State of England stood thus diseased at home, An. 1314
, Robert Bruce King of Scots, both recovers most of his own Country, and lays
waste all the borders; so that King Edward awakened by the Complaints of His
People, with most of the Nobility and especial Men of England, with an Army
consisting of 100000 men enters Scotland (the Earls of Lancaster, Warwick
Warren and Arundel refused to go, for that the King protracted the execution of
the aforesaid Articles) and near Striueling is this numerous Army defeated by
the Scots, Walsingham, p. 103. n. 1, 2, etc.
being the greatest overthrow given to England that ever it received. The
Battle of Striveling.
There dyed in this Battle Gilbert Earl of Gloucester, Ibi occubuit Gilbertus
comes Glocestriae, quem Scoti libenter ad redemptionem servassent si
cognovissent, at vero is Togam propriae Armaturae eo die induere neglexerat.
Tho. de la Moor, p. 594. n. 32.
the last of the surname of Clare (whose Body lay among the dead for some time
undiscovered, he having that day forgot to put on his Coat of Arms) the Lords,
Thomas de la Moore, p. 594. n. 16.
Mawle, Clifford and Tiptot, etc. and 700 Knights and Esquires; the slaughter
of the common Soldiers was very great, though not so great as Hector Boethius
speaks of, who says they were 50000. Humphrey de Bohun Earl of Hereford, with
many other persons of Quality, were taken Prisoners, The King Himself, with the
Bishops, and some few of the Nobility escaped by flight. This sad disaster is
accompanied with a great Dearth, and so extreme a Pestilence, that for three
years the Living could scarce bury the Dead.

Walsingham, p. 107 n. 18. Thomas de la Moor, p. 594. n. 45.
This defeat put Scotland into Arms and Money, An. 1315.
and King Robert sent his Brother Edward Bruce with an Army into Ireland,
whereof he got a great part, and the Title of a King, which he held for three
years, whilst himself having Berwick betrayed unto Him, advances as far as
York, where he had like to have surprised the Queen.

Upon this a Parliament is called at London, Walsingham, p. 3. n. 25. and 57.
Tho. de la Moor, p. 595. n. 1.
wherein an Aid of Men is granted against the Scots, An. 131^^
London sets out 200 Men, Canterbury 40, St. Albans 10, and so all other Cities
and Borroughs according to their proportion. The King laid close siege to
Barwick, and was in great probability of regaining the Town, (had not Lancaster
(perceiving the Kings intentions of giving the keeping thereof to the Lord Hugh
le Despenser, successor to the Office, Walsingham, p. 112. n. 7.
and private favor of Gaveston) withdrawn himself upon discontent. An. 1319.
York and the Countries adjacent being the Seat of War, receiving inestimable
damages by the Scots, raise an Army of 10000 men, and encounter them at Milton
upon Swayle, but are defeated with the loss of 3000 Men, so that King Edward is
forced to conclude a Truce for two years, and again returns with dishonor from
those parts.

Lancaster, An. 1320.
since his deserting the King at Barwick, becoming the refuge of Malcontents,
Walsingham, p. 113 n. 45. Thomas de la Moor p. 595. n. 8.
at Sherborne with the Earl of Hereford, and diverse other Barons, enters into a
Confederation to procure the Banishment of the Spencers, Father and Son, as the
Seducers of the King, and Oppressors of the State; and coming armed to St.
Albans, by the Bishops of London, Salisbury, Hereford and Chichester, sent from
the King to mediate a Peace, requires the banishing the Spensers, and Indemnity
to themselves and adherents: But, not receiving a satisfactory answer, they
advance to London, and lodge in the Suburbs, till they had the Kings leave to
enter the City, where they renew their Demands, and by the mediation of the
Queen and the Prelates obtain it: Hugh le Despenser the Father keeps beyond Sea
where he then was, and Hugh the Son absconds in England to expect the return
of a better season.

Queen Issabel is in her progress denied Lodging in the Castle of Leedes
belonging to the Lord Badlesmere, An. 1321.
which Indignity she complains of to the King, Ibidem, p. 114. n. 53. Tho. de
la Moore, p. 595. n. 29.
who thereupon besieges the Castle and takes it, hangs the Governor, sends
Badlesmeres Wife and Children prisoners to the Tower, and seizes all his Goods
and Treasure, and at Cicester Arms against the Barons; the Lords Audeley and
Berkeley with many others, seeing the Kings Power increase, submit themselves
to Mercy, An. 1322.
but are notwithstanding made Prisoners. Lancaster and Hereford retreat
Northwards, Walsingham, p. 115. n. 52.
and at Burton upon Trent where they had made Head, are put to flight; and
seeking to escape farther Northwards, are again encountered at Burrough-Brigg by
Sir Simon Ward Sheriff of York, and Sir Andrew Harkley Constable of Carlisle.
The Earl of Hereford is slain in gaining the pass, and Thomas Earl of Lancaster
and many other Lords are taken by Harkeley and brought to Pomfract, where the
King Himself sitting in Judgment with His Brother Edmond Earl of Kent, the
Earls of Pembrook and Warren, and Hugh le Despenser lately created Earl of
Winchester; Lancaste is Sentenced to be Drawn, Tho. de la Moor, p. 595. n. 15^
Walsingham, p. 116 n. 33. Tho. de la Moor, p. 596. n. 20^.
Hanged and Quartered; but, in regard of his Princely blood, the rigor was
indulged him, so that on the same day he was Beheaded before his own Castle of
Pomfract: By the like Judgment were condemned the Lords Roger Clifford, Warrin
Lisle, William Touchet, Thomas Maudit, Henry Bradborne, etc. and Executed at
York. Shortly after Henry Lord Teyes is taken, Drawn, Hanged and Quartered at
London, and others of the Nobility were executed after the same manner in other
places, to make it more exemplary over the Kingdom. And, whilst the terror of
this lasted, with a mighty Army he marches again into Scotland, Walsingham, p.
117. n. 32.36.
but returns very unsuccessfully, An. 1323.
and the Earl of Richmond is taken Prisoner. And now Misfortune makes Him have
a sense of the death of the Earl of Lancaster, with which He upbraides His
Counselors, Ibidem, p. 118.
and Sir Andrew Harkley who took the Earl Prisoner, and was therefore made Earl
of Carlisle, upon a suggestion of a correspondence with Scotland, was formally
Degraded, Hanged and Quartered.

The King this Parliament requires a Subsidy for the Redemption of John of
Britain Earl of Richmond, but is denied. An. 1324.
The Bishop of Hereford is Arrested for aiding the Kings Enemies in the late
Rebellion, Walsingham, p. 119. n. 32.
but refuses to answer, he being a Consecrated Bishop, and twice by the
Archbishops of Canterbury, York and Dublin, and their Suffragan Bishops, with
their Crosses erected, taken from the place of Judgment. Then the King causes
enquiry to be made Ex Officio Judicis, where he is found guilty, and all his
Goods and Possessions seized, which quite lost him the Clergy.

A Summons is now sent from France to King Edward, Ibidem. p. 120.
to do Homage for Gascoigne, which He omitting, all His Territories are
adjudged forfeited, Tho. de la Moore, p. 597. n. 37.
and many places of importance seized by the French. Edmond Earl of Kent the
Kings half-brother is first sent over, but could effect little, and therefore
the Queen puts her self on for the Accommodation of the business, An. 1325.
which She going over into France does, upon condition, that the Duchy of
Aquitaine and the Earldome of Ponthieu should be given to Prince Edward, and he
to do Homage for the same, which the King with great difficulty yielded unto,
but Queen Issabel therein had Her desire, for then with the young Lord Mortimer
Her Mignion, She has private Consultations, which being discovered to the King
by the Bishop of Exeter, she is sent for back; but delaying her return,
Walsingham, p. 122. n. 16. Tho. de la Moore, p. 598. n. 15. Walsingham, p. 123.
n. 19.
she and her adherents are Proclaimed Enemies to the Kingdom, where, finding no
great encouragement from Her brother the King of France, She applies Her self
to the Earl of Henault, to whose Daughter Philippa she contracts the Prince,
and having got Men and Money, with the Earls of Kent and Pembrook, the Lord
Mortimer, and John brother to the Earl of Henault, with 2000 Henowayes and
Flemings she arrives at Harwich, and to Her flock all the discontented Nobility
and others, especially the Bishops of Hereford and Lincoln.

The King, upon notice of Her arrival, commands that none upon pain of death
should aid the Queen, but destroy all the Invaders, excepting only Her own
Person, the Prince, and his brother Edmond Earl of Kent, and offers a 1000 l.
for the Head of Roger Mortimer, and having committed the Ward of the Tower to
His younger Son John of Eltham Earl of Cornwall, He departs toward the West,
hoping there to have the same aid He formerly had against the Barons, but
finding none regard Him, after having put 1326.
Hugh le Despenser the Father into the Castle of Bristol with what Force He
had, the King hides Himself first in the Isle of Lundy, and afterward in the
Abbey of Nesh. Tho. de la Moore, p. 599. n. 9. Walsingham, p. 124. and 125.
Tho. de la Moore, p. 598. n. 50.


The Queen (whose Army daily increased) follows Him first to Oxford, and
thence to Gloucester, where the Lord Percy and other Barons with the Northern
Forces meet Her, thence to Bristol, which Castle She wins, and causes Hugh le
Despenser, lately made Earl of Winchester, without form or Trial of Law, to be
Drawn, Hanged and Quartered on the common Gallows in his Coat of Arms. This
done she passes to Hereford, where Proclamation is made, that if the King would
return and Govern as He ought; He should be received with the General Consent
of the People; but He not daring to trust this offer, advantage is taken of
making the Prince Guardian of the Kingdom, and has Fealty sworn to him.

After which, it was not long ere King Edward was discovered, and by Henry Earl
of Lancaster, brother to the late Earl Thomas, William Lord Zouch, and Rice ap
Howel, conveyed to Kenelworth Castle. Hugh le Despenser the younger,
Walsingham, p. 125. and 126. Thomas de la Moore, p. 599. n. 52. Ibidem. p 600.
n. 12
Robert of Baldock the Chancellor, and Simon Reading are taken with Him;
Gloucester likewise in his Coat Armor, on which was written Psalm 52. Quid
gloriaris in malitia, to the Verse Ego autem sicut Oliva, is Drawn and Hanged
on a Gallows 50 Foot high: upon whose Execution a certain Author thus
Versifieth, Funis cum lignis, a te miser, ensis, and ignis
Hugo securis, equus, abstulit omne decus.
Reading was hanged 10 foot lower then Spencer, and Baldock because a Priest
Pined to death in Newgate. And a little before Richard Fitz-Alan Earl of
Arundel, John Daniel, and Thomas Micheldene, at the instance of Mortimer are
all three beheaded; In the mean time the Commons of London possess themselves
of the Tower, and put to death Weston the Constable, and the Bishop of Exeter.

After a months stay at Hereford Queen Issabel returns to London, Walsingham,
p. 126. n. 30.40. and 50.
where the Parliament being assembled agree to Depose the King, and Elect His
Eldest Son Edward in His place, which He hearing refused, unless his Father
would freely resign. Thomas de la Moore, p. 600. n. 40.
Whereupon by common Decree, 3 Earls, 2 Bishops, 2 Abbots, 4 Barons, the
Knights of every Shire, and a certain number of Burgesses of every City and
Borrough are sent to the Imprisoned King to Kenelworth-Castle, to require His
Renuntiation; who being brought in Mourning Robes before the Assembly (and the
Bishop of Hereford declaring the cause of their coming) as soon as His Passion
would give Him leave, answered them, That as He was much grieved His People
should be so hardened against Him, Ibidem, p. 601. n. 16.
as utterly to reject Him, so it was some comfort to Him, that they would yet
receive His Son to be their Sovereign: Ibidem. n. 21.
After which William Trussel Speaker of the Parliament, in Name of the whole
Kingdom Pronounced a Form of renouncing all Allegiance to Edward of
Caernarvon, which was the first example of a Deposed King; no less
Dishonorable to the State, then to Him.

After His Deposing, Walsingham, p. 127. n. 37.
he remained a Prisoner at Kenelworth-Castle, with an Allowance of 100 Marks a
Month; but, not being thought safe enough under the Custody of his Cousin the
Earl of Lancaster, Thomas de la Moor p. 601. n. 58.
he is committed to other Guardians, the Lord Maltravers and Thomas Gourney,
and removed to Berkeley-Castle, and thence to Corfe-Castle, and so carried up
and down to disappoint his Friends, if any Plot should be laid for his
Restoration; and, to disguise him the more, Gourney caused this miserable King
in the open Fields to sit upon a Molehill whilst his Barber shaved his head
and beard with water out of the Ditch; Ibidem, n. 33.
many other vile Reproaches these Villains put upon their Sovereign as they
carried him back to Berkley-Castle, where many ways were attempted to take
away his life, Ibidem, n. 10.
by vexing him in his diet, lodging him in a Chamber over Carrion, and also by
Poison, none of which succeeding, that Pestilent Achitophel, Adam Torleton
Bishop of Hereford devised a Letter to his Keepers, blaming them for giving the
King too much liberty, Ibidem. p. 602. n. 53.
and for not performing the Service which was expected from them, and finished
his Epistle with this Line.

Edwardum occidere nolite timere bonum est. Which admitting of a double
construction, both the Keepers might find sufficient Warrant, and himself
sufficient excuse; for, if you place the Point between nolite and timere it
forbids: but, if between timere and bonum it exhorts them to the committing
of the Fact, in which Sense (guessing at Torletons meaning) they took it, and
put it in execution; Walsingham, p. 127 and 128. Tho. de la Moor, p. 603. n. 29.
for finding the King in bed, they stifled Him with heavy Boulsters, and not
satisfied with that, heated an Iron red hot, and through a Pipe, thrust it up
into his Fundament, that no marks of violence might be seen; but when the Fact
was doing he was heard to roar and cry all the Castle over. The Queen and
Bishop Torleton disavowing the Command, Ibidem. n. 39.
threaten to question Gourney and Maltravers for the Kings death; who, in stead
of the expectation of a Reward, are forced to fly beyond Sea, Gourney into
France, from whence about three years after he was taken, and beheaded at Sea
in his return for England; And Maltravers into Germany, Ypodigmae Neustriae, p.
508.
where he had the Grace to Repent, but lived ever after miserably.

Thus dyed King Edward II. more then half a year after his Deposing,
Walsingham, p. 126, 127, and 128.
upon the 25th day of January, An. 1326. His Death,
in the year 1326 ( Walsingham says An. 1327.) and 43 of his Age, when he had
Reigned 19 years, 6 months, and 18 days. His Body was carried to Gloucester,
and there without any Funeral Pomp buried in the Monastery of St. Peter (since
a Cathedral) by the Benedictine Friars, where King Edward III. His Son erected
a Monument of white Stone, with His Portaiture thereon of Alablaster, See the
Figure of His Tomb in the following Page.
in the second Arche, and on the North-side the Altar, betwixt two Pillars
monument Honoratissimo et Nobilissimo Domino, Dno: GEORGIO Baroni BERKLEY,
Mowbray Segraue et Breuse de; Gower hanc Tumuli Regis EDWARDI Secundi, Figuram.
H.D.D.D.F.S.

of the Tuscan-Order, about which (near to the Capitals) are painted the
Figures of several Staggs, with which (as common Fame tells us) His Corpse was
drawn thither from Berkley-Castle: In the same place also the King His Father
erected a Chantry to Pray for His Soul, etc. Nor did King Edward II. leave
Posterity without remarkes of His Charity, having Founded Oriall College, and
St. Mary-Hall in Oxford, and built a Church for Friars at His Manor of
Langley, where the Soul of Gaveston should be Prayed for.

Penes Eliam Ashmole Armigerum. Windsor.
On His Royal Seal (the Figure of which is represented in the 121. Page of this
Third Book) He used the same Circumscription as did His Father King Edward I.
viz. EDWARDUS DEI GRACIA REX ANGLIE DOMINUS HIBERNIE DUX AQUITANIE,
distinguishable from His Fathers Seal only by the Addition of two Castles, one
on each side His Throne (Queen Elianor His Mother being of the Royal House of
Castile and Leon) and some small difference in the Grate of the Kings Helmet.
This Seal (of Green-Wax) is annexed to a Charter dated at Westminster upon the
20th day of November, in the 14th year of his Reign, Anno Dom. 1320.

Children of King EDWARD II. by Queen ISSABEL of France His Wife.
9. EDWARD, the Eldest Son of King Edward the Second and Queen Issabel, after
the Deposition and Death of His Father, succeeded him in his Kingdom by the
Name of King Edward III. vide the III. Chapter of this Third Book.

9. JOHN of Eltham Earl of Cornwall, John Earl of Cornwall did bear Gules 3
Lions passant Guardant, Or, within a border of France, which are Embossed and
Painted upon the North-side the Tomb of Queen Philippa Wife of King Edward
III. and also upon his Shield in his Monument depicted in the following Page.
Which Border was not only a Brizure to distinguish his Arms from those of King
Edward III. his brother, but also to signify his being descended from a
Daughter of the Flowers de Lize, as was Queen Issabel his Mother. The Figure
upon his Monument (there exhibited) is adorned also with a Diadem composed of a
Circle of greater and lesser Leaves or Flowers, and is the most ancient
Portraiture of an Earl (in my observation) that has a Coronet. For the
Effigies of Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, sometime lying on a fair Tomb in the
East End of St. Paul's Church, had the head encompassed with a Circle only, and
that of William de Valence Earl of Pembrook (covered with Copper) in St.
Edmonds Chapel in Westminster-Abbey, has only a Circle of the same Metal
enriched and embellished with Stones of several Colors, but without either
Points, Rays or Leaves.


second Son of King Edward II. (so Surnamed from the Kings Manour-House of
Eltham in Kent, Ypodigmae Neustriae, p. 502. n. 41.
where Queen Issabel was delivered of him upon Assumption-day, An. 1315. in the
9th. year of King Edward II.) was in a Parliament held at Salisbury, Tho.
Walsingham, p. 129. n. 7.
An. 1328, and second year of the Reign of his brother King Edward the III.
created Earl of Cornwall, at which time Roger Mortimer, and James Butler of
Ireland were created Earls, the one of March, and the other of Ormond.

Upon the 25th of May, Apud Dover, Pat. an. 3 Ed. 3. pars 1. m. 16. Pat. an. 7
Ed. 3. pars 1. m. 17.
Anno 3 Edw. 3. He was Constituted Custos of the Kingdom of England, and the
Kings Lieutenant during his absence beyond Seas, etc. in the 7th year of whose
Reign there were Proposals of a Marriage betwixt this Earl John and Joane the
Daughter of Ralph Earl of Eu. monument Nobilissimo et Potent. Dom^: HENRICO
Comiti de ARLINGTON Vicecomiti The^^ ford Baroni Arlington nec non Hospitij Dni
Regis Car: IIdi. Cameraria, a secretioribus Consilijs, Nobilissimique. Ordinis
Garterij Equiti Tumuli hanc IOHANNIS Comitis Cornubia figuram H.D.FS.

HAVD FACILE EMERGVNT

The year following ( viz. An. 1334.) there was also a Treaty of Marriage
between him, Pat. a. 8 Edw. 3. pars. 1.
and Mary Daughter to the Count of of Blois, neither of which taking effect,
made way for a third, with Mary the Daughter of Ferdinand of Spain, Lord of
Lara, which was agreed upon betwixt Blanch Countess of Savoy, Ibidem, pars. 2.
in behalf of the said Lady Mary, on the one part, and this John of Eltham Earl
of Cornwall on the other, Dated at London the 28th day of September, An. 1334.
and confirmed by King Edward III. upon the 30th day of the same Month. Pat. a.
8 Edw. 3. m. 26.
This doubtless had proved a Match had not the Obligation been Cancelled by the
death of Earl John, which although it happened in the next Month, being
October, yet deceased he at St. Johns-Town in the most remote part of Scotland:
From whence his Corpse being brought into England, had a Solemn Interrment in
St. Edmonds Chapel, on the South side of the Choire in Westminster Abbey; (for
which the Prior and Convent claimed 100 pounds Fine, in lieu of horses and
armor offered there upon the day of his burial) where his Tomb of White Stone
with his Effigies of Alablaster lying thereon remains entire, Clausae de a. 27
E. 3. m. 27.
in the form expressed in the precedent Figure.

9. JOANE Queen of Scots, The Figure of this Joane Queen of Scots stood in a
Niche on tue North-side the Tomb of Queen Philippa Her Sister in Law, in
Westminster. Abbey, under which on an Escocheon of Alablaster, her Arms are
Carved and Painted, Being per Pale Scotland and England, viz. Or, a Lion
Rampant within a double Tressure, flowery Counter-flowry, Gules: And Gules 3
Lions passant guardant, or.
eldest Daughter of King Edward II. and Queen Issabel of France his Wife, born
in the Tower of London, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 510. n. 37.
was, being yet a Child, Married at Barwick (on the 18th day of July, Anno 3
Edw. 3. in the year 1329.) to David Prince of Scotland, Son and heir apparent
of King Robert Bruce, whom, within half a year after he succeeded in the
Kingdom at the age of seven years: Being the second King of Scotland of the
name of David.

Queen Joane was his Wife 28 years, and being come into England to visit her
Brother King Edward III. she deceased here without issue in the two and
thirtieth year of his Reign, An. 1357. and was buried in the Church of the Gray
Friars in London.

9. ELEANOR Duchess of Geldres, In 2 Niches on the South Side of the said Queen
Philippas Tomb sometime stood the Statues of this Raynold Duke of Geldres, and
Duchess Elianor his Wife in Alablas^er, long since defaced, but there still
remain the Escocheons of their Arms; The Dukes being, Azure, a Lion Rampant
queve forche, or, crowned proper. And the said Coat impaleing, Gules, 3 Lions
passant Guardant, or, under the Nich^ where stood the Effigies of the Duchess
Elianor.
second Daughter of King Edward II. and Queen Issabel, was the second Wife of
Reynald II. Earl of Geldres, Married to him with a Portion of Fifteen Thousand
pounds, Anno 1332. being the sixth year of the Reign of King Edward III. her
Brother.

This Earl Reynald being Vicar General of the Empire to the Emperor Lewis of
Bavaria, he created him first Duke of Geldres. The Duchess Elianor had issue by
him two Sons, Reynald and Edward, who were Dukes successively after their
Father, and both dyed without issue. The latter of them leaving his Duchy and
his Wife to his Nephew William Duke of Gulick, his half Sisters Son.

9. EDWARD III. Anno 1327.
KING of ENGLAND, and FRANCE, and LORD of IRELAND, Surnmed of WINDSOR.
CHAP. III.
THis most Renowned King Edward III, The Seal of this Edward (in vita patris)
being of Greenwax, is annexed to a Grant, bearing date in the year 1325. An. 19
Ed. 2. upon the circumferences on both sides thereof He is styled, EDWARDUS
PRIMOGENITUS REGIS ANGLIE DUX AQUITANIE COMES CESTRIE PONTIVI ET MONTISTROLLI.
The Figure of this Seal is exhibited in the 123. Page of this Third Book, on
the one side of which He is represented on Horseback, with His Shield,
Sur-coate, and His Horse Caparizon'd: All which are charged with 3 Lions
passant guardant, and a Label of 3 Points: On the Reverse is a large Escocheon,
on which are also 3 Lions passant Guardant, with the distinction of a File of 5
Points. This Instrument is in the Library of Sir John Cotton Baronet, a
Gentleman as generously free in communicating, as his Grandfather Sir Robert
Cotton was curious in collecting those excellent Manuscripts, and rare
Antiquities. Being King, Edward made use of 3 several Great Seals, upon the
first of which (delineaed in the 123 Page of this 3d. Book.) He is figured on
his Throne between 2 Collateral Flowers de Lize, to denote his descent from a
Daughter of France. This Grant bears date at Roxborrow (in Scotland) the 16
day of January, An. 8 E. 3. and is in the Registry of Westminster-Abbey

His Second Royal Seal affixed to a Deed dated at Windsor upon the 20th day of
September in the 13 year of his Reign, An. 1339. differs materially from the
former only in this particular, That the King on his Throne is seated betwixt 6
Lions passant guardant, on each side 3, all respecting His Royal Seat. The
Circumscriptions on both these Seals are the same with those of Ed. 1. and Ed.
2. his Grandfather and Father, viz. EDWARDUS DEI GRATIA REX ANGLIE DOMINUS
HIBERNIE ET DUX AQUITANIE. This Instrument is in the Chamber of the Duchy of
Lancaster; and the Figure thereof is delineated in the 122. Page of this Third
Book.

The Figure of His Third Great Seal represented in the 124 Page of this Third
Book, in which He is styled EDWARDUS DEI GRATIA REX FRANCIE ET ANGLIE ET
DOMINUS HIBERNIE is affixed to a Charter dated at Westminster upon the second
day of May, in the 15 year of His Reign of England, and of France the Second;
in which Seal He leaves out the Title of Duke of Aquitaine, it being immerged
in His new assumed Title of King of France. On one side thereof the King is
represented on his Throne with a Scepter in His Right Hand, and a Globe on His
Left, betwixt two collateral Escocheons of France and England, Quarterly The
same Quartering is also upon His Shield, Surcoat, and Caparizons of His Horse
on His Counterseal; and so careful have the Kings his Successors been ever
since in Marshalling the Arms of both Kingdoms in the same shield, that when
Charles VI. King of France changed the Semee Flowers de Lize, into Three, our
King Henry V. did the like, and so has it continued ever since.

As Edward III. was the first of our Kings, who Quartered Arms in His Seal, so
was He the first King that on His Counterseal represents you with a Crest,
being a Lion passant guardant crowned upon a Chapeau, with which His Figure on
Horseback is adorned, and which our succeeding Monarchs down to Edward VI.
inclusive, have continued in their Royal Seals. And furthermore we must
observe, that in the Margin of this Counterseal, near to the point of the Kings
Sword, is represented the Hand of Justice, being an Ensign of Royalty peculiar
only to the Kings of France; for although the Monarchs of the Lillies carry in
their Right Hands a Scepter of Gold (which is common to other Princes) yet in
the other they bear The Hand of Justice, being a Rod of a Cubit in height,
having on the top thereof a Left Hand wide open, of Ivory, pure white, framed
out of the Tooth of the Elephant, which among all four-footed Beasts is
observable for his Devotion and Piety, love to his Governors, and also for his
Equity: The reason why the Left Hand is here preferred before the Right, is
said to be because that the Left Hand not being employed to the working of many
dishonest actions, or violent, without art, deceit, or industry, is much more
proper to represent and signify the Rudder or Stern of Justice, than the
Right Hand: Most aptly therefore was this Hand of Justice placed at the point
of King Edwards Sword (in His Counterseal,) seeming to intend, that as the
Sword of Force in the Right Hand of Power, was to be used in obtaining that
Kingdom; yet that Sword only pointed out to the hand of Justice, for the Rule
and Government thereof. You may find this hand so placed in the Counterseals of
His Successors Richard II. and Henry IV: Henry V. omitted it in His Seal, and
Conquering France, both placed that Crown on the Head; and the French Scepter,
and this Rod of Justice in the Hands of his Son and Successor King Henry VI.


, was the Eldest Son of K. Edward the Second, Scevole and Louis de Saint
Marthe. Live. VII. Chap. IV.
and of Queen Issabel his Wife, Daughter to Philip IV. Surnamed the Fair,
King of France (whose sons Lewis, Philip and Charles, all Kings of France
successively) dying without Issue-male, this Prince challenged the Crown of
France as the next Heir-male thereunto, in the Right of his said Mother.

He was born in Windsor-Castle upon the 13th day of November, being Monday, in
the year 1312. Claus. 6 Ed. 2. m. 22. in dorso. Pat. a. 19. Edw. 2. p. 1. m.
25. Tho. Walsingham. p. 102. n. 33. Claus. de eodem, An. m. 28. in Dorso. E.
Bibliotheca Cottoniana. Claus. 20 Ed. 2. m. 3. Dorse.
An. 6 Ed. 2. who on the second day of September, in the 19th year of his
Reign, first gave to this Edward, his Heirs and Successors Kings of England,
jure haereditario imperpetuum, the Counties of Ponthieu and Monstroile, and on
the 10th day of the same Month (at Dover) Granted to him the Dukedom of
Aquitaine, and all the Lands he had, or ought to hold in the Kingdom of
France, for which (passing into France) he did his Homage to that King. In His
Charter dated upon the Sunday before Christmass-Day, An. 1325. He is styled
Eddouart fuis ainzne du Roy d' Angleterre Duc d' Aquitaine Conte de Cestre and
de Pontyu.

Shortly after his return into England he was unanimously Chosen Custos of the
Kingdom (the King his Father being fled into Wales) not long after which
followed his Fathers Resignation of the Crown, upon which great preparations
were made for this young Princes Coronation, which was Solemnly performed at
Westminster, Tho. Walsing. p. 127. n. 18.
by Walter Archbishop of Canterbury, upon the first day of February, An. 1327.
An. Dom. 1327. so that he began his Reign not at the Death, but Deposition of
his Father, which so great a crime can in no wise be attributed to this King,
being then but 14 years of age; the whole cause of that horrid blame too
apparently remaining upon the Queen His Mother, and her Minion Roger Lord
Mortimer (though Countenanced by a Parliament, and forced Resignation) who
usurped all to themselves; notwithstanding, for mere show of the contrary,
Twelve especial Men are Elected to manage the Affairs till the King was fit to
Govern of Himself. VVhereupon, to busy the present Times, and uphold this
Change, an Expedition is immediately set on foot for Scotland, wherein all the
Hainowayes and other strangers still retained with the Queen, Ypodigma
Neustriae p. 509. n. 50.
since her last return from France and Hainault are principally employed, under
the conduct of John Lord Beaumont; which being very much disgusted by the
English, a Commotion is raised, some Blood spilt, and the Tumult hardly
appeased. At Stannop-Parke, Tho. Walsingham, p. 127. n. 46.
in the Bishopric of Durham both Armies met, where the English, though thrice
the greater in number, could not be said to have obtained the Victory, the
Scots all without hurt escaping, by Treason of some of the English great ones,
as is more than probably suspected.

In the year also 1327, Ypodig. Neustriae p. 510. n. 13.
King Edward's Marriage is Solemnized at York, In a South-Window of St. Mary
Bothaw Church near London-stone, ( An. 1665.) stood in painted Glass an
Escocheon of the Arms of Q. Philippa, viz. Or, 4 Lions rampant in quadrangle,
the first and fourth Sable, the second athird Gules, impaled with Gules 3 Lions
passant guardant, or, set up in that Window before King Edward III. Quartered
the Arms of France: But afterward I find them impaled in diverse Windows with
France and England Quarterly. Upon Her Privy Seal of Red-Wax (See the Figure
thereof, p. 124.) is this Circumscription, SECRETUM: PHILIPPE: DE: DANONIA:
REGINE: ANGLIE: about a Shield charged with the Arms of England and Henault
Quarterly. This Indenture bears date at Westminster, the 24 day of June, An.
33 Ed. 3. and is in my custody. The like Arms of this Queen are in a Window of
Leyer Church in Leicestershire: And I find that Q. Anne Wife to King Richard
II. Quartered Her Arms with the Arms of France and England; but neither of
these being Heirs, these two Examples do absolutely thwart the true Rule for
Quartering of Arms.
with Philippa the Third daughter of William Earl of Henault (she was Crowned
at Westminster on the first Sunday in Lent in the same year) Sister to William
IV. of the name, Walsingh. p. 129. n. 28. Scevole and Louis de St. Marthe Tome
1. p. 451. Tho. Walsingham, p. 128. n. 16.
Earl of Holland and Henault, slain by the Frisons, without lawful issue, and
to Margaret of Henault Wife of the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria. Her Mother was
Joane the eldest daughter of Charles Count of Valois, younger Son of Philip the
Hardy King of France, and Sister to King Philip de Valois; notwithstanding
which Alliance she proved a most constant, and true-hearted Lover of the
English Nation, and highly assisted King Edward III. her husband in the
prosecution of his claim to the Crown of France, being a Lady of great honor
and virtue.

During this time the Deposed King Edw. II. is Murdered in Berkley Castle by
the Lord Maltravers and Thomas Gourney; Thomas de la Moor. p. 602. n. 53.
The Murderers, though they had a Commission, and great hopes of a reward, yet
not daring to avow so monstrous a Fact fled their Country. Gourney is three
years after taken in France, Ibidem, p. 603. n. 39.
and being upon his return for England is put to death at Sea, least by his
arrival more of the Villainy might be revealed; though before Divine Justice had
sufficiently fallen, and was still lighting, not only on the heads of the
Contrivers themselves, but the whole Kingdom. A Parliament is held at
Northampton, where a most dishonorable Peace is made with the Scots, the King
quits His Interest in that Kingdom, delivers up the Evidence called
Ragman-Roole, the Black Cross of Scotland, together with all Fealties and
Homages whatsoever, etc. and in a Parliament at Winchester, An. 1329.
Edmond Earl of Kent is accused to have endeavored the Restoration of the
late deposed King his Brother, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 510. n. 38.
for which he is condemned, and lost his head.

Another Parliament is held at Nottingham, where, on the contrary, An. 1330.
the Power of the Queen and Mortimer are quite plucked up by the roots, Ibidem,
p. 510. n. 52.
she reduced to the maintenance of 1000 l. per annum. Mortimer accused of the
Kings Death, The Scots escape at Stanhop Park, The young Kings late Marriage
with Philippa of Hainalt, The dishonorable Peace with the Scots, To have
wasted the Treasure of the Kingdom, and been too familiar with the Queen, for
which he is Condemned, sent up to London, and hanged at Tyburne. Ibidem, n. 57.
Thus did this Noble young Prince (being now arrived at somewhat more maturity
of years) begin to wipe out the stains which during His Minority had blemished
the State of His Kingdom.

Notwithstanding upon the Coronation of the new King of France, He being
Summoned to do Homage for the Dukedom of Guien, and other Lands which He there
possessed, was about this time induced to render this Homage at Amiens,
according to the arrogant demands of the King of France, with more then due or
decent submission, for which, in short time after, the new Sovereign and His
whole Nation paid severely. For full of indignation, and swollen for Revenge, He
returns for England, Ypodigmae Neustriae, p. 511. n. 31.
where first a fit occasion is offered Him to rectify the abuse He had
received by the late ill concluded Peace with Scotland; An. 1332.
Edward Baliol now appearing out of France to question His Right to that Crown,
from which His Father John had 32 years before been unjustly Deposed, with
whom he goes against Barwick, and after three Months siege took it, and the
Scots Army, which came to its relief, Hollinshed Chr. p. 350. a.
utterly defeated at Hallydowne Hill; Battle of Hallydown-Hill. An. 1334.
where were slain 7 Earls, 90 Knights and Bannerets, 400 Esquires, and about
32000 Common Soldiers. The year following King Edward Baliol does His Homage
to the King of England, Ypodigma Neustria, p. 511. n. 60.
and takes His Oath of Fealty for Himself and His Successors for ever,
delivering up several Counties adjacent to the borders, that thereby He might
for the future secure Himself with more quiet, with which His own Subjects were
not so contented, but often rebelled; against whom, K. Edward of England went
as often in Person, and never returned but with Victory. Scotland being thus
quieted for some years, gave King Edward opportunity to look toward France,
which afterward became the Scene of all His Martial Glory. For Robert d'
Artois (a Prince of the Blood, and near Kinsman to Philip VI. King of France,
Surnamed of Valois) being discontented at the Sentence, wherein King Philip had
given the Earldome of Artois from him to Maud Countess of Burgundy, let fall
some dangerous words, and they being laid hold on, force him into England,
where he is honorably received, Froiss. Chron. Lib. 1. Chap. 28.
and advises King Edward to set on Foot His Claim to the Crown of France, An.
1337.
whereunto he is easily inclined, and by the advice and assistance of His
Father in Law the Earl of Henault, Confederates with the Dukes of Brabant and
Geldres, the Archbishop of Cologne, and other Princes of Germany, and from the
Emperor Himself obtained to be made Vicar General of the Empire. The Flemings
also, by Jaques d' Artuell a Citizen of Gaunt, Ibidem, Chap. 29.
are wrought to His Party, who were ready to assail the French upon all
occasions, so that having thus prepared his Confederates abroad, all means are
devised to raise Money at home, which by a Parliament held at Northampton is by
diverse ways effected with which He, His Queen, Ypodig. Neustriae, p. 513. n.
19, and 32.
and Children go for Flanders, An. 1338.
and reside at Antwerp, where by the persuasion of the Flemmings He takes upon
Him, the Style, Title, and Arms of the king of France, that they might thereby
justify the Oath which they had formerly made, never to bear Arms against the
King of France; standing engaged also in the Popes Chamber in Two Millions of
Florens upon the same account. King Edward therefore upon His return into
England, delivers His New Great Seal to Sir John de St. Paul in the
Cage-Chamber at Westminster, See His d3 Great Seal, p. 124. An. 1339.
upon the First day of March in the year 1339. Claus. 14. Edw. 3. p. 1. m. 42.
dorso.
An. 14 Ed. 3. on both sides, thus Circumscribed, EDWARDUS DEI GRACIA REX
FRANCIE ET ANGLIE ET DOMINUS HIBERNIE. The first example of the Quartering of
Arms is found in Spain when the Kingdoms of Castile and Leon were united under
Ferdinand III. and here followed by King Edward III. by Quartering the Arms of
France and England, An. 1338. And afterward in the year 1349, Humbert the last
Dauphin of Viennois enjoined Philip of Valois King of France, when he granted
him that Dauphinate or Province, that the eldest Son of the French King should
for ever bear the Title of Dauphin, and quarter the Arms of the Dauphinate
with those of France.
But in a Charter to which the said Seal is affixed, Ex Registro
Westmonasteriensi.
He is styled Edwardus dei Gratia Rex Anglie and Francie and Dominus Hibernie,
Test 2do Die Maii, Anno Regni nostri Anglie quinto decimo, Regni vero nostri
Francie secundo; Giving England precedence in the Charter, and France in the
Seal, on which the King is represented sitting on his Throne, holding His
Scepter and Globe betwixt 2 Collateral Escocheons, each containing the Arms of
France and England quarterly, which Arms are also upon His Shield, Surcoat,
and the Caparizons of His Horse, in the Counter-Seal.

The preparations of the French King were in all respects equivalent both at
home and abroad, so that they War upon the borders of each others Countries:
King Edward sets upon Cambray, and King Philip seizes on the Duchy of Guyen;
a great Navy he had at Sea, which committed much Spoil upon the Coasts of
England: King Edward enters France by the way of Vermandois, and the Armies of
both Kings lodge between Viron Fosse and la Flemenguere, where they only face
each other, and withdraw, the French King to Paris, and the King of England
into Brabant; from whence (leaving His Queen there) He returns for England,
Ypodigma Neustriae p. 513. n. 40.
and finding the Tower of London unguarded (with which He is highly offended)
He sends for the Lord Mayor of London, whom He commanded to bring before Him
the Chancellor and Treasurer, with the Officers of His Receipt, commits them
all to Prison (except the Chancellor) as He did diverse other Officers of
Justice and Accomptants, upon inquiry made of their unjust proceedings.

In Lent following He called a Parliament at London, Ypodig. Neustriae p. 513.
n. 42.
wherein a great Subsidy is granted Him of all sorts of Merchandable
Commodities, etc. And much about the same time William Montague Earl of
Salisbury, Tho. Walsingham, p. 148. n. 2. Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 514. n. 7.
and Robert Vfford Earl of Suffolk, left in Flanders to oppose the proceedings
of the French, having performed diverse great exploits with happy success, and
presuming overmuch upon their fortune, were in an encounter about Lisle both
taken prisoners and sent to Paris, which so encouraged the French King, that to
impede the return of King Edward, Tho. Walsing. p. 148. n. 35.
he sets forth a mighty Navy, consisting of 200 Sail of Ships, besides
Gallyes; Anno 1340.
whereof King Edward having advise, with as numerous a Fleet sets out to Sea,
and on Midsummer-day encounters His Enemy near Sluice, with such force and
courage, that He utterly defeated their whole Navy, took or sunk all their
Ships, slew 30000 Men, and Landed there with as great Glory, as such a Victory
(the greatest at Sea that ever before by the English was obtained) could yield.

This loss, though it much abated the power of the French King, yet with great
industry it is soon supplied, so that out of His own Dominions and those of His
Confederates, He makes a mighty head against this Victorious King of England,
who now lay before Tourney with His whole Army, Tho. Walsingham. p. 149. n. 21.
Tho. Walsingham p. 149. n. 29.
who from Chyn sends his Chartel, July 17, to Philip de Valois at St. Andrews
les Air, both places not far distant from Tourney, Declaring, That He was come
with the Power of His own Kingdom, and Aid from the Flemings, to recover His
due Right to France, which since He could obtain by no other means then the
Sword, to avoid the shedding of Christian blood, seeing the business was
betwixt them two, He offers to try the same by Combat in Close Camp, Body to
Body, Ibidem, p. 149. n. 34.
or with 100 choice Men of a side, or to strike Batrel within ten days after,
before the City of Tourney.

Upon the last day of July the King of France returned his Answer, Tho.
Walsingham, p. 149. n. 37.
That whereas those Letters and requests appeartained not to him, and so from
him required no answer: But, since that contrary to his Oath and duty of a
Liege-man he had with his Forces invaded the Territories of his Liege-Lord; by
the Divine assistance he would endeavor to beat Him out, and make Him a weary
of the War which He had so unjustly begun, and, as their History reports,
added, That King Edward by His Chartel, adventured nothing of His own, but only
exposed the Dominion of another, but if He would venture the Kingdom of England
against that of France, he would enter Combat with Him in close Camp, on
Condition the Victor should enjoy both, but that they say King Edward would not
do. Three Months the Siege continued before Tourney, and nothing done but
devastation of the Country thereabouts, when Jone de Valois sister to King
Philip, and Mother of Queen Philippa, leaving her Monastery, never rested,
though often denied by both the enraged Kings, until she obtained a day and
place of parley; whereupon a Truce for a year is concluded.

This sudden Truce thus condescended unto by King Edward, had indeed no other
motive than want of Supplies, which notwithstanding the aforesaid great
Impositions, Tho. Walsingham, p. 150. n. 13.
came short of His expectation, upon which (with his Queen, and two of his
Sons) he returns for England, from whence he had now been absent 3 years,
where in great displeasure He removes His Chancellor, Imprisons his Treasurer,
with other Officers (most of them Clergymen) and still held them in durance;
Ibidem, p. 1^2. n. 17. n. 57. and p. 154. n. 31. Walsingham, p. 154. n. 37.
whom John Stratford Archbishop of Canterbury, by his Letters to the King
boldly undertakes to vindicate, to whom, upon examination of the matter, the
neglect of the Kings Supplies is in all Men's Judgment imputed.

Shortly after the King is much pressed in Parliament, and earnestly Petitioned
by the whole Assembly of the Three Estates, that the Great Charter of
Liberties, and the Charter of Forests might be duly observed, and that
whosoever of the Kings Officers had infringed the same might lose their Places,
and that as in formers times, the High-Officers of the Kingdom should be
Elected in Parliament. The King stood stiff upon His own Choice and
Prerogative, yet yielded (in regard to have His own turn served, as Himself
afterward confessed) whereupon a Statute was to that purpose made, but not
long after revoked.

The Truce agreed upon before Tourney yielded some Cessation of Arms, Anno
1342.
but not plotting more mischief; Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 514. n. 58. Ibidem, p.
515. n. 3.
for Lewis de Bavaria, Entitled the Emperor, is won to the French King, but in
stead of so remote a Confederate, Fortune brought another out of their own
Country unto us. A Controversy is there raised between Charles de Blois, and
John de Montfort for the Duchy of Bretague, and by the Parliament of Paris
adjudged to Blois, whereupon Montfort enraged comes for England, Tho.
Walsingham p. 160. n. 37.
and tenders his Homage to King Edward, who receives him with Applause; and,
however his Title is looked upon in France, it is here made good. Furnished
therefore with some assistance from King Edward, he returns for Bretagne,
encounters with his Enemy, and is taken Prisoner, whereupon his Wife, Sister to
the Earl of Flanders, prosecutes his Quarrel, craves Aid of the King of
England, which, for his own Designs sake he denies her not, but sends the
Earls of Salisbury, Pembrooke and Suffolk, the Lords Stafford, le Despenser,
and Bourchier, together with Robert d'Artois (now Earl of Richmond) with great
Forces to the Ladies assistance, Ypodig. Neustriae, p. 515. n. 7.
where at the Siege of Vannes Robert receives his last wound, but dies in
England, after he had served the English six years.

After which King Edward goes thither in Person, Tho. Walsingham, p. 160. n. 19.
and before Vannes endeavors to encounter the Duke of Normandy, eldest Son to
King Philip, but before they come to Engage, a Truce is made betwixt then by
the Mediation of two Cardinals sent thither by Pope Clement the Sixth, Ypodigm^
Neustriae, p. 514. n. 52.
and concluded for three years. The Isle of Man about this time is taken by
William Montague Earl of Sarum, whom King Edward causes to be styled King
thereof.

Many Solemn Tournaments, An 1344.
and other Exercises of War are performed at Dunstable and Smithfield, but
more especially at Windsor, where King Edward designed the Restoration of King
Arthur's Round Table, Tho. Walsing, p. 164. n. 33.
in imitation of which He caused to be erected a Table of 200 Foot Diameter,
where the Knights should have their entertainment of Diet at His Expense,
amounting to 100 l. per Week. In Emulation of these Martial Associations at
Windsor, King Philip of Valois practiced the like at his Court in France, to
invite the Knights and valiant Men of Arms out of Italy and Almain thither,
Ibidem, (...). 1344.
least they should repair to King Edward, which, meeting with success, proved a
Countermine to King Edward's Main Design, who thereby finding that His
Entertainment of Stranger Knights was too general, Samuel Daniel History, fol.
233.
and did not sufficiently oblige them His in the following Wars, at length
resolved on one more particular, and such as might tie those whom he thought
fit to make His Associates, in a firm bond of friendship and honor.

Order of the Garter Instituted.
Wherefore having given forth his own Garter for the Signal of a Battle that
sped fortunately (which with du Chesne we conceive to be that of Cressy,
Histoire General d'Engleterre; etc. p. 670.
fought three years after his setting up the Round Table at Windsor) he thence
took occasion to institute this Order, and gave the Garter (Assumed by him for
the Symbol of Unity and Society) pre-eminence among the Ensigns thereof,
whence that select number (being Five and twenty besides the Sovereign) whom he
Incorporated into a Fraternity, are frequently styled Equites Periscelidis,
vulgarly Knights of the Garter.

The Patron of this Order is St. George, on whose day ( viz. the 23d of April)
their Feast is kept, from whom they are also called Knights of the Order of St.
George. For Satisfaction in all particulars concerning this Order, I refer my
Reader to that laborious and excellent History in Folio, written by Elias
Ashmole Esquire, Winsor Herald, Entitled, The Institution, Laws and
Ceremonies of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, Printed at London, An. 1672.
Their Habit is a Surcoat of Crimson Velvet, Hood of the same, and a Mantle of
Purple Velvet lined with white Sarcenet, on the left shoulder whereof is an
Escocheon of the Arms of St. George, (viz. Argent a Cross Gules) embroydered
within a Garter, with the Motto, Honey soit qui mal y pense. About the neck they
wear a Collar of Gold, composed of red Roses within the Garter, and Knots,
inamelled, appendant unto which is the Figure of St. George on Horseback
killing the Dragon, enamelled also and enriched with Stones of great value: And
about the left Leg a Garter, the Buckle and Pendant of Gold Enamelled, and set
with Diamonds, the Garter enriched with Gold, Pearl, and other Stones, with
the Motto before mentioned.

Besides these Exercises of Arms, this great and provident King during this
Truce takes especial care for the Government of His Kingdom, and Reformation
of the abuses thereof, a Parliament at Westminster is called, wherein upon the
Grievous Complaint of the Lords and Commons, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 515. n. 13.
against the Collation of Benefices upon Strangers, Letters are sent to the
Pope by Sir John Shordich, whose reception in that Court was so unwelcome, that
from thence he returned without regard or Answer, which notwithstanding the
King proceeded to the prohibition of all such Provisions and Collations within
His Realm, upon pain of Imprisonment and Death to whomsoever should for the
future admit any such person or persons.

In another Parliament held at London, Anno 1344.
a Tenth is granted the King by the Clergy, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 515. n. 50.
Tho. Walsingham, p. 164. n. 55.
and a Fifteenth by the Laity for one year. Edward the Kings Son is created
Prince of Wales, and General Musters taken throughout the Kingdom. The King
Himself goes to confirm the Flemmings unto him, at Sluice; whereunto their
Commissioners from their Chief Towns repair, where a motion is made, that
either Lewis their Earl should become a Homager to King Edward, or be
disinherited, and the Prince of Wales Elected, for the King Promised to Grace
them with a Dukedom; one d' Artuel is forward to entertain the Motion, but the
rest not willing to disinherit their natural Lord, require leave to acquaint
the Towns that sent them. D'Artuel undertakes to bring them to it, and with a
Guard of Welshmen returns to Gaunt, where one Gerard Denis Provost of the
Weavers opposing him, and the People, whom he had often led to Mutiny now
rising against him, a Cobbler with an Axe knocked out his brains, whereby King
Edward lost his chief Agent: However the Towns excused themselves of the
Accident, laying the fault on the turbulent Gauntois, promised to persuade the
Earl to become homager, and to endeavor a Match between the Earls Son and the
Kings Daughter, the League thus renewed, he returns for England.

But now in Guyen the War grew hot, An. 1345.
the Sword out before the Truce expired, the Earl of Derby on one side, and the
Duke of Normandy on the other take several Castles, Tho. Walsingham, p. 165. n.
20. Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 516. n. 11. Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 516. n. 46.
and Cities, whereof the French King lays the blame on the King of England,
and He the same on him, neither it seems any longer holding their hands from
the fatal work of destruction.

Wherefore upon the fifth of July, An. 1346. An. 1346.
with the greatest Fleet that ever crossed the English Seas for France, He
passes over into Normandy (leaving for Wardens of England in His absence the
Lords Percy and Nevil, taking the Prince with Him, about Fifteen years of Age,
to show him the way of Men. Upon His landing he divides his Army into Three
Battles, the one Marched on His right hand along the Seaside, Tho. Walsingham,
p. 166. n. 23.
the second on his left (both which were conducted by his Marshals Godfrey de
Harecourt, and Thomas Earl of Warwick) and Himself with the third in the
middle. The first Town He took was St. Lo in Constantine, next Caen, after
which he plunders Lisieux, and spoils the Country of Eureux, and leaving Roan,
he passes to Gaillon and burnt it, with Vernon, Pont de l'Arche, and all the
Country thereabout, having overrun and wasted Normandy and Bretagne, he passes
the River Seyne, and spreads His Power over the Isle of France, to urge King
Philip to Combat, giving out, that He would Wrestle with him before His
Capital City of Paris.

King Edward having staid sometime at Poissy to expect the French King, Marches
through Beauvoysin Burning and destroying all before him, the Castle of Angiers
and Town of Porke run the same fate; Thomas Walsingham, p. 166. n. 27.
and, drawing near to Abbevile, he endeavors to pass the River of Soame at
Blanchtaque, the Foord was guarded on the other side by 12000 Soldiers,
commanded by Sir Gomar du Foy, which King Edward resolves to gain, or dye in
the Attempt, and so He plunges Himself first into the Water, saying, Those will
follow me that love me; whereupon every one striving which should be foremost,
the Pass was gained, and the routed Enemy driven to Abbevile.

There lay King Philip with his Army, Thomas Walsingh. p. 160. n. 32.
composed of Lorrainois, Almaines, Genowaies and French: Enraged at this
defeat, and resolved (though against the consent of his Counsel) to fall
immediately upon the English with an assured hope of a Triumphant Victory; when
King Edward Fortifying himself near a Village called Cressy in Ponthieu, formed
his Army, consisting of 30000 Men, Battle of Cressy, An. 1346. Aug. 26.
into three Battles, the first of which was led by the Prince of Wales, the
second by the Earl of Northampton, and the third by himself, mounted on a white
Hobby; who rid from Rank to Rank to encourage every Man to have regard to his
honor.

The French Kings Army, both greater in number and advantage, composed of above
60000 Combatants well Armed, were also divided into three Battles, the Vanguard
he commits to his Brother, the Rereward to the Earl of Savoye, Ypodig.
Neustriae, p. 517. n. 21.
and the Main Battle he leads; after a long and doubtful fight, the Victory
remains on the English side, and the honor of the day to the Prince of Wales;
there being slain on the French part near 30000. the Chief of which were, John
King of Bohemia, the Duke of Lorraine, the Dauphin of Viennois, the Earls of
Alanson, Flanders, Harcourt, Blois, and St. Paul, etc. Barons, Knights, and
Gentlemen 1500. This Memorable Victory happened on Saturday the 26 day of
August, An. 1346. The French King fled to Bray-Castle with Five Barons only,
and thence to Amiens. Several Troops coming to the Kings Supply on the next
morning, fell also into the hands of the English and were cut off: so that
according to report the number slain in pursuit, and straggling, were more then
in the main Battle.

Nor was this all the good Fortune which befell King Edward this year, Tho.
Walsingham. p. 167. n. 4.
for the King of Scots (being set on by the French) Invaded England with 60000
Men, which by the Archbishop of York, the Bishop of Durham, and the Northern
Lords, Ypodigma Neustria, p. 517. n. 40, and 47.
were utterly overthrown, David Bruce their King taken at Merington, David King
of Scots taken prisoner.
by John Copland an Esquire of Northumberland, and several of their Nobility,
with the Bishop of St. Andrews, made Prisoners: Besides, another great Victory
is now obtained in France by the Countess of Montfort in Bretagne, against
Charles de Blois (pretender to that Dukedom) whom she takes Prisoner, and thus
all fell before the Sword of England.

King Edward next lays Siege to Calais, Ypodigma Neustriae p. 517. n. 35 Tho.
Walsingham, p. 167. n. 44.
which was most stoutly defended for a whole year, An. 1347.
and then surrendered; the King having condemned six of the Burgesses (which
came with submission, in their Shirts, and Halters about their necks) they were
by the Queens humble entreaty upon Her knees, Pardoned, and set at Liberty. A
Collony of English he there planted, and having sent the Inhabitants to seek
out new dwellings, returns with his Queen for England, after he had concluded
a Truce for some Months. And, to add yet to his Glory, the Electors sent him
word, that they had chosen him King of the Romans, but in regard that it seemed
out of his way, King Edward refused it. But to allay the great joy that was now
throughout this Kingdom, a most contagious Pestilence arose over all
Christendom; and in England took away, as is reported, one half of the Men:
in London, between New-years-day, and the first day of July, 57374. persons.

After which, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 519. n. 28.
the next Action is the Lord Geoffrey Charney's attempting to corrupt Sir Amery
de Pavy an Italian, Anno 1349.
then Governor of Calais, to betray the Town to him for 20000 Crowns, which
Sir Amery accepts, but privately sent King Edward word, who, the night that it
should have been delivered (the sum being paid) arrives there with 900
Soldiers, surprises the Persons that brought the Money, and issuing out of the
Town on Foot and in disguise, Tho. Walsingham, p. 168. n. 50.
under the Banner of Sir Walter Manney, meets Charney and his Forces, where he
happened to encounter one Eustace of Rybemont, a valiant Knight, who having
struck him twice on his knees, was at last mastered by the King, and taken
prisoner, who, Froissard. c. 1.52.
for his valor forgave him his Ransom, and honored him with a rich Chaplet
of Pearl which himself wore upon his head; Charney is likewise taken, and the
whole Force defeated.

King Philip not born to see better Fortune leaves the World; but his
distressed Kingdom to his Son John: An. 1350.
and King Edward the next Year is in Person with a Fleet to encounter certain
Spanish Ships passing from Flanders, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 519. n. 38. Tho.
Walsingham. p. 169. n. 6.
Laden with Cloth and other Commodities, which, after a sharp Fight, he
mastered, revenging himself upon that People, who, in the River Garrone, had
taken away several Ships, and slain diverse of his Subjects. In Guyen also his
Soldiers continue in Action; and several hot encounters there are between the
Widow of Montfort, and the Wife of Charles of Blois Prisoner in England, eager
Defenders of eithers pretended Right to the Dukedom of Britain.

Diverse overtures of Peace had been made by Legates sent from the Pope, and
the Commissioners met to the great expense of both Princes, but nothing
effected. The King in discontent with the Flemmings for being disappointed of a
Match between their Heir with his Daughter, Anno 13^^.
withdrawes the Staple of Wooles from their Towns, Ypodig. Neustriae, p. 520.
n. 31.
and places it at home. Charles of Blois long here a Prisoner, buys his
Ransom for 40000. Florins, which to raise, he is permitted to return into
Britain. Great Mediation is made by the Pope for Peace, upon this Article,
That the King of England should enjoy the Dukedom of Aquitaine without homage,
Tho. Walsingham. p. 170. n. 16.
which the Frenchmen resolutely deny, though in the end, at a Treaty in
Britany, they were forced to condescend unto.

But the Commissioners returning without effecting any thing at this time, King
Edward grew so much displeased, that he would not any longer prorogue the
Truce, but appoints the Prince, An. 13^^.
with considerable Forces, Ypodigmae Neustriae, p. 520. n. 48, and 57.
to go for Gascoigne, and at Michaelmas Himself follows with a great Army,
endeavoring by all means possible to draw the French to a Battle, whose
Distemperatures are mightily increased by Charles II. King of Navarre, a subtle
and haughty Prince, who, being descended from Jane, the Daughter of Lewis
Hutin, late King of France, and put by the Inheritance of the Crown in regard
of their Salique Law, holding himself wronged of the Counties of Campaign and
Bry, falls violently on the Constable of France, at l' Aigle in Normandy, and
rushing himself into his Chamber (with his Brother, and two of the Harecourts)
Murders him in his Bed, and returning home justifies the Act. The French King
highly displeased thereat, Summons the King of Navarre to appear before him at
Paris; promising, That if he would come and ask pardon, he should have it; but,
upon his appearance, commits him to Prison: Three Queens become suitors for
him, by whom his enlargment is obtained, which he immediately imployes (by way
of revenge for that indignity) in the Service of the King of England, by
withdrawing the People of Normandy from their Obedience to the King of France;
however, coming to visit Charles his Son, newly invested in the Duchy of
Normandy, he is at Roan surprised (the two Harecourts slain, several others
Executed or taken prisoners, and sent under Guard to Arras) which so amazed the
Partisans of Navarre, that Philip his Brother, and Geoffry Uncle to the two
Harecourts, come immediately for England, sadly complaining of the Injustice of
King John, and offering to King Edward all their Towns and Havens, to let him
into Normandy; whereupon Henry Duke of Lancaster, Tho. Walsingham, p. 171. n.
is sent with an Army thither, and with their assistance, won many strong Towns.

Mean while King Edward with another Army Marches to recover Barwick; Anno 1356.
which, during the time that he was at Calais, Ypodigma Neustrioe, p. 521. n.
16. Tho. Walsingham, p. 171. n. 25.
had been taken from him by the Scots; where he not only reobtaines that place,
but has the whole Kingdom of Scotland resigned unto him by Edward Baliol
himself, yielding to be content with a Pention. At which time Prince Edward
enters Guyen, passes over Languedock to Toulouse, Narbon, and Bruges, without
any encounter destroys, and laden with booty returns to Bordeaux.

King John thus distressed, on all sides, Assembles the Power of his whole
Kingdom 60000 fighting Men, and marches first against his Enemies in Normandy,
recovers many of his lost Towns, and then turns all his Force upon the Prince
of Wales, Battle of Poictiers. An. 1356. September 19.
whom he followed through Tourain and Pouicton, and within two Leagues of
Poictiers had him at a great advantage; when, at the instant, Ypodigmae
Neustria, p. 521. n. 38.
two Cardinals come from the Pope to Mediate for Peace; which the French King
(supposing he had all at his mercy) would by no means hearken unto upon any
less Condition, Then the surrender of the Prince himself, and the whole Army.

The Prince, whose Army consisted of 8000 Men only, was content to yield all
that he had gotten upon the French King, without prejudice to his Honor, for
which he stood accomptable to his Father and Country, but that would not
satisfy King John, who, presuming of Victory, because his Army was above six
to one, would lose no time, but instantly sets upon the Prince, who now, in so
great a strait, took all the advantage he could of Ground, and placing his
Archers among the Vineyards, the French Horse were so entangled therein, that
without danger they galled them at pleasure, and, in a short time, put all
their Army into such a disorder, that they became utterly defeated. The King,
after a brave resistance, was made Prisoner (by Sir Denis Morbeck a Knight of
Artois) with his Son Philip, afterward Duke of Burgundy, who, for his valiant
defending of his Father that day, was called the Hardy; most of the Nobility of
France, and 2000 Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen; insomuch, that the
Conquerors not holding it safe to retain so great a number, let many of them
go, upon Promise, of appearing with their Ransomes at Bordeaux. By their own
Report there dyed in this Battle (fought upon the 19th day of September, An.
1356.) 1700. Gentlemen bearing Coat Armor, of which 52 Bannerets, Thomas
Walsingham, p. 172. n. 29.
the most eminent Peter de Bourbon Duke of Athens; the Constable of France,
John de Clermont Marshal, Geoffery de Charmy High Chamberlain; Sir Reginald
Camian, who that day bare the Oriflamb, was slain, and an hundred Ensigns
taken; three of the Freneh Kings Sons escaped, viz. Charles the Daulphin,
Lewis, afterward Duke of Anjou, and John Duke of Berry. This Victory might
seem enough to have subdued all France, a greater than which never was obtained
by the English with so few hands, but all this blood-letting was not sufficient
to make that great Body faint.

The Prince of Wales, as he won this Battle with the greatest Magnanimity and
Courage, so with as much Heroic Courtesy he visits the Captive King, and with
all reverence and regard of Majesty, assures him of fair entertainment, and
having providently accommodated his Affairs, Tho. Walsingham, p. 172. n. 45.
Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 522. n. 14.
returns with his Prisoners to Bordeaux, and thence for England, An. 1357.
having rewarded most of the Principal Actors in this great work, whose names
ought not to pass unremembr^d, viz. The Earls of Warwick, Suffolk, Salisbury,
Oxford and Stafford; the Lords, Cobham, le Despenser, Berkley and Basset; of
Gascoignes, the Capitow de la Bouch, Pumier and Chaumont: James Lord Audeley
won immortal renown here, where he received many wounds, and shared the Princes
Gift of 500 Marks in Feesimple among his four Esquires, who had continued with
him in all the brunt and fury of the Day.

The King of France is Lodged in the Savoy; many Prisoners at a reasonable
Ransom, and some upon King John's Word for them are sent honorably home. David
King of Scots here also a Prisoner about eleven years, by the earnest
Solicitation of his Wife Joane, King Edward's Sister, is likewise set at
liberty. Four years King John remained here a Prisoner, Thomas Walsingh. p.
173. n. 1.
diverse overtures are made for his delivery by the Daulphin his Son, who
Governed all during this time, but with his own People could effect nothing,
unless Charles II. King of Navarre were delivered, An. 1358.
which being at last agreed upon, he comes to Paris, and is triumphantly
welcomed of the Factious Citizens, which now put all thoughts of redeeming King
John out of mind: But the Daulphin, not at all remiss, travels from place to
place to obtain Aid, leaving his Brother Philip Duke of Orleance at Paris, to
keep them in the best order he could during his absence. Languedoc is renowned
in their Histories for making the first and largest offers for their Kings
Releasment, but nothing could move the Parisians to do any thing, the King of
Navarre had so debauched them from their Obedience and Humanity, so that the
Daulphin upon his return to Paris had his House beset by the Provost of the
Merchants (with 3000 Artificers in Arms) who, Vignier, fol. S. Marth. Tome. 1.
p. 841.
rushing into his Chamber, slew John de Constance and Robert de Clermont
Marshall of France, two of his Chief Counselors before his face, whereat the
Daulphin cries out, Will you set upon the Blood of France? the Provost replied,
Fear not, it is not you we seek, it is your disloyal Servants, and evil
Counselors; and herewith takes the Daulphins Hat, and puts his own
party-colored Hat upon the Daulphins head, intimating thereby, that he was but
a Member of their Corporation, and only fit to wear the Cities Livery.

The Dauphin with much ado gets out of this Tumultuous City thus disgraced,
and at Vertus assembles the States of the Country, whom he found Loyal, the
rest of the great Towns, with much disdain, refusing to join with the City of
Paris, offer him their Aid, so that thereby he is now in some heart, and hopes
to effect his desires. But the King of Navarre on the contrary raised still new
Broiles against him; besides, the Peasants, that had been all this while eaten
out, and trodden under foot by the Soldiers and their Lords, rise up in Arms
for themselves against the Gentry, and in the Country of Beavoyfis commit great
outrages, burning their Houses, killing their Wives and Children, all within a
Kingdom so much already in Confusion, could be thought no other then to draw on
an utter Subversion.

And so much less likely is the redemption of their King to be expected, An.
1359.
whose Ransom King Edward now longed to have in His Treasury, requiring
besides infinite Sums of Money, that the French should do Homage, and hold the
Crown of France of the Crown of England, which King John refused; whereupon
King Edward resolves to end the Controversy by the Sword, and with a Fleet of
1100 Sail Landed at Calais, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 523. n. 10. Tho. Walsingham,
p. 174. n. 2. and 9.
from whence dividing His Army into three parts, one whereof is led by the
Prince of Wales, the second by the Duke of Lancaster, and the third by Himself:
He Marches to Arras, which within three days he won; thence to Campaigne, An.
1360.
where the Cities of Sens and Nevers are rendered unto Him; the Duchy of
Burgoine terrified with the others example buys her Peace for 70000 Florins of
Gold: Ypodigma Neustriae p. 523. n. 18.
Thus furnished with Treasure by the way, He Marches to Paris, where the
Daulphin, (who now had the Title of Regent, and had overcome the Faction, and
Executed many of the Principal Mutineers) with a great Force which he had there
raised, Tho. Walsingham p. 175. n. 50.
would by no Provocation be drawn out to hazard his Army, but stood only upon
his defense, which King Edward seeing, raised his Siege, and returned into
Britain; during which time, the Regent Stores and Fortifies the City so, that
at His return, finding little good to be done there, He takes His way to
Besiege Chartres, but being terrified with horrible Tempest of Hail,
Froissard, l. c. 211. Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 523. n. 51. Tho. Walsingham, p.
175. n. 15. and n. 51. p. 176. n. 13. Rotulo de Tractatu pacis Franciae, An. 34
Ed. 3. m. 10.
Thunder and Lightning that fell upon His Army, He Vowed to make Peace with the
King of France upon any reasonable Conditions. Which was done shortly after (
viz. upon the 15 day of May, An. 1360.) near Chartres, by a Treaty Managed
between Edward Prince of Wales, and Charles Regent of France, in the Name of
both Kings, upon these Articles, viz. That the Dukedom of Aquitaine, the
County of Poicton, the Ficfes of Thouars and Belvile, the Country of Gascoigne,
Agenois, Perigort, Limosin, Cahors, Torbe, Bigorre, Rovergne, and Engolmois,
remain to the King of England and His Heirs and Successors, in Sovereignty,
with the Homages of the Lords thereof: That Monstruel on the Sea, Ponthieu,
Calais, Guines, La Merke, Sangore, Bologne, Hames, Vales and Oye, should also
be to the Kings of England, besides three Millions of Scutes of Gold, whereof
one half in hand, and the other half at two payments within three years after.

And the King of England for Himself and His Successors did renounce all Claim
unto the Crown of France, the Countries of Normandy, Touraine, Anjou and Maine,
with the Duchy of Britain and Earldome of Flanders; for Assurance of which
Accord He had Hostages given, the Kings Brother, and two younger Sons, with
about 22 more of the Chief Nobility of France; Whereupon King John is delivered
at Calais, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. ^24. n. 14. Tho. Walsingham, p. 177. n. ^9.
after near upon five year Imprisonment in England, An. 1361.
from whence both Kings part with great kindness; the one is with much Joy
received of his subjects, and the other with as great Triumph returns with his
Hostages for England.

Where to attend this inexpressible joy, a most woeful Pestilence sweeps away
many of the Nobility, one whereof is Henry Duke of Lancaster, a great Pillar of
the Nation, whose Daughter Blanch was lately Married to John of Gaunt, whereby
he is now created Duke of Lancaster. Tho. Walsingham, p. 178. n. 5. Ypodigma
Neustriae p. 524. n. 43.
The Prince of Wales is made Duke of Aquitaine, Anno 1362.
and with his Wife and Family sent into Gascoigne: and Lionel Earl of Vlster is
also created Duke of Clarence in the 50th year of his Fathers Reign, an Year of
great Jubilee, in which King Edward; among many other gracious Acts made for the
good of His People, caused the Laws heretofore written in French to be
Translated into English: Whose Honor is now so great in the World, that the
Kings of France, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 525. n. 8. Tho. Walsingham, p. 179. n.
43.
Scotland and Cyprus become His Visitants; An. 1363.
the first of which, as if not willing to part from his old Prison, resigned
His last breath in the Savoye, much lamented by King Edward, (who Solemnly
Accompanied his Corpse to Dover, whence it was conveyed to St. Denis, and there
Interred) being succeeded in His Kingdom by his Son Charles the Daulphin.

And now are we come to the Fortieth year of the Reign of this Mighty King, at
this time the most Glorious Prince in the Christian World; notwithstanding,
during these remaining Ten years, Charles the V. King of France (Entitled the
Wise) the late Daulphin, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 526. n. 12. and 55. Tho.
Walsingham, p. 181. n. 40.
won much advantage upon him. An. 1367.
The Prince of Wales having aided and restored Peter the ungrateful King of
Castile, is by him sent back to Aquitaine, without the least pay for that great
Army which he had brought to His Assistance, for which, being forced to raise
Money amongst his Subjects at home, they Rebel against Him; The Lords of
Armaignack and Albret, and many others in France make Protestations against
King Edward, by whose Example the Cities of the County of Ponthieu render
themselves to Guy de St. Paul, An. 1368.
and Guy de Chastilion. Ypodig. Neustriae, p. 527. n. 16.
The King of England Complains of this Breach of Peace to the Emperor Charles
the IV. who took a Journey into France to Reconcile the two Kings; Tho.
Walsingham, p. 183. n. 44.
but, not desiding the Matter, King Edward sends over His Son John Duke of
Lancaster, An. 1369.
with a mighty Army to Invade the French on that side, whilst the Prince of
Wales strives to recover the revolted Towns on the other; but little being
effected, the Duke returns, and Thomas Beauchampe Earl of Warwick with fresh
Supplies is sent in his stead, and dies in the Journey; then Sir Robert Knoles,
an eminent Man both for Counsel and Valor, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 527. n. 40.
is made Leader of that Army, against whom the Great Ones murmur, in regard of
the meaness of his quality, by which they overthrew themselves and that Action.

In the year 1369. Death of Qu. Philippa.
on the 15th day of August Deceased Queen Philippa the Wife of King Edward III.
Tho. Walsingham, p. 184. n. 22.
(having been Married 42 years) An. 43. of his Reign, and was buried in the
Abbey of St. Peter at Westminster, in the Chapel of the Kings, where She has
a fair Tomb, at the Feet of Her Husband, of Black Touchstone, with the
Garnishing, and Her Portraiture thereon of Alablaster; about which Monument
were placed the Figures, and now remain the Shields of Arms (Carved and
Painted) of these Persons following, viz. at the Head, of Edward Prince of
Wales, Lewis the Emperor, King Edward III. John King of France, and William
Earl of Henault the Queens Father: On the South Side, of Joan Countess of
Henault the Queens Mother, William Earl of Henault the Queens Brother, Margaret
Empress of Germany the Queens Sister, Reginald Duke of Geldres, Elianor Duchess
of Geldres, John of Bavaria Earl of Henault, Mary Duchess of Britain, Lewis
Duke of Bavaria, Margaret Countess of Pembrook, Charles of Valois Son to the
King of France, and John Duke of Brabant: On the North-side, of Joan Queen of
Scots, John Earl of Cornwall, Joan Princess of Wales, Lionell Duke of Clarence,
Issabel Countess of Bedford, John Duke of Lancaster, Elizabeth Duchess of
Clarence, Edmond Earl of Cambridge, and Thomas Earl of Buckingham: And at the
Foot, of the Kings of Navarre, Bohemia, Scotland, Sicily, and Spain.

The Form of this Tomb is represented in the following Page, near unto which
on a Tablet you may read this Epitaph; Gulielmi Hannonis soboles postrema
Philippa,
Hic roseo quondam pulchra decore jacet.
Tertius Edwardus Rex ista conjuge letus
Materno suasu nobiliumque fuit:
Frater Johannes Comes Mauortius heroes,
Huic illam voluit consociare viro.
Hec junxit Flandros conjunctio sanguinis Anglis:
In Francos venit hinc Gallica dira lues.
Dotibus hec raris viguit regina Philippa,
Forma prestanti, Religione, fide.
Fecunde nata est proles numerosa parenti,
Insignes peperit magnanimosque duces.
Oxonii posuit studiosis optima nutrix
Regineas edes, Palladiamque scholam.
DISCE VIVERE. Fair Philip, William Henaldes Child,
And youngest Daughter dear,
Of roseat hue and beauty bright,
In Tomb lies hilled here.
Edward the Third, through Mothers will,
And Nobles good consent,
Took Her to Wife, and joyfully
With Her His time He spent.
His Brother John, a Martial Man,
And eke a valiant Knight,
Did linck this Woman to this King,
In Bonds of Marriage right.
This Match and Marriage thus in blood,
Did bind the Flemings sure
To Englishmen, by which they did
The Frenchmens wrack procure.
This Philip flowr'd in Gifts full rare,
And Treasures of the Mind,
In Beauty bright, Religion, Faith,
To all and each most kind.
A fruitful Mother Philip was,
Full many a Son she bred,
And brought forth many a worthy Knight,
Hardy and full of dred.
A careful Nurse to Students all,
At Oxford She did found
Queens College She, Dame Pallas School,
That did Her fame resound.
LEARN TO LIVE.

monument REGINA PHILIPPA CONIVNX EDWARDI IACET HIC REGINA PHILIPPA ^^CE VIVERE
Illustrissimo Nobilissimoque Principi IOANNI LAVDERDALIAE Duci, Marchioni
Marchiae, Comiti Lauderdaliae, Vice comiti Maitland, Baroni de Thirlestone,
Musselburgh Bolton, andct. Serenissimo CAROLO II. Mag: Britanniae, Franciae,
et, Hiberniae, Monarchae, ab. Intimis et Sanctioribus utriusque Regni
Consilijs, et Nobilissimi Ordinis Periselidis Equili; Tumuli hanc PHILIPPAE
Reginae Edwardi III Consortis, Imaginem. HD.FS.



Upon the Ill-management of Affairs by the English, Charles V. King of France
grows both in Power and Alliance, having obtained Margaret the Daughter and
sole Heir of the Earl of Flanders for his Brother Philip, whom King Edward
endeavored for His Son Edmond; Tho. Walsingham p. 183. n. 42. Ibidem, n. 34.
whereupon He reassumes His Title to the Crown of France, requires Aid of His
Subjects, and has 50000. l. granted Him from the Clergy, An. 1370.
and as much from the Laity. John Duke of Lancaster with Edmond Earl of
Cambridge are sent with Forces into Aquitaine to assist the Prince of Wales,
who after he had Sacked the City of Limoges which had Revolted, his health
failing him, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 528. n. 27.
leaves the Prosecution of the War to his Brothers, and with his Wife, and
young Son Richard, born at Bourdeaux, returns for England.

After the Princes Departure, An. 1372.
John Duke of Lancaster did little, Thomas Walsingham, p. 186. n. 25.
but his Wife being lately dead, Marries a Daughter of the beforementioned
Peter King of Castile and Leon, (one that through his own wickedness scarcely
ever enjoyed it, as appears by his speedy extirpation, after his base
Ingratitude to our Prince of Wales) by whom he obtained the empty Title of King
of those places. Thomas Walsingh. p. 186. n. 39.
So that the Earl of Pembrook being sent with a Fleet to the Relief of Rochel,
is set upon by the Spaniards, and after a long Fight utterly lost: Which King
Edward seeing, and how all things without him went backward, prepares another
Navy and goes in Person, but the Winds not favoring Him, He returns to Sum up
the Charge of this Expedition, which cost Him 900000. Marks. And shortly after
the Duke of Lancaster Lands with an Army at Calais, An. 1373.
passes through France by the way of Avergne, Ibidem, p. 187. n. 16.
where, among the Mountains he lost most of his Men, and all his Horse, and
with the rest almost starved for want of Victuals gets to Bourdeaux, An. 1374.
makes some few Attempts upon the Enemy, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 529. n. 54.
and the next year returns for England, not only without Victory, but also
with the sad News of the Defection of the whole Duchy of Aquitaine, excepting
Bourdeaux and Bayon.

The Prince of Wales His Sickness continues, An. 1376.
which ever since he had aided Peter King of Castile hung upon him, Tho.
Walsingham. p. 190. n. 10.
and now proved his end, to the great sorrow of the whole Kingdom, whose death
changed the face of all Affairs in the Nation. The Duke of Lancaster, the Lord
Latimer, Sir John Sturry, and Dame Alice Pierce the Kings Concubine, Ypodigmae
Neustriae, p. 530. n. 34. Tho. Walsingham, p. 190. n. 4.
who were upon Complaint in Parliament amoved from the Court, are all recalled
to their former places: The Duke of Lancaster is now Regent, and Governs all.
Sir Peter de la Mar, at the Suit of Alice Pierce, is committed to perpetual
Imprisonment at Nottingham, who was Speaker of this Parliament, called, The
Good; So much could the Impudence of this Woman work upon the Age and Weakness
of the King, that she would sit in the Public Courts of Justice, to see that
whatsoever she had a mind to Prosecute should go forward. Tho. Walsingham, p.
190. n. 21. Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 531. n. 53.


But the King however noting the greatness and ambition of the Duke of
Lancaster, to prevent disorder in the Succession, providently settled the same
in Parliament upon Richard of Bourdeaux His Grandson, Tho. Walsingham, p. 190.
n. 21. Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 531. n. 53.
Knighting him at Windsor, and having Created him Earl of Chester and Prince of
Wales; which, though it put by Duke John of what he really intended, yet with
much imperiousness he behaves himself in the State that he had, wherein he
displaced the Earl of March; and asserting John Wickliff and his Doctrine
against the Bishop of London, thereby breed ill Blood betwixt the Court and
City.

And now the Kings Age, Tho. Walsingham, p. 192. n. 4.
Grief (for His Son Prince Edward's Death) and Sickness, An. 1377.
having overcome Him, He is forced to forsake the World, as the World before
His Breath had forsaken Him; His Concubine first, with all that she could
snatch, even to the Rings of his Fingers, all His Counselors and Servants
following her example, with all they could get, left Him alone, to fight with
Death; which, a poor Priest by chance in the House, seeing, went to his
Bedside, and perceiving Him to Breath, Calls upon Him to Remember His Savior,
and to ask Pardon for His Offenses; at which, showing all Signs of
Contrition, His last Breath expresses Jesus. Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 531. n. 55.
And so died this Victorious and Mighty King (a perfect Example of this Worlds
Vanity) at His Manor of Shene (now Richmond) in Surrey, The Death of King
Edward III.
the 21th day of June, An. Dom. 1377. in the LXIV. Year of His Age, having
Reigned L. years IV. Months and XXVIII. days, from whence His Body was
conveyed by four of His Sons, and others of His Lords, and Solemnly Interred on
the South Side of the Royal Chapel in the Abbey of St. Peter at Westminster;
where (betwixt two Pillars parallel with the Tomb of King Edward the Confessor)
He has His Monument of Gray Marble; upon the Superficies of which lies His
Portaiture of Copper Guilt, and upon the Verge of this Tomb these Verses in
Latin are Engraven, beginning on the North-side at the Foot, in which (says
my Author) you must bear with the breaking of Priscians Head, for it is Written
of a King that used to break many, and in an Age when the Sword was preferred
before the Pen.

Of English Kings here lies the beautiful flower
Of all before passed, and a mirror to them shall sue:
A merciful King, of peace conservator,
The III. Edward, the death of whom may rue
All English men, for he by Knighthood due,
Was Libarde invict, and by feate Martial
To worthy Macabe in virtue peregall.

Hic decus anglorum, flos regum preteritorum,
Forma futurorum, rex clemens, pax populorum
Tertius Edwardus regni complens jubileum,
Invictus pardus, bellis pollens machabeum,
Prospere dum vixit regnum pietate revixit,
Armipotens rexit: jam celo celice rex fit.
On a Tablet near to His Monument, part of this Epitaph is thus Englished;

Tertius Edwardus fama super aethera notus.

monument Illustrissimo and Potent. Do^m THOMAE Comiti de SOUTHAMPTON and
Chichester; Baroni Wrlothsley de Tichfield, summo Angliae Thesaurario
Serenissimo Dom Regi Carolo II^e secretioribus Consilijs, Nobilissimique,
Ordinis Garterij Equiti.

Tumuli hanc Regis. EDW III Figuram, HD.F.S.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE VNG PA^ TOVT
Inuictus pardus bellis etc.

TERTIVS EDWARDVS FAMA SVRER AETHERA NOTVS PVGNA PRO PATRIA 1577

R Gaywood fecit


On both sides of this Tomb are the Figures of all the Sons and Daughters of
King Edward III. in solid Brass: on the South Side (a prospect of which is
represented in the preceding Page) in several Niches, are Edward Prince of
Wales, Joan de la Tower, Entitled Queen of Spain, Lionel Duke of Clarence,
Edmond Duke of York, Mary Duchess of Britain, and William of Hatfield, under
which their several Escocheons of Arms enamelled, are placed, and also under
them the Arms of St. George and King Edward III. upon four large Shields also
of Brass enamelled. On the Northside were the Statues, and still remain the
Arms of Issabel Lady of Coucy, William of Windsor, John Duke of Lancaster,
Blanch de la Tower, Margaret Countess of Pembroke, and Thomas Duke of
Gloucester; near to which Sepulcher they show you the Sword which (it is said)
this King used in His Conquest of France, being seven Foot long, and weighing
Eighteen pounds.

Those Lawrells placed upon His Head in His life time became withered with Age,
and faded in His Death: But now let us take notice of Him Crowned with the
immortal Bays of His Charity, and Works of Piety, which followed Him after
death, and those were many, Stow, fol. 117.
as the Founding of Eastminster an Abbey near the Tower of London; a Nunnery at
Deptford, Kings Hall in Cambridge for Poor Scholars, an Hospital for the Poor
at Calais, and St. Stephens.-Chapel at Westminster (now the House of Commons)
with the endowment of 300 l. per annum to that Church. He also augmented the
Chapel at Windsor with the Provisions for Churchmen and 24 Poor Knights: His
Buildings were great and many, as the Castle of Windsor, which he Re-edifyed
and Enlarged; the Castle of Quinborrow, Fortifications at Calais and other
places.

Children of King EDWARD III. by Queen PHILIPPA of Henault His Wife.
10. EDWARD of Woodstock Prince of Wales, Eldest Son of King Edward III. and
Father of King Richard II. whose History follows in the next Chapter, being
the IV. of this III. Book.

10. WILLIAM of Hatfield, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 112. (...) (...)
Second Son of King Edward III. and Queen Philippa, born at Hatfield in the
County of Hertford (from whence he took his Surname) An. 1336. in the 10/12
year of his Fathers Reign. He had his Christen Name from William Earl of
Henault his Grandfather, deceased in his Childhood, and was interred in the
Cathedral of York.

10. LIONELL of Antwerp Duke of Clarence, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. ^13. n. 31.
Third Son of King Edward III. of whom see more in the XII. Chapter of this
III. Book.

10. JOHN of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, Thomas Wa^singham, p. 148. n. 12.
fourth Son of King Edward III. Ancestor of the Royal House of Lancaster,
mentioned at large in the IV. Book of this Genealogical History, vide Chap. 1.

10. EDMOND of Langley Duke of York, fifth Son of King Edward III. Ypodigma
Neustriae, p. 514. n. 56.
He was the Root from whence the Kingly Family of York Branched it self, of
which I shall discourse at large in the V. Book of this History. See the first
Chapter.

10. WILLIAM of Windsor (a Second William) is named among the Sons of King
Edward III. but dyed so young, that other mention is not made of him, but that
Windsor was the place of his Birth, and Westminster of his Burial; where, in
the Chapel of St. Edmond, is to be seen a Tomb of Gray Marble, on which lie
the Figures of this William and his Sister Blanch de la Tour, carved in
Alablaster in the Habit of that time, each about a foot and half in length. The
Fillet of Brass which contained their Epitaph is torn away.

10. THOMAS of Woodstock Duke of Gloucester, Thomas Walsingh. p. 171. n. 49.
youngest Son of King Edward III. and Queen Philippa, concerning whom, and his
Descendants, you may read in the XV. Chapter of this III. Book.

10. On a Shield of Copper enamelled, on the North-side of K. Edward III. Tomb
in Westminster.-Abbey, are the Arms of this Lady Issabel, viz. In Pale Ba^ry
of 6 pieces, varry Argent and Azure, and Gules. And quarterly France semee and
England.
ISSABEL Lady Coucy, and Duchess of Bedford, Pat. a. 41. E. 3. p. 2. m. 18.
Eldest Daughter of King Edward III. and Queen Philippa, was Married at Windsor
with great Pomp to Ingelram de Coucy (Son of Ingelram by Katherine Daughter of
the Duke of Austria, Orig. de a. 2 R. 2.
Lord Coucy, and Earl of Soyssons; and, after his Uncle Peter, Archduke of
Austria) who was by his Father in Law King Edward the III created Earl of
Bedford, An. 1366. This Issabel was buried in the Church of the Friars- Minors
without Aldgate, leaving Issue by Her said husband two daughters, Mary and
Philip.

11. MARY de Coucy, was the Wife of Robert de Bar, to whom She bare Robert de
Bar, and Joan Married to Lew is of Luxemburg Earl of St. Paul.

11. Rex concessit, (viz. Ricardus 2 dus) Roberto de veer facto Marchioni
Dublin, quod ^pse quamdiu ^iverit and teram and Dominium Hiberniae habucrit,
gerat Arma de Azureo cum tribus Coronis aureis and una circumferentia vel
Bordura de Argento, 1 pars Pat. an. 9. R. 2. m. 1. With this augmentation,
being Azure 3 Coronets or, a border Argent, Marquess Robert did quarter his
Paternal Coa^, viz, Quarterly Gules and Or, in the first quarter a Mullet
Argent.
PHILIP de Coucy was given in Marriage to Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland,
Marquess of Dublin, Pat. (...) 9 R. 2. p. 1. ^. 1.
(a Title before his time unknown in England) and Earl of Oxford, who in the
height of his fortunes forsook this Noble Lady, and Married one Lancerona a
Joyners daughter (as is reported) who came with King Richard the Seconds Wife
out of Bohemia; notwithstanding which affront to His Kinswoman, King Richard
endeavored to justify him, (like another Gaveston) in all his pride and
greatness, which drew upon him the hatred of the Nobility, so that by their
procurement he was Banished the Realm, for abusing the Kings Ear, to the hurt
of the State, and dyed at Lovaine in great vexation of Mind, and extreme
penury, An. 1392. His Corpse was brought into England, and honorably Interred at
Earles-Colne in Essex by King Richard II. leaving his Uncle Aubrey de Vere his
heir.

10. Quarterly Gules a Castle or, and Argend a Lion Rampant purpure, impaleing
quarterly France semee and England. These Arms are enamelled in an Escocheon,
on the South Side K. Edward the III Tomb in Westminster- Abbey and stand under
the Figure of this Joane.
JOANE, Entitled Queen of Spain, second daughter of King Edward III. was born
in the Tower of London, An. 1335. and ninth Year of her Fathers Reign. Being 14
years of Age, she was desired in Marriage, by Solemn Embassy, from Alphonso
King of Castile and Leon, Tho. Walsingham, p. 148. n. 60.
Son of King Ferdinand IV. was Espoused by Proxy, Entitled Queen of Spain,
and conveyed into that Country, where She presently deceased of the Plague that
then raged; so as the King coming to meet Her, to solemnize the espousals, with
extreme grief accompanied Her to Church, only at Her Funeral, in the 22 Year
of Her Fathers Reign, An. 1348.

10. BLANCH DE LA TOVR, Tho. Walsingham, p. 148. n. 60. Ypodigma Neustriae, p.
514. n. 49.
Third daughter of King Edward III. and Queen Philip, so called from the place
of her Birth, the Tower of London; dyed an Infant, and was Interred in the
Abbey of Westminster, in the year of our Lord 1340. Her Figure of Alablaster
lies by the side of that of her Brother William of Windsor, on their Tomb in
St. Edmonds Chapel in the said Abbey.

10. This Mary Duchess of Britain did bear Pale Ermine, being Britain, and
quarterly France Semee, and England, which are on the South side of her Fathers
Tomb in Westminster- Abbey.
MARY, Duchess of Britain, fourth Daughter of King Edward the III. Ypodigma
Neustriae, p. 516. n. 9.
was the Wife of John Montfort, Surnamed the Valiant, Duke of Britain (who
slew the Earl of Blois) and by him had Issue John Duke of Britain, called the
Sage (Father of Peter and Francis both Dukes of Britain, who dyed without
issue) Richard Count of Estampes, and Arthur III. of the Name also Duke of
Britain.

10. The Arms of this Margaret, Impaled with her Husband's John Hastings Earl
of Pembroke, are enamelled on a Shield upon the North-side of K. Edward III.
His Tomb in the Abbe of Westminster.
MARGARET Countess of Pembroke, Thomas Walsingh. p. 167. n. 24.24. Ypodigma;
Neustriae, p. 517. n. 54. Claus. 24 E. 3. p. 1. m. 13.
youngest daughter of King Edward III. and Queen Philip, born at Windsor upon
the Third of the Calends of August ( viz. the 30th. day of July) in the Year
1346. was the first Wife of John Hastings Earl of Pembroke. He being sent by
King Edward III. to raise the Siege of Rochel, fell into the hands of the
Spainards at Sea, and remained a Prisoner in Spain two years, after which he
was sold to a Noble Man of France, with whom, having agreed for his Ransom,
was at his departure Poisoned at a Banquet, An. 1375. without issue by this
Wife; being the first Subject which followed the example of King Edward III.
John Hastings Earl of Pembroke, the first Subject in England that quartered
Arms.
in Quartering of Arms, as you may observe in his Escocheon yet remaining on
the North side King Edward the Thirds Tomb in Westminster-Abbey, upon which He
bears Quarterly, or, a Manch Gules, by the Name of Hastings: and Barry of 12
pieces Argent and Azure, an Orle of 8 Martlets Gules; being Valence, Impaleing,
France Semie, and England, Quarterly.

10. EDWARD, PRINCE of AQVITAINE and WALES, DUKE of CORNWALL, and EARL of
CHESTER, Surnamed of WOODSTOCK.
CHAP. IV.
Quarterly Azure, semee of Flowers de Lize, or: and Gules three Lions passant
guardant, or, over all a Label of three points, argent, are the Arms of this
Edward Prince of Wales, as you may observe in his Seals, page 125. and on his
Tomb at Canterbury, page 188. also upon the Monument of K. Edward III. His
Father at Westminster, page 173. and many other places.
THis Magnanimous and Great Prince Edward, Ypodig. Neustriae, p. 510. n. 50 Ex
Chron. Tho. de la Mars. Tho. Walsingham, p. 130. n. 47.
born at Woodstock in the County of Oxford, upon Friday the 15th of June, at 10
of the Clock in the morning, An. 1330. ( Walsingham says, in the year 1329.)
was the Eldest Son of King Edward III. and Queen Philip; The News of his Birth
was so welcome to his Father, Pat. An. 5 Ed. 3. p. 1. m. 33. 4 Feb.
that He gave the Messenger thereof a noble reward, and Pentions to others to
be concerned in his Education. He had not passed the 3 year of his Age, Charta
7 Edw. 3. m. 4.
when K. Edward by his Charter dated 18 of May in the seventh year of His
Reign, granted him by the Title of Edward His most dear and eldest Son, the
County of Chester, the Castles of Chester, Beston, Rothelan and Flint, with
many other Lands and Places in England and Wales, from whenceforward he had the
Title of Earl of Chester added to his Style, Pat. 7 Ed. 3. p. 1. m. 13.
and in the same year other Provisions made to him for Maintenance thereof.

In the Parliament held at Westminster, Chart. An. 11 Ed. 3. n. 55. Claus. An.
11 Ed. 3. (...). 1. m. 19.
An. 11 Ed. 3. he was created Duke of Cornwall by a Charter bearing date the 17
of March in the same year, and invested by the Sword only; this being the first
Precedent for the Creation of the Title of a Duke with us in England, settling
on him diverse Manours and Franchises for the better support of the State and
Honor of that Dignity; And from this Prince Edward the Dukedom of Cornwall
has ever slept in the Crown: for the Eldest Son and Heir apparent of the King
of England is Duke of Cornwall by Birth, but he is Prince of Wales by special
Creation, Investiture, and Donation of the Lands thereunto belonging.

Into this highest Dignity of Prince of Wales Duke Edward was likewise Created
by the King his Father in the Parliament held An. 17 Ed. 3. Investing him with
a Coronet, 12 May, Chart. An. 17 Edw 3. m. 24. n. 27.
a Gold Ring, and a Silver Rod: and for the better support of his State as
Prince of Wales, granted him several Lands, particularly innumerated in a Writ,
to be delivered to this Prince or his Attorney with this dignity. So that he
became the second Prince of Wales of the Royal Family of Plantagenet (for I
find not that King Edward III. his Father was at any time so styled) King
Edward the First, after the death of Lewellin ap Griffith, having created
Edward His Eldest Son, born at Caernarvon, Prince of Wales; which Principality
is ever since annexed to the Crown, and the Portion and Appennage of the Eldest
Sons of the Kings of England and Monarchs of Great Britain.

In the 16 year of his Age he entered upon the stage of War, accompanying King
Edward his Father into France, where at his landing he received the Honor of
Knighthood from that Martial Kings hands, Battle of Cressy, An. 20 E. 3. 1346.
Aug. 26.
and at the Battle of Cressy led the Vanguard, Stowes Chron. p. 241. b. Tho.
Walsingham, p. 166. n. 32^
where after a fierce encounter with the French, being somewhat distressed from
the Enemies breaking in among his Archers (though soon relieved by his own
Soldiers) notice of his condition was sent to the King commanding the
Reer-ward, who asked the Messenger if the Prince were dead or wounded; He
answered, Neither, but stood in need of His Assistance: Well, (said the King)
Return, and bid them send no more to Me so long as my Son lives, Froissard,
cap. 130.
for I will have him this day win his Spurs, since I design him the Honor of
this Expedition. The compleatness of which Victory fully conferred it upon him,
as did King Edward's Acknowledgment after the Battle, when Embracing Prince
Edward and Kissing him, He said, Fair Son, God give you resolution to pursue
Honor; Ibidem, c. 131.
you are My dear Son, and have acquitted your self Nobly, you are Worthy to
Govern a Kingdom, Among many Eminent Persons which died that day on the French
part, Tho, Walsingham, p. 166. n. 48.
John of Luxemburgh King of Bohemia fell by the Conquering Hand of Prince
Edward, who deplumed his Casque of those Ostrich Feathers, which in Memory of
this Victory became his Cognizance, sometimes useing one Feather, sometimes
three (as appears in his Seals and on his Tomb) with Scroles containing
this Motto, ICH DIEN, that is, I serve: John King of Bohemia meaning thereby,
that He Served the French King in His Wars, and was His Stipendary: Camdens
Remains, p. 214.
Others make in Prince Edward's Devise, alluding to the words of the Apostle,
that, The Heir while he is a Child differs nothing from a Feathers and this
is the more probable conjecture, seeing that the Feathers and this Motto, have
been ever since born by our Princes of Wales Heirs apparent to the Kings of
this Realm, with the addition (by the more Modern) of a Coronet, within which
they are encircled. Nor were these Feathers and Motto so confined to the direct
Line of these Princes, but that they have been made use of as a Device (with
due distinctions) by collateral Branches, both of the Royal House of Lancaster
and York evidence their Seals, exhibited in several places of this History,
upon which the Feathers and Scroles are delineated.

The year following a Truce being agreed upon at Calais, was lengthned by
several Prorogations till Anno 29 Edw. 3. without effecting any thing of Peace.
An. 1355.
In which year both Kings provide again for War, July 10. Rot. Vas. 29 Edw. 3.
m. 6. Tho. Walsingham, p. 170. n. 54. Ibidem, m. 8.
and the King constitutes Prince Edward His Lieutenant in the Dukedom of
Aquitaine and other places in France, whither he should happen to March, to
reform the State of that Dukedom, and to recover His Lands possessed by the
Rebels; with power also to receive Homage and Fidelity from the Nobility and
others of Aquitaine and France: Armed with which Powers, and accompanied by the
Earls of Warwick, Oxford, Salisbury and Suffolk, Ex Libro Miscellan. Rob.
Glover, Somerset, fol. 29.
in the head of a good Army he takes Shipping and Lands in Gascoign; Having
entered the River Garronne, he makes his way into Languedoc, and burning the
Town of Carcassona, thence passes to Narbon, destroying the Country with Fire
and Sword, endeavors to encounter the Earls of Clermont and Armaignac, who
upon his approach retire, and after eight weeks returns to Bourdeaux, with many
Prisoners, and store of Pillage.

Intelligence of Prince Edwards taking the Field the following Summer, being
brought to King John of France, he resolved to fight him, Hollingsh. p. 387.
who now with about 8000. Men had entered the Country of Berry, and taken the
Towns and Castle, of Vierzon and Remorentin by Assault: Tho. Walsingham p. 171.
n. 48. Ibidem, p. 172. n. 1. Ypodigma Neustriae, 521. n. 42. Froissard, cap. 64.
and passing into Anjou and Tourain (wasting those Countries) he intended to
return for Bourdeaux. But after this long and wearisome Journey, drawing near
to Poictiers, Battle of Poictiers, An. 1356. Sept. 19.
he had information that the French Army, consisting of 60000. fighting Men,
was not far distant (here the Cardinal of Perigort endeavored an
Accommodation, but the French Demands were so high, that it proved ineffectual)
whereupon the Prince prepared for the Battle, which joined in the Fields of
Beauvoir, three Leagues from Poictiers, and, after some space, with his Archers
broke the Van of the French Cavalry, when the Main Body, led by the Duke of
Normandy, consisting also of Horse, finding the other routed, fell also into
disorder, which encouraged the Prince of Wales to attaque the Reere commanded
by King John, at whose approach the Main Body of the French Army left the
Field. The King behaved himself valiantly, and maintained the Fight for some
time, but was at length taken Prisoner by Sir Denis Morbeck a Knight of Artois
(to whom the Prince afterward gave 2000. Froissard, chap. 64.
Nobles to support his Estate) whilst the pursuit continued to the Gates of
Poictiers, and a complete Victory was obtained; In which so many Noble Men were
slain, or made Prisoners, that there were few left to Manage the Affairs of
France. Among diverse of the English Nobility who behaved themselves with
signal courage in this Memorable Battle, James Lord Audley won Honor, Ypodigma
Noustriae, p. 521. n. 53.
both by his valor and his bounty, who having vowed to be foremost in this
Fight, performed his word, and sealed it with many wounds; for which the Prince
having rewarded him with the gift of 500 Marks Feesimple in England, he
presently gave it to his four Esquires: whereupon the Prince demanding it he
accepted not his Gift? answered, That those Men had deserved the same as well
as himself, and had more need of it: with which reply the Prince was so well
pleased, that he granted him 500 Marks more in the same kind.

And now though King John had the misfortune to fall into the hands of his
Enemy, Thomas Walsingh. p. 172. n. 42.
yet had he the happiness to be captivated by a Noble Enemy, Prince Edward, who
used him with such respect and observance, that his Confinement little differed
from Liberty, whom the Prince led to Bordeaux, Anno 1357.
and there remained till April following, at what time the Prince took Shipping
for England with his most eminent Prisoners, landed at Plymouth, Ibidem, n. 47.
and on the 24th of May in a stately Cavalcade rode through London, his Royal
Prisoner by his side on a white Courser, and himself on a black Hobby, and so
proceeded to Westminster Hall, where he presented King John to his Father, from
whence he was conducted to his Lodgings, and not long after had the Savoy
furnished for his Entertainment.

His Marriage.
Three several Marriages having been proposed for Prince Edward in his
Minority, Tho. Walsingham, p. 178. n. 16. Pat. An. 5 Ed. 3. p. 2. m. 28. Rot.
Alman. 12 E. 3. part. 1. m. 17. Pat. 19 E. part. 3. m. 11. Tho. Walsingham, p.
178. n. 176.
The first with a Daughter of Philip King of France, An. 5 Ed. 3. The second
An. 12 Ed. 3. with Margaret one of the Daughters of John Duke of Braband and
Lorrain. And a third with a Daughter of the King of Portugal, An. 19 Ed. 3. All
which being of others providing, and not taking effect, at length (in the year
1361. An. 35 Ed. 3.) He took to Wife a Lady of his own choice, namely Joane
Countess of Kent, Daughter of Edmond of Woodstock Earl of Kent (fifth Son of
King Edward the First, but second by his second Wife Margaret, Daughter of
Philip the Hardy King of France) Sister of Edmond, and Sister and heir of
John, both Earls of Kent successively, who dyed without issue; She was the
repudiated Wife of Thomas Montague Earl of Salisbury, and the Relict of Sir
Thomas Holand Knight of the Garter, Earl of Kent in her Right, and commonly
called (for her excellent Beauty) the Fair Maid of Kent: whom the Prince having
Married notwithstanding nearness of Blood betwixt them, and Christning of her
eldest son which she had by Sir Thomas Holand; it was thought necessary to have
a Papal Absolution from Excommunication, Id. September. ex Lib. in Offic.
Cantuar. vocat. Islip. fol. 177. b. 17 and 18. a.
and dispensation for Marriage, both which were obtained from Innocent the
Sixth, in the Ninth year of his Popedom: She survived the Prince her third
Husband, and deceased at Wallingford in the Ninth year of the Reign of her Son
King Richard the Second.

In Pale, quarterly France semee and England, a label of 3 points argent, and
Gules 3 Lions passant guardant or, a border Argent are the Arms of Joane
Princess of Wales, being carved and painted on the North-side the Tomb of
Queen Philippa in Westminster-Abbey.
Some years after the Battle of Poictiers, King Edward having prepared for
another Expedition into France, this Prince accompanied him (as did also his
three Brethren) and Commanded the Rear of that Army, which making its way
through the Bowels of France, at Bretigny near Chartres a Peace was concluded,
and all Controversies, touching that Kingdom, brought to a happy composure, by
which King Edward became possessed of a considerable part of the Territories of
his own Inheritance, or Invested in him by the said Peace, to enjoy without
resort, or Sovereignty to the Crown of France. Wherefore the Nobility of these
Provinces desiring to be Governed by a Prince of their own, rather than by the
Kings Lieutenants as before, address themselves to King Edward, to confer the
Government thereof on this Prince, and send him thither, where he had so great
Possessions and Revenues; whereupon the King Created him Prince of Guyenne the
19th day of July, Rot. Vasc. 36 Edw. 3. m. 16. 19. Julii.
An. 36 Ed. 3. 1362. and gave him Guyenne and Gascoigne, by the Name of a
Principallity, during his life; Prince Edward created Prince of Guyenne.
whereupon (taking along with him his Princess) he hastes thither, and having
received the Fealty of the Barons and Knights his Homagers, keeps his Court at
Bordeaux with great State and Magnificence. In Camere Ducatus Lancastriae.
In pursuance of this Dignity, in an Instrument dated the Eighth day of
October, in the year 1370. An. 44 Ed. 3. (whereby he grants to his Brother John
Duke of Lancaster, the Castle, Town and Chastellane of la Roche sur Yon) he
writes himself Prince of Aquitaine, viz. Edouard ainsne filz du Roy de France
et d'Engleterre Prince d'Aquitaine et de Gales duc de Meaning Cornwall.
Cornville Comte de Cestre Seigneur de Biscaie et de Castre d'Ordiales:
Appendant to which in Green Silk-strings is his Seal also of Green-Wax ( vide
the Figure thereof, p. 125.) on which he is represented in his Robes sitting on
a Throne, with a Circle on his head, and a Scepter in his right hand as Duke of
Aquitaine, betwixt two Ostrich Feathers and Scroles, over which are the Letters
E. P. (viz. Edwardus Princeps) in Capitalls: on the Reverse he is figured on
Horseback, his Surcoat, Shield, and the Caparizons of his Horse charged with
the Arms of France and England quarterly a Label of 3 points; and for his
Crest, a Lion passant guardant, crowned, and gorged with a Label also of 3
points. The Seal and Reverse are Circumscribed thus in Saxon Capitals, S.
EDVARDI. PRIMOGENITI. REGIS. ANGLIE. PRINCIPIS. AQUITANNIE. ET. WALLIE. DUCIS.
CORNUBIE. ET. COMITIS. CESTRIE. But after he had resigned the Principality of
Aquitaine (in a Grant under his Privy Seal, Ex Chartis Dom. Henrici Comitis de
Peterborrow.
dated at London the 14 day of February, An. 49 Ed. 3. in the year 1374) his
Titles were these only, Edward eisne filz du Roi d'Engleterre et de France,
Prince de Gales, Duc de Cornwall et Comte de Cestre, And the Seal of Red-Wax
is Circumscribed, S: Edwardi primogeniti regis anglie franc: principis wall:
ducis cornub: et commit: cestr: and upon this Seal are his Arms, Healme, Crest
and Mantlings, placed betwixt two Feathers and Scroles, the Figure thereof
being delineated in the 125. Page of this Third Book.

Not long after, Hollingshed. Chron. p. 397.
( viz. An. 39 Ed. 3.) this Noble Prince was induced to re-establish Peter King
of Castile, who had made a Personal Application to him in his so great
distress, being driven our of his Kingdom by his base Brother Henry, whose
Quarrel Prince Edward freely undertakes, and recalling those English Forces
lately disbanded upon the Peace with France, and now in the Service of Henry
the bastard, and receiving Assistance from King Edward, conducted by his
Brother John Duke of Lancaster, enters into Castile with 30000. Horse and Foot,
where Don Henry confronts him with an Army of 86000. Tho. Walsingham, p. 182.
n. 3. Ypodigmae Neustriae, p. 526. n. 12.
The Battles join between Nazar and Naveret on Saturday the third of April,
Battle of Nazar. An. 1367.
An 40 Ed. 3. and here Prince Edward, after a bloody fight, restores King Peter
to his Throne, and is a Third time crowned with the Laurels of Victory;
whereupon King Peter repairing to Sevil, promises to send the Prince Money for
the payment of his Army; but, after four Months stay and expectation he is
forced to return into Aquitain without any Satisfaction from that Ungrateful
King, so that he was forced, for payment of his Soldiers, to Coin his Plate,
and also in this Voyage contracted such a Sickness that he never recovered,
Thomas Walsingham, p. 182 n. 46.
which his Phisicians and Chirurgians judged to be an incurable Dropsy,
others, that he was Poisoned. To which indisposition of Body may be added his
Coffeehouse of Mind, for not having Money to pay his Soldiers, who now being
returned home, prey upon the Country, and grow outrageous. Ypodig. Neustriae,
p. 528. n. 24.
The Bishop of of Rhodes, An. 1370.
his Chancellor, devising a new way of Imposition, by Levying a Frank upon
every Chimney throughout the Princes Territories in France, to continue for
five years, toward the payment of his Debts, the Poictovins, Xaintons, and
Lymosins in a sort consent thereunto, but the Counts of Armignack and Albret,
and many others so distaste it, that they take Arms, and complain thereof to
the King of France as their supreme Lord; He Summons Prince Edward to appear
in Person to answer the Complaint; who replies, That if he needs must appear,
he would bring 60000. Men in Arms to appear with him: and had certainly
brought his Army against Paris that Summer, had he not fallen into Symptoms of
a Dropsy, Tho. Walsingham, p. 182. n. 47.
which ( Walsingham says) was wrought by Enchantment. Notwithstanding which he
still prosecutes the War against the Dukes of Anjou and Berry, who with great
Armies enter upon his Territories; Ypodigmae Neustriae, p. 528. n. 25.
when News being brought him of the taking of Limoges (the Bishop of which
place was his especial Friend) he resolves to regain it at any price, Tho.
Walsingham, p. 185. n. 36.
and not to spare a Man which had a hand in delivering it up; whereupon, taking
it by force, he commanded to Sack and Pillage it, and would not be stayed by
the Cries of the People, casting themselves at his feet; till, passing through
the Town, he observed three French Captains, who themselves alone had withstood
the assault of his Army, and moved with the consideration of their Valor,
abated his anger, and for their sakes granted Mercy to all the Inhabitants.
This was the last Martial Act of this most Heroic Worthy, with whom the good
fortune of England, as if it had been inherent in his person, flourished in his
Health, languished in his Sickness, and expired in his Death; (with whom, says
my Author, died all the hope of English Men: Ypodigmae Neustriae, p. 530. n. 47.
during whose life they feared no Invasion of the Enemy, nor encounter in
Battle: for he assailed no Nation which he overcame not, The. Walsingham, p.
190. n. 15.
and besieged no City which he took not) which followed shortly after, for
leaving the prosecution of the War to his Brethren, John Duke of Lancaster, and
Edmond Earl of Cambridge, Ypodigma Neustriae, 528. n. 30. Thomas Walsingh. p.
190. n. 9. Lib. in Offic, principal. Cant. vocat. Sudbury. fol. 90. b.
he sets sail for England with his Princess and young Son Richard, where his
Sickness increasing upon him, he resigned his last breath in the Royal Palace
at Westminster on Trinity Sunday, the eighth day of July, in the year of our
Lord 1376. His Death, 1376. July 8.
By his Will, made in the Kings Great Chamber the day before his death, he
disposed of his Body to be buried in the Cathedral Church of the Trinity in
Canterbury; and such was his care to gratify those who had done him Service,
that he charged his Son Richard by his Will, to continue the payment of those
Pentions which he had given them. In order to his Interment, his Corpse being
Imbalmed, was wrapped in Lead, and kept till Michaelmas (the Parliament being
then to meet) to be buried with greater Solemnity, which was performed at
Canterbury, on the South Side, and near the Shirne of St. Thomas Becket, and
over his Grave a stately Monument erected of Gray Marble, with his Portraiture
lying thereon, of Copper Gilt; the ends and sides thereof are garnished with
Escocheons also of Copper, enamelled with his Arms and Devises, and
superscribed with the words Houmont, and Ich dien. On an Iron Bar over the
Tomb are placed the Healme and Crest, Coat of Maile, and Gantlets, and on a
Pillar near thereunto his Shield of Arms richly diapred with Gold, all which
he is said to have used in Battle. The Figure of this Monument is delineated in
the following Page, upon which this French Epitaph is circumscribed on a Fillet
of Brass, beginning at the Head.

Cy gist le noble Prince Monsieur Edward, aisnez filz du tresnoble Roy Edward
tiers: jadis Prince d'Aquitame and de Gales, Duc de Cornwaille and Comte de
Cestre, qi morust, en la feste de la Trinite, qestoit le v^ii four de Iuyn,
l'an de grace mil trois cenz septante sisine, Lalme de qi Dieu eit mercy Amen.

Tu qi passez our bouche close On the South Side the Tomb.

Par la ou ce corpse repose
Intent ce qe te dirai
Sycome te dire le say.
Liel come tu es autiel fu,
Tu seras tiel come je su.
De la mort ne pensai je mye
Tant come javoi la vie:
En tree avoi grand richesse
Don't je y fis grand noblesse
Terre, Mesons, grand tresor,
Draps, chivaur, argent, and or.
monument Illustrissimo Domino Dn: IACOBO Comiti de NORTHAMTON, et Baroni
COMPTON, necnon Locum-tenenti Serenissimo Regi Carolo Secundo, in Comitatu
Warwici, hanc Tumuli EDWARDI PRINCIPIS WALLIAE cogno minanti NIGRI figuram;
H.D.D.D.F.S.

(...) come le su (...) la mort argent ^^or

Donmout

Ich dien

Donmout

Ich dien

Donmout

Ich dien

W Hollar fecit


Mes ore su jeo poures and chetifs
At the Foot of the Tomb.
Perfond en la tree gis
Ma grand beaute' est tout alee:
Ma char est tout gastee;
On the North-side
Moult est estroit ma meson;
En moy na si verite non.
Et si ore me veissez
Ie ne quide pas qe vous deissez
Qe je eusse onques home este
Si su je ore de tant changee
Pour dieu priez au celestien Roy,
Qe mercy ait de l'alme de moy
Touz ceulx qi pur moy prieront,
Ou a dieu macorderont,
Dieu les met en son Paradis
Ou null ne poet estre chetifs.
Thus Englished by John Weever in his Funeral Monuments, p. 204 and 205.

Here lies the Noble Prince, Monsieur Edward, the Eldest Son of the most Noble
King Edward the Third, in former time Prince of Aquitaine, and of Wales, Duke
of Cornwall and Earl of Chester, who dyed on the Feast of Trinity, which was
the Eighth day of June, in the year of Grace 1376. To the Soul of whom God
grant Mercy, Amen.

Who so thou be that passes by
Where these Corpse interred lie,
Understand what I shall say,
As at this time speak I may:
Such as thou art sometime was I,
Such as I am, such shall thou be.
I little thought on the Hour of Death,
So long as I enjoyed Breath.
Great Riches here I did possess,
Whereof I made great Nobleness;
I had Gold, Silver, Wardrobes, and
Great Treasures, Horses, Houses, Land:
But now a Caitife poor am I,
Deep in the Ground, lo here I lie.
My Beauty great, is all quite gone,
My Flesh is wasted to the Bone.
My House is narrow, now, and throng,
Nothing but truth comes from my Tongue.
And, if ye should see me this day,
I do not think but ye would say,
That I had never been a Man,
So much altered now I am.
For God sake Pray to the Heavenly King,
That he my Soul to Heaven would bring.
All they that Pray, and make accord
For me unto my God and Lord,
God place them in his Paradise,
Wherein no wretched Caitiffe lies.
Children of EDWARD Prince of Wales, by JOAN Countess of Kent his Wife.
II. EDWAR'D of Engolesme, Tho. Walsingham p. 180. n. 39.
eldest Son of Prince Edward, whose Name he did bear, was born at Engolesme in
the Year 1365. Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 525. n. 39.
An. 39 of King Edward III. his Grandfather. He deceased in Gascoigne in the
seventh year of his Age; some assert he died younger.

II. RICHARD of Bordeaux, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 525. n. 49.
born An. 1366 second Son of Edward Prince of Wales, succeeded his Father in
the Principality of Wales, and his Grandfather King Edward III. in the Kingdom
of England, by the name of Richard II. whose History follows in the V.
Chapter of this III. Book.

Natural Issue of EDWARD Prince of Wales.
II. Sir JOHN SOVNDER, a Base Son of Prince Edward, of whom I have not found
other mention made, then of his Name.

II. Sir ROGER de CLARENDON, He did bear. Or, on a Bend Sable 3 Ostrich
Feathers argent the Quills transfixed through as many Scroles of the first,
vide l. 10. fol. 39. Lib. in in Collegi^ Armerum.
another Natural Son of Edward Prince of Wales, so surnamed from Clarendon in
Wiltshire (its probable) the place of his Birth. To this Sir Roger, the Prince
his Father by his Will gave a Silk Bed, with all thereto blonging. He was
afterward made one of the Knights of the Chamber to King Richard II. his
half-brother; to whom the said King also the first of October, Claus. 14. R. 2.
m. 13.
An. 13 R. 2. granted 100. l per An. during life out of the Issues of His
Subsidies in several Counties. He was attainted in the Reign of King Henry IV.
and is thought to be the Ancestor of a Family of the Smithes in the County of
Essex.

Sigillum ricardi principis wallie ducis cornubie et comitis cestri


Sigllum ricardi principis wallie ducis cornubie et comitis cestrie pro officio
Suth wallie


Ricardus Dei Gracia Ref Arancie et Anglie et Dns hibernie


RICH II

Ricardus Dei Gracia Ref Francie et Anglie et Dns hibernie


Viro Generosissimo Dno ^^ANCISCO LAWLEY de Cannall in agro Staffordiensi
Baronetto, Sigillorum hanc Iabulam, HD. ^ S.



blazon or coat of arms

II. RICHARD II. KING of ENGLAND and FRANCE, and LORD of IRELAND, Surnamed of
BORDEAUX.
CHAP. V.
EDward Prince of Wales, that shining Star of Military Glory, eldest Son of
King Edward III. had issue, by His most beautiful Princess Joane Countess of
Kent, two Sons; the elder born at Engolesme, named Edward, who dy^d at the age
of 7 years; and the other this Richard, their second Son, a Native of Bourdeaux
(and so Surnamed) born in the year 1366. and at his Baptism honored with the
Presence of two Royal Godfathers, Tho. Walsingham p. 181. n. 4.
Richard King of Navarre, Ypodigma Nenstriae, p. 525. n. 46.
and James King of Majorca.

This Richard had not completed his seventh year, when His Grandfather King
Edward upon His last Expedition into France (by Commission bearing date at
Sandwich the 30th day of August, Pat. An. 46 Ed. 3. pars 2. m. 25.
in the 46th year of Ed. 3. ( An. 1372.) constitutes him Custos of the Kingdom,
and his Lieutenant, during his absence beyond the Sea, etc. in which he is
styled Ricardus filius primogenitus Edwardi Principis Aquitaniae et Walliae,
etc.

During that Parliament (called the Good) held at London, Ypodigma Neustriae,
p. 530. n. 51.
An. 1376. deceased Prince Edward His Father, and this Richard was then created
Earl of Chester, Thomas Walsingh. p. 190. n. 21.
and not long after He succeeded him in the Dukedom of Cornwall and
Principality of Wales. On His Royal Seal depicted in the 190. Page of this 3
Book, K. Richard bears Quarterly. France semee, and England, as did His
Grandfather King Edward III. But in Escocheons of Glass of His Arms set up in
his time, and now in being in the We^t-Window of the Abbey of S^r^wsbury, and
of several Princes of the Royal House there also depicted with their
distinctions; the Arms of England are placed in the dexter quarter; As also in
a large Escocheon in an East-window of the North-Isle of Christchurch in
London, there remaining till the late Dreadful Fire, An. 1666. K. Richard II.
having chosen St. Edward the Confessor to be his Patron, impaled his Coat being
Azure; a Cross Flowery, inter 5 Martlets, or, with the Arms of France and
England, Quarterly (which were so Painted in a North-window of St. Olaves
Church in the Old-Jewry, and also now remain in a South-window of the Church of
St. Bartholomew the Lesser, near Smith field) which Holy Kings Arms, King
Richard of his mere Grace and Favor granted, as an augmentation to Thomas
Mowbray Duke of Norfolk. without any distinction, to be impaled with his
paternal Coat as you may observe in this Dukes Seal exhibited in Mr. Vincent,
Page 389. notwithstanding Henry Howard Earl of Surrey lineally descended from
him was attainted, among other pretenses for so bearing the same. To Thomas
Holland Duke of Surrey He gave the same Arms, differenced with a Border
Argent; and to John Holland Duke of Exceter, with the distinction of a Label of
3 points Argent, whose Escocheon stands depicted in a South-window of St.
Bartho'omews Church the Lesser near Smithfield. I also find the Arms of St.
Edward, with a Border gobony argent and azure, in a South-window of the Chapel
in Vnive^sity-Colledge in Oxford, Impaleing the Coat of one of the Beausorts.
He was the first of our Kings that had his Escocheon supported, as you may
observe in his Arms, and those of St. Edward the Confessor over the Porch at
the North-door of Westminster Hall by Him erected, which are there (and in
diverse other places) held or supported by two Angels, beneath both which
Escocheon, is His Devise, viz. a white Heart couchant gorged with a Gold Coronet
and Chain, under a Tree. The same Heart is Painted bigger then the Life on the
wall in the South-cross of Westminster-Abbey, and expressed in Coloured-glass
over the Portraiture of this King in a South-window of the said Monastery. This
Emblem without doubt he derived from that of Princess Joan his Mother, which
was, a white Hind Couchant under a Tree, gorged and chained as the other: For
wearing this His Badge of the Heart some after His Deposition lost their lives.
He used also a Pescod branch, with the Cods open, but the Peace out, as it is
upon His Robe in His Monument at Westminster.


About which time He caused a Seal to be made, upon the one side of which He is
represented on Horsback in His Surcoat, with His Shield, and His Horse
Caparizon'd, all charged with, Penes Eliam Ashmole Arm, Faecialem nom. Windsor.
Quarterly, semee of France and England, a label of 3 points (in the lifetime
of Prince Edward His Father He bare a File of 3 points Argent, the middlemost
charged with the Cross of St. George, as you may observe in the Catalogue of
the Knights of the Garter) on the Reverse is a large Escocheon of the same
Arms, thus Circumscribed, Sigillum: ricardi: principis: wallie: ducis:
cornubie: et: comitis: cestrie: pro officio suth-wallie. This Seal is also
annexed to a Grant dated Kaermerdyn 16 day of April, in the ninth year of his
Reign, the Figure thereof being exhibited in the 138. Page of this Third Book.

In the following year, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 531. n. 53.
, ( viz. 1377.) upon the Feast of St. George, He had the Order of Knighthood
conferred on him at Windsor by King Edward III. who also to prevent disorder in
the Succession, settles the Crown in Parliament upon this Richard His Grandson,
who shortly after (by His death) becomes possessed thereof, at the age of
eleven years.

Upon the 16th day of July, Anno 1377.
in the same year 1377. Tho. Walsingham, p. 195. n. 11. Ypodig. Neustriae, p.
532. n. 9.
. His Coronation is Magnificently performed at Westminster by Simon Sudbury
Archbishop of Canterbury; at which diverse Noblemen and others put in their
Claims (by their Tenures) for their respective Offices in the Solemnity, and
were admitted accordingly. To John Duke of Lancaster, and Edmond Earl of
Cambridge, the Kings Uncles, with some other Lords and Bishops, is committed
the present management of the State, and the tuition of the young King to
Guischard d'Engolesme.

Those Princes that had now any quarrel with England, Tho. Walsingham, p. 198.
n. 55.
thought this the fittest time of Action, and the opportunity is presently
embraced by the French and Scots; The first burning Rye, Hastings, Portsmouth,
Dartmouth, Plymouth, on the Coast; and, the later making havoc upon the
Borders, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 532. n. 43. Tho. Walsingham, p. 200. n. 34.
, and taking the Castle of Barwick, but were both repulsed with considerable
loss; and, to complete the return upon the French, Sir Hugh Calverley, Deputy
of Calais, burnt 26 of their Ships in the Haven of Bolloigne; though in the
mean time one Mercer, Anno 1378.
a Scotch Pirate, who infested the Coast about Scarborow, is with his Fleet
taken by John Philpot a Citizen of London, with a Navy set out at his own
charge, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 532. n. 32 Tho. Walsingham, p. 211. n. 30. and
44.
, which being done without Commission, he is called in question for; But, the
Service was so eminent, that it was thought fit to dispense with his objected
contempt of Authority, and to acquit him with a great deal of reputation. Other
Attempts upon the French and Scots, and theirs again upon us, were as diverse as
their Events; But, Tho. Walsingham. p. 231. n. 56. Ibidem, p. 247. n. 43.
our most unhappy, Anno 1379.
the loss of many of our Ships by storm under the command of Sir John Arundel,
etc. that were designed for Britain; and the Insurrection of Wat Tyler, Jack
Straw, John Lettestere, Robert Westbrom, etc. with the Commons of Kent, Essex,
Hartford, Cambridge, Suffolk and Norfolk, who by the Instigation of one John
Ball a Seditious Malecontent, and Hypocritical Preacher, intended to destroy
all Gentlemen, Lawyers, Clergymen, and whosoever were of any account, either
for their Estates, Family, or Authority in the Commonwealth. The Kentish
Rebels mustered 100000 on Blackheath, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 535. n. 13.
whence they Marched to the Savoy, the Duke of Lancasters Palace, which, with
the Lawyers Lodgings at the Temple, and the Priory of St. John near Smithfield,
they set on fire, thence to the Tower where the King lay, and after some
rudenesses offered to the Princess Joane the Kings Mother, Thomas Walsingham,
p. 250. n. 39.
they behead Simon Sudbury alias Tibold Archbishop of Canterbury Lord
Chancellor, and Sir Robert Hailes Lord Treasurer, on Towerhill; neither were
Sacred places exempt from their Insolences, for having drawn 13 Flemings out
of the Augustine Friars, and 17 others out of other Churches, they cut off
their heads in the open streets: King Richard Proclaimed Pardon to all that
would lay down their Arms, which the Essex men did, but not they of Kent; But
at length their Leader Tyler, after many insolences committed, is by the
valor of that valiant Citizen William Walworth Lord Mayor of London (the King
being present) killed in the head of his rabble, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 535. n.
18.
whom King Richard to pacify, desires to follow Him as their Leader into the
Fields to receive their Demands. In the mean time Walworth Arms 1000. men in
the City, puts them under the command of Sir Robert Knolls, who leading them
into the field, so daunted the Rebels, that they immediately submitted; Thomas
Walsingham p. 254 n. 6.
notwithstanding which, the King gave them a Charter of manumission, though
afterward he revoked it; and for this their good service, the King Knighted the
Lord Mayor and five Aldermen, and augmented the City Arms, with a Dagger in
the dexter quarter. The Rebels of Norfolk, Cambridgshire and Suffolk are
dispersed by the Bishop of Norwich, and 1500 of them in several places
exemplarily put to death.

In the time of this uproar the Duke of Lancaster had been sent into Scotland,
Tho. Walsingham, p. 278. n. 54.
where he concluded a Truce for two years, before ever they heard of the
Rebellion in England; and, being in his return denied entrance into Barwick by
the Earl of Northumberland, is highly incensed against him, Ibidem. p. 279. n.
57.
and offers to lay diverse things to his charge at the Parliament there
beginning; But King Richard, by whose mistake the offense was given,
interposed, and made them friends.

After the Feast of Epiphany, Walsingham, p. 281 n. 42. Ypodigma Neustriae, p.
535. n. 26.
(the 22th day of January) An. 1382. King Richard took to Wife the Lady Anne,
His first Marriage, An. 1382.
daughter to the Emperor Charles IV, and sister to Wenceslaus Emperor and
King of Bohemia; which Lady was formerly promised and assured to Him, as one
whom the King did particularly affect; though the daughter of Barnabas Duke of
Millan was also offered with a far greater Dower. She was with much pomp and
glory Crowned at Westminster by William Courtney Archbishop of Canterbury, and
having been His Wife 12 years, Tho Walsingham, p. 350. n. 43.
then deceased issuless at the Kings Manor of Shene in the County of Surrey in
the year 1394, to the extreme grief of the King, who so passionately loved
Her, that He ever after not only abandoned, but cursed the place of Her death.
Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 547. n. 17.
Her Corpse was solemnly interred in Westminster-Abbey, Queen Anne did bear,
Quarterly an Eagle displayed with two heads, sable, being the Imperial Arms,
and, Gules, a Lion rampant queue forchee, argent, crowned or: the Arms of
Bohemia impaled with those of King Richard II. her Husband, viz. quarterly
France semee, and England, which are painted on the inside the Canopy, over the
Tomb of K. Richard II. in the Abbey of Westminster. In a North-window of the
Choire of the Parish Church of St. Olave in the Old-Jewry London, was an
Escocheon, divided into 3 parts, per Pale, The dexter part whereof was charged
with the Arms of St. Edward the Confessor, on the Pale were the Arms of
France and England quarterly, and on the Sinister side the Arms of the Empire
and Bohemia quarterly, which last was the Coat of Queen Anne.

Whose Seal (depicted in the 124 Page of this 3d. Book.) represents you with a
large Shield crowned, and charged with the King her Husbands Arms and Hers, in
pale, differing from the former in this particular, That the Eagles are
single-headed; from which we may observe, that at the time of making that Seal,
her Father was only King of the Romans and Bohemia, and had not yet been
Emperor. This Seal is circumscribed, Sigillum: anne: regine: francie: et:
anglie: et: domine: hibernie. But in her Indenture, unto which the said Seal is
affixed, dated at London the 15th day of July, An. 15 Rich. 2d. England is
first named, for therein she is styled Anne par la grace de Dieu Royne
d'Engleterre et de France et Dame d'Ireland. Ex Chartis Johannis Philpot
quondam Somerset.


where Her Effigies is now to be seen of copper guilt, lying hand in hand with
that of King Richard II. Her Husband on that Tomb erected for Him by King
Henry V. with this Epitaph.

Hoc jacet Anna loco Britonum redimita corona,
Cui vir Richardus jure secundus erat:
Cui pater illustris, guata, generoque superbus,
Rome ter felix Induperator erat.
Wenceslaus illam magna comitante caterva,
Londinum misit letus ovansque pater:
Cujus in adventu ludi, spectacula fiunt,
Regali pompa, regia virgo venit:
Sed bona sunt hominum tenui pendentia filo,
Reges, Reginas mors capit, omne rapit.
Hec Regina fuit magna de stirpe Quiritum,
Omnibus illa fuit femina chara viris.
Larga coloratis virtutum splendida gemmis:
Nunquam leta parens, nam sine prole jacet.
Queen Anne, Richard the Seconds Wife,
Lies buried in this place:
Adorned with the Britains Crown,
With whom she found much grace.
Whose noble Sire of daughter proud,
Of Son-in-law full glad, Qu. Anne was Sister, and not Daughter to the Emperor
Wenceslaus.

Of Rome thrice happy Emperor was,
And that large Empire had.
Wenceslaus so called by name,
Who thus in joyful plight
Sent her to London, guarded well
With valiant men of might.
Against whose coming Plays were made,
And sights and shows were seen,
With Princely Pomp, to gratify
This noble Virgin-Queen.
But all men's treasures last not long,
They hang but on a twine,
Or slender thread: death Kings and Queens
Does all catch up in fine.
This Queen was of the Royal Race
Of Romans by descent:
Of all beloved, most dear to most,
In honor relucent.
Full Liberal and Bountiful,
Adorned with virtues rare:
No Child she had, but issuless,
She lies without such care.
The Queens Nuptials and Coronation being finished, Thomas Walsingham, p. 281
n. 50.
the Parliament (which by Her arrival was interrupted and prorogued) began
again (and William Vfford Earl of Suffolk fell down dead suddenly on the
stairs as he was going up to the Lords House) in which, many things concerning
the excess of Apparel, transportation of Coin, etc. were enacted, all which
came to nothing, for the King with His Privy-Counsel was wont to abolish, Tho.
Walsingham, p. 281. n. 56.
what by the whole Commons and Nobility of the Kingdom, had in former
Parliaments been agreed upon. With the good liking of this Parliament Sir
Richard Scroope Knight was made Chancellor, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 535. n. 35.
Tho. Walsingham, p. 290. n. 20.
and Sir Hugh Seagraue Treasurer; but it was not long before the Chancellor
denying to pass such large Gifts under the Great Seal as the King in His
youthful humor had imprudently granted to His still craving Courtiers, fell
into His undeserved displeasure, and was forced to surrender the same; not long
after which, Ypoligma Neustriae, p. 535. n. 43.
Robert Braybroke Bishop of London was made Chancellor in his place: By this
act, and His prodigality toward those strangers which accompanied the Queen
out of Bohemia, He renders Himself uneasy to His People.

Henry Spenser the valiant Bishop of Norwich, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 535 n. 52.
Thomas Walsingham, p. 293 n. 43.
having procured himself to be sent over with an Army into France, Anno 1383.
on the behalf of Pope Urban, against the Antipope Clement, performs several
exploits with happy success, and having been Victor in a battle against 30000
abettors of Clements claim, sends afterward to King Richard, that if ever he
meant to take Arms against France, now was the time, which news the King
receiving as He sat at supper at Daventry, rose immediately, and rode post to
London, intending to have gone Himselt in Person, but afterward thought if
fitter to send the Duke of Lancaster, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 536. n. 36.
who is so tedious in his preparations, that the Bishop returns, Anno 1384.
and the opportunity is lost, so that the Dukes voyage only produces a short
Truce, to continue from the present Christmas till Midsummer.

The Duke being returned, Tho. Walsingham, p. 308. n. 40. Ypodigma Neustriae,
p. 536. n. 40.
, he, and his brother Thomas Earl of Buckingham lead an Army into Scotland,
where things are so ordered, that the Scots having had time enough to withdraw
their goods and persons, left him no other enemy to dispute with then hunger
and cold, so that effecting little he returns inglorious; not long after which
he is accused by an Irish Friar, Tho. Walsingham, p. 309. n. 15. Ypodigma
Neustriae, p. 536. n. 43.
in the Parliament held at Salisbury, to conspire the death of the King, and
the Usurpation of the Crown, of which the Duke of Lancaster purges himself,
and the Friar is secretly put to a cruel death; Anno 1385.
notwithstanding which, it was not long ere the King himself intending to have
Arraigned the Duke upon some points of Treason, before the Lord Chief Justice
Sir Robert Tresilian (whereas he ought to have been tried by the Peers) he
stands upon his guard in his Castle of Pontfract, Tho. Walsingham, p. 314. n.
56. Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 537. n. 24.
till by the Mediation of the Princess of Wales, the King is pacified, and an
Accommodation procured between them; But, these disgraces came unseasonably
upon the Duke of Lancaster, whose head was no doubt full of designs how to
pursue the conquest of Spain, which he intended, and to which end he had
earnestly labored for a sure and firm Peace with France and Scotland, Thomas
Walsingh. p. 316. n. 10.
but Scotland being supplied with Forces under the command of John de Vienna
Admiral of France, prepares for an Invasion of the North parts, and King
Richard with an Army of 120000 men enters Scotland, Ibidem, n. 52. Ypodig.
Neust. p. 537. n. 36.
but, as formerly, not being able to bring the Scots to a battle, burns
Edinburgh and several other places, and so returns.

But, let there be War or Peace with France and Sotland, the King, that had
disobliged the Duke of Lancaster, Anno 1386.
now finds a way both to gratify him, Tho. Walsingham, p. 321. n. 41. Ypodig.
Neustriae, p. 538. n. 35.
and be rid of his company; which he effected by raising him an Army for to be
employed in the Conquest of Spain, which Kingdom he claimed in right of his
Wife the Duchess Constance, daughter and coheir of Peter, surnamed the cruel
King of Castile and Leon; and in order thereto, the Duke and Duchess having
received two Diadems of Gold from the King and Queen, Tho. Walsingham, p. 321.
n. 56.
with 20000 Men, of which at least 1000 were Knights and Esquires, and a brave
Fleet, set sail for Spain, whereof he is styled King; and, in his passage,
freeing the Castle of Breast from the French, lands at the; Groyne; thence
passes to Compostella, where he gave the King of Portugal the meeting; Ypodigma
Neustriae, p. 538. n. 39
and there a Marriage is concluded betwixt him and the Lady Philip the Dukes
Daughter, who was honorably attended into Portugal. Some incursions they make
into the Confines of Castile, and the Country de Campo; but, at length, a Peace
is concluded, upon the consideration of a Marriage between the King of Spaines
eldest son Henry Prince of Asturgus, and the Lady Katherine of Lancaster, and
so all the Dukes claim to cease, and to have during the life of him and his
Duchess 10000 pounds yearly, and in hand 200000 Nobles.

The French, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 544. n. 51.
who thought that England could not furnish another Army to oppose them, now
prepare a Navy of 1289 Ships, and 100000 Soldiers, for an Invasion, with no
less than assurance of an absolute Conquest, which its to be doubted they had
effected had not the Winds for a long time proved adverse; For, King Richard
could not (without Capitularions made by Thomas Duke of Gloucester his Uncle)
obrain any Aides of Money for the public defense. And, though he thought
himself more free by the Duke of Lancasters departure, yet had he left behind
him spirits very untractable; those popular Lords, by this gentle Prince armed
with power and grandeur, to His own ruin, who, under the specious pretense of
reforming abuses in the Government, sacrifised the whole Kingdom to their pride
and malice. Tho. Walsingham, p. 323 n. 18. Ypodigma Neust. p. 539. n. 6.
This Armado of the French, had, for their more security, prepared a Timber
enclosure 3 Miles in compass to incamp in, a great part of which was taken by
William Beauchamp Captain of Calais; and the French Army so distressed for want
of Provisions at Sluice, that they gave over the Enterprise.

Robert de Vere Earl of Oxford was lately created Marquess of Dublin (an Honor
not heard of before this time in England) and now Duke of Ireland; and, the
year before Michael de la Pole, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 539. n. 23. Tho
Walsingham, p. 320. n. 53. and p. 323. n. 7. and p. 324. n. 2.
a Merchants Son, had been made Earl of Suffolk and Lord Chancellor. The King
being now at age, and thus honoring undeserving Men, so disgusts the
Parliament, that upon demand of a Subsidy, none would be granted till they had
fined the Chancellor 20000 Marks, and then half a Tenth and half a Fifteenth
was given, but not to be issued but by order of the Lords. A Design was about
this time laid to Murder the Duke of Gloucester, Ypodigmae Neustriae, p. 539.
n. 34. Tho. Walsingham, p. 324. n. 39. Thomas Walsingham, p, 325. n. 1.
and others that opposed the Kings Designs, but is discovered; upon which the
Lord Chancellor and Lord Treasurer are displaced, others put into their rooms,
and 13 Lords constituted to have oversight (under the King) of the whole
Realm. The Duke of Ireland is removed from the Court, and is to receive 30000
Marks, which the French were to give to the heirs of Charles de Blois, upon
condition that before Easter he should go into Ireland, to recover such Lands
as the King had given him there, this the King was forced to give way to, but
upon the dissolution of the Parliament, the Duke and the Earl of Suffolk were
received into greater favor then before.

About this time the King nominated Roger Mortimer (son of Edmond Mortimer Earl
of March, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 539. n. 57. The. Walsingham, p. 325. n. 57.
and Philippa his Wife daughter and heir of Lionel Duke of Clarence, third son
of King Edward III.) for His Successor in the Kingdom. Anno 1387.
And in the beginning of March the Earls of Arundel and Nottingham took 100
Rochel Vessels laden with Wines, relieved Breast, demolishing two Forts the
Enemy had built against it: But, this good service was rather envied then
encouraged by those about the King, and indeed by the King himself, because not
countenanced by the Duke of Ireland, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 540. 42. Thomas
Walsingham, p. 328 n. 56. and 329. n. 5.
who now puts away his lawful Wife the Lady Issabel, one of King Edward III.
Grand-daughters, and Marries a Joyners daughter of Bohemia; at which Indignity
the Duke of Gloucester her Uncle took such displeasure, that new Plots are
forged by Suffolk, Sir Robert Tresilian, etc. to take away his life; as also
of the Earls of Arundel, Warwick, Derby, (son of the Duke of Lancaster)
Nottingham, and such others as they thought fit to clear themselves of; Easter
being now past, K. Richard pretends to send the Duke of Ireland to the
waterside, but after some stay in those parts brings him back again with him,
and at Coventry 2000 persons are Indicted by the L. Chief Justice; Ypodigma
Neustriae, p. 540.59.
and at Nottingham where the King and Queen lay, Robert Belknap Chief Justice
of the Common Pleas, and other Judges, by the Kings command attend him, to whom
He propounds several Questions of the unlawfulness of the proceeding of the
Parliament and Lords, and what Penalties they had incurred: They declare them
unlawful, and the Abettors guilty of Treason, which the King having effected,
not only those Justices, but all other Justices and Sheriffs were thereupon
summoned to Nottingham, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 541. n. 5. Ypodigma Neustriae,
541. n. 7.
to know what Forces they could raise for the King against the Lords, and to
take care that no Members should be chosen in the Parliament he then intended,
but such as the King should approve of; Furthermore, the King and the Duke of
Ireland send all over the Kingdom to dispose the People as much as possible to
their party, as to their Elections, and in the mean time endeavor to surprise
the Duke of Gloucester and the Earl of Warwick (who had got a great Power of Men
about them) and also sends to the Lord Mayor to know what Forces he could raise
for Him in the City of London, Thomas Walsingham, p. 329 n. 22.
who promised 50000 Men, but could not perform, the Citizens refusing to fight
against the Kings Friends, and Defenders of the Realm, as they called them.
Whereupon King Richard, by advice of the Earl of Northampton, requires the
Lords to come to Him, which by reason of an Ambush laid for them (though
without the Kings knowledge) they forbore at that time, Thomas Walsingham, p.
330 n. 56.
but afterward upon safe conduct came, and the King receives them seemingly
with all kindness, and agrees to them, that at the next Parliament all parties
should be indifferently heard, and in the mean time to remain in his
Protection; upon which the Favorite Lords not daring to come to the Test,
withdraw from the Court; But the King not enduring their absence, commands the
Constable of Chester to raise an Army, and to conduct the Duke of Ireland to
him, who is by the way encountered and overthrown by the Earl of Derby: Ypodigma
Neustriae, p. 542. n. 46. Tho. Walsingham, p. 332. n. 8. Ibidem, p. 332. n. 27.
Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 542. n. 52.
The Duke very very narrowly escaping flies beyond Sea, and at Lovaine, after
two or three years ends his life. The Earl of Suffolk also, in disguise,
retires to Calais, where he is discovered and sent back into England, but by
the King is permitted to go at large.

The Lords having now, Anno 1388.
as they thought, matter enough to justify the taking of Arms, march to
London with 40000 Men, and to the King then at the Tower, the Duke of
Gloucester, and the Earls of Derby and Nottingham declare their Grievances; and
produce Letters from the Duke of Ireland, Tho. Walsingham, p. 333. n. 39.
for his levying an Army for their destruction, and also another of safe
Conduct, written to him by the French King, to come into France to do Acts to
his own and the Kingdoms dishonor: The King promised He would come the next
day to Westminster to Treat further of these matters, but repenting that
promise, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 543. n. 1 and 3.
they peremptorily send him word, That if He did not come and hearken to his
faithful Council, they would choose another King: so that the next morning He
went, and there with no small regret condescended to the removal and
imprisonment of all those whom the Lords required, Alexander Nevil Archbishop
of York is removed from the Parliament, all the Judges except one are Arrested
on the Bench and sent to the Tower; Tho. Walsingham. p. 334. n. 20.
Sir William Tresilian Lord Chief Justice is hanged at Tyburne, and the rest of
the Judges banished, and the King bound by Oath to abide by such Rules and
Orders as the Lords should make, and the same imposed throughout the whole
Kingdom.

After much ado a Peace is concluded for 3 years, Anno 1389.
Thomas Walsingham, p. 337. n. 39. Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 544. n. 23. Ypodigma
Neustriae, p. 544. n. 45. Thomas Walsingham. p. 347 n. 7. Tho. Walsingham. p.
347. n. 55 Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 546. n. 55. Tho. Walsingham, p. 350. n. 50.
Ibidem, p. 351. n. 16.
betwixt England, France and Scotland: And afterward John Duke of Lancaster,
Anno 1392.
upon his return from Spain, meets the King of France at Amiens with a train of
1000 Horse, to treat of a more lasting Truce betwixt the two Crowns, but only
procures the addition of a year more to the former: In this year ( viz. An.
1392.) the Queen dies, and the City of London having forfeited their Charter,
are by the Duke of Glocesters intercession, and the payment of 10000 pounds
Fine, restored to their Liberties. The King sends the Dukes of Lancaster and
Gloucester once more into France about a Peace, Anno 1393.
but this negotiation produces only a Truce for 4 years.

Great numbers of Irish resorting into England, are commanded to return,
whether the King himself not long after takes a Voyage, and at Dublin summons a
Parliament, to which repair the Kings of Mead, Thomond, Leynster, etc. and
thence sending the Duke of Gloucester to his Parliament in England, called in
his Name (by the Duke of York) in His absence, to demand Supplies, he so far
prevails, that a Tenth is granted by the Clergy, and a Fifteenth by the Laity.
The King had not continued long in Ireland when the Clergy of England
petitioned his return for the suppression of the Lollards, who at that time
much increased, being favored by many eminent persons of the Kingdom: Anno
1396.
and shortly after takes a voyage into France, where, at that famous interview
between Him and Charles the VI. Tho. Walsingham, p. 353. n. 5. Scevo^c and
Lovis de St. Ma^she Liureviii. Chap. v.
King of France, betwixt Ardres and Guines, King Richards Second Marriage.
King Richard espoused the Lady Issabel his eldest daughter; and upon the 28th
day of October 1396, in the presence of all the greatest Princes, Lords and
Ladies of either Nation, received her from His Father-in-law as a most noble
and acceptable Gift, Queen Issabel ^id bear Azure 3 Flowers de Lize, or Her
Father King Charles VI. reducing the semee of Flowers d^ ^i^e to the number 3.
Which Coat was impaled with King Richar^s, in a North-window in the C^oir of
St. Olaves Church in the Old-Jewry, London, and in other places. Anno 1397.
and Pledge of that peace and amity contracted betwixt the two Kingdoms, which
was agreed upon for 29 years. The Lady Issabel was not above 7 or 8 years of
age, wherefore her person was committed to the Dutchesses of Lancaster and
Gloucester and other great Ladies who accompanied her to Calais, Ypodigma
Neustriae, p. 549. n. 45.
and there she was Married to King Richard, who had not it seems any Nuptial
enjoyment of her, by reason of her tender age, before such time as his
Traytrous Lords (to compass their own disloyal purposes, and gratify the
ambition of an Usurper) had dethroned Him; Scevole and Lovis de Saint Marshe,
Livre viii Chap. v. Tho. Walsingham, p. 353. n. 46.
After whose death she was sent home, and Married to Charles Duke of Orleance.

At this time the Duke of Lancaster caused the issue he had by Katherine
Swinford before Marriage, to be legitimated by Act of Parliament: But the Duke
of Gloucester unadvisedly reproves the King for delivering up the Town of Breast
to the Duke of Britain, upon which he had only a Mortgage; so that upon
payment of the Money, words are multiplied between them, and the King
complains thereof to his other Uncles, the Dukes of Lancaster and York, who
excusing his intemperance, assure the King of his duty and faithfulness; yet
fearing how far the King might press them to undertake for him, they retire
from the Court, which gave the Duke of Glocester's enemies opportunity of
improving the Kings displeasure against him: and not long after, he, with
several Lords both Spiritual and Temporal (at Arundel Castle) contrive to seize
upon King Richard with the Dukes of Lancaster and York; but the whole project
being discovered, the King Himself, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 550. n. 23. Tho.
Walsingham. p. 354. n. 6.
by a stratagem, surpriseth the Duke of Gloucester (that darling of the people)
at his Castle of Pleshey in Essex, and sends him prisoner to Calais, where he
was smothered to death by Thomas Mowbray the Earl Marshal; diverse other Lords
are sent to the Tower, and the King, for the better security of His Person,
Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 550. n. 44.
appoints him a Guard of Cheshire Men, and styles Himself Prince of Chester.

In a Parliament begun at Westminster the 17th day of September 1397. Thomas
Walsingham, p. 354. n. 41. Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 551. n. 4.
the King complains of several things done by the Lords in His minority; and
first, the Archbishop of Canterbury is by the Commons impeached, but not being
suffered to make his defense, is sent into banishment; The Pardons granted to
the Duke of Gloucester, and the Earls of Arundel and Warwick which the King
protested to be extorted from Him, are required to be revoked; which being
done, Thomas Walsingham, p, 354, n. 49.
the Earl of Arundel is before the Duke of Lancaster, who sat that day as Lord
High Steward, condemned, and immediately afterward beheaded; but Warwick, by
the Dukes intercession is banished to the Isle of Man.

Anno 1398. Anno 1398.
In that Parliament called the Great, Ibidem, p. 355. n. 47.
the King to kindle new Lights in the place of such as he had extinguished,
created His Cousin Henry Earl of Derby, Duke of Hereford; Ypodigma Neustriae, p.
551. n. 55.
Edward Earl of Rutland, Duke of Aumarle; Tho. Earl of Nottingham, Duke of
Norfolk; Thomas Earl of Kent, Duke of Surrey; John Earl of Huntington, Duke of
Exceter; and Thomas Earl of Somerset, Marquess Dorset, etc. who, Ibidem, p.
552. n. 5. Tho. Walsingham, p. 355. n. 54.
for the better support of these dignities, had a great part of the estates of
Gloucester, Arundel and Warwick parcelled among them: And added to his Escocheon
Royal the Armories of St. Edward King and Confessor; which he granted in
augmentation to the Dukes of Norfolk, Surrey and Exeter, and the Marquess
Dorset. The Judges also at this time gave their opinions, that when the King
propounds Articles to be handled in Parliament, it is Treason to propose
others: Tho. Walsingham, p. 355. n. 39. Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 551. n. 46.
The King also obtained the whole power of the Parliament to be confirmed upon
John Duke of Lancaster, Edmond Duke of York, Edward Duke of Aumarle and
others, or any seven or eight of them, and granted a pardon to all except 50
persons, which He would not have named, but reserved them for a curb to His
Nobility, to keep them still in danger, upon any displeasure, of being declared
one of the 50 excepted; and to all these things procures the Popes Bulls, with
Censures and Curses to the infringers thereof.

A difference now falling out betwixt the Dukes of Hereford and Norfolk about
treasonable words, Tho. Walsingham p. 356. n. 5.
a Combat was agreed upon to be disputed at Coventry, but the King taking the
matter into His own hands, Ibidem, n. 15. Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 553. n. 6.
banishes the Duke of Norfolk for ever (it being the day whereon a twelve
month before he had caused the Duke of Gloucester to be smothered at Calais)
and the Duke of Hereford for six years. Banishment (formerly the punishment of
the Delinquencies of great Men) has proved of dangerous consequence, as it
here fell out, for the Exiled Archbishop of Canterbury Thomas Arundel, and the
Duke meeting in France, after aggravating the miscarriages of King Richards
Government, fell at last to consult how He might be removed, and that which
encouraged their design was the many invitations the Duke of Hereford received
from England, to come and take the Government upon him.

To the accomplishment of whose design, Anno 1399.
Thomas Walsingham, p. 356 n. 45. Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 552. n. 51.
two things did exceedingly concur; first King Richards absence in Ireland,
whither He was gone with a mighty Army to revenge the death of his Cousin Roger
Mortimer Earl of March and Lieutenant of Ireland (slain by O Brin and the Irish
of Leinster) to whom he intended the Crown of England, if He failed of issue;
To the furnishing of which Expedition He had extorted Money on all hands,
taking up Carriages, Victuals, and other necessaries, without any recompense,
whereby the hatred of His Government grew universal: Secondly, John Duke of
Lancasters death, which happened about this time, Thomas Walsingh. p. 357. n.
1. Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 553. n. 5. Tho. Walsingham, p. 358. n. 5.
upon whose Estate the King most unjustly seizes, banishing the new rightful
Duke of Lancaster, Henry, not for a few years, but for ever.

Henry Duke of Lancaster therefore laying hold on this opportunity (accompanied
by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the late Earl of Arundels Son and Heir,
with three Ships which he borrowed of the Duke of Britain, and not above 60
persons) sets sail for England, and hovering a while upon the Coast, the
better to observe the countenance of his Affairs, lands at Ravenshire in
Yorkshire, Ypodigmae Neustriae, p. 554. n. 16.
where Henry Earl of Northumberland, his son Lord Henry Percy, Ralph Earl of
Westmerland, with great numbers of the Nobility, Gentry and Commons resort to
him, continuing their solicitation for his acceptance of the Crown, whiles the
Duke pretends his coming to be only for the Inheritance descended to him from
his Father: Before he had advanced as far as Berkeley his Army was grown very
numerous, and all the Castles in those parts were surrendered to him.

The Duke of York left Governor of the Kingdom during the Kings absence in
Ireland, Thomas Walsingham, p. 358 n. 11.
used all diligence to raise Forces to oppose Lancaster; but, the Peoples
protestations that they would not hurt the Duke, whom the knew to be wronged,
were so general, that the Duke of York could effect little: so that Lancaster
with an Army of 60000 Men Marches to Bristol, Thomas Walsingham, p. 358 n. 31.
Ypodigma Neustriae, 554. n. 21.
besieges the Castle and takes it, and in it William Earl of Wiltshire, Bushie
and Green, whose heads were the next day severed from their bodies. Six weeks
the Duke was in England before King Richard had notice, by reason of the
contrary winds, which as soon as he understood he resolved upon his return, but
was dissuaded by the fatal advice of the Duke of Aumarle; however He sent the
Earl of Salisbury before, promising to follow himself within six days. The
Earl landed at Conway, and soon got an Army of 40000, but the King not coming
at His time, the Soldiers suspecting He was dead, though by the Earls
persuasion they continued together some time longer, at length disbanded and
went away; eighteen days after the Earl departed, The Walsingham, p. 358. n.
37.
the King (having secured the sons of the Dukes of Gloucester and Lancaster in
Trym Castle) took shipping, being in no fear of prevailing; but, hearing of the
revolt of His Castles, the death of His Counselors, and that the greater part
of the Nobility and Commons forsook Him, He fell to despair, and though His
Soldiers offered to live and die with Him, yet he dismisseth his Family,
bidding his Steward Sir Thomas Percy and others to reserve themselves for
better times, and the next night, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 554. n. 52.
with the Dukes of Surrey and Exeter, the Bishop of Carlisle and others, stole
away from the Army to Conway Castle.

Lancaster, upon notice of the Kings return out of Ireland, comes by short
Marches to Chester, where he sent for his own Son, and the Duke of Glocesters
out of Ireland, and the Archbishop of Canterbury, with the Earl of
Northumberland to King Richard at Conway Castle: The sum of whose demands were,
Thomas Walsingham, p. 358. n. 50.
That if He and eight whom he would name, might have honorable allowance, with
the assurance of a quiet private life, He would resign His Crown; this the Earl
of Northumberland swore should be performed: whereupon the King forthwith
departs in their company to Flint, from whence, after a short conference with
the Duke, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 554. n. 36.
they ride to Chester, attended by the Lancastrian Army; from thence they
travel to London, and the King is lodged in the Tower. After this a Parliament
is called by the Duke of Lancaster in K. Richards name, Tho. Walsingham, p.
359. n. 1.
in which many miscarriages of his Government were drawn up in 33 Articles, and
laid to his Charge, upon which he is Adjudged to be deposed, whereof being
advised, He is Councelled rather voluntarily to resign His Crown, then to be
forced thereunto, which on Monday the 29 of September 1399. Ypodigma Neustriae,
p. 554. n. 41.
He did solemnly in the presence of diverse Lords and others sent to Him to the
Tower for that purpose, reading it before them all Himself, and taking His
Signet from His Finger, puts it upon the Duke of Lancasters, desiring he might
be His Successor: The Resignation being showed to the Parliament, Tho.
Walsingham, p. 359. n. 32. Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 555. n. 1.
was presently by the whole Body of them accepted (the Loyal and Magnanimous
Bishop of Carlisle excepted) and the Sentence of Deposition pronounced by
Commissioners appointed to that purpose, after which Duke Henry puts in his
feigned Claim to the Kingdom, is Elected, Crowned, and succeeds his Cousin King
Richard (after He had Reigned xxii. years, iii. months, and viii. days.) by
the Name of Henry IV.

The deposed King was immediately removed to Leeds Castle in Kent, and from
thence to Pomfret (to the end that by often changing He might either more
secretly be dispatched, or more uncertainly found) where (it is reported) He
was served with costly Meats; but not suffered to eat, and dyed of forced
Famine: Thomas Walsingham, p. 363 n. 50. Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 556. n. 30.
Others say, of a voluntary pining of Himself: But, one Writer, who would seem
to have the perfect intelligence of this affair, makes report, That, King
Henry (after He had with much difficulty defeated those Conspirators which
designed His death, and King Richards Restoration) sitting at His Table sad
and pensive, brake forth into these words, Have I no faithful friend that will
deliver me of Him whose life will breed destruction to me, and disturbance to
the Kingdom? upon which speech one called Sir Pierce of Extone presently parted
from the Court with eight Men in his company and went to Pomfret, and all Armed
enter the Chamber where the King was at dinner, whereupon King Richard
perceiving their design and His own danger, putting the Table from Him advances
to the foremost, and wresting the Bill out of His hands, slew four of His
assailants, but at last being forced toward his chair, upon which Sir Pierce
stood, He, with his Poleax stroke out His brains, King Richards Death.
upon St. Valentines day, in the year 1399. Tho. Walsingham, p. 363. n. 50.
An. 1 H. 4. His Body was embalmed and covered with Lead all but the face,
monument Illustrissimo Domino Dn^ ROBERTO Comiti de SVNDERLAND, Baroni SPENCE
de WORMELEIGHTON, Figuram hanc, Monumenti RICHARDI II.de Regin, H.D.D.D.R.

Sub petra l^^a (...).

RICHARDVS SECVNDVS HIC IACET IMMITI CONSVMPTVS MORTE RICHARDVS 1399 FVISSE
FELICEM MISERRIMVM

and brought to St. Paul's Church, where it was for three days exposed to
public view, Ypodigma, Neustriae, p. 556. n. 30. John Weevers Funeral
Monuments, p. 471.
and afterward obscurely interred at Langley in Hertfordshire, in the Church
of the Friars Predicants; but by the appointment of King Henry V. removed from
thence with great Honor in a Chair Royal, Himself and his Nobility attending
the Sacred Relics of this Anointed King, which he solemnly interred in the
Abbey of Westminster amongst his Royal Ancestors, and founded a Chantry to
celebrate Mass weekly for the Soul of King Richard, and Annually 20 l. in Pence
to be distributed to the Poor. He also erected for Him and His first Queen,
Anne, a glorious Tomb of Gray Marble, upon the South Side the Chapel of the
Kings, at the Head of King Edward III. upon which lie their Portraitures of
gilt Copper, the Figure of which is delineated in the precedent Page: This
following Latin Epitaph is upon the verge thereof, deciphering the Lineaments
of His Body, and Qualities of His Mind, which to any who knows upon what
points He was put out of Majesty and State, may seem strange, if not
ridiculous: Thus it runs, beginning on the Northside at the Foot,

Prudens et mundus Ricardus jure secundus,
Per fatum victus, jacet hic sub marmore pictus.
Verax sermane fuit, et plenus ratione:
Corpore procerus, animo prude us ut Omerus.
Ecclesie favit, elatos suppeditavit,
Quemvis prostravit regalia qui violavit,
Obruit hereticos, et eorum stravit amicos:
O clemens Christ, tibi devotus fuit iste.
Votis Baptistesalves quem protulit iste.
Thus Englished on a Tablet near the Tomb.
Perfect and prudent,
Richard by right the second;
Vanquished by fortune,
Lies here now graven in stone
True of his word
And thereto well resound,
Seemly in person
And like to Homer, as one
In worldly prudence,
And ever the church in one
Upheld and favored,
And casting the Proud to ground,
And all that would
His royal state confound.
In a Charter of this King, E. Registro Westmonasteri^ ensi.
dated at Westminster upon the 28 day of November, in the third year of His
Reign, He is styled Ricardus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae et Franciae et Dominus
Hiberniae (using the Title of England before that of France in all His
Instruments and Commissions that I have ever yet seen) but on His Great Seal
exhibited in the 190 Page of this III. Book, Thomas Walsingh. p. 259. n. 48.
and p. 269. n. 52.
France is placed in the first quarter of His Arms, and it is circumscribed,
Ricardus Dei: Gracia: Rex: Francie: et: Anglie: et: Ons: Hivernie.

In the 21 year of His Government He caused the great Hall of His Palace at
Westminster to be repaired, both the Walls, Windows and Roof as it now stands,
adorning it with Escocheons of His Arms, Crest and Devises, Harding; cap. 193.
in which 10000. persons are reported to be daily fed at this Kings Charge and
Expense.

8. THOMAS, Earl of NORFOLK and SVFFOLKE, and Marshall of ENGLAND, Surnamed of
BROTHERTON.
CHAP. VI.
This Thomas Earl of Norfolk did bear, Gules, 3 Lions passant guardant or, a
file of 3 points argent. And his Seal exhibited in the 121. Page of this Third
Book, annexed to his Charter dated at Tweedmouth, An. 7 Ed. 3. represents you
with the same Arms which the Mowbrays Dukes of Norfolk, his descendants
(discontinuing their Silver Lion in a field Gules) did bear, both to honor
themseves, and to show their descent from a Prince of the Blood Royal. The
Holands Earls of Kent and Dukes of Surrey, descended from Edmond of Woodstock
Earl of Kent, brother of this Thomas, forsook the Arms of their House, which
were, Azure, a Lion Rampant guardant, and semee of Flowers de Lize, Argent, and
took the Princely Coat of Woodstock, viz. Gules, 3 Lions passant guardant or,
within a Border, argent: And for the same reason the Staffords Dukes of
Buckingham, leaving their Cheveron gules in a field gold, assumed the
Coat Armor of Thomas of Woodstock Duke of Gloucester and Earl of Buckingham,
which was Quarterly, France and England, a Border argent.
THis Prince was Fifth Son of King Edward the First (but Eldest Son by His
second Wife Margaret, Daughter of Philip the Hardy King of France) Penes will:
Pierepoint Armigerum, lib. 119. p. 29.
born at Brotherton a little Village in Yorkshire, upon the first day of June
in the Year 1300. from which place he had his Surname; and was called Thomas,
from Thomas de Corbridge Archbishop of York, who Christened him and gave him his
Name. King Edward the Second, his half-Brother, by a Chart. An. 6 Ed. 2. n. 30,
31, 32, etc. in cedula and Parl. 3 H. 6. m. 4.
Charter dated at Westminster, on the sixteenth day of December, in the fixth
year of His Reign, Anno 1312. granted to this Thomas and his heirs the
Earldome of Norfolk: And afterward the same King made him Marshal of England
by Chart. 9 Ed. 2. n. 32.
Patent, dated at Lincoln the 10th day of February in the ninth year of His
Reign, Anno 1315. (at what time He also gave him the Verge of the Marshalship)
to him and the heires-male of his body lawfully begotten, and for want of such
issue wholly to revert to the said King and His Heirs. In his Clausian. 6 E.
3. m. 17. in dorso.
Deed dated at London on the fifth day of August, An. 6 Edw 3. he wrote
himself, Thomas Comes Norff: et Suff: et Marescallus Angliae, etc. And in a Ex
Cartis Will. le Neue militis Clarenceaux Regis Armorum.
Grant in French, dated An. 7 Edw. 3. to which his Seal is annexed, Thomas filz
du noble Roy, Comte de Northfolke et Suffolk Marshall d'Engleterre, in both
which Instruments he is styled Earl of Suffolk.

This Thomas Earl of Norfolk Claus. an. 37 Ed. 3. m. 28. dorso.
afterward passed all his Estate in the Counties of Buckingham, Norfolk and
Suffolk, to King Edward the Third, and dying without leaving issue male, was
interred in the Choire of the Abbey of St. Edmonds bury, An. 1338. where (says
Mr. Weever) once stood a goodly Monument erected to his Memory, Weever, p. 726.
now wholly defaced.

He Married two Wives, the first of which was Pat. 9 Ed. 2. part 2. m. 10.
Alice daughter of Sir Roger Halys of Harwich, and by her had issue, after
whose death he took to his second Wife Mary (who Escheat, an. 36 Ed. 3. part.
2. n. 9.
dyed Anno 36 Ed. 3.) daughter of William Lord Roos (Widow to William Lord
Brewes of Brember and Gower) she was after married to Sir Ralph Cobham Knight,
by whom she had a Son (Sir John Cobham) commonly called the son of Mary the
Countess Marshall.

Children of THOMAS Earl of NORFOLK by ALICE HALYS his first Wife.
9. EDWARD PLANTAGENET only Son of Thomas of Brotherton, dyed without issue in
the lifetime of his Father. Brook, York-Herauld, uncorrected by Vincent,
Rouge-Croix, Vincent, p. 326.
makes him to Marry Beatrix seventh daughter of Roger Mortimer first Earl of
March, afterward re-marryed to Thomas Brews.

9. MARGARET PLANTAGENET, Duchess of Norfolk, eldest daughter and coheir,
whose History follows in the next Chapter.

9. Fines, 12 E. 3. m. 3. Claus. 13 E. 3. part 1. m. 33.
ALICE PLANTAGENET the younger daughter and coheir of Thomas, was married to
Edward Mountague, and had issue Joane her only daughter and heir ( Ex bundel.
probat. aetatum. ab an. 30. usque 41 Ed. 3.
born at Bungey in Norfolk, and there Baptized An. 23. of Edward the Third)
Esceat. an. 5 R. 2. n. 57.
Wife of William de Vfford (after her death Earl of Suffolk) but this Joane
dying issuless, her Aunt Margaret came to be her heir. Jucatores dicunt quod
Will. Vfford nuper comes Suffolk tenuit per legem Angliae post mortem Johannae
nuper uxoris suae filiae Aliciae nuper uxoris Edwardi de Monteacuto, sororis
Margaretae Marshall nunc Comitissae Norfolk, filiarum et haeredum Thomae de
Brotherton nuper Marescalli Angliae unum Ten: in London, etc.

9. MARGARET MARSHALL, Duchess of NORFOLK and Lady SEGRAVE.
CHAP. VII.
This Margarets Seal, in the 122. page of this Third Book, represents you with
her Arms supported by an Angel, which were, Gules, 3 Lions passant guardant
or, a file of 5 points, argent, between two colateral Esatcheons, that on the
dexter side charged with the Coat of her first Husband John Lord Segrave, who
did bear Sable, a Lion Rampant Argent Crowned, or And that on the senister side
containing the Arms of Sir Walter de Manny her second husband, viz. or 3
Cheveronels, Sable. This Seal is of pale red wax, annexed to her Charter in
French, dated September 26. An. -- R. 2. and is circumscribed Sigillum:
Margarete: Comitisse: Norfolchie: et: Domine: de: Segrave: Penes Edwardum
Walker Mil: Gart. Pr. Regem Armorum. The Arms also of John Lord Segraeve and
Duchess Margaret were impaled in an East-window of Mountsorrel Church in the
County of Leicester. Penes H. St. George Ar. foecial. nom. Richmond, lib. J.
33. p. 100.
THis Lady was eldest daughter and coheir of Thomas of Brotherton Earl of
Norfolk, and after the death of her Niece Joane Countess of Suffolk had his
whole Inheritance, and was Countess of Norfolk. At the Coronation of Richard
II. she exhibired her Ex Rot. Clausarum arum de an. 1 R. 2. m. 45.
Petition for the Marshalcie of England, to be executed by her Deputy, urging
the example of Gilbert Marshall Earl of Strighul, who performed the same office
at the Coronation of King Henry the Second, but the Marshalcie, being by the
death of her Father without issue-male, in the hands of the King to dispose of
at pleasure, and the time before the Coronation, too short to determine the
matter, Clans. An. 1 R. 2. n. 45.
Henry Lord Percy was appointed by the King to execute the said Office for that
time, till a final determination might be made therein.

In a P^nes Ed. Walker mil. Gart. Prin. Reg. Armorum
Deed dated the 26th day of September, Anno (...) Richard the Second, she
writes, in her style, Margaret Marshal Countess of Norfolk (as heir to her
Father) and Lady of Segraue; and afterward was (for the greatness of her
birth, her large revenues and wealth) Chart. an. 21 R. 2.
created Duchess of Norfolk fo term of life by the same King Richard the
Second, by Charter bearing date on the 29th day of September, in the 21th year
of His reign. She departed this life upon the 24th day of March, in the first
year of Henry 4. Anno 1399. and was So says Book York-Herald, p. 156. Inq.
Anno 43 Edw. 3. ^ art. 2.
interred at the Fryersminors (vulgarly called the Minories) in London, having
outlived her two Husbands: The first of which was John Lord Segraue, who dyed
in the 27th year of King Edw. 3. by whom she had issue, and after his decease
was re-marryed unto Sir Walter Manny Knight of the Garter, Lord of the Town of
Manny in the Diocese of Cambray: Weever fun. mon. p. 432.
He founded a Chapel of the Order of Carthusians, and built there a Monastery,
for the health of King Edward the third, and Dame Margaret his wife, and was
there buried in his own Church, deceasing in the same year that he laid the
foundation vizan. 1371. his death was much lamented by the King, Nobility and
Commons of England; for, with singular commendations he had served King Edward
the Third in His French wars, and was employed by Him on several Embassies: his
Obsequies were performed with great solemnity, King Edward and all His
Children, with the great Prelates and Barons of the Realm being present. And
although Brook, York-Herauld, Weever, p. 433.
makes Margaret Duchess of Norfolk to be buried in the Minories, yet Stow in
his Survey says, she was here interred with this Sir Walter Manny her second
husband.

Children of MARGARET Duchess of Norfolk, by JOHN Lord SEGRAVE her first
Husband.
In Pale, Mowbray and Segrave, viz. Gules, a Lion Rampant argent, and Sable a
Lion rampant argent, crowned proper.
10. ELIZABETH SEGRAVE Lady Mowbray, their daughter and heir, was the Wife of
John Lord Mowbray of Axholme, Esceat. an. 43 E. 3.
who dyed beyond Sea upon the Feast of Sr. Botolph in the 42 year of the Reign
of King Edward 3. leaving issue by her two sons, John and Thomas.

Mowbray did bear Gules, a Lion Rampant, argent.
11. JOHN Lord MOWBRAY Earl of Nottingham, eldest son and heir of Elizabeth
Segrave, and John Lord Mowbray of Axholme, Tho. Walsingham, p. 197. n. 48.
was created into the dignity of Earl of Nottingham at the Coronation of King
Richard the Second, in the year 1377. which honor he enjoyed until the 18th
year of his age, Esceat. an. 6 R. 2. n. 58. Stowes Survey of London, p. 438.
and then (leaving his Mother alive) deceased upon the tenth day of February,
in the sixth year of the reign of King Richard II. An. 1382. and was buried in
the White-Fryers (or Carmelite-Fryers) in London, his brother Thomas being
found his heir of the age of 17 years and upward.

11. THOMAS MOWBRAY second son succeeded his brother in his estate, and was
created Earl of Nottingham, Earl Marshal of England, and Duke of Norfolk: See
more of him in the following Chapter.

Segrave, Sable, a Lion Rampant argent crowned proper.
10. ANNE SEGRAVE the younger daughter of Margaret Countess of Norfolk, and
John Lord Segrave, was Lady Abbess of Barking in the County of Essex.

Children of MARGARET Duchess of Norfolk, by Sir WALTER MANNY her second
Husband.
Manny, Or, three Cheverone^^ Sable.
10. THOMAS MANNY their only son, was, being young, drowned in a Well at
Derford in Kent, in the lifetime of his father.

10. ANNE MANNY Countess of Pembroke, only daughter and heir of Sir Walter de
Manny by Duchess Margaret, Inq. an. 46 Edw. 3. n. 38.
aged 18 years at the death of her Father, was married to John Lord Hastings
Earl of Pembrook, son of Lawrence Earl of Pembrook, by Agnes his wife daughter
of Roger Mortimer Lord of Wigmore, and first Earl of March. This John Earl of
Pembrook being but 25 years of age, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 528. n. 60.
This John Earl of Pembroke did bear quarterly, first Hastings, viz. or, a
Maunch Gules, and secondly, Valence, viz. Barry, Argent and Azure, an Orle of
Martlets, Gules, which Arms are enamelled on the north-side of King Edw. III.
His Tomb at Westminster, he being noted to be the first subject that bare 2
Coats quarterly.
was sent by King Edward III. to raise the siege of Rochell, An. 1372. but in
his voyage for France was taken by Henry the usurper of Castile, and with 160.
others carried into Spain, where, after two years imprisonment, he was sold to
Bertrand Cleykyn a Nobleman of France, with whom having agreed for his Ransom,
was yet at his departure poisoned at a Banquet, and dyed in France, the 16th
day of April An. 1375. (his Ransome-money being come to Calais to redeem him)
leaving issue by the Lady Anne Manny, Ibidem, p. 530. n. 13.
his only son named also

This John bare Quarterly, 1. Brotherton Gules, 3 Lions passant guardant or, a
label of 3 points, argent. 2. Hastings, or a Maunch gules 3. Valence, Barry,
argent and azure an Orle of Martlets gules. The 4th At the first. which
quarterings were so depicted in the roof of Christ-church in London, vide,
Vincent, p. 420. But in a window of the said Church, he did bear quaterly, in
the first quarter, Brotherton; in the second Hastings and Valence Quarterly;
the third as the second, the fourth as the first: vide penes H. S. George ar.
Foecialem nom Richmond.
11. JOHN HASTINGS Earl of Pembroke, three years of age at the death of his
father, after whose decease he was Earl of Pembroke, Lord Hastings, Weshford,
and Aburgavenny, by reason of whose Minority King Edward III constituted
William Lord Beauchamp Custos of the County of Pembroke. Many years after, this
Earl John being with King Richard II. at Woodstock in Oxfordshire, in the time
of Christmas, was at a Tournament there held, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 544. n. 53.
slain by Sir John St. John, in the year 1390. after he had been Earl 14 years.

He took to wife Philip, the third daughter of Edmond Mortimer Earl of March,
but dying without issue, she was re-married to Richard Fitz-Alan Earl of
Arundel and Surrey. This John was interred in the Fryers-Minors within Newgate
in London, and his inheritance went to his Cousin Sir Edw. Hastings Knight, who,
for some displeasure taken against him by the King, Esceat. 2 H. 4. n. 54. post
mortem Hastings.
was committed to the Fleet, where he dyed without issue.

II. THOMAS MOWBRAY Duke of NORFOLK Earl Marshall of ENGLAND, and Earl of
NOTTINGHAM,
Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk did (by the grant of King Richard the II) bear
in his Seal, His Arms per pale, the one of St. Edward the Confessor, and the
other of Thomas of Brotherton Mar^hall of England, and in place of a Crest, a
Lion passant guardant gorged with a ducal Coronet upon a Chapeau, with 2. small
collateral Escocheons, of Mowbray, or Mowbray and Segrave, encompassed with two
Ostrich Feathers, vide Vincent, p. ^89. where the Figure thereof is exhibited.
At the intended Combat at Coventry betwixt this Duke Thomas and Henry Duke of
Hereford, He entered the Lists on Horseback, his horse barded with Crimson
Velvet, embroydered richly with Lions of silver (his Arms) and Mulbery-Trees,
His Rebus, to express the name of Mowbray, his surname.


WAs the second son of John Lord Mowbray of Axholme and Elizabeth his wife,
daughter and heir of John Lord Segrave by Margaret his wife, daughter and at
length heir of Thomas of Brotherton, fifth Son of King Edward I. He succeeded
his brother John in his Inheritance, and was also advanced to his Honor of
Earl of Nottingham by King Richard II. upon the 12th day of February in the
sixth year of his Reign, Claus. an. 5. H 4. m. 7.
An. 1382. (per cincturam gladii) to him and the heires-male of his body, etc.
And by Patent, bearing date the 12 day of February in the 9th year of Richard
II. he had granted to him the Title and Office of Earl-Marshal of England, with
the same Habendum (being the first Earl Marsharl of England, Pat. an. 15 R. 2.
pars sacunda.
for before his time they were only Marshals) In a Charter bearing date 11th of
January, An. 15 R. 2. he is styled Thomas Earl Marshal and Nottingham, Captain
of the Town of Calais, etc. And upon the 29th day of September, Chart. an. 21.
R. 2.
in the 21 year of King Richard II. An. 1397. the said King advanced him to the
dignity of Duke of Norfolk, to him and the heirs male of his body, etc. with
an annuity of 40 Marks out of his Exchequer.

Notwithstanding all which favors, this Thomas (with Henry of Bollingbroke
Duke of Hereford) was banished the Realm, Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 551. n. 5^.
An. 22 R. 2. (that day, whereon twelve Months before he had Arrested Thomas
of Woodstock Duke of Gloucester, whom by the Kings order he sent to Calais,
where he was Murdered) because that he the said Henry had complained to this
Thomas of the Kings evil Government; with all which this Thomas made the King
acquainted, But upon the Kings hearing the matter, what the Duke of Norfolk
affirmed, was by the Duke of Hereford as stoutly denied, whereupon ensued a
Challenge, and a day assigned for trial thereof, but the King by the advice of
his Council forbade the Combat, banished Duke Henry for ten years, and this
Duke Thomas for term of life, who traveling into Italy, and thence to Venice,
Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 552. n. 16.
dyed there with grief in the year 1400. ( An. 1 H. 4.) and was buried in the
Abbey of St. George in that City.

In Pale, Brotherton, viz. Gules 3 Lions passant guardant or, a Label of 3
points argent. And, Strange of Blackmere, viz. Argent, 2 Lions passant Gules.
This Thomas had two Wives, the first whereof was Elizabeth the daughter of
John le Strange of Blackmere, but she dyed without issue upon the 23th day of
August in the 7th year of King Richard II. by reason whereof all her
inheritance fell to Ancharet Strange her Aunt, Esceat, an. 7 R. 2. n. 60.
Mother of John Lord Talbot of Gooderich-Castle, first Earl of Shrewsbury.

He took to his second Wife Elizabeth Fitz-Alan sister and coheir of Thomas
Earl of Arundel, To the Indenture made between this Elizabeth and her third
Husband Gerard Ufflete, dated 18 of April, An. 12 H. 4. her seal of pale red
wax is annexed (see the figure thereof, p. 123.) upon which, her Arms, being
quarterly Fitz Alan and Warren, are impaled with the Coat of Brotherton, which
Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk her first husband did bear, as I have noted in
my observations upon his Arms. The Seal is circumscribed, Sigillum:
Elizabethe: ducisse: Norfolchie.
by whom he had issue several children; And she out-living him, was the second
time married to Sir Robert Gowsel Knight, and after his death I find she had a
third husband, Penes Edw. Walker milit. Garterum prin. Regem Armorum.
called Gerard Vfflete, who is named with her in an Indenture dated at Epworth
the 18th day of April, An. 12 H. 4. after which, her death happened in the
third year of Henry VI.

Children of THOMAS MOWBRAY first Duke of Norfolk by Elizabeth FITZALAN his
second Wife.
12. THOMAS MOWBRAY eldest son and heir, Tho. Walsingham, p. 373. n. 11.
commonly called the Earl Marshal, Mowbray and Holand, per Pale.
was beheaded at York (with Richard Scroope Archbishop of York) in the sixth
year of Henry IV. An. 1405. for conspiring against that King, Inq. an. 6 H. 4.
n. 44. and an. 8 H. 4. n. 76. per nomen Tho. Comitis Marescalli.
and was interred in the Cathedral of that City: He took to wife Constance only
daughter of John Holand Duke of Exceter and Earl of Huntington, styled in the
Office after her death Constancia nuper Comitissa Marshal, who deceased without
issue by this Thomas in the 16th year of H. 6. and Edmond Gray was found her
heir of the age of 24 years, Inq. an. 16 H. 6. n. 59.
which Edmond, was her eldest son by her second husband John Lord Gray of
Ruthyn, from whom the three branches of the Greys Earls of Kent are descended.

12. JOHN MOWBRAY Duke of Norfolk, etc. second son of Thomas Duke of Norfolk
and younger brother of Duke Thomas, This John, in his Grant dated at London the
20 day of January, An. 1 H. 5. is styled Johan Comte Mareschall et de
Nottingham Mareschall d'Engleterre Seigneur de Mowbray de Segrave et de Gowere;
His Seal (of pale red wax) is charged with the Arms of Brotherton, betwixt 2
Escocheons of Mowbray; and as many Ostrich Feathers. The circumscription is
much defaced, these words only remaining, Comitis: Ma^^^alli: Nottinghamie:
Dni. Ex Chartis Edw. Walker mil. Gar. Prin. Regis Arm.
was restored to the Earldom of Nottingham, An. 1 Hen. 5. with the Office of
Earl-Marshal. And afterward in the third year of H. 6. he preferred his
Petition in Parliament to have Place and Precedence above Richard Beanchamp
Earl of Warwick his Cousin, Ex Rot. Parliamenti tertii apud Westminst. an. 3 H.
6. m. 4. articul. 13.
as the Earls of Norfolk had formerly had; And in the same alleged his
descent from the Royal Blood and Armes-Royal, and also to be restored to the
Dukedom of Norfolk, as next heir-male (his Father dying without attaindor)
which Petition being heard, the King at the same time restored him to the said
Dukedom, and thereby ended the contest for Precedence betwixt him and the Earl
of Warwick; he deceased at his Manor of Eppeworth in the Isle of Axholme on
the 19th day of October, An. 11 H. 6. Inq. capta 20 Ianuarii, an. 11 H. 6. n.
43.
in the year 1432. and was there buried in the Abbey of Carthusians, leaving
issue (by Katherine Nevil his wife) daughter of Ralph Earl of Westmerland (and
Joan his wife daughter of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster) John Mowbray, In a
Window of Tauestock Church in the County of Devon, stood the Arms of this John
Duke of Norfolk and Elianor Bourchier his Wife, viz. Per Pale, gules, 3 Lions
passant guardant or, a Label of 3 points Argent, and quarterly, Bourchier and
Lovaine, viz. argent, a cross ingrayled gules, inter 4 water bougets sable;
and, gules, a fesse, argent, between 10 billets, or, Penes H. St. George ar.
Richmond.
second of the name, and third Duke of Norfolk, Pat. an. 14 H. 6. m. 9.
who took to wife Elianor only daughter of William Bourchier Earl of Ewe, and
had issue, John Mowbray third of the name, and the last Duke of Norfolk of
this Family, who (by Elizabeth his wife, daughter of John Talbot first Earl of
Shrewsbury) had issue his only child named Anne, married to Richard of
Shrewsbury second Son of King Edward the IV. by whom not having issue, her
Fathers inheritance was divided betwixt the Howards and Berkleys who descended
from Margaret, and Issabel, daughters of Thomas Mowbray the first Duke of
Norfolk.

Sir Robert Howard this Margarets husband did bear, gules a Bend inter 6 cross
croslets fiche argent, which shield is carved upon his Tomb in
East-Winch-Church in the County of Norfolk, this part of their Epitaph only
remaining Animabus: Domini: Roberrt: Noward: militis: et Margarete: uxoris: sue
Vide Weever Fun. Monuments, page 842 and 843.
12. MARGARET MOWBRAY Lady Howard, eldest daughter of Thomas Mowbray Duke of
Norfolk, and of Elizabeth Fitz-Alan his second wife, Esceat an. 29 H. 6.
Norfolk Suffolk.
was married to Sir Robert Howard Knight (son of Sir John Howard Knight, by
Alice his wife daughter of William Tendering) and by him had issue John Howard,
created a Baron by King Edward the IV. and Duke of Norfolk by King Richard
III. being the stem of that illustrious Family of Howard, which has branched
it self into one Duke, five Earls, one Viscount, and one Baron; all now
flourishing 1673, viz. Thomas Duke of Norfolk, Henry Earl of Norwich and
Earl-Marshal of England, Charles Earl of Nottingham, James Earl of Suffolk,
Charles Earl of Berkshire, Charles Earl of Carlisle, William Viscount Stafford,
and Edward Baron Howard of Escrick, all Peers of this Kingdom, and of the
Sur-name of Howard.

Per pale, Berklcy, viz. Gules, a Cheveron inter 10 Crosses patee 4, 2, 1, 2,
and 1, argent, and Brotherton, viz. Gules 3 Lions passant guardant or, a Label
of 3 points, argent.
12. ISSABEL MOWBRAY Lady Berkley, E. fol. 143.
second daughter of Thomas Duke of Norfolk, was first married to Sir Henry
Ferrers Knight (that died in the lifetime of his Father) son of William Lord
Ferrers of Groby, and of Philip his wife, daughter of Roger Lord Clifford of
Appleby, by whom he had issue his only daughter Elizabeth Ferrers the wife of
Edward Gray, second Son of Reginald Lord Gray of Ruthyn. This Issabel Mowbray
was the second time married to James Lord Berkley, and by him had issue two
sons, viz. William the elder, created Marquess Berkley, who dyed issuless: and
Maurice Lord Berkley second son, Progenitor of the present George Baron Berkley
of Berkley Castle in the County of Gloucester.

8. EDMOND, Earl of KENT, Surnamed of WOODSTOCK.
CHAP. VIII.
Concerning the Border, by Writers in Heraldy assigned for a difference to the
youngest son; we have three examples in the Royal Family; The first being in
the Arms of this Edmond Earl of Kent, the youngest son of King Edw. I. who
bare, Gules, 3 Lions passant guardant or, a Border argent. Secondly, of Thomas
of Woodstock Duke of Gloucester, the youngest son of King Edw. III. whose Arms
were, Quarterly, France semee, and England, a Border argent. And Thirdly, of
Humphry also Duke of Gloucester the youngest son of King Henry IV. whose
Escocheon containing the Arms of France and England, quarterly, was also
encompassed with a Border argent, which three Princes being sent out of the
world by violent deaths, ( Edmond being Beheaded, Thomas Smothered, and
Humphrey Poisoned) we will not positively averr, was the reason why the use of
this Border was declined by the youngest sons of our succeeding Kings, but its
most certain that we find it not since about any of their Escocheons. The Arms
of Margaret Wake his wife being, Or 2 Bars Gules, and 3 Torteaux in Chief, are
impaled with Earl Edmond's in a Window in Chesterfield-Church in the County of
Derby. vide L. 4. fol. 18. Lib. in Collegio Armorum.


KIng Edward I. Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 490. n. 48.
(by Margaret His second wife, eldest daughter of Philip III. surnamed the
Hardy, King of France) had issue two sons, Thomas surnamed of Brotherton, and
this Edmond His sixth Son but second by his Mother, Penes Hen. Pierpoint, Arm.
Lib. 119. p. 29.
who was delivered of him at the Kings Manor of Woodstock in Oxfordshire upon
the 5th day of August, An 1031. in the 29th year of his Fathers reign, Penes
Will. Dugdale, Arm. Norroy Reg. Armorum Lib. AAI. fol. 98.
and Baptized Edmond, by the Bishop of Chichester.

He was created Earl of Kent (per cincturam gladii) by King Edward II. his
half-brother, upon the 28th day of July, in the 15th year of his reign, An.
1321. And after at a Council held at Winchester in the fourth year of the reign
of King Edward III. his Nephew, An. 1329. on the morrow after the Feast of St.
Gregory, this Edmond Earl of Kent was Arrested, and on the vigil of St. Cutbert
adjudged to die for high Treason; for abetting several of the Nobility to plot
the delivery of King Edward II. out of prison; Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 510. n.
38. Inq. an. 4 Ed. 3. n. 38.
who had indeed been murdered near twelve months before, for which (by the
malice of Qu. Issabel, who took upon her to Govern all during the Minority of
the King her Son, and Roger Lord Mortimer her Minion) he was beheaded at
Winchester, after he had stood upon the Scaffold from noon till five a clock in
the evening, expecting the deadly stroke, which no one would give him, till a
base wretch of the Marshalsea was sent, who performed it.

This Edmond took to Wife Margaret Wake, daughter of John Lord Wake and Joan
his wife, and sister and heir of Thomas Lord Wake of Lydell in the County of
Northampton, who deceased upon the 21th day of May, Esceat. 23 E. 3. p. 1. n.
75.
An. 23 Ed. 3. leaving this Margaret Countess of Kent his heir, of the age of
about forty years.

Children of EDMOND Earl of KENT, by MARGARET WAKE his Wife.
9. EDMOND PLANTAGENET, eldest Son, succeeded his Father in the Earldom of
Kent, vide Chap. IX.

9. JOHN PLANTAGENET, second Son, was Earl of Kent after the death of his
brother Edmond, without issue, of whom see more in the X. Chap. of this III.
Book.

9. JOANE PLANTAGENET only daughter of Edmond Earl of Kent, and sister and heir
of John Earl of Kent, whose History follows (that of her brother John) in the
XI. Chap. of this III. Book.

9. EDMOND PLANTAGENET, Earl of KENT.
CHAP. IX.
THis Edmond, Gules, 3 Lions passant guardant or, a Border, argent.
eldest son and heir of Edmond of Woodstock Earl of Kent, and Margaret his
wife, sister and heir of Thomas Lord Wake of Lydel, Parliament. an. 4 Ed. 3. p.
1. Pat. an. 5 Ed. 3.
was in a Parliament held An. 5 Ed. 3. ^restored to the Earldom of Kent; and
died the Kings Ward without issue, in the sixth year of the reign of Edward
III. leaving his brother John to succeed him in the said Earldom.

9. JOHN PLANTAGENET, Earl of KENT.
CHAP. X.
HE was second Son of Edmond of Woodstock, The Arms of this John and Elizabeth
his wife were painted in a Glass window in the Cathedral Church of Lychfield,
being party per pale Gules, 3 Lions passant guardant or, a border argent; and
Juliers, viz. or, a Lion rampant sable. visit. Staff. C. 10. fol. 160. b. in
Coll. Arm.
and succeeded his brother Edmond (dying without issue) in the Earldom of Kent;
by which Title he sat in Parliament in the 25 year of King Edward III. Inq.
an. 26 Ed. 3. n. 54. Not.
And upon St. Stephens day in the year following ( viz. An. 26 Ed. 3.) he
deceased without issue, having married Elizabeth a daughter of the Duke of
Juliers', who after his death was the Wife of Eustace Dabridgecort, second son
of the Lord Dabridgecort of Henault, Pat. an. 13 R. 2. m. 15.
by whom she had issue Sir Sanchius Dabridgecourt, one of the Founders of the
most noble Order of the Garter; This Countess Elizabeth afterward took upon
her the Habit of a Nun in the Abbey of Waverley, and departed this life about
the 12 year of King Henry IV.

9. JOANE PLANTAGENET, Princess of WALES, and Countess of KENT.
CHAP. XI.
The Lady Joane in the lifetime of her first husband Sir Thomas Holand Earl of
Kent, did bear, Party per Pale Holand and Kent, viz. Azure, Semee of Flowers de
Lize and a Lion rampant guardant, Argent; and Gules, 3 Lions passant guardant,
or, a Border, argent. Her Arms Impaled also with those of Prince Edward her
third husband are carved upon the North-side the Tomb of Queen Philippa in
West-minster-Abbey, and were painted in a Window in Christchurchs near New
gatemarket.
THis Lady Joane was the only daughter of Edmond of Woodstock Earl of Kent, sixth
and youngest son of King Edward I. sister to Edmond, and sister and heir to
John Earl of Kent, at whose death happening in the 26 year of the reign of
Edward III. Inq. capta 13 Februtrii an. 27 Ed. 3.
she had passed the 25th year of her age (being for her admirable beauty
called, The Fair Maid of Kent.)

She was at the same time the Wife of Sir Thomas Holand Knight, Ibidem:
one of the Founders of the most noble order of the Garter (second son of Sir
Robert Holand of Lancashire Knight (and Maud his wife daughter and heir of Alan
la Zouch) steward of the household to William Montague Earl of Salisbury, God.
M. S. Miscel. R. Glover Somerset.
and in right of this Joan his wife, by King Edward the third, created Earl of
Kent, and Lord Wake of Lidell, and by her leaving issue, and having performed
many brave acts in the Kings service, he departed this World on the 26 day of
December, Esceat. an. 35 Ed. 3. p. 1. n. 104.
( An. 34 Ed. 3.) in the year 1360.

The before mentioned William Montague Earl of Salisbury was her second
Husband, from whom she was divorced by consent, and he married another Noble
Lady at Lambeth upon the 6th day of October, Out of the Book of Wills called
Islip.
An. 1361. in the presence of Roger Lord Laware, Edward Courtney, James Audley,
etc.

Yet did this Countess Joane still retain so much beauty and excellency, as to
attract the admiration of that Martial Prince and heir apparent to the Crown of
England, Edward, called the Black Prince, who out of a most sincere affection,
(after he had declined several illustrious Matches) made choice of her for his
wife, but by reason of their consanguinity (for she was Cosin-german to his
Father King Edward III.) could not Marry) till a Dispensation from Pope
Innocent VI. salved the matter. Lib. in Offic. Cantuar. vacat. Islip. f. 177.
b. 17 and 18. a.


She also outlived Prince Edward her third Husband, and had issue by him King
Richard II. until the ninth year of whose reign she lived, Ypodigma Neustriae,
p. 537. n. 40.
but then ( viz. 8 Iulii an. 1385.) deceased of Grief in Wallingford-Castle,
after four days sickness, because the said King denied her earnest suite for
the Pardon of her son and his half-brother John Holand, Tho. Walsing ham, p.
316. n. 40.
who had wickedly slain Ralphe son and heir of Hugh Earl Stafford. Her Corpse
(embalmed and wrapped in Lead) was ordered to be honorably entombed in the
Church of the Fryers-minors at Stamford.

Children of JOANE Plantagenet Countess of KENT, by Sir THOMAS HOLAND Earl of
KENT her first Husband.
In a Charter in French dated at London upon the eighth day of February, An. 11
R. 2.1387. This Thomas styles himself Thomas de Holand Comte de Kent, and
Seigneur de Wake, His Seal of Red Wax represented in this III. Book, p. 124. is
appendant thereto, upon which is represented a Hind lodged under a Tree, gorgod
with a Ducal Coronet, which was the Devise of his Mother the Countes Joane, And
upon a shield hanging about the neck of the Hind Her Arms, being, Gules 3
Lions passant guardant or, a Border Argent. Which this Thomas Holand Earl of
Kent assumed, discontinuing the Paternal Coat of his Family, as I have noted
before. This Instrument is in the custody of the Right Honorable Henry Earl of
Peterborrow.
10. THOMAS HOLAND Earl of Kent and Lord Wake of Lydell eldest son of Sir
Thomas Holand Earl of Kent (and Joane his Wife daughter of Edmond of Woodstock
Earl of Kent) and halfe-brother by the Mothers side to King Richard the second,
was after his fathers death Earl of Kent, and Lord Wake of Lydel; He was
Marshal of England in the year 1380. M.S. Anot. D. p. 599.
( An. 3 R. 2.) and made Constable of the Tower of London, upon the 4th day of
July An. 13 R. 2. Inq. an. 13 R. 2. p. 2. m. 35.
He deceased in the year 1397. ( An. 20 R 2.) and by his last will, appointed
his Body to be interred in the Abbey of Brune, leaving issue by Alice his wife
daughter of Richard Fitz-Alan Earl of Arundel, four sons and six daughters,
viz. Thomas Holand Earl of Kent and Duke of Surrey, beheaded at Circester,
without issue, Chart. an. 21 R. 2. n. 23. Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 551. n. 58.
An. 1400. Edmond Holand, Earl of Kent after his brother, who also deceased
issueless, John Holand and Richard Holand who dyed young. Elianor Holand, first
Married to Roger Mortimer Earl of March, and secondly to Edward Charlton Lord
Powis. Joane Holand, first the wife of Edmond of Langley Duke of York, and
secondly of Sir Henry Bromslet Knight. Margaret Holand also twice married,
first to John Beaufort Earl of Somerset, and afterward to Thomas Duke of
Clarence. Elianor Holand the younger, the wife of Thomas Montague Earl of
Salisbury. Elizabeth Holand Married to John Lord Nevil son and heir of Ralph
Nevil first Earl of Westmerland. And Bridget Holand a Nun at Barking. From
which Daughters many of the Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom derive
themselves.

In a Grant to John de Chancy, etc. dated at London upon the fourth day of
April, An. 22 R. 2. This John wrote in his style, Johannes Holand Dux Exon.
Comes Huntingdon and Camerarius Anglie, to which his Seal of red wax (exhibited
in the 124. Page of this third Book) is annexed, on which you have his shield
hanging upon a Tree charged with the Arms of St. Edward the Confessor,
differenced with a Laked of 3 points (an Augmentation granted to this Duke by
King Richard II.) impaled with his Paternal Coat, which was Gules 3 Lions
passant guardant, or, a Border of France, which Border he gave to distinguish
him from Thomas Holand Earl of Kent his elder brother, who did bear a plain
Border Argent. The same Escocheon, Augmentation and Arms of this John Duke of
Exceter are to be seen in a fourth window of the Church of St. Bartholomew the
Lesser near Smithfield.
10. JOHN HOLAND Duke of Exceter Earl of Huntington, and Chamberlain of
England, second son of Sir Thomas Holand Earl of Kent (by Joane daughter of
Edmond of Woodstock Earl of Kent) was created Earl of Huntington, An. 1388. in
the 11th year of King Richard the second. Afterward the said King by Letters
Patent dated at Beauley-Abbey the fourth day of September in the 17th year of
his reign, an. 1394. granted unto him the office of Chamberlain of England for
term of life: And on the 29th of September in the 21th year of the reign of
the said King Richard II. his half-brother, This John was created into the
dignity of Duke of Exceter, Chart. an. 21 R. 2. n. 23.
and made Governor of Calais. But in the first year of King Henry IV. he was
deposed from the Title of Duke, and in the same year beheaded at Pleshey in
Essex, Tho. Walsingham, p. 363. n. 40.
upon the third day after the Epiphanie, in the year 1400, for a Seditious
Conspiracy against the life of King Henry the fourth, in the very place where
the Duke of Gloucester was Arrested by King Richard II. (which was in the base
Court of the Castle of Pleshey) that he might seem to have been justly punished
by way of satisfaction for the Duke of Glocesters death, of which he was
thought to be a principal procurer, and lies buried in the Collegiate-Church
there; upon one part of his dismembered Monument (says Weever) carelessly cast
here and there in the body of the Church, Weever, p. 637.
were found these words, Here lies John Holland Earl of Exceter, Earl of
Huntingdon, and Chamberlain of England, who dyed (...)

This John Duke of Exceter took to wife Elizabeth, second daughter of John of
Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, and sister to King Henry IV. (who was afterward
married to Sir John Cornwall Knight Lord Fanhop) and by her had issue,

Richard Holand his eldest son, who dyed issuless upon the third day of
December, An. 4 H. 5. and,

This John upon his sumptaous Monument in St, Katherines Church near the Tower
of London has his Arms and Crest curiously carved in stone, being Gules 3
Lions passant guardant or, a Border Azure Flowery or, and on his Helm, upon a
Chapeau doubled Ermine, a Lion passant guardant crowned, and gorged with a
Collar of France. The same Coat and Crest are upon his Seal affixed to a
discharge dated the last day of June, An. 17 H. 6. in which he is styled
Johannes Comes Huntingdon and de Ivory, ac Admirallus Anglie Hibernie and
Aquitanie. Ex Chartis Edw. Walker mil. Garteri Prin. Regis Arm. The Arms of
his Wife Anne Stafford, viz. OR, a Cheveron Gules, are impaled with his Coat
upon the Tomb beforementioned.
John Holand his second son, restored to the Dukedom of Exceter An. 22 H. 6.
who wrote in his style, Duke of Exceter, Earl of Huntington and Ivory, Lord of
Sparre, Admiral of England, Ireland and Aquitaine, and Constable of the Tower
of London: He lest issue, by Anne his first wife, Daughter of Edmond Earl of
Stafford (and Anne his wife daughter of Thomas of Woodstock Duke of Gloucester)
his only son

It appears by this Henry's Seal affixed to his Indenture dated the 9th day
of April, an. 38 H. 6. in which he is styled, The high and mighty Prince Henry
Duke of Exeter, that his Arms were Gules, 3 Lions passant guardant or, a
Border of France. Penes Will. Pierpoint Arm. Lib. 119. p. 58.
Henry Holand Duke of Exceter, Earl of Huntington, etc. disinherited An. 1 Ed.
4. and found dead in the Sea betwixt Dover and Calais, without issue, (by Anne
his wife daughter of Richard Duke of York) but had two base sons, one named
Robert, who, Visit. Deven and Cornwall, fol. 109. b.
by Margaret his wife, had issue two daughters, Ioane married to John Kindall
of Treworgie in the County of Cornwall, and Jane the wife of John Reskimer, who
dyed without issue: What name his other base son had we do not find, Stows
Chronicle, p. 415.
but Stow in his Chronicle informs us, that they were both slain at the Battle
of Towton.

The second wife of John Duke of Exceter, also named Anne, was the daughter of
John Montacute Earl of Salisbury, by whom he had issue his only daughter

Anne Holand, first married to John Lord Nevil (son and heir of Ralphe the
second Earl of Westmorland) slain at Towton-Field An. 1 Ed. 4. sans issue, and
secondly to Sir John Nevil Knight, Uncle to her former husband, and by him had
issue Ralph Nevil (third of the name) Earl of Westmerland, etc.

Sir Edward Holand Knight, third son of John the first, Duke of Exceter, and
Elizabeth of Lancaster his wife.

Constance Holand only daughter of John Duke of Exceter, and Elizabeth of
Lancaster, was first married to Tho. Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, and had not by
him any issue, she was afterward the wife of John Lord Gray of Ruthyn, and
from them all the Earls of Kent derive their descent.

Children of JOANE Countess of KENT, by EDWARD Prince of WALES her third
husband.
10. EDWARD the elder son of Joane Princess of Wales by Edward the black
Prince, was born at Engolesme in the year 1375, Tho. Walsingham, p: 180. n. 39.
Ypodig. Neustriae; p. 525.^.39. Weever, p. 419. Ypodigmae Neustriae, p. 525. n.
49.
dyed at the age of seven years, and was interred in the Church of the
Augustine Friars in London.

10. RICHARD of Bordeaux the younger son of Princess Joane, and Edward Prince
of Wales, succeeded his Grandfather King Edward III. in the Kingdom of England,
etc. by the name of Richard II. whose History you have in the 191. Page of this
Third Book. chap. V.

10. LIONELL, Duke of CLARENCE, Earl of VLSTER, and Lord of CONAVGHT and TRIME,
Surnamed of ANTWERP.
CHAP. XII.
THis Lionell, named in Latin, Leonellus, Lionellus, and Paulus Jovius in vita
Galeosii secundi, p. 152.
Leonatus, which signify, A Lioncel, The Coat Armor of this Lionell is
enamelled upon an Escocheon of Copper under his Portraiture on the South Side
K. Edward the Third's. Monument in the Abbey of Westminster. It also stands in a
Glas^-window of St. George's Hall in Windsor-Castle, in a window on the
North-side of that Parish Church, and in many other places. The Arms are,
Qu^rierly France s^mee, and England, a label of 3 points argent, each charged
with a Canton gules, concerning which distinction see more in the history of
this Lionell.
or diminutive Lion; had this appellation either from being the offspring of
that Lion of England King Edward III. (alluding to the royal Arms he bare)
whose third son he was, or to revive the British name Llewellin, signifying
Lyon-like, being the same with Leominus and Leontius.

His Surname is derived from the City of Antwerpe in the Dukedom of Brabant,
Tho. Walsingham, p. 146. n. 58.
where Queen Philippa was delivered of him upon the Vigil of St. Andrew the
Apostle ( viz. the 29th day of November) An. 1338. in the 12th year of the
reign of his Father King Edward III. who about that time took upon him the
Title and Arms of the King of France, Tpodigmae Neustriae, in Anno 1338.
in order to his Conquest of that Kingdom.

He had not exceeded the third year of his age, when, upon Petition of the
Irishry, his Marriage was agreed upon with Elizabeth de Burgh, P^t. an. 15 Ed.
3. p. 1. m. 10. Escea^. 16. Ed. 3. n. 3.
in which it is read, Quod Elizabetha filia et haeres Willielmi de Burgo nuper
Comitis Vlton. defuncti, cum aetatem ad hoc aptam attigerit, Leonello filio
Regis et non alteri, ipso Leonello vivente maritetur. This Elizabeth was the
daughter and heir of William de Burgo, Annals Hib. apud Camden, p. 193. E.
or Burgh, Earl of Vlster (and Maud his wife, the second daughter of Henry Earl
of Lancaster, second Son of Edmond Earl of Lancaster, second son of King Henry
III.) which William was the son of John de Burgh who dyed in the lifetime of
his Father Richard Earl of Vlster, An. 1313. having married Elizabeth the third
sister and coheir of Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester and Hertford, and
daughter of Gilbert the Red Earl of Gloucester, by Joan of Acres his wife,
second daughter of King Edward I.

His first Marriage.
The Marriage betwixt Lionell and this Elizabeth de Burgh his first wife, was
consummated about his fourteenth year, at what time ( viz. An. 26 Ed. 3.) He
was created Earl of Vlster in Ireland in the right of his said wife Elizabeth,
On the Northside the Monument of Queen Philippa, in the Chapel of the Kings in
Westminster-Abbey, the Arms of Lionell Duke of Clarence, and this Elizabeth de
Burgh are carved and painted, viz. in Pale, Quarterly France Semee, and
England, a labell of three points argent, charged with as many Cantons, Gules,
being Clarence. And Or a Cross Gules, by the name of Burgh.
who leaving issue by him their only child Philippa, Weevers Funeral Monum, p.
740.
deceased in the year 1363. and was interred in the Chancel of the Augustine
Friars at Clare in Suffolk.

King Edw. III. upon the first day of July, Pat. an. 19 E. 3. p. 1.
in the 19th year of his reign, An. 1345. constituted this Lionell his son (by
the Title of Leonellus filius Regis) Custos of the Kingdom of England, and his
Lieutenant, during his absence out of the Realm, etc. And in the beginning of
November, An. 1355. Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 520.
Lionell Earl of Vlster, and John Earl of Richmond his brother, accompanied
their Father King Edw. III. into Flanders and Brabant, etc.

Nor did this Lionell acquire only the Earldom of Vlster in the Kingdom of
Ireland with Elizabeth de Burgh his wife, but having also with her the Honor
of Clare in the County of Suffolk, as parcel of the Inheritance of her
Grandmother Elizabeth (the sister and coheir of the last Earl Gilbert de
Clare) was in a Parliament held An. 1362. in the 36th year of Edw. III. created
Duke of Clarence, as it were of the Country about the Town, Ypodig. Neustria,
p. 524. n. 52.
Castle and Honor of Clare, from which Duchy the name of Clarenceaux (being
the Title of the King of Arms for the South, East, and West parts of England,
on this side Trent) is derived. In relation to which Honor, he distinguished
his Arms by A label of 3 points, Argent, each charged with a Canton, Gules:
Argent, a Canton, Gules, being a Coat attributed to the Clares, and is placed
in the first quarter, with the 3 Cheverons; L. 17. fol. 201. lib. in Coll.
Armorum.
as appears upon the Covering of a Tomb, of Gilbert de Clare Earl of
Gloucester, in the Abbey of Tewkesbury.

About four years after the death of the Duchess Elizabeth, Tho. Walsingham, p.
183. n. 1.
viz. the 25th day of April, His second Martiage.
An. 1368. a Marriage is concluded at Windsor for Duke Lyonell with Violanta or
Jolantis the daughter of Galeasius or Galeas, In Pale, Clarence as before and
Millain; being Argent a Serpent wreathed in Pale Azure, crowned Or, gorging an
Infant Gules, which was the Coat Armor of a Sarasin, vanquished by Otho first
of the Viconti in the Holy Land. The Munificent entertainment of the Duke of
Clarence at Millain.
II. of the name, Prince of Millain, Eliaz Reusnerus ASILIKON Genealogici
auctarium, p. 196. Fines an. 42 Ed. 3.25 Aprilis.
and sister to John Galeas the first Duke of Millain; upon which King Edward
III. acquitted the said Prince Galeas of 100000. Florens, by him paid by
reason of the said Treaty: And Duke Lionell, with a select company of the
English Nobility, and a most glorious Equipage, is sent into Millain, where he
espoused his new Bride; for whose entertainment such abundance of Treasure was
spent by Duke Galeas in sumptuous Feasts, stately Scenes, and honoring with
Gifts above 200. Englishmen, which accompanied his Sonin-Law the Duke of
Clarence, that it seemed to surpass the Grandeur of the most wealthy Kings; for
in the Banquet where Francis Petrarch was present, among the chiefest guests,
there were above 30 Courses of Service at the Table, and betwixt every Course
as many presents of high value intermixed; all which John Galeasius, bringing
to the Table, did offer to Lionell.

In one Course were presented 70 goodly Horses caparizon'd with silk and
silver; and in others, silver Vessels, Falcons, Hounds, Stow, ez Paulo Jovio in
vita Galeocii secundi, p. 152.
Armor for Horses, costly Coats of Mayl, Brest-plates glistring, of Massy
Steel, Corslets, and Helmets adorned with rich Crests, Apparel embroydred with
costly Jewels, Soldiers Belts, and lastly certain Gemmes by curious art set in
Gold, and of Purple and Cloth of Gold for men's Apparel in great abundance: And
such was the plenty of this Banquet, that the Meats which were brought from
the Table would have sufficed 10000. men.

But, not five Months after the Duke of Clarence (having lived with this new
Wife after, the manner of his own Country, forgetting, or not regarding his
change of air, and addicting himself to immoderate feasting, spent and
consumed with a lingering disease) departed this World at Alba Pompeia, His
Death.
called also Languvil, in the Marquisate of Montferrat in Piemont, Esceat. an.
43 Ed. 3. p. 1. n. 23. in Com. Cant. Summers. Dorset. etc. Weevers Fun.
Monuments, p 742.
on the vigil of St. Luke the Evangelist ( viz. the 17th day of October) An.
1368. and in the 42 year of the reign of King Edw. III. his Father, being first
buried in the City of Papia, and afterward brought over into England by Thomas
Newborn Esquire and others, and interred at Clare in the County of Suffolk,
in the Convent Church of the Augustine Friars, near to his first wife Elizabeth
de Burgh; thereby giving way for the Marriage of his second wife Violanta,
Elias Reusnerus ASIAIKON Genealogici auctarium, p. 196.
with her second Husband Otho Paleologus Marquess of Moutferrat.

A Daughter of LIONELL Duke of Clarence by ELIZABETH de BURGH his first Wife.
11. PHILIPPA, Pat. an. 2 Ed. 4. n. 8. and sequent.
their only daughter and heir, was Married to Edmond Mortimer the third Earl of
March, and Lord of Wigmore, of whom see more in the Chapter following.

11. PHILIPPA Of CLARENCE, Countess of MARCH and VLSTER, and Lady of WIGMORE
and CLARE, etc.
CHAP. XIII.
This Coun^^ss Ph^lippa did bear for her Arms, Glarence and 0652 01 Mortimer,
in Pale (and not Mortimer and Clarence) as appears by her Escocheon in Painted
Glass now standing in a South-Window of St. Katherines Church near the Tower,
her Coat being placed on the dexter-side out of respect to her Royal-blood and
Title, and that large Inheritance which she transmitted to the Family of
Mortimer: The like example we find upon the Surcoat of John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster in his Tomb, in the Cathedral Church of St. Paul, where the Arms of
Constance his second wife, the elder daughter and coheir of Peter King of
Castile and Leon, were placed on the right side of his Surcoat, and his Arms
on the left; other examples there are of this kind, but let this suffice. The
House of Mortimer did bear for their Arms, Barry of 6 pieces, Or and Azure, on
a Chief of the first, 2 Paletts between as many base esquierres or squires of
the second, over all an Escocheon, Argent, which Arms are frequently set up in
Church-Windowes in the Counties of Salop, Worcester and Hereford, but more
especially in the Abbey of Shrewsbury, the Churches of Quat, Quatford,
Chelmerch and Clebury-Mortimer, and in the Cathedral of Hereford and Church of
Wigmore, the ancient Seat of this illustrious Family.
LIonell Duke of Clarence, Es^eat. an. 43 E. 3. p. 1. Leonellus Dux Clarenciae
ob. 17 die Octobris, an. 42 Ed. 3. and Philippa filiae and hares ejus est atat.
13 annor. 16 die Aug. an. 42 supradicto.
by the Duchess Elizabeth his first wife, had issue this Philippa their only
Child, born upon the 16th day of August, in the 29th year of the reign of her
Grandfather King Edward III. An. 1355. Her Grandmother Queen Philippa (whose
Name she did bear) and Katherine Countess of Warwick, the wife of Thomas
Beauchamp Earl of Warwick and daughter of Roger Mortimer the first Earl of
March, were her Godmothers; John Harding, cap. 186. and 187.
and her Godfather John Thursby Archbishop of York.

This Philippa was at the death of her Father 13 years of age, about which time
( viz. An. 1368. Weever. p. 741. and 742. out of John Harding, cap. 187. Pat.
an. 43 Ed. 3. m. 11. Pat. an. 47 Ed. 3. in dorso.
and 42 Ed. 3.) King Edward married her to Edmond Mortimer the third Earl of
March and Lord of Wigmore, Her Marriage.
who enjoyed with her the Earldom of Vlster and the Lordships of Clare,
Conaught and Trime. I find him styled Marshal of England in a Patent dated upon
the first day of February, An. 43 Edw. 3. and enjoying the same Title the 21th
of May in the 47th year of the said Kings Reign.

This Edmond recovered the Castle and Honor of Denbigh from William Mountague
Earl of Salisbury, which had been by Edward III. given to Roger Mortimer the
first Earl of March his Great Grandfather, and was, by Richard II upon the 22th
day of October in the third year of his reign, Pat. an. 3 R. 2. p. 1.
constituted Lieutenant of Ireland during the King's pleasure: Not long after
which taking a voyage into that Kingdom, in order to the execution of his
Lieutenancy, and the settlement of his estate there, he happened to dye at
Cork ( An. 5 R. 2.) from whence his body was brought back into England and
interred in his Monastery of Wigmore in the County of Hereford; leaving issue
by the Countess Philippa his wife, three sons and two daughters.

Children of PHILIPPA of CLARENCE, by EDMOND MORTIMER Earl of MARCH her Husband.
12. ROGER MORTIMER Earl of March, etc. eldest son and heir, succeeded his
Father in his Honors, of whom you may read in the XIV. and next Chapter of
this III. Book.

12. Sir EDMOND MORTIMER Knight, second son of Roger Earl of March, and
Philippa of Clarence, Aug. Vincent Rouge Croix, is his discovery of Brooks's
Errons, p. 327.
took to wife (...) daughter of Owen Glendour a Gentleman of North Wales, The
Arms of Glendour, Paly of 8 pieces Argent and Gules, over all a Lion rampant
sable.
upon which alliance, the said Owen became a confederate with the Percyes
against King Henry IV. pretending to establish Roger Mortimer Earl of March in
the Throne of England, whom King Richard II. had nominated for his Successor.

12. Sir JOHN MORTIMER Knight, third son of Roger Mortimer Earl of March, and
Countess Philippa, being a Prisoner in the Tower of London in the third year of
King Henry VI. John Speed, p. 814. col. 1. Rob. Fab. 1. Conc.
was Arraigned for Treasonable speeches used to a Yeoman (servant to Sir Robert
Scot Keeper of the Tower) to induce the said Yeoman to let him escape,
promising him a great Reward. The Points charged upon him by this Witness in
open Parliament, were these, 1. That the said Mortimer meant to fly into Wales
to the Earl of March (his Nephew) and with an Army of 40000. Men to enter
England, and strike off the heads of the Protector and the Bishop of
Winchester. 2. That the Earl of March ought, by right, to be King of England,
and if the Earl would not, that then he himself was next heir. 3. That if he
could not safely reach to the Marches, he would sail to the Daulphin of France,
and there serve with Honor, of which he was assured. For these Overtures of
Escape and Conspiracy Sir John Mortimer was Drawn, Hol. Chron.
Hanged and Beheaded. The whole Stratagem being only looked upon as a Plot to
rid him out of the way, and to yield pretense for the securing and imprisonment
of his Nephew Edmond Earl of March, which was hereupon performed.

The Arms of Henry Lord Percy and Elizabeth Mortimer his wife, are impaled in
a south-window of that part of the Cathedral Church of Durham, called, Novem
Altaria, being Or, a Lion rampant Azure, and Mortimer, as before. C. 22.
Durham. fol. 84. a.
12. ELIZABETH MORTIMER Lady Percy, elder daughter of Edmond Mortimer Earl of
March, was the wife of Henry Lord Percy, on whom was entayled the Manor of
Thurstanby and other Lands, Pat. an. 3 R. 2. p. 2. m. 16. and 17
An. 3 R. 2. he was the eldest son of Henry Percy the first Earl of
Northumberland, by Margaret his first wife daughter of Ralphe Lord Nevill of
Raby; and for his high mettle and courage named Hotspurre, which he signallized
against the French and Scots; and lastly, at the Battle of Shrewsbury, in the
third year of King Henry IV. where he was slain valiantly fighting against that
King, in behalf of Edmond Mortimer the last Earl of March his wives Nephew, and
his Confederates, according to the Tripartite Indenture, betwixt the said Earl
of March, Owen Glendour, and this Henry; who, by Elizabeth Mortimer his wife,
was the Ancestor of a descent of Ten Earls of Northumberland, which have
inherited the Grandeur of his Spirit, but its to be wished that none of them
had succeeded him in the Humor of Hotspurre.

In Pale, Hastings, viz. Or, a Manch Gules, and Mortimer.
12. PHILIPP A MORTIMER, Countess of Pembroke and Arundell, younger daughter of
Edmond Earl of March, and sister to Earl Roger, was first married to John
Hastings Earl of Pembroke, In Pale, Fitz-Alan Gules, a Lion Rampant Or, and
Mortimer.
afterward she was the second wife of Richard Fitz-Alan Earl of Arundel, and
had by him a son named John that dyed young. Her third Husband was John
Poynings Lord St. John, leaving him, as she had her two former husbands,
without issue of her body. Quarterly Poynings, and St. John, viz. Barry of 6
pieces Or, and Vert, a Bend Gules; and Argent on a chief Gules 2 Mulletts Or.
Impaleing Mortimer.


12. ROGER MORTIMER, Earl of MARCH and VLSTER, Lieutenant of IRELAND, and Lord
of WIGMORE, CLARE, TRIM and CONAVGHT.
CHAP. XIV.
This Roger did bear, Quarterly, Mortimer and Burgh, as appears by his Letter
of Attorney to Roger Partrich of Dorston, Sealed with these Arms in Red-Wax,
bearing date at Ludlow the 24th day of December, An. 7 R. 2. wherein he is
styled, Roger de Mortimer Comte de la March et d'Ulvestier, etc. (This
Instrument is in the custody of Sir Edward Walker Knight Garter, principal King
of Arms.) From which we may note, that the Arms of Philippa of Clarence, this
Earl Roger's Mother, by which those of Burgh (according to the rule of
quarterings) ought to be introduced, are left out; The reason of which omission
was either because that Earl Roger not enjoying the Dukedom of Clarence,
omitted to quarter the Ensign thereof; or, that by bearing the Arms of
Clarence, he should have anticipated King Richard the II. in declaring him his
Heir to the Crown, when by them it would have appeared, that next after that
King, and the heirs of his body to be begotten, this Roger Mortimer stood next
in succession to the Kingdom: For I find, that Roger Earl of March and Vlster
sealed the beforementioned Deed three years before that King Richard the
Second declared him his Successor, which was in the 10th year of his reign. The
Achievement of this Roger stood in Painted Glass on the North-side the
Parish Church of All hallowes in Northampton; the Escocheon contains the Arms
of Mortimer and Burgh, quarterly, and hangs cornerwayes, upon his Helmet, out
of a Ducal Coronet issues a Plume of Feathers his Crest, and his Lambrequin or
Mantleing is charged with the said Arms of Burgh and Mortimer quarterly. Penes
H.S. George Arm. Richmond.
NOt long after the death of Edmond Mortimer Earl of March, this Roger, his
eldest son, Pat. 5 R. 2. p. 2. m. 35.
was constituted Lieutenant of Ireland during the King's pleasure, upon the
24th day of January, in the fifth year of the Reign of Richard II. An 1381.
Pat. an 20 R. 2. p. 1. m. 20.
in the possession of which Office I find him upon the 12th day of August, An.
1396. in the 20th year of the said King's Reign; for, he is then styled Rogerus
de Mortuomari Comes Marchie et Vltonie Locum-tenens Hibernie, etc.

King Richard II. An. 1387. nominated this Roger Mortimer for His successor in
the Kingdom of England, being the eldest son of Philippa, the only child of
Lionell Duke of Clarence, third son of King Edward III. for William of Hatfield
(the second son of King Edward III.) dying young and issueless, and King
Richard II. (the only child of Edward Prince of Wales, eldest son of King
Edward III.) deceasing also without issue, this Earl Roger's heirs ought to
have preceded the House of Lancaster to the Crown, being descended from John of
Gaunt, a fourth son of that King.

He took to Wife Eleanor Holand, the eldest daughter of Thomas Holand Earl of
Kent (by Alice Fitz-Alan his wife, daughter of Richard Earl of Arundel) sister
of Thomas Holand Duke of Surry, Esceat. an. 3 Hen. 5. n. 55. Esceat. an. 3 H.
6. n. 32
and sister and coheir of Edmond Holand Earl of Kent. She was after the death
of Roger Earl of March, re-married to Sir Edward Charlton Knight Lord powis,
and leaving issue by both her husbands, deceased upon the 23 day of October,
Inq. an. 7 Hen. 4. n. 23.
in the seventh year of King Henry IV. An. 1405.

This Roger Mortimer Earl of March, and Lieutenant of Ireland, trusting too
much to the strength of his own Forces, was slain by O-Brin and the Irish of
Leinster at a place called Kenlis, in the 22 year of the Reign of King Richard
II. who, Ypodig. Neustriae, p. 552. n. 51.
resolving to revenge the death of his Cousin Mortimer, takes a voyage into
Ireland, and reduces those Rebels; but, in his absence, Henry of Bullingbroke
the son of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, landing in England, upon pretense
only of obtaining his Dukedom of Lancaster, takes his opportunity, first to
Usurp his Crown, and after to deprive him of Life.

Children of ROGER MORTIMER Earl of MARCH, by ELIANOR HOLAND his Wife.
13. EDMOND MORTIMER Earl of March and Vlster, Parl. an. 1. Ed. 4. n. 6. m. 2.
Lord of Wigmore, Clare, Trim and Conaught, Walter Rumsey (in his deed datted
A. 10. H. 5.) because his seal was unknown to many (these are his words. Quia
Sigillum meum pluribus est incognitum, Sigilla metuen-dissimorum Dominorum
meorum Comitis Marchie Comitis Devon: et Comitis Sarum in fidem et testimonium
omnium et singulorum premissorum presentibus apponi procuravi, etc. procures
(with the other) this Earl of March his Seal (of Redwax) to be affixed to his
Grant, upon which is his complete Achievement, His Shield after the mode of
that time hangs corner-wayes, and is charged with the Arms of Mortimer and
Burgh quarterly; upon his Healme a Plume of Feathers issuing out of a Ducal
Coronet, the Healme is mantled, and the Escocheon supported by two Lions
rampant guardant, with their tails turned betwixt their hinder legs and over
their backs (with which Lions (being Argent) King Edward the Fourth supported
his Escocheon Royal, and the Standard of his Earldome of March) in the
Circumference of this Seal you may read, S. Edmundi de Mortuomari Comitis
Marchie et Ulronie dni.Wigmore et Clare. Ex Chartis Commit. Huntington. Being at
Cirencester in Glocestershire in the year 1666. I took a Note of the
representations of five Persons neatly painted in Glass in an East-window of
the North-Ile of that Church, they are all in a standing posture, their Arms
on their Surcoates, denoting them to be, this Edmond Earl of March (who there
bears March and Ulster quarterly) Peter King of Castile, Richard Duke of
York, Thomas Holand Duke of Surrey, and Sir Peter Genevile: See more of them in
the History of Richard Duke of York, Book V. Chap. IV.
was the eldest son of Roger Earl of March and Eleanor Holand, and Grandson of
Edmond Mortimer Earl of March, by Philippa the only daughter of Lionell Duke of
Clarence third son of King Edward III. This Edmond, by reason of his Royal
blood, and right to the Crown, stood greatly suspected by Henry IV. who had
Usurped the Kingdom, and was by him exposed to dangers, being taken Prisoner in
a Battle fought at Pelale in Radnorshire (where many of the Gentry of
Herefordshire were slain) by Owen Glendour the Rebel; and afterward, whereas
the Percies purposed to advance his right, he was, by that Kings order,
conveyed into Ireland, kept almost 20 years prisoner in the Castle of Trim,
suffering all miseries incident to Princes of the Blood, while they lie open to
every suspicion; and there, through extreme grief, ended his life the 19th day
of January, An. 1424. in the third year of the reign of King Henry VI. This
Earl Edmond (having had no issue by Anne Stafford his wife, daughter of Edmond
Earl of Stafford, who after his death was re-married to John Holand Earl of
Huntington and Duke of Exceter) left his Nephew Richard Duke of York his heir.
Weever Fun. Mon. p. 742.
His Corpse was brought into England, and Entombed in the College of Stoke,
near unto Clare, in the County of Suffolk.

13. ROGER MORTIMER, Parl. an. 1 Ed. 4. n. 8. m. 2.
Second son of Roger Mortimer Earl of March, and Elianor Holand, dyed young.

The Arms of this Anne, with those of Earl Richard her Husband stood in a
west-window of the Cloister of Fotheringhey in Northamptonshire, viz. Quarterly
France and England a Label of 3 points Argent, each charged with as many
Torteaux, Impaleing, Mortimer and Burgh quarterly.
13. ANNE MORTIMER Countess of Cambridge, the elder daughter of Roger Earl of
March, Pat. an. 1 Ed. 4 n. 8. and seguent.
and Countess Eleanor his wife, was Married to Richard of Coningsborrow Earl of
Cambridge, second son of Edmond of Langley Duke of York, fifth son of King
Edward III. by whom she had issue Richard Duke of York, heir to her brother
Edmond Mortimer Earl of March, who, setting on foot his Claim to the Crown
against King Henry the VI. was slain in the attempt at the Battle of Wakefield,
leaving the prosecution thereof unto Edward Earl of March his eldest son, who,
after many Battles, and much effusion of blood, obtained the Kingdom, and was
Crowned by the name of Edward the IV.

In Pale, Courtney, viz. Or, 3 Torteaux, a Label of 3 points Azure: and
Mortimer and Burgh quarterly.
13. ELEANOR MORTIMER Countess of Devon, Parl. an. 1 Ed. 4. n. 8. and. sequent.
the younger daughter of Roger Mortimer Earl of March, and Elianor Holand his
Wife, was Married to Edward Courtney surnamed the Blind, the Eleventh Earl of
Devonshire, by whom he had not any issue, and deceased in the seventh year of
the reign of King Henry the Fifth, An. 1418.

10. THOMAS, Duke of GLOUCESTER, Earl of BVCKINGHAM, ESSEX and NORTHAMPTON, and
Constable of ENGLAND; Surnamed of WOODSTOCK.
CHAP. XV.
The Foundation Charter of Plescy-Colledge by the Duke of Gloucester, with the
Constitutions and Orders established by Robert Braybrook Bishop of London (now
remaining in the Chamber of the Duchy of Lanc.) is under their Seals. The Dukes
is of Green-Wax, and thus circumscribed, Sig: thome: filli: regis: anglie:
ducis: gloucestrie: commit: essxie: et: buk: ac: constabul: anglie. On which he
is represented on horseback, his shield, surcoat, and the caparizons of his
horse, charged with, Semee of France and England quarterly, a Border Argent.
From behind his Helmet issues his Lambrequin or mantle, and his Crest is, upon
a Chapeau doubled Ermine a Lion passant guardant, with a Collar and Coronet.
The ground of which Seal is diapred with Feathers and Swant. His Counterseal
(about an Inch and half in Diameter) is impressed upon Red-Wax: In the
circumference you may read, S: thome: ducis: glocestrie: within which are three
small circles in Triangle, the uppermost charged with the Crest of Duke Thomas,
that on the right hand, with his Shield of Arms, and that on the left with the
Coat of the Duchess Elianor his Wife, viz. Quarterly Bohun and Milo Earl of
Hereford.

Another Seal of Thomas Duke of Gloucester (of pale Red Wax, Ex Chartis Johannis
Phillipot Somerset. Weever Fun. Mon. p. 626. 627
annexed to a Letter of Attorney, made by him and Elianor his Wife, dated the
8th day of January, 14 R. 2.) is charged with his Healme, Crest, and Escocheon
of Arms, hanging on the Stock or Trunk of a Tree, between two Shields of the
Coat of Milo Earl of Hereford, and as many Swans as the Root thereof: The
representations of these Seals are in the 125. Page of this Third Book, which
contain (besides his complete Atchievment) his Devise, for John Gower, in his
Vox Clamantis, calls him Cygnus, the Cygnet, from the Swan, which was his
Cognizance. And the Rebus of his Surname Woodstock, is there represented by the
Stock of Wood, upon which his Crest and Shield are placed.


THe sixth and youngest Son of King Edward the III. Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 521.
n. 14. Tho. Watsingham, p. 171. n. 49.
and Queen Philip, was this Thomas; Surnamed of Woodstock (in the County of
Oxford) the King's Mannour-House, where he had his birth, upon the vii. of the
Ides of January, An. 1355. In the 50th year of the reign of K. Edward his said
Father he sat in Parliament held at Westminster, Pat. an. 50 Edw. 3. p. 1. m.
18.
by the Title only of Constable of England, which Office was granted to him
during pleasure, upon the 10th day of June in the same year, having fallen into
the Kings hands by reason of the minority of Humphrey de Bohun's heirs, late
Earl of Hereford, and Constable of England.

King Richard II. Orig. dean. 17. R. 2. Rot. 36.
upon His Coronation-day, honored this Thomas his Uncle with the Title of Earl
of Buckingham, with an Annuity of 1000. pounds per annum to maintain that
Dignity; And, Pat. an. 1 R. 2. p. 1. m. 7.
by Patent, bearing date at Westminster, the 22th day of June, in the first
year of his Reign, confirmed to him the Office of Constable of England, with
the same Habendum before granted by King Edward III. so that upon the fourth
day of August following, 0664 0141 V An. 1 R. 2. Claus. an. 1 R. 2. m. 37.
he was summoned to Parliament by the 0664 0141 V 3 Title of Earl of Buckingham
and Constable of England.

His Marriage. The Arms of Duchess Elianor were Painted in an East-window of
Rochford Church in Essex, viz. Quarterly, France semee and England a Border
argent, Woodstock. Impaleing, Azure a Bend Argent between 2 Cotises and 6 Lions
rampant, Or, Bohun. Which Coat is also carved in Brass on her Tomb in
Westminster-Abbey, as you may see in the Figure thereof: Her Seal is
represented in the 125. Page of this Third Book, upon which are Her Arms
Impaled with the Duke Her Husbands on a Lozenge, and supported by an Angel in a
Boat, upon the Head and Poop of which sit two Swans, Collered and Chained.
He took to wife Elianor, the elder of the two daughters, and coheires of the
beforementioned Humphrey de Bohun Earl of Hereford, Illustrissimo Domino Dn:
ARTHURO Comiti de ESSEX, Vice-comiti MALDON, et Baroni CAPELL de HADHAM, hanc
monumenti ALIANORAE Glocestriae Ducissae, Tabulam, Humile D.D.D.F.S.

Cy gilt Alianore de Bohun eisne^ille ^ un des heirs a lonnrable Seignour
Monsr Humfir^ de Bohun Count de Hereford D'elle de Norhampton Conestable
D'engleterre fein^e a puissant noble prince

Th^^ias de wodestake fil^ a trese cellant trespuissant seignour Edrd

D'englet^re puis le conquestier^ Duc de Gloces^^^ Count^ Desse^ de Bukyngani
Conestable D'engletere De mmull le tierz iour Doctobr^lan Dugrare mil
CCC.lxxxxix:

Essex and Northampton, and Constable of England, Lord of Brecknock, and Patron
of the Abbey of Lanthony, and of Joane his wife daughter of Richard Fitz-Alan
Earl of Arundel; In right of which Eleanor, the Earldomes of Essex and
Northampton, and the Constableship of England, etc. fell to this Thomas, being
the greater part of her fathers inheritance: She outlived her husband about
two years, Weevers Funeral Monum, p. p. 638.
spent her Widdowhood in the Abbey of Barking, where she became a Nun; and,
making her Will upon the sixth day of August, in the year 1399. An. 23 R. 2.
Her Death,
deceased upon the third day of October in the same year, An. 1 H. 4. and was
interred in the middle of St. Edmond's Chapel in the Abbey of Westminster,
under a Monument of Gray Marble, raised about two foot from the ground, with
her Effigies thereon, inlay'd in brass; upon the verge of which you may read
this Inscription following, and view the Figure of the Tomb in the Preceding
Page.

Cy gist Alianore de Bohun eisne fille et un des heirs a l'onnrable Seignour
Monsr. Humphrey de Bohun Count de Hereford d'Essex et de Northampton et
Conestable d'Engleterre femme a puissant et Noble Prince Thomas de Wodestoke
fills a tres excellent et trepuissant Seignour Edward roy d'Engleterre puis le
Conquest tiers, Duc de Gloucestre Count d'Essex et de Buckingham et Conestable
d'Engleterre, Qe morust le tiers jour d'October l'an de grace, Mil, ccc.
ixxxxix. This Thomas Earl of Buckingham and Essex and Constable of England, the
King's Uncle (so named in the Grant of his Dukedom) was advanced to the
dignity of Duke of Gloucester (by Charter) bearing date at Hocelologh in
Tividale, Pat. an. 9 R. 2. p. 1. m. 15.
upon the sixth day of August, in the 9th year of Richard II. his Nephew, Anno
1385. and invested in the Parliament that began at Westminster on St. Lukes
day, that King sitting in his Throne, and Skirlaw the Lord elect, confirmed of
Coventry and Lichfield, that was Keeper of the Privy Seal, Selden's Titles of
Honor.
delivering the cause of his Creation; The Form in the Creation of a Duke.
The Parliament Roles says, The King, ipsum Ducem de predictis titulo nomine
et honor, Per Gladii cincturam, et Pilei ac Circuli aurei, suo capiti
impositionem, maturius investivit, That Instalment being by guirding on the
Sword, and adorning his head with a Coronet and Cap of Estate.

But afterward, Chart. an. 21 R. 2. n. 23.
An. 21 R. 2. the Dukes of Hereford, Surrey, Excester, Aumerle and Norfolk,
were Created per appositionem Cappae suo capiti, ac traditionem virgae aureae,
etc. These Creations were performed by the imposition of a Cap of Estate, and
the delivery of a Rod of Gold. Our modern times have had for the most part all
these, the Sword, Coronet (which supposes the Cap) and Rod of Gold, together
in the Clause of Investiture per Gladii cincturam, Cappae and Circuli aurei,
impositionem in capite, and traditionem virgae aureae, insignimus, investimus,
and realiter nobilitamus, per praesentes, etc. But enough concerning these
Creations, let us now return to our Duke of Gloucester, Speed, Chron. p. 710.
who was a Man of Valor, Wisdom and Vigilance for the service of the King his
Nobili et praeclaro Viro Domino ORLANDO BRIDGEMAN, Equili Aurato, et Baronetto;
nec non Capitali Iusliciario de Conu^ni Banco, hanc Monumenti Thonice Ducis
Glocestriae Figura^. D.D.D.F.S

^re gist enseuelz enter les come tu poes icy deoir soit a matyn niydy ou ^oyr:
priez a dieu pur ^a^me de luy: qil en est de luy mercy meint ho^nie ^^e

Nephew and the State; But, those noble virtues were distempered with too much
wilfulness and froward obstinacy; for, he ever repined against King Richard his
Nephew, in all things whatsoever he wished to have forward; Hist. Ang. l. 20.
Weevers Fun. Monuments, p. 639.
being (as Polidore censures him) Vir ferocissimus and praecipitis ingenii, a
most fierce Man, and of an headlong wit; who thinking still that those times,
wherein he had Mastered the King, were nothing changed, though the King was
above Thirty years old, forbear not, roughly, not so much to admonish, as to
check and school his Sovereign, which first bred him envy, and afterward
ruin; for, the King finding him to be too severe an observer of his Actions,
consulted with Thomas Mowbray the Earl-Marshal, to make him away; who,
surprising the Duke at his Castle of Plescy in Essex, conveyed him to Calais,
where, Ypodigma Neustrioe, p. 551. n. 30.
by his order, he was smothered, His Death,
under a Featherbed by William Serle, -- Franceis, and others; who, having
declared to him the Kings Command, that he should die; answered, That if it
were his Sovereign's Pleasure, he willingly submitted thereunto: Placita
Coronae coram Rege in Parliamento apud West. die Lunae in Festo Sanctae Fidis
virginis, An. 1 H. 4. n. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
This appears upon the Examination of John Hall, taken in Parliament, An. 1 H.
4. who being Privy to, though not Active in the said Murder, was Sentenced to
be Executed at Tyborne, and his head sent to Calais where the Fact was done.
Thus died this Royal Prince, the Son of a King, and Uncle to a King, on the
Feast of the Nativity of our Lady (being the 8th day of September) in the 21th
year of King Richard II. his Nephew, Anno 1397. who, not much above two years
after this Murder, was Deposed from His Crown and deprived of his life, Inq.
cap. apud Ailesbury in Com. Euck. 24 die January. An. 1 H. 4. n. 51.
having before Sentenced Thomas the Earl-Marshal, and at that time Duke of
Norfolk, to perpetual Banishment, on that very day, whereon, 0141 a
Twelve-moneth before, He had Arrested the Duke of Gloucester at Plescy; To which
place the body of the Duke of Gloucester was afterward conveyed with all
Funeral Pomp, and buried in the College of Canons-Regular, Hollinsh. p. 489.
Weevers Funeral Monum. p. 638.
by him Founded, and Dedicated to the Holy Trinity, in a goodly Sepulcher
provided in his lifetime, whose Relics were afterward removed and laid under
a Marble inlaid with brass (in the Chapel of the Kings in the Abbey of
Westminster, on the South Side the Shrine of King Edward the Confessor) and
beautified with the figure of himself, Duchess Eleanor his wife, King Edward
his Father, Queen Philippa his Mother, and all his Brothers and Sisters, with
Escocheons of their several Arms, as by the Figure of his Monument in the
preceding Page does more fully appear, that part of his Epitaph on the
South Side being only legible, the rest wholly obliterated.

Children of THOMAS Duke of GLOUCESTER, by ELEANOR BOHUN his Wife.
He did bear the Arms of his Father.
11. HVMPHREY PLANT AGENET Earl of Buckingham, only son of Thomas of Woodstock,
Duke of Gloucester, and Eleanor his Wife, so named from Humphrey de Bohun his
Grandfather, the fifth Earl of Hereford of that Christen-Name; was, after the
untimely death of his Father (with Henry son and heir of Henry of
Bullingbrooke, Duke of Hereford) sent into Ireland by King Richard II. and
imprisoned in the Castle of Trim. But Bullingbrooke having deposed King
Richard, and Usurped his Kingdom, by the Title of Henry the IV. immediately
recalled from Imprisonment these two Princely Captives, his Son Henry, and this
Humphrey his Nephew, whom he had as certainly restored to his Fathers Honors,
as he revenged his Death; but, this Humphrey most unhappily deceasing of the
Plague at Chester (some have it at Coventry) in his return from Ireland
(leaving his Sisters his heirs) put a period to the King's intentions; but
renewed his Mother Eleanor's grief, who had now not only survived her Murdered
Husband, but her only Son, Weevers Fun. Mon. p. 616. and 627.
to be the Chief Mourner at his Funeral; whose Corpse she caused to be conveyed
to the Abbey of Walden (now called Audley-End) and there solemnly interred
among her and his Noble Progenitors, surviving him not many Months.

The Arms of this Countess Anne and Earl Edmond, were in a Window in
Christ-Church near Newgate, being, per Pale, Or a cheveron, gules, Stafford:
and quarterly, France Semee, and England, a Border argent, Woodstock. Penes,
Hen. St. George Arm. Richmond. But Humphrey, the first Duke of Buckingham their
son left off his Paternal Arms, The cheveron, and assumed the Coat of his
Mother, as appears by the Seal of the Duchess Anne Nevil his Wife, annexed to
her Deed dated the 12th day of July, An. 1 Ed. 4. upon which her Saltir is
impaled with the Arms of Woodstock alone.

As to the Coat of Henry Stafford Duke of Buckingham, this Humphrey's Grandson,
take this Note in the College of Arms, Lib. L. 1. fol. 15. Memorandum, That
in the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Edward the Fourth, the 13th year of his
Reign, on the 18th day of February, it was concluded in a Chapter of the Office
of Arms, That where a Nobleman is descended Lincally Hereditable to 3 or 4
Coats, and afterward is ascended to a Coat near to the King, and of his Royal
Blood, may for his most honor bear the same Coat alone, and no lower Coat of
Dignity to be quartered therewith; As my Lord Henry Duke of Buckingham Earl of
Hereford. Northampton and Stafford, Lord of Brecknock and of Holderness is
ascended to the Coat and Array to Thomas of Woodstock Duke of Gloucester, and
son to King Edward the III. He may bear his Coat alone. And it was concluded,
by Clarenceaux King of Arms, March King of Arms, Guien King of Arms, Windsor
Herald, Fawcon Herald, Hereford Herald.

Nevertheless, the right high and mighty Prince Edward Duke of Buckingham, Earl
of Hereford, Stafford and Northampton (son of Duke Henry) for so is he styled
in his Indenture dated the 17th day of February, An. 10 H. 8. did bear upon his
Seal 4 Coats quarterly, viz. 1, Woodstock, 2. Bohun Earl of Hereford, 3. Bohun
Earl of Northampton, and in the fourth place Stafford, his Paternal Coat; The
Escocheon containing the Arms of his Dukedom and 3 Earldomes' Ex Chartis Dom.
Hen. Com. Huntington.


11. ANNE PLANTAGENET Countess Stafford and of Eu, eldest daughter of Thomas
Duke of Gloucester, and Eleanor Bohun his Wife, and Sister, and at length Heir
to her Brother Humphrey, was twice Married; first, to Edmond the fifth Earl of
Stafford, slain at Shrewsbury Fight, An. 4 H. 4. and buried at Stafford in the
Augustine-Fryers, and had issue Humphrey Earl Stafford Duke of Buckingham, etc.
who fell at the Battle of Northampton, An. 38 H. 6. Father of Humphrey Earl
Stafford, who dyed (in vita patris) of his wounds received at the first Battle
of St. Albans, An. 33 H. 6. and left issue Henry Duke of Buckingham Beheaded at
Shrewsbury (or Salisbury) An. 1 R. 3. Father of Edward Duke of Buckingham, who
lost his head on Tower Hill An. 13 H. 8. and had issue Henry, admitted only to
the Barony of Stafford, Father of Edward Lord Stafford, who had issue Edward
Lord Stafford, Father of Edward Stafford that deceased in the lifetime of his
Father, and left issue Henry Baron Stafford, that deceased without issue, and
Mary Married to Sir William Howard Knight of the Bath, since created Viscount
and Baron Stafford.

This Anne Plantagent Countess Stafford took to her second Husband, William
Bourchier; or Bourghchier, created Earl of Eu, at Maunt in Normandy, Rot. Nor.
a. 7 H. 5. p. 1. m. 4. n. 4. and 33.
the 10th day of June An. 7 H. 5. in the year 1419. He deceased at Troyes in
Campaigne, in the 8th year of that Kings reign, and his body being imported
into England, was interred in the Priory of Lanthony in the County of
Gloucester, where also lies buried this Anne Countess Staf ford his Wife.

They left issue Henry Bourchier Earl of Eu and Essex their eldest son,
Visitation of Devon and Cornwall, p. 15 and 16.
William Bourchier Lord Fitz-Warin second son; Thomas Bourchier Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Cardinal of St. Cirac, third son; And, John Bourchier Lord
Berniers, Bourchiers Lords Berniers.
fourth son, who, taking to Wife Margaret the daughter and heir of Richard Lord
Berniers, had issue Humphrey Bourchier Lord Berniers, Father of John Lord
Berniers, Father of Thomas Bourchier that dyed without issue, and of Joane
Bourchier Married to Edmond Kuyvet Esquire.

Bourchiers Earls of Essex.
The said Henry Bourchier Earl of Essex, Chart. a. 1 E. 4. p. 2. n. 1.
so Created A. 1 E. 4. married Issabel daughter of Richard Earl of Cambridge,
and had issue, William Viscount Bourchier, that died in his Fathers lifetime,
Father of Henry Bourchier Earl of Essex, whose daughter and heir Anne was
married to William Lord Parr of Kendal and Earl of Essex, and died without
issue, and of Cecilie Bourchier the Wife of Sir John Devereux Knight of the
Garter, and Lord Ferrers of Chartley.

Sir John Devereux Lord Ferrers of Charlley, by Cecilie Bourchier, had issue
Walter Devereux Viscount Hereford, who by Mary his first Wife, daughter of
Thomas Gray Marquess Dorset, had issue Sir Richard Devereux, who died in vita
patris, Devereuxes Earls of Essex. Argent a Fesse Gules, in Chief 3 Torteaux.
and Sir William Devereux, Father of Barbara Devereux, Wife of Sir Edward
Hastings Knight, a younger son of Francis Earl of Huntington, from whom is
descended a numerous posterity, and of Margaret Devereux Married to Sir Edward
Littleton of Pilleton in the County of Stafford Knight, Great Grandfather to
Sir Edward Littleton of the same place, Baronet.

Sir Richard Devereux was the Father of Walter Earl of Essex, Father of Robert
Earl of Essex, which Robert had issue Robert the last Earl of Essex of that
Family, Frances Devereux the Wife of William Seymour Lord Beauchamp, since Duke
of Somerset, and Dorothy Devereux Married to Henry Shirley, son and heir of Sir
George Shirley Baronet.

The beforementioned Walter Devereux Viscount Hereford, by Margaret his second
Wife, Devereux Viscount Hereford.
daughter of Robert Garnish of Kenton Esquire, had also issue, Sir Edward
Devereux of Castle Bromwich in the County of Warwick Baronet, Father of Sir
Walter Devereux of the same place Baronet, who had issue Essex Devereux that
died S. P. and Leicester Devereux Viscount Hereford, the heir-male of this most
noble Family.

Bourchiers Lords Fitz-Warin and Earls of Bath. The Arms of this William
Bourchier and Tamazine his wife, stand in an East-window of Kymbalton Church,
being, Quarterly, Argent a Cross ingrayled Gules between 4 Water-Bougets Sable
Bourchier, and Gules a Fesse Argent inter 14 Billets Or, Levaine, over all a
Label of 3 points Azure, each charged with as many Flowers de Lize, Or.
Impaleing Quarterly Fitz-warin and Hankford, viz. quarterly, Ermine and Gules
indented per Fesse, and Argent, 2 Bendlets wavy, Sable.


The Earls of Bath, and Lords Fitz-Warin derived themselves from William
Bourchier (a second son of Anne Countess Stafford, daughter of Thomas of
Woodstock Duke of Gloucester, by William Bourchier Earl of Eu her second
Husband) which William taking to Wife Tamasine the daughter of Sir Richard
Hankford Knight, by Elizabeth daughter and heir of Foulk Lord Fitz Warin, was,
in her right, Lord Fitz-Warin, and by her had issue Foulk Bourchier Lord
Fitz-Warin, Father of John Bourchier Earl of Bath and Lord Fitz-Warin, Father
of John Bourchier second Earl of Bath, Father of John Lord Fitz-Warin who
deceased in the lifetime of his Father, and Sir George Bourchier Knight. John
Lord Fitz-Warin, had issue, William Bourchier the third Earl of Bath, Father of
Edward Bourchier the fourth Earl of Bath, who left issue three daughters his
heirs, Elizabeth the Wife of Basil Fielding Earl of Denbeigh, Dorothy, second
daughter, first Married to Thomas Lord Gray of Groby, son and heir of Henry
Earl of Stamford, her second husband was Gustavus Mackworth, and her third
Charles Howsden; and Anne, third daughter, first the Wife of James Cranfield,
Earl of Middlesex, and afterward Married to Sir Chichester Wray Baronet; so
that the Earldom came to Sir Henry Bourchier (son of Sir George Bourchier
aforesaid Knight, son of John the second Earl of Bath) who was fifth and last
Earl of Bath, L. Privy Seal to K. Charles the I. and Lord Fitz-Warin, a person
answerable in all parts to his ancient and most noble Ancestors. He deceased
without issue upon the 16th day of August, An. 1654. and was buried at Tawstock
in Devonshire: to whose dear Memory the Lady Rachel Fane (daughter of Francis
Earl of Westmerland) his Countess Dowager, has erected a Monument, answerable
to his high quality and merit; the Figure whereof, in respect of the
singularity of the form, I have here inserted.

Quarterly, Gules a Lion rampant and border ingrayled, Or, Talbot, and Argent 2
Lions passant, Gules, Strange of Blackmere Impaleing, Quarterly France Semee,
and England a Border Argent, Woodstock. Which Escocheon is painted in glass in
an East-window of Whit-Church Church in the County of Salop.
11. JOANE PLANTAGENET Lady Talbot, the second daughter of Thomas of Woodstock
Duke of Gloucester and Eleanor Bohun his Wife, E. Genealogia Comitum Salopiae:
was Married to Gilbert Lord Talbot of Goderick-Castle and Blackmere, and by
him had issue their only child named Ancharet, who deceasing in her tender
years, An. 9 H. 5. John Lord Talbot (afterward Earl of Shrewsbury) this
Gilberts younger brother, came to be his heir.

11. ISSABEL PLANTAGENET, the third daughter of Thomas of Woodstock Duke of
Gloucester, was a Nun in the Minories at London.

11. PHILIP PLANTAGENET, the fourth and youngest daughter died young, unmarried.

monument Illustrissima Domin^^ RACHELL BATHONIAE Comitissa filia praenobilis
Francisca nuper Westmerlandiae Comitis relicta HENRICI Bourchier nuper Comitis
BATHONIENSIS In Viri ^u^ memoriani. (...) hoc p^^uit.

Bon Temps Veindra ^se vile Fano


BOOK IV. Plantagenets Divided: OR, The ROYAL HOUSE of LANCASTER.

CONTAINING A Genealogical History OF THE KNIGS OF ENGLAND, etc. From HENRY IV.
to EDWARD IV.

From the Year 1399. to the Year 1461.

S Pivat Iohis ducis lancastr commit richmond derb linc leyc seneseash angl


Johan Roy de castle et de leon due de lancastre


Henricus Dei Graci Rex Arancie et Anglie et Dus hibernie


Henricus Dei Gracia Rex Francie et Anglie et Dus hibernie


Viro Generosissimo et rei Antiquaria Conservatori RADOLPHO SHELDON de Be^ly in
Agro Vigorniensi Armigero Sigillorum hanc Tabulam H.D.F.S.



blazon or coat of arms

Generosisimo Viro Domino ROBERTO SOUTH. WELL Equin Au^ato Serenissimo D^ Regi
CAROLO, (...) secretioribus Consilijs Clericorum, Vni Sigi^^orum hanc ^abula^
H.D.F.S.



blazon or coat of arms

henricus dei gra rex angli et francie et dus hibernie


* sigillum raterin regis francie regine anglie dn^e hibernie


s henrici principis watt ducis aquitan lancastr cornu^ comits ce^tr


sigillum edwardi regis anglie p francie primogeni^i princip^llie (...)ornubie
et eomitis castrie


* sigillum edwardi regis anglie p francie primogeniti principis wallic duris
cornubrie et co^^ius cestrie


HENRICUS DEI GRACIA FRANCORVM ET ARCLIE REX


blazon or coat of arms

Viro Generosissimo Dno. GILBERTO TALBOTE quiti Aurato, serenisiimo Dno. Regi
Carolo 2do. joca^ium Magistro sigillorum hanc Tabulam HD.F.S.



blazon or coat of arms

blazon or coat of arms

s dn^e mergarete coitsse Richmu^die p derbi fillie per her iohi^s duc^
sumerset ac matis hen^ un reg angl per fr


SIGILLVM ARMORVM KAROLI COMITIS WIGORNIAE


A GENEALOGICAL TABLE Of the Fourth BOOK.
10. BLANCH daughter and heir of Henry Duke of Lancaster first Wife, p. 244.
11. HENRY IV. King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland, p. 250.258.
MARY ROHUN p. 259. 12. HENRY V. King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland
p. 268. and 270.
13. HENRY V I. King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland, p. 283, 286.
MARGARET of Anjou p. 291. 14. EDWARD Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl
of Chester, ob. S. prole p. 229. ANNE NEVIL p. ibidem.

KATHE RINE of France p. 277. Sir OWEN ap MERYDETH ap TUDOR p. 278, 283.
EDMOND TUDOR Earl of Richmond p. 283.=MARGARET Beaufort daughter and heir of
John Duke of Somerset, son of John Earl of Somerset p. 284, 318. HENRY VII.
King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland. Book 6. Chap. I.
JASPER TUDOR Duke of Bedford, and Earl of Pembroke 284. KATHERINE Woodvile p.
285. OWEN TUDOR 3 d Son p. 285.
THOMAS of Lancaster, Duke of Clarence, p. 268, 301. MARGARET Holand p. 303.
JOHN Duke of Bedford p. 268 and 304. ANNE of Burgundy p. 304. JAQUETTA of
Luxemburg p. 305. HUMPHREY Duke of Gloucester p. 269, 307. JAQUELINE of Bavaria
p. 308 ELEANOR Cobham p. 308. BLANCH Duchess of Bavaria, 2. Queen of Aragon,
and 3 Duchess of Bar p. 9 PHILIPE Queen of Denmark and Norway p. 269.
PHILIPE Queen of Portugal p. 250. ELIZAB. Duchess of Exceter, and Lady Fanhop
p. 251.
JOHN King of Castile and Leon, Duke of Aquitaine and Lancaster, etc. fourth
Son of King Edward III. p. 243 CONSTANCE elder daughter and coheir of Peter
King of Castile and Leon, second Wife, p. 244. KATHE- RINE Queen of Castile and
Leon, p. 253.
KATHERINE Widow of Sir Ottes Swynford Knight. afterward the third Wife of John
Duke of Lancaster, p. 247.
JOHN Beaufort Earl of Somerset p. 253 and 313. HENRY Beaufort Cardinal of St
Eusebius, and Bishop of Winchester p. 253. THOMAS Beaufort Duke of Exceter, and
Earl of Dorset, p. 256. JOANE Beaufort, Countess of Westmerland p. 256.

Anno Domini 1372.
10. JOHN KING of CASTILE and LEON, DUKE of AQVITAINE and LANCASTER, EARL of
RICHMOND, DERBY, LINCOLN and LEICESTER, and STEWARD of ENGLAND, Surnamed of
GAVNT.
CHAP. I.
KING Edward the Third, This John of Gaunt made use of three several Seals; the
impressions of which are to be seen in the Chamber of the Duchy of Lancaster.
On the first of which ( vide 238 page) he bears (in his Shield hanging
cornerways) France semee and England, quarterly, a Label of 3 points Ermine,
upon His Healm, Lambrequin, and Chapeau, turned up Ermine, stands his Crest
being, A Lion passant guardant crowned, and accolled, with a Labell of 3
points, also Ermine. Which brisure or distinction, he probably took from having
been created Earl of Richmond (by his Father K. Ed. 3d. An. 1342.) upon the
death of John de Dreux, Duke of Britain, and Earl of Richmond; which Duke did
bear his Escocheon charged with a Canton Ermine; and also to distinguish
himself from his Brothers Lyonel and Edmond; who bare on their Labels, the one
Cantons, and the other Torteauxes. On each side this Achievement is placed an
Eagle, standing upon a Padlock, and essaying to open the same; it may be, this
John meaning thereby, that although he wanted the Key of Right and Title to
free him from this Lock of Subjection; yet would he, by power of the Eagle,
that King of Birds, force off his Fetters. Not willing patiently to expect
(with Edmond Duke of York his Brother, the freeing of his Falcon from the
Fetterlock of servitude, till King Edward IV, his Great Grandson opened it with
the right Key.) But endeavors to cut this Gordian Knot, which he could not
untie, making way to the Crown for his son Henry Earl of Derby; who usurping
it, placed the same on the Head of his Royal Eagle. The Canopy of whose Tomb at
Canterbury is powdered with Eagles volant, Crowned, within the Garter and
scroles containing the word Sovereign. This Seal is Red Wax, upon the
circumference whereof, are these words, S: Private: Johannis Ducis Lancaster:
commit: Richmond: Derb: Line: Ley^: Senescalli Angl: and is affixed to his Deed,
dated the 28 Januarii 1374. in the 49th year of Edw. 3. vide, this Seal in the
238 page of this fourth Book.

Another of his Seals (being an exact Circle) is affixed to a Letter of Attorney
in French, bearing date at the Savoy. the 20th day of October, An. 50 Ed. 3.
over England, and over France the 37th. in which he is styled, Johan par la
Grace de Dieu Roy de Castile and de Leon duc de Lancastre. And on his Seal is
represented the Shield of the Kingdom of Castile and Leon quarterly, impaling
his Ducal Coat as more plainly appears in the 238 page of this fourth Book;
which Royal Ensigns have the preference in the Shield, not as the Arms of
Constance of Castile his second Wife, but to signify his being Sovereign of
those Realms; and therefore are placed before his Paternal or Ducal Coat
therewith impaled: For proof whereof you might have noted the Arms on the
Surcoat of his Effigies, on his Tomb in St. Paul's Cathedral; the like
Achievement within the Garter in a glass Window of Kippax Church in York shire,
and other places; all which exactly agree in the Marshalling: For by the same
Law of Arms, no Femes Arms can be impaled with her Barons, either upon his
Surcoat, or within the Garter of the Order, as some ignorantly have practiced.

A third Seal he had (of Green Wax) on the one side of which, a Man on
Horseback is delineated, his Shield Surcoat, and caparizons of his Horse
charged with the Arms of France and England, quarterly a Label of 3 points
Ermine; and on the reverse in a large Escocheon the same Coat empaled with that
of his first Wife, Blanch of Lancaster, who did bear Gules 3 Lions passant
guardant Or, a File of 3 points Azure, each charged with 3 Flowers de Lize Or;
being the Ensign of the first line of Lancaster, which Label of three points
Azure charged with nine Flowers de Lize Or, last mentioned, were also borne in
the Escocheon of John Duke of Lancaster when he had surrendered his Kingdoms of
Castile and Leon, as appeared upon his Shield which (with his Lance) hung on
his Tomb in the Cathedral Church of St Paul; noted as an example by E. Bolton
in his Elements of Armories, page 69. both for the unusual form and also matter
thereof. Over against which Tomb, in the border of a South Glass Window, was
painted (among many Arms of the first House of Lancaster) the device of this
Duke being in a Field Sable 3 Ostrich Feathers Ermine the Quills and Scroles
Or, to distinguish him from his eldest Brother, Prince Edward, who valiantly
won them at the Battle of Cressy. and ever wore them, Argent.


by Queen Philipe his Wife, Daughter of William Earl of Henault, Ypodig. Neust.
p. 514. n. 12.
had issue this John, their fourth Son, born at Gaunt, the Capital City of
Flanders (from whence he took his Surname) in the year 1340. Tho. Walsingh.
148. n. 12.


He was, in his Infancy (upon the death of John de Dreux, Chart. an. 16 E. 3.
n. 2. and m. 4.
Duke of Britain, and Earl of Richmond, (deceasing without issue An. 1341)
created Earl of Richmond, by Charter bearing date the 20 day of September 1342.
An. 16 Ed. 3. to have and to hold the said Earldom to him and the Heirs of his
Body, Rot. Franciae an. 46. E. 3. n. 12 and 21.
etc. Which Earldom he afterward released to King Edw. III. his Father, upon
the 25th day of June, in the 46th year of his Reign; which King, on the 8th day
of August next following made a grant thereof to John Montfort, Out of a yellow
Book in the Duchy. Registarium Regis Castelle and Legionis fol. 5. a.
Duke of Britain, who had married his Daughter Mary. And in exchange gave to
this John his son, the Castles, Manors, and Honors of Tickhill, Alto-pecco,
etc. and by another Charter of the same date, the Honor of Knaresborrow.

On the 14th of the Kalends of June 1359. Anno 1359. His first Marriage.
An. 34 Edw. 3. Tho. Walsing. p. 173. n. 53.
he being then only Earl of Richmond, took to his first Wife Blanch, the
younger Daughter and coheir of Henry Duke of Lancaster, Leland p. 168.689. and
691.
(by Isabel his Wife, The Arms of this Blanch of Lancaster being Gules three
Lions passant guardant Or, a Label of three points of France impaled with those
of John Duke of Lancaster her Husband, viz. quarterly France seem, and England,
a File of three points Ermine, were painted in a Glass-Window directly opposite
to the Tomb of the said Duke John, in the Cathedral of St. Paul, penes H. S.
Esquire Monum. of Burials and Arms etc. p. 127.
Daughter of Henry Lord Beaumont) for which Marriage dispensation was obtained
from the Pope; Ypodigma Neustriae p. 523. n. 4. and 527. n. 55.
which Lady having been his Wife nine years, deceased Duchess of Lancaster, in
the year 1369. An. 43. E 3. and was interred in the Cathedral Church of St
Paul, London; Tho. Walsing. p. 184. n. 32. an. 1369.
where her Effigies of Alablaster was to be seen, lying on the right hand of
the Duke her Husband, on his Monument, till with that stupendous Pile, it
suffered the violence of the late conflagration, An. 1666.

Not two years after this marriage ( viz. An. 1361) deceased the Duke Henry her
Father; and upon the 13th of November, Chart. 36. Ed. 3. n. 9.
in the year following, viz. 36 Edw. 3. the Dukedom of Lancaster was in
Parliament granted to John Earl of Richmond; and among the Summons of An. 37
Edw. 3. primo Junii, Claus. 37. E. 3. m. 22. in dorso.
he is called by the Title of Duke of Lancaster, to a Parliament to be holden
at Westminster, in Octabis Sancti Michaelis following; being also in a Patent
dated the 13th of July in the same year ( viz. 1363. An. 37 Edw. 3) styled
Johannes Filius Regis, Dux Lancastrie, Pat. 38. E. 3. p. 1.
Comes de Richmond, de Derby, de Lincoln, and de Leicest. Seneschallus Angliae,
which three last Earldoms, and the Stewardship of England he enjoyed in the
right of his Wife Blanch, after the death of Maud of Lancaster, Inq. an. 35.
Ed. 3.
Duchess of Bavaria her elder Sister, Anno 1372.
who deceased without issue.

His second Marriage.
It was now about two years since the death of the Duchess Blanch, She did bear
quarterly, Castile and Leon, viz. Gules a Castle Or, and Argent a Lion Rampant
purpure, impaled by Lancaster her Husband. Which impalement was painted in a
Glass-Window of Wanlip Church in Com. Leic. and in Retton Church in
Rutlandshire.
when Lancaster hearing of the decease of Peter King of Castile and Leon (whom
his Brother Prince Edward had invested in his Kingdoms) and that he had left
issue two Daughters his Heirs, then residing in the City of Gascoigne (and
thither fled to avoid the tyranny of their base Uncle Henry Count of
Trastamare, usurper of their Fathers Kingdoms.) He caused them to be brought to
Bourdeaux, and there married Constance the elder, Tho. Walsing. p. 186. n. 25.
in the 46th year of Edw. 3. his Father An. 1372. in whose right he took upon
him the Title of those Kingdoms; Leland p. 186. and 691.
being thereupon the 6th day of October, in the said year, summoned by Writ,
dated at Winchester, Chart. an. 46 E. 3. n. 9.
to a Parliament to be held at Westminster in crastino Animarum following, by
the name of John King of Castile and Leon, and Duke of Lancaster, and so
likewise An. 49 Edward 3.

The Duchess Constance departed this life in the year 1394, Ypodigma Neustriae
p. 547. n. 14. Will. Dugdale Arm in Hist. Cathed. Divi Pauli p. 37.
having been married 22 years; and was Interred in the Collegiate Church of our
Lady at Leicester, and not in St Paul's Cathedral, as the Epitaph of the Duke of
Lancaster her Husband (there Intombed) does import.

He was sent General into France in three several expeditions, the first,
Ypodigma Neustriae p. 528. n. 27.
An. 1369. The second, An. 1370. to the assistance of the Prince of Wales his
Brother, in both which, he performed nothing considerable. And in his third,
An. 1373. passing with a brave Army through France, Tho. Walsing. p. 187. n. 16.
by the way of Avergne, he lost most of his men among the Mountains, and all
his Horse; and with the rest almost starved for want of Victuals, marched to
Bourdeaux, made some few attempts upon the Enemy, and returned for England,
with the unwelcome news of a general Revolt in Aquitaine, excepting Bourdeaux
and Bayon.

Lancaster himself was as little welcome to England as the news he brought;
Tho. Walsing. p. 190. n. 10.
but the Prince of Wales his sickness increasing upon him ever since he had
re-established Peter King of Castile, now proving mortal, accompanied with a
national sorrow, and change of affairs, gave him opportunity, with the Lord
Latimer, Sir John Sturry, Ypodigma Neustriae p. 530. n. 34.
and Alice Pierce, the Kings Concubine (who were all upon complaint in
Parliament, banished the Court) to be recalled to their former Places; and the
Duke of Lancaster now working upon the age and weakness of the King his Father,
is Regent and governs all. But the King however noteing his ambition, to
prevent disorder in the succession, Ypodigma Neustriae p. 531. n. 53.
providently settled the Crown upon Richard of Bourdeaux, his Grandson, which
though it put by Duke John of what he really intended, yet with much
imperiousness, he behaved himself in the Estate he had: Wherein he displaced
Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March, from the Marshalship of England, and quarrelled
with the Bishop of London in his own Cathedral, in the behalf of John Wickliff,
and his Doctrine.

Upon the death of King Edward III. his Father, his Brother Edward Earl of
Cambridge, with many of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, were joined with the
Duke of Lancaster, An. 1384.
in the management of the State, during the minority of King Richard II. his
Nephew; Tho. Walsing. p. 308. n. 40.
whose Martial Affairs in France and Scotland, succeeded as ill under the Dukes
conduct, as they had done formerly. Not long after which, Ypodig. Neustriae p.
536. n. 43,
he is accused by an Irish Friar, to conspire the death of the King, and the
usurpation of the Crown, An. 138^.
of which he purges himself; and the Friar is secretly put to a cruel death;
notwithstanding which, Tho. Walsing. p. 314. n. 56.
sometime after the King intending to arraign him upon some points of Treason,
before Sir Robert Tresilian, the Lord Chief Justice (whereas he should have
been tried by his Peers) he stands upon his guard in Pontfract Castle, Ypodig.
Neustriae p. 537. n. n. 24.
till his peace is mediated by the Princess of Wales the Kings Mother.

These disgraces came unseasonably upon the Duke of Lancaster, who was now full
of designs how to pursue the Conquest of Spain, Tho. Walsing. p. 31^. n. 10.
to which end he had earnestly labored for a firm Peace with France and
Scotland; the latter was supplied with Forces commanded by John de Vienna
Admiral of France, which drew King Richard thither with an Army of 120000 Men,
but not being able to bring the Scots to a Battle he burns Edinburgh, and
returns. The King having thus disobliged the Duke, finds a way both to gratify
him, and to be rid of his company; which was, by giving him the command of part
of these Forces, to be employed in the Conquest of Castile and Leon, the Title
of which Kingdoms he had long used, but is now resolved by Arms to force a
Possession: in order to which, Anno 1386.
he, with the Duchess Constance his Wife, Ypodig. Neust. p. 538. n. 35. Tho.
Wall. p. 321. n. 56.
having received two Diadems of Gold from the King and Queen, and an Army of
20000 Soldiers, of which number, at least 1000 were Knights and Esquires, and a
brave Fleet of Ships, set sail for Spain, land at the Groyne, thence march to
Compostella, where they are met by John King of Portugal; Ypodig. Neust. p.
538. n. 37.
and there a Marriage is concluded betwixt that King and the Lady Philipe the
Dukes eldest Daughter, and she honorably attended into Portugal.

Some incursions they make into Castile, Tho. Walsing. p. 341. n. 32.
and the Country de Campo; but a Peace is at last made up in a Marriage
betwixt the Lady Katherine of Lancaster, the Dukes only Child by the Duchess
Constance of Castile, and Henry Prince of Asturgus, Son of King John; Anno 1388.
and a composition to have during the life of him and his Duchess, to each
10000 pounds yearly, and in hand 200000 Nobles. By which agreement, though the
Duke of Lancaster, was obliged to unking himself, yet did he in this his most
fortunate expedition, not only place those Crowns of Castile and Leon, but also
that of Portugal upon the heads of his Posterity.

The year after his return out of Spain, Parl. an. 13. R. 22.21. Tho. Walsing.
343. n. 34.
viz. (upon the second day of March) An. 13 R. 2. in the year 1389. this John
Duke Lancaster was by the said King created Duke of Aquitaine, Anno 1389.
by the ceremony of delivering him a Golden Rod, and the imposition of a Cap of
Estate; Pat. 22. R. 2. p. 3. n. 10.26.27.29.30. etc.
and afterward styled himself in all his Charters, Anno 1395.6.
Johan. filz du Roy d' Engleterre, Duc de Guyene and de Lancastre, Comte de
Derby, de Nicol, and de Leycestre, Seneschall d' Engleterre.

In a Parliament held at London An. 19 R. 2. he moved, Leland p. 383.
that his son Henry of Bullingbrook might be adjudged Heir of the Kingdom of
England, as being the son of Blanch, Daughter of Henry Duke of Lancaster,
Grandson of Edmond first Earl of Lancaster, An. 11 R. 2. Roger Mortimer Earl of
March, was proclaimed Heir to the Crown. Leland p. 693.
who, he pretended was elder Brother to King Edward I. but put by the Crown, by
King Henry III. because of the deformity of a broken back, and therefore named
Crouchback; which argument of his was contradicted by Roger Mortimer Earl of
March, who made it appear to the contrary; and alleged it belonged to him, as
son of Philipe only Daughter and Heir of Lyonel Duke of Clarence, second son
(that lived) of King Edward III. who not allowing Henry's pretended succession
from an eldest son of King Henry III. was to be preferred before the son of
John Duke of Lancaster, being younger than Lyonel. This bold motion of the
Dukes, how well it pleased King Richard, you may imagine, which bad it been
true, did not only reflect upon the King, but fixed upon the three Edwards his
Predecessors the Title of Usurpers. It was this spark which his son Henry of
Bullingbrook afterward blew into a Flame, which continued burning in the two
Royal Families of Lancaster and York, till having well-nigh consumed both, it
became quenched with the effusion of much Princely Blood.

But the Duke, who was by all admired for his ambition, Anno 1396.
is now as much wondered at for his condescension, for (his second Wife the
Duchess Constance having been dead about two years) he marries to his third,
Leland. Coll vol. 1. p. 191. Stow. p. 312.
Dame Katherine Swynford, at Lincoln, His third Marriage.
in the year 1396. a Match highly disdained by the Duchess of Gloucester, the
Countess of Derby and Arundel, and others, The Escocheons of this Katherine and
the Duke of Lancaster, are in laid in Brass on her Tomb, in the Cathedral
Church of Lincoln. That above her head on the right side being charged with the
Arms of England a Labell Ermine. The other on the left, contains the Arms
aforesaid, impaling those of this Katherine, which were, Gules, three
Katherien-Wheels, Or.
Ladies descended of the Blood Royal; by means of which, she should be
accounted the second person in the Kingdom, and be preferred before them. She
was the Daughter of Sir Pain Roet alias Guyen King of Arms, and Widow to Sir
Ottes Swynford Knight. and had been familiarly acquainted with the Duke of
Lancaster, in the life time of his former Wives, being Guardianess to his
Daughters the Ladies Philipe and Elizabeth, Ex Libro nigro in Camera Ducatus
Lanc. fol. 96.
in their minority: for a recompense of whose care in their education, the Duke
grants her by Patent dated 27 December. An. 3 R. 2. the Wardship of Bertran de
Sanneby's Heir, (these are his words) Pur le bone and greable Service quelle
nostre treschier and bien amee, Dame Katherine Swynford Maistresse de noz
tresames filles Philipe and Elizabeth de Lancastre ad fait a noz dittes filles
lui anoir grauntes, etc. In which he calls her, our most dear and wellbeloved,
Dame Katherine Swynford; and by the same appellation, and upon the same
consideration, Duke John grants her an Annuity of 200 Marks upon the seventh
day of September An. 5 R. 2. payable out of his Honor of Tickhill. Ibidem.
A valuable recompense in those times, but not so consirable when we know that
it was not only to support the Governess, but also those Children which the
Duke had begotten in his often visiting the Nursery; of whom he took a
particular care, Anno 1396.
not only in repairing their Mothers Honor, Parl. an. 20. R. 2. Feb. 9.
by marriage, but in procuring them to be made legitimate, by an Act of
Parliament, An. 20 R. 2. in which they were rendered capable of all
Ecclesiastical and Civil Honors and Employments, the Royal Dignity excepted:
being called Beauforts, from the Dukes Castle of Beaufort in Anjou, the place
of their Nativity.

This Dame Katherine was Duchess of Lancaster about three years; outlived her
Husband four years; deceased upon the 10th day of May, Anno 1403.
An. 1403. and was buried in the Cathedral Church of Lincoln, on the South Side
of the Choire, where she lies intombed under a Marble Monument, built
Altar-ways, inlaid with her Effigies in Brass, and on Fillet of the same
mettle, this Epitaph is written in old English Characters, beginning on the
Southside from the Head.

Ici gist dame Katherine Duchess de Lancastre jadis Femme de la tresnoble and
tresgracious Prince John Our de Lancastre, filz a tresnoble roy Edward le
tierce, la quelle Katherine moreult le x jour de May l'an de grace Mil CCCC
tierz, de quelle alms dieu eyt mercy and pitee amen. About the Feast of the
Purification of our Lady, Ypodig. Neust. p. 553. n. 5.
John Duke of Lancaster departed this mortal life, His death.
at the Bishop of Ely's Palace in Holborn, Anno 1399.
in the year 1399. An. 22 R. 2. (leaving his Estate and Honors to his son
Henry of Bullingbrook, Duke of Hereford, Leland Col. vol. 1. p. 695.
at that time a banished Man; who landing here, upon pretense of taking
possession of his Fathers Duchy, took also the advantage of King Richard's
absence in Ireland, to seize his Kingdom.) He was Interred in the Cathedral
Church of St Paul, in London, by his first Wife Blanch of Lancaster, in a lofty
Monument of Freestone, placed betwixt two Pillars, on the North-side the high
Altar. Their Portraitures are cut in Alablaster, The Figure of this Tomb is
exhibited in the History of St. Paul's Cathedral written by Will. Dugdale Esquire
(now Norroy King of Arms, an. 1674.) printed at London, in the year 1658. p. 90.
according to the Figure in the following Page; in which you have a view of the
Crest, Shield, and Spear, which he is reported to have used in his life time;
the upper part of which Tomb was defaced in the late sacrilegious times, to
make way for a Galary there built: and the remains burnt to ashes in the late
dismal Fire, An. 1666. This memorial following was written on a Tablet, placed
near the said Monument.

Hic in Domino obdormivit Johannes Gandavensis, vulgo de Gaunt, a Gandavo
Flandrie urbe loco natali it a denominatus; Edwardi tertii Regis Anglie filius;
a patre Comitis Richmondie titulo ornatus; Tres sibi uxores in matrimonio
duxit, primum Blanchiam, Ibidem p. 91.
filiam and heredem Henrici Ducis Lancastrie, per quam amplissimam adiit
hereditatem. Nec solum Dux Lancastrie, sed etiam Leicestrie, Lincolnie and
Derbie comes effectus. E cujus sobole, Imperatores, Reges, Principes and
Proceres propagati sunt plurimi, Alteram habuit uxorem Constantiam ( It was
Blanch his first Wife, and not Constance his second, that lies buried with the
Duke in St. Paul's Cathedral.
que hic tumulatur) filiam and heredem Petri Regis Castillie and Legionis,
cujus jure optimo Titulo Regis Castillie and Legionis usus est, Hec unicam illi
peperit filiam Catherinam, ex qua ab Henrico Reges Hispanie sunt propagati:
Tertiam vero uxorem duxit Catherinam, ex Equestri familia, and eximia
pulchritudine feminam, ex qua numerosam suscepit prolem: unde genus ex matre
duxit By which the Reader may note, that this Epitaph was written in the Reign
of King Henry the Seventh, if not later.
Henricus 7. Rex Anglie prudentissimus. Cujus felicissimo conjugio cum
Elizabetha Edwardi 4. Regis filia a stirpe Eboracensi, Regie ille
Lancastrentium and Eboracensium family ad exoptatissimam Anglie pacem
coaluerunt.

Illustrissimus hic Princeps Johannes cognomento Plantagenet, Rex. Castillie
and Legionis, Dux Lancastrie, Comes Richmondie, Leicestrie, Lincolnie, and
Derbie, locum tenens Aquitanie, magnus monument Illustrissimo et Potent. Domino
Dno: IOHANNI Comiti BATHONIAE, Dicecomiti Grenvile de Lousdowne, Ba^^ni
Grenvile de Kilkhampton. et Bideford; Dntustodi et Guardiano Stannar: Capitali
Senesehallo Ducatus et Dn^: Legato Comitat Cornubi^e Gubernaturi Plimothiae,
Gromettae, Stolae, e cubiculo Dni^ Regis primo Generoso. et e Sanctioribus
Regis Carodi II serenissimi Consilijs; hanc Tumuli IOHANNIS Ducis LANCASTRIAE
figuram, humile DDD.F.S.

FVTVRVM INVISIBILE
R Gaywood fecit. 1664.
Seneschallus Anglie, Obiit An. 22. Regni Regis Richardi secundi Annoque Domini
1399.

He was the Son of a King, the Father of a King, and the Uncle of a King, and
could have said as much as Charles of Valois, had he been Brother to a King.

Children of JOHN Duke of Lancaster, by BLANCH of Lancaster his first Wife.
2. HENRY of Lancaster, surnamed of Bullingbrook, only son, was Duke of
Hereford and Lancaster, and lastly King of England, by the name of Henry IV. He
usurped the Crown, and was the first that placed it in the House of Lancaster,
vide Chap. II.

2. PHILIPE of Lancaster, Portugal.
Queen of Portugal, Andrew Chesne in his History of England. Nunez. Ypodigma
Neustriae p. 538. n. 37.
eldest Daughter of Duke John, Argent, 5 Escocheons in Cross Az. Each charged
with as many Places in Saltire; on a Border Gules, 8 Castles Or. Impaling
Lancaster, viz. France semee and England quarterly, A Label of three points
Ermine.
was espoused to John, first of the name, King of Portugal, in the year of our
Lord 1387. Which Marriage was celebrated to contract a more firm League betwixt
the Duke of Lancaster, her Father, and that King, that by this alliance he
might be the better enabled to pursue the Conquest of Castile and Leon, which
he claimed in the right of Constance his second Wife, the elder daughter and
coheir of King Peter, surnamed the Cruel. Vasconcellius. Vignier.
She died many years before King John her Husband, An. 1415. Which King also
departed this World at Lisbon, upon the 14th day of August, An. 1433, after he
had lived 76 years, and Reigned 48, 4 months, Vasnconcellius.
and 9 days. Anno 1433.
His Body was with Funeral Solemnity (at that time a thing unaccustomed)
conducted by men of all degrees in a triumphal Chariot, his sons accompanying
it, and deposited in the Abbey of Battle in Portugal; leaving by Philipe his
Queen a numerous Issue; of which, the eldest son living, was Edward, so named
from his great Grandfather King Edw. III. This Edward succeeded his Father in
the Kingdom of Portugal, Ibidem.
and died Anno 1438. leaving Issue two sons, Alphonso, and Ferdinand Duke of
Visco; Anno 1438.
Alphonso was King after his Father Edward, by the name of Alphonso V. Mariana
lib. 24. cap. 21.
and deceasing in the year 1481. left his son John II. of the name to inherit
his Kingdom; Anno. 1481.
which John had Issue Alphonso Prince of Portugal, in whose death that Line
extinguished.

So that we now asscend to Fedinand Duke of Visco, beforementioned, younger son
of King Edward, who deceased An. 1470. Anno. 1470.
leaving issue Emanuel King of Portugal, who departed this World An. 1521.
Father of John, Henry, and Edward. Vasconcellius. Mariana.
John succeeded his Father by the name of John III. and had a son called John
Prince of Portugal, that deceased in his Fathers life time An. 1554. leaving
issue his only son Sebastian the last King of Portugal, Anno 1554.
in descent of that Branch, Conesstaggio.
slain by the Moors in Africa, Anno 1578.
without issue An. 1578. and succeeded by his great Uncle Henry the Cardinal, a
younger son of King Emanuel, who, by reason of his function and years, not
being capable of issue, that Kingdom was seized by Philip II. King of Spain,
An. 1580. in the right of Issabel his Mother, daughter of the said King
Emanuel, and possessed by Philip III. and IV. his son, and grandson, Anno 1580.
until the year 1640. But then recovered by John II. Anno 1640.
of the name, Vasconcellius.
eighth Duke of Braganza (son of Duke Theodosius II. son of John I. sixth Duke
of Braganza, and Katherine his Wife (lister of Mary Duchess of Parma) daughter
of Edward Infant of Portugal before named, Conestaggio.
youngest son of King Emanuel) who being, by the primitive constitution and Law
of Lamego, undoubted heir of that Kingdom, was by the universal consent of the
three Estates, crowned, by the name of John IV. He departed this life An. 1656.
leaving issue Alphonso VI. lately deposed from his kingly Office, Dom Pedro,
Anno 1656.
now Regent of Portugal An. 1674. and the Infanta Katherine, Queen of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland, etc. espoused to our Sovereign Lord King Charles
II. in the year 1662.

11. In Pale, Holand Duke of Exceter, which is Gules, 3 Lions passant guardant
Or, within a Border of France; and Elizabeth of Lancaster, who did bear,
Quarterly France semee and England, a Label of 3 points, Ermine.
ELIZABETH of LANCASTER, Duchess of Exceter, and Lady Fanhop, second daughter
of John Duke of Lancaster, and Blanch his first Wife, was twice married, her
first Husband being John Holand, created Earl of Huntington, in a Parliament
held An. 11 R 2. Pat. an. 14. R. 2. p. 2. n. 7.
(second son of Thomas Holand Earl of Kent, and Joane, afterward Princess of
Wales, his Wife, daughter of Edmond of Woodstock, Earl of Kent, youngest son of
King Edward I. by Margaret of France his second Wife) He was half brother to
King Richard II. Chart. an. 21. R. 2. n. 23.
made Duke of Exceter upon the 29th day of September. An. 21 R. 2. deposed from
that Title in the first year of H. 4. and in the same year, flying from
Cirencester, was taken and beheaded, Weevers Fun. Monuments p. 637.
for plotting the death of King Henry IV. his Wives Brother, and buried at
Plescy in Essex.

In Pale, Cornwall, viz. Ermine, a Lion Rampant, Gules, crowned Or, within a
Border ingrailed Sable Bezanty, and Lancaster, being Quarterly France semee and
England, a Label Ermine. Both which Arms were painted in Glass in Ampthill in
the County of Bucks, as appears in the following page.
The second Husband of Elizabeth of Lancaster, Duchess of Exceter, E.
Genealogia Gilberti Cornwall Equitis auroti Bar. de Burford.
was Sir John Cornwall Knight of the Garter, son of Sir John Cornwall Knight
(whose Martial Acts were so acceptable to the Duke of Britain, that he gave him
his Niece in Marriage) third son of Sir Geoffry de Cornwall Knight) and Margaret
his Wife daughter and coheir of Sir Hugh Mortimer, Baron of Burford in
Shropshire, and Lord of Richard's Castle in the County of Hereford) second son
of Richard de Cornubia or Cornwall, a natural son of Richard Earl of Cornwall,
and King of the Romans, second son of King John, and Brother to King Henry III.

This Sir John Cornwall Knight of the Garter, was born at Sea in the Bay of St.
Michaels Mount in Cornwall, and therefore called the Green Cornwall, from the
color of that Element: at what time his Mother, the Duke of Britain's Niece,
had been sent for England, by Sir John her Husband, to be here delivered, among
his kindred, being then busied in the prosecution of the Wars in Britany, and
was christ'ned in the Parish Church of Markenshawe, the said Mount, by the name
of John, enjoying his Fathers Name, and inheriting his Valor; a testimony of
which he gave in the year 1400, when King Henry IV. being at York, Stowe p.
325. Col. 2. l. 46.
this Sir John Cornwall and James of Artois, were there challenged to fight in
the Lists, against two valiant Knights, the one a French Man, and the other an
Italian, and came off victorious; by which heroic Act, Sir John grew so highly
favored by King Henry IV. that he made him Knight of the Garter; and he
married this Lady Elizabeth, Duchess of Exceter, his sister. He signalized his
valor also at the Battle of Azincourt, with King Henry V. where he took
Prisoner Lewis de Bourbon, Count of Vendosme, to whom Henry VI. in the second
year of his Reign, Pat. an. 2. H. 6. p. 1.
confirmed this noble Prisoner with his Ransom, and created him Baron Fanhope
in the eleventh year of his Reign, Stowes Survey of London p. 374.
and about the same time, Baron of Milbrook. He deceased at Ampthill in
Bedfordshire, and was interred in the Blackfriars in London, in the year 1443.
An. 21/22 H. 6.

Elizabeth Duchess of Exceter his Wife, dyed before him, C. MS. p. 56. Inq. an.
4. H. 6.
An. 4. H. 6. in the year 1425/6. and was intombed in the Church of Burford in
Shropshire (the Seat of this noble Family of Cornwall, called Barons of
Burford) her Effigies is adorned with a Ducal Coronet, a Purple Robe guarded
with Ermine, and other rich Ornaments of a Princess: the Arms of her Father the
Duke of Lancaster are also depicted upon her Monument.

depiction of two nobles Nobili et prae claro Viro Domino CHRISTOPHERO CLAPHAM
de Com: Ebo racensi Eqviti Aurato, h^e ELIZABETHAE L'anniae Ducis^^, et
IOHANNIS Baronis de Fa^^hop, dictae Consortis Iconia. H.D.D.D.F.S.

honi soit Qui mal y pense


Her Portraiture also in a Mantle of her Arms; and that of the Lord Fanhope in
his Coat Armor, both in a kneeling posture, are depicted in a window of
Ampthill Church, with his Arms within the Garter, and those of the Duchess in
a Banner, according to the form in the precedent page.

A Daughter of JOHN of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, by CONSTANCE of Castile his
second Wife.
11. KATHERINE of LANCASTER, Queen of Castile and Leon, third daughter of John
Duke of Lancaster, This Katherine did bear, Quarterly Castile and Leon,
Impaling Lancaster, viz. France and England quarterly a file of 3 points Ermine.
but only child by his second Wife Constance, was by her said Father married to
Henry Prince of Asturgus, Leland p. 190.
son and heir of John King of Castile, son of Henry Count of Trastamare, base
brother to King Peter, surnamed the Cruel, from whom Count Henry had usurped
the Kingdoms of Castile and Leon; so that Katherine was espoused to the son of
her Cousin German; upon which Marriage, it was agreed betwixt the said Fathers,
that those Kingdoms should descend to the heirs of this Katherine and Prince
Henry, and for want of such issue, to divolve to the son of Edmond of Langley
Duke of York, the Duke of Lancasters younger brother, who had married Issabel
the younger daughter and coheir of King Peter, and Aunt to Katherine. But of
that remainder no use was made, Eli^s Reusnerus ASILIKON Genealogiel p. 61.
for Prince Henry succeeded his Father in the Kingdoms of Castile and Leon, by
the name of Henry III. and by Queen Katherine of Lancaster had issue King John
II. Father of Issabel his daughter and heir, married to Ferdinand King of
Aragon, surnamed the Catholic, by whom she had issue her only daughter Joane,
espoused to Philip Archduke of Austria, Elias Reus^erus p. 39. and 39.
in her right King of Spain, Father of Charles V. Emperor, Father of Philip II.
who had issue Philip III. Father of Philip IV. who has left issue Charles II.
the present King of Spain, etc. An. 1674.

Children of JOHN Duke of Lancaster, by KATHERINE SWYNFORD, afterward his
third Wife.
11. The Escocheon or Arms of this Cardinal Henry, are depicted in a Window of
Queens College in the University of Oxford, being France and England
quarterly, a Border gobony Azure and Argen. Over which stands his Cardinals Hat
between the Letters H and B, for Henry Beaufort; and underneath the said
Escocheon is this Inscription. In hoc Coll. Studuit Henricus V. sub patruo suo
Henrico Beaufort Cancellario Acad. post Episcopo Winton. and Cardinale. These
his paternal Arms are impaled with those of his Bishopric of Winchester in one
of the Windows of Merton College Hall. And also adorn several Glass Windows of
his Hospital of St. Crosses near Winchester, as I have observed in the time of
my being there.
HENRY BEAVFORT, Cardinal of St. Eusebius, and Bishop of Winchester, Fra^ciscus
Godminus in Prasuli^^ A^gliae.
second son of John Duke of Lancaster and Katherine Swynford, had much of his
education at Oxford, from whence he traveled to Aken in Germany, where he also
spent some years in the study of the Civil Law; and upon his return home, was
preferred to the Bishopric of Lincoln, An. 1397. He continued Bishop there
seven years, and immediately upon the death of William Wickham, was translated
to Winchester June 23. An. 1426. This Henry was made Cardinal of St. Eusebius,
and received his Hat with great solemnity at Calais the Lady day following. A
man he was of great frugality, and therefore exceeding rich; and happy it was
for the Church that he was so; for King Henry V. in the later end of his Reign,
by great and continual Wars, being very much exhausted, and greatly indebted,
began to cast a covetous eye upon the Goods of the Church, which at that time
were grown to a full height, when this wealthy Prelate best known by the name
of the Rich Cardinal) supplied his wants out of his own purse, to divert him
from that sacrilegious course, and lent him 20000 l. a great deal of Money in
those days.

He was also valiant, and very wise. Pope Martin V. determining to make War
upon the Bohemians, who had renounced all obedience to the Sea of Rome, chose
this Cardinal his Legate into that Kingdom, and Commander of his Forces; toward
the charge of which Voyage, the Clergy of England gave a tenth of all their
promotions, and furnished out above 4000 Men, with which Army he passed by
France (there performing some services for his Prince and Country) into
Bohemia the year 1429. where he remained several Months, behaving himself with
much valor, till by the Pope he was discharged.

In his youth he was wantonly given, and by Alice, the daughter of Richard
Fitz-Alan Earl of Arundel, begat Joane a base daughter; whom he afterward
married to Sir Edward Stradling or Easterling, a Knight of Glamorganshire;
Powell in his History of Wales p. 138.
but this was done before he entered into Orders. Toward his latter end, he was
employed altogether, either in matters of Council, and business of the
Commonwealth, or the service of God and the Church committed unto him. Among
other good deeds, it is remembered that he built an Hospital in Winchester, near
St. Crosses, which he presently endowed with Land to the value of 158 l. 13 s.
4 d. of yearly Rent, and moreover, gave unto it the Hospital of St. John de
Fordingbridge. In it was to be maintained a Master, 2 Chaplains, 35 poor Men,
and 3 Women.

He deceased upon the eleventh day of April, Anno 1447. having been Bishop of
Winchester 43 years, and from the time of his first consecration 50 years. He
lies interred in an exalted Monument, (represented by the Figure in the
following page, delineated from the original An. 1665.) behind the high Altar
of his Church at Winchester toward the South. This part of the inscription did
remain when Doctor Francis Godwin wrote his History de Praesulibus Angliae,
viz. Tribularer sinescirem miserecordias tuas. Godwin p. 189.
He was several times Chancellor of England, two years being yet Bishop of
Lincoln, then at Winchester, four years at one time, and two at another.

monument Illustrissimo, Domino Dno. IOHANNI Vicecomiti ^ORDAVNT de Aviland.
Baroni de Rygate. Constabulario Castri Regalis de WINDSORE, et Serenissimi.
Regis CAROLI IIdi. in Comitatu Surrey Locum-tenenti, Hanc Tumuli HENRICI
BEAVFORT Vintoniensis Episcopi. et Cardinalis, Imaginem. H.D.D.D.F.S.



11. THOMAS BEAVFORT Duke of Exceter, Pat. an. 5 H. 4. p. 1. m. 23.
and Earl of Dorset, This Thomas being Earl of Dorset, did bear on his Shield,
France semee and England quarterly, a Border gobony, Azure, and Ermine, as does
appear in the Role in the Knights of the Garter. But after he was created Duke
of Exceter, he changed his Border into, Gobony, Argent, and Azure flowery Or,
relating thereby to the Holands Dukes of Exceter, who distinguished their Coat
Armor, with a Border of France.
etc. third son of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, by Katherine Swynford
(afterward his third Wife) was first in the fifth year of King Henry IV. his
half brother, Pat. an. 11 H. 4. p. 2. m. 10.
made Admiral of England, then Captain of Calais, An. 11 H. 4. And afterward,
upon the 20th day of April in the same year, Pat. an. 11 H. 4. p. 2. m. 4.
appointed Lord Chancellor. About two years after, by Charter dated at
Reterhithe, upon the fifth day of July, 1412. An 13 H. 4. F. 9. fol. 9. b. M S.
in Coll. Armorum.
he was created Earl of Dorset, being a Companion of the most Noble Order of
the Garter.

King Henry V. his Nephew, in a Parliament held in the 4th year of his Reign,
upon the 18th day of November, Pat. 4 H. 5. m. 11. Tho. Walsing. p. 395 n. 5.
erected this Thomas into the dignity of Duke of Exceter, for term of life, and
also granted unto him and his Heirs Male an Annuity of 100 l. per annum,
payable out of the Exchequer. Claus. 4 H. 5. m. 18. and vide Camden p. 216.
He was Earl of Harecourt in Normandy, and behaved himself with much valor and
conduct in the French Wars, and more particularly at the famous Battle of
Azincourt, where he commanded the Rereward of that Army, led by his Victorious
Nephew King Henry V. who, upon his deathbed, appointed Duke Thomas to be
Governor of his son Henry VI. during his Childhood. He bravely defended Harflew
in Normandy (whereof he was Governor) against the French, and in a pitched
Field encountering the Earl of Armignac, and put him to flight.

His marriage.
He took to Wife Margaret daughter of Sir Thomas Nevil Knight. Fines an. 1 H. 5. m.
18.
and Grand daughter of Sir Robert Nevil of Horneby in the County of Lincoln
Knight, Pat. an. 11 H. 6. p. 1. m. 10.
and had a son named Henry that died young; His death.
so that leaving no child, he departed this World at his Manor of
East-Greenwich in Kent, Escheat an. 5 H. 6.
upon the 27th day of December, in the 5th year of H. 6. An. 1424. and was
buried at St. Edmondsbury in Suffolk, Weever p. 726.
leaving his Nephew John Earl of Somerset his heir, at the decease of this
Thomas, AC. 105. vide etiam D. 14.
aged above Twenty three years.

11. JOANE BEAVFORT Countess of Westmerland, only daughter of John of Gaunt
Duke of Lancaster, In Pale, Ferrers of Wem, viz. Varry Or, and Gules, a Lion
passant guardant of the first, in the Dexter Canton, And quarterly, France and
England, a Border gobony Argent and Azure. The Arms of Beaufort.
by Dame Katherine Swynford, afterward his third Wife; Penes W. Dugdale Ar.
Nor. roy Regem Armorum E. p. 141.
was first married to Robert Ferrers (aged eight years upon the death of his
Father) son of Robert Ferrers Lord of Wem in Shropshire, and Oversley, in the
County of Warwick, in the right of Elizabeth his Wife, daughter and heir of
William Boteler, fourth of the name, Lord of Wem and Oversley aforesaid; by
whom she had issue two daughters, Elizabeth and Mary. Elizabeth Ferrers was the
Wife of John Baron of Greystock; and Mary Ferrers was married to Ralphe Nevil,
a younger son of Ralphe Earl of Westmerland, by Margaret Stafford his first
Wife.

The second Husband of Joane Beaufort, was Ralphe Nevil, the first Earl of
Westmerland, His Tomb is in the Church of Standrope in the Bishopric of
Durham, on which lie the figures of himself, and Margaret, and this Joan his
two Wives, vide the Baronage of England p. 298. Col. 2.
to whom she was second Wife; Nevill, viz. Gules a Saltire Argent, Impaling
Beaufort, which is France semee and England quarterly a Border gobony, Argent
and Azure. This Impalement is on the Seal of Joane Countess of Westmorland,
affixed to her Deed dated the first of May an. 5 H. 6. and also stood painted
in Glass in an Eastern Window of the Collegiate Church of Fotheringhey in the
County of Northampton.
and by him had Issue Richard Nevil Earl of Salisbury (Father of Richard Nevil
the great Earl of Warwick and Salisbury, called Richard Make-king) William
Nevil Lord Fauconberg, George Nevil Lord Latimer, Edward Nevil Lord Bergavenny,
Robert Nevil Bishop of Durham; Cutbert, Henry, and Thomas Nevil died without
Issue: Katherine eldest daughter, first married to John Moubray, the second
Duke of Norfolk, and after his death, to Sir John Woodvile, son of Richard Earl
Rivers; Eleanor second daughter first espoused to Richard Lord Spencer, and
after to Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland: Anne, first the Wife of Humphrey
Duke of Buckingham, and afterward of Walter Blount Lord Mountjoy: Jane a Nun,
and Cecilie, youngest daughter, Monast. Angl. Vol. 1. p. 158. a. n. 5.
married to Richard Plantagenet Duke of York, Father of the Kings Edward IV.
and Richard III.

The Countess Joane deceased upon the Feast of St. Brice, ( viz. the 13th day
of November) in the year 1440. Penes Will Dugdale Ar. Norroy Regem Armorum D. 3.
An. 19 H 6. and was buried in the Cathedral Church at Lincoln, Her death.
on the South Side of the Choire, in a Monument of gray Marble built
Altar-wayes, contiguous to the Tomb of her Mother Katherine Duchess of
Lancaster; upon the Verge of which, on a Fillet of Brass, this Epitaph is
Engraven, beginning at the Foot:

Filia Lancastr: ducis inclita sponsa Iohanna
Westmerland primi subjacet hic Comitis:
Desine scriva suas virtutes promere, nulla
Vox valeat merita vir reboare sua,
Stirpe, decore, fide, fama, spe, prece, prole,
Actubus et vita polluit ymmo sua,
Natio tota dolet pro morte, deus tulit ipsam,
In Bricij Festo, C. quater M. quater X.
portrait of Henry IV K HENRY IV
portrait of Henry V K HENRY V
portrait of Henry VI K HENRY VI
II. HENRY IV. KING of ENGLAND and FRANCE, Anno Dom. 1399. October. 13.
and LORD of IRELAND, Surnamed of BULLINGBROOK.
CHAP. II.
HENRY surnamed of Bullingbrook in Lincolnshire, The Royal Seal of this Henry,
so exactly agrees with that of King Richard II. his Predecessor, that I am
persuaded he usurped his Seal with his Crown, and only raseing out the word
Ricardus, engraved in the place thereof Henricus, Dei gratia rex Francie and
Anglie and Dominus Hibernie, in all his Charters also imitating King Richard in
the placing England before France ( vide pages 238 and 190. and compare these
two Seals together.) Nor is this the first example of this kind; for King
Edward II. continued the Seal of King Edward I. his Father, only adding (on
each side his Throne) a Castle for distinction. I cannot find any example of
the time, to prove that King Henry IV. did bear His Shield supported; but later
ages have assigned him an Antilope and a Swan; it is very probable deduced from
the Caparizons of his Horse (at the intended Combat at Coventry, betwixt Him
(being then Duke of Hereford) and Thomas Moubray Duke of Norfolk) which were
embroidered with Swans and Antilopes of Goldsmiths work, as appears in his
History.

He was the last of our Kings that did bear semee of Flowers de Lize quartered
with his Lions of England, as you may note on his Seal page 238. And for his
Devise, used a Fox Tail dependent, following Lisander's advice, If the Lions
Skin were too short, to piece it out with a Foxes Case. Camdens Remains page
215.


where he had his first breath, about the year 1366. (which came to the House
of Lancaster, by the marriage of Alice daughter and heir of Henry Lacy Earl of
Lincoln, with Thomas Earl of Lancaster) was the only son of John of Gaunt Duke
of Lancaster (fourth son of King Edward III.) by Blanch his first Wife,
Daughter, and at length Heir of Henry the first Duke of Lancaster, son of Henry
Earl of Lancaster, second son of Edmond surnamed Crouchback, the first Earl of
Lancaster, second son of King Henry III. In a Parliament held at Westminster,
in the ninth year of the Reign of Richard II. Leland Col. vol. 1. p. 693.
his Cousin German, His first Marriage. In an East Window of the Chancel of
Rochford Church, in Essex, was an Impalement of the Arms of the Countess Mary
and this Henry, he being then Earl of Derby, viz. Gules 3 Lions passant
guardant Or, a Label of France, the Coat Armor of his Grandfather Henry Duke
of Lancaster, (from whom afterward he derived his Title to the Crown) Impaling
the Arms of his first Wife, Mary de Bohun Countess of Derby, which were, Azure,
a Bend Argent, cottized Or, inter 6 Lions rampant of the third. Penes Will.
Lilly R. D.
he was honored with the Earldom of Derby, and taking to Wife Mary de Bohun,
the younger daughter and coheir of Humphrey Earl of Hereford, Essex, and
Northampton, and Constable of England (which Match was granted to John his
Father, Pat. an. 4 R. 2. p. 1.
for him, July 27. An. 4 R. 2.) this Henry enjoyed with her the Earldoms of
Hereford and Northampton; the Lordship of Brecknock, Ypodigma Neustriae p. 547.
n. 16.
and the Patronage of Lanthony. Having also Issue by her a Royal Progeny;
although she lived not to be a Queen, deceasing only Countess of Derby, in the
year of our Lord 1394. Tho. Walsing. p. 350. n. 42.
and was interred in the Cathedral Church of Canterbury, which place King
Henry, out of a sincere affection to the Memory of her his beloved Wife, Weever
p. 210.
made choice of for his Interment.

Under which Title of Earl of Derby, Tho. Walsing. p. 343. n. 53.
he performed that Expedition into Prussia, where joining his Forces with those
of the Grand Masters of Prussia and Lifland, he overcomes the Army of Skirgalle
King of Lithuania, taking captive four Dukes, and killing 3 more, and above 300
of his best Soldiers. From this Battle Skirgalle flies for refuge to the City
of Will, which is first assaulted by the Earl of Derby's followers, and his
Standard set upon the Wall; about 4000 were in this action either taken
Prisoners or slain, the principal of which was a brother of the Kings of
Poland; and the King Skirgalle with the remainder of his routed Forces, secures
himself in the Castle; which after five weeks siege, was, by reason of the cold
season, and sickness in the Christian Camp, abandoned: Anno 1390.
Eight of the Lithuanians embrace the Christian Faith, and 3000 Prisoners are
by the Master of Lifland conducted into his Country, when the Earl of Derby
returns home with much honor and reputation.

About three years after his Wives death, Ypodigma Neustriae p. 551. n. 55.
this Earl was created Duke of Hereford, upon the 29th day of September ( An.
21 R. 2.) in the year 1397. Anno 1397.
And not long after accused by Thomas Moubray Duke of Norfolk, Chart. an. 21 R.
2. n. 23.
of diverse points of High Treason, against King Richard II. who both
recriminates, and for the clearing of himself, Rot. Par. 21 R. 2.
chalenges Norfolk to a single Combat, which is by him accepted, Tho. Wall. p.
355. n. 47.
and allowed by the King; the place of appointment is Coventry; and on the day
prefixed the Combatants enter the Lists; the Duke of Hereford mounted on a
white courser, Ypodigma Neustriae p. 552. n. 16.
barded with green and blew Velvet, richly embroidered with Swans and
Antilopes, of Goldsmiths work; and the Duke of Norfolk on his Horse,
caparizon'd with crimson Velvet, embroidered with silver Lions and Mulbery
Trees. Their Spears were in their Rests, ready for the encounter, when the
King casting down his Warder, and the Heralds crying Stay, Stay, they were
unexpectedly disarmed and dismounted, and by the King sentenced to banishment,
the Duke of Hereford for six years, and the Duke of Norfolk to a perpetual
exile; making them swear, the one should never come in place where the other
was.

It was the custom in those times to punish the delinquences of great Men by
banishment, which proved not more grievous to the Subject than dangerous to the
Prince; an example of which was never more evident than at this time, in the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Duke of Hereford; who often meeting together
in France, in their banishment, and aggravating the grievances of King
Richard's Government, fell at last to consult how they might remove him; to the
effecting of which, three things did most fortunately occur; First, the death
of his Father the Duke of Lancaster, upon whose Estate King Richard II. had
seized; under pretense of regaining which, the Duke of Hereford took umbrage of
returning for England. Secondly, The Kings absence in Ireland, Ypodigma
Neustriae p. 552. n. 52.
whither he had lately taken a Voyage, to revenge the death of his Cousin the
Earl of March, and where he was stayed by contrary Winds, till the Duke, by the
affluence of his Friends and Allies, had formed a Power, not only capable of
putting him in possession of his Inheritance, but also of placeing the Crown
upon his Head. But neither of these, nor both together, could have effected the
matter, had it not been for a third, viz. The Kings dissolute and uneasy
Government; and on the contrary, the Dukes acceptableness to the people, in
whose hearts he had already reigned, having won them by a generous and obliging
carriage, and always asserted their Privileges, that their election would
better pass for a Title to the Crown, than his feigned descent from the eldest
son of King Henry III. which had been formerly insinuated by the Duke of
Lancaster his Father, and which to all Historians and Men of Judgment, appeared
ridiculous.

By what conduct and resolution these advantages were put in practice we find
in the close of King Richard's Reign, that Prince being not only forced with
much ease to part from a Crown, which he had worn with great violence, but is
also seemingly made to become an earnest Suitor to Henry of Lancaster for the
acceptance thereof, making a formal resignation of his Kingdom, and confirming
it, by putting his Signet upon the Dukes Finger; who by an unanimous consent of
the Lords and Commons ( Thomas Merkes, the Religious, Learned, Lib. 1. Regum
cap. 9.
and Resolute Bishop of Carlisle excepted) was chosen King: and a Sermon upon
this Text, F. 9. Lib. in Col. Arm. fol. 7.
Vir dominabitur in populo, His Coronation: at which were created 46 Knights of
the Bath.
Preached by the Archbishop of Canterbury. Having the Crown of England set upon
his head with all Magnificence, at Westminster, Ypodigma Neustriae p. 555. n.
27.
by Thomas Arundel the said Archbishop, his exiled Companion, upon the 13th of
October, An. 1399. (on which day the year before, Anno 1399.
he had been banished) having in the Tower the day before his Coronation, Tho.
Wall. p. 360 n. 51.
made Forty six Knights of the Bath, four whereof were his sons, Henry, Thomas,
John, and Humfrey; the eldest of which, Henry, Ypodigma Neustriae n. 40.
was created Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, and soon
after, also Duke of Aquitaine; and the Crown by Parliament intailed on King
Henry, and the Heirs of his Body lawfully begotten.

After this, in the same year, a Parliament is held at Westminster, in which
the Acts made in the 11th year of Richard II. are revived, and those of the 21
year, Tho. Wall p. 361. n. 22. and 30.
wholly repealed. Richard Earl of Warwick is delivered out of Prison, and the
Earl of Arundel's son restored to his Honors and Inheritance; and many
banished by King Richard recalled. Several accusations in this Parliament were
exhibited against many great Peers of the Kingdom, for treasonable practices
against the new King, who waves them all, as having got the Crown in a Storm,
he thinks it best to keep it in as great a Calm as he could.

And so to moderate as well the hard opinions of Foreign Princes, Tho. Wall. p.
362. n. 12.
as his Subjects at home, concerning King Richard's deposition; several
Ambassadors are sent to Rome, Spain, France, and Germany; all which, as not
much concerned, seem easily satisfied; only France having lately married a
daughter to King Richard, prepares an Army, and threatens revenge; but before
they could proceed to any action, hearing of King Richard's death, they
disband, considering that the time was then past.

In this Parliament it was moved what should be done with King Richard (not as
yet murdered) whereupon Thomas Merkes, the Loyal Bishop of Carlisle, made a
bold Speech in his behalf, affirming him to have been most unjustly deposed;
and the Duke of Lancaster without any right received to the Crown, but strength
prevailing, did no good, but rather hastened the ruin of that miserable Prince.

Whether it were upon this Speech or otherwise is uncertain, Tho. Wall. p. 362.
n. 44.
but a Conspiracy is forged by the Earls of Kent, Anno 1400.
Huntingdon, and Rutland, (lately Dukes of Surrey, Exceter, and Aumarle) the
Earl of Gloucester, the said Bishop of Carlisle, and other discontented Lords,
in the Abbots House at Westminster, where it is contrived, that at a Tournament
to be held at Oxford, whereat King Henry promised to be present, he should be
slain; which by accident was discovered by the Earl of Rutland, or rather by
the Duke of York his Father; whom he chanced to visit on his way to Oxford,
against the appointed day, having the Indenture of Confederacy in his bosom;
as they sat at dinner, the Duke spyed it, and demanding what it was, forced it
from him, and perusing the contents, bitterly reviled his son, for being twice
a Traitor, before to King Richard, and now to King Henry, vowed to discover him
to the King, then at Windsor; but the younger years of the son outstript his
Fathers speed; and coming to Court before him, confessed the Treason, and
obtained pardon.

The confederate Lords perceiving that their Plot was discovered, and
dispairing of mercy, thought it best now openly to declare their intentions,
and the better to color their proceedings, they apparel one Magdalen in Royal
Robes, who was one of King Richard's Chapel, and extremely like him, to
personate him, as though he had escaped out of Prison, and march toward
Windsor; but finding that King Henry was removed to London, they fell into
consultation, whether to pursue him before he could raise a force to oppose
them, or to release King Richard before their counterfeit was discovered; so
being divided in opinion, since they could not do both, they do neither; but
hearing at Colebrooke, of King Henry's approach with an Army of 20000, not
daring to encounter, expecting as supposed, aid from France, they withdrew to
Sunnings near Reading, where the young Queen Issabel lay, to whom their coming
gave some sparks of consolation, which became soon extinguished; for at
Cirencester, Ypodigma Neustriae p. 555. n. 60.
the Townsmen rising against them, the Earls of Kent and Salisbury were there
slain, and their heads sent to London; Sir Bernard Brocas, Sir Bennet Shelley,
and Sir Thomas Blount, with 28 Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen taken Prisoners,
and sent to Oxford; their whole Army dispersed, whereof the Earl of Gloucester
fled toward Wales, the Earl of Huntingdon and Sir John Shelley into Essex, but
were all shortly after taken and beheaded; their Pseudo King Magdalen, with
Frereby, Tho. Wall. p. 363. n. 46.
another of King Richard's Chapel, hanged and quartered, as also diverse others
of the Nobility and Gentry put to death in several places, so that so great a
massacre of noble Blood at one time, and for one cause, has seldom been heard
of.

The English conspirators being thus rooted out, Ypodigma Neustriae p. 557. n.
54. and p. 578. n. 1.
the Welsh spring up as fast; for now in the year 1400, and second of this
Kings reign, Owen Glendour (formerly an Esquire to King Richard, having
quarrelled with the Lord Gray of Ruthin, about some Lands, and and in a hostile
manner taken him Prisoner) draws the Welchmen to a general defection; who
entering Herefordshire, were opposed by Edmond Mortimer Earl of March, whom Owen
took Prisoner at Pelale in Radnorshire, Anno. 1402.
and slew above 1000 English whose Privy Members the Welsh Women most
barbarously cut off, Tho. Wall. p. 364. n. 7.
not suffering their Corpse to receive burial for many days. Ypodigma Neustriae
p. 558. n. 14.
But the Kings fortune under his Lieutenants in the North, was more propitious;
where the Scots having, with above 10000 Men, under the conduct of Archibald
Earl of Douglas, made great spoils as far as Newcastle, were encountered near
Halydown-Hill, upon Holy Rood day, by Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland, his
valiant son the Lord Henry Percy called Hotspurre, and George Earl of Dunbar,
and put to flight; much of which Victory is attributed to the gallantry and
valor of the Lord Percy's Archers; Tho. Wall p. 366. n. 7.
against whose Shafts neither the Scottish Shields, nor Armor could protect
them. Earl Douglas the General himself was taken Prisoner, (having sealed his
valor with five wounds, and the loss of an eye) with Murdack Stewart Earl of
Fife, George Earl of Angus, the Earls of Murrey and Orkney, the Lords
Montgomery, Erskin, and Grahme, and about fourscore Knights, besides Esquires
and Gentlemen. The Lords Gourdon and Swynton, with several other Men of Honor
and Name, fell upon the place; and above 500 were in their flight drowned in
the River Tweed. Upon which Action, out of a settled Peace, an open War breaks
out betwixt England and Scotland, whereby King Edward is diverted from
resisting Glandour; Ypodigma Neustriae p. 566. n. 9.
who having solicited the French King for aid, had about the year 1405 Twelve
hundred Men sent him, most of which were lost at Sea, and the rest returning
home, were reinforced with 12000. These landed safely, but did Owen no service;
for upon report of the approach of the English, suspecting their own strength,
and the Welshmens fidelity, they fly to their Ships, and disgracefully return
home.

Anno 1403.
King Henry having been nine years a Widdower, Tho. Wall. p. 367. n. 26.
takes to his second Wife Joane of Navarre (the relict of John Earl of
Montfort, His second Marriage.
surnamed the Valiant, Histoire de la Maison de France Tome 1. p. 846, 847. and
474. and 475.
Duke of Britain; who deceased, Joane of Navarre did bear in her Escocheon,
Evereux and Navarre, quarterly in the 1. and 4. Azure 3 Flowers de Lize Or,
over all a Bendlet Compony Argent and Gules. And on the 2 and 3 Gules an
Escarbuncle of eight rays pometty and flowery Or. Impaled with the Coat Armor
of her Husband King Henry IV. being thus painted on an oblong Shield supported
by an Angel, at the head of their Tomb in the Metropolitan Church of
Canterbury. The Canopy whereof is diapred with the Devise of Queen Joane, viz.
An Ermine collerad. and chained, with this Motto, A Tamperance, subscribed in
golden Characters.
An. 1399. leaving Issue by her, three sons and four daughters) she was the
daughter of Charles II. King of Navarre, and Count of Evereux, surnamed the
Bad, and Joane his Wife eldest daughter of John King of France, by Bona of
Luxemburg his first Wife. He espoused her at Winchester, Ypodigma Neustriae p.
559. n. 3.
in the year of our Lord 1403. and caused her to be Crowned at Westminster,
with much magnificence, upon the 26 day of January in the same year. She
outlived the King her Husband many years, F. 9. lib. is Coll. Arm. fol. 8.
and died without Issue by him, at Havering in the Bower in Essex, An. 1437. on
the 10th day of July, in the 15th year of King Henry VI. her Husbands Grandson;
whom she lived to see crowned King of England, and also of France; and was
Interred at Canterbury; where her Effigies is to be seen lying on the right
hand of King Henry IV. her Husband, upon his Monument; the representation of
which is exhibited at the end of this Chapter, vide page 267.

In the year 1403 also, Ypodigma Nustriae p. 559. n. 14.
began the memorable Rebellion of the Percyes, the first of whom, that
discovered in Arms his mortal hatred to King Henry was the noble Hotspurre,
Tho. Wall. p. 367. n. 37.
(who under color of the Scottish War) made head about Chester, and the
Marches of Wales: Ibidem n. 39.
to him repairs the malicious old Man Tho. Percy Earl of Worcester his Uncle,
leaving the young Prince of Wales, and the Princes Household, over both which
the King had placed him as Governor; and although Henry Earl of Northumberland,
Hotspurrs Father, the chief Conspirator, was not joined to them, as he did
intend; yet by his influence, were their numbers grown mighty, with which they
intended to join Glendour, and to enter Shrewsbury, Ypodigma Neustriae p. 559.
n. 24.
as the most advantageous place for the seat of the War. But before they do
either, colorable causes of their taking Arms are declared, viz. Care of the
Commonwealths reformation, and their own safeties, with a Protestation of their
innocencies as to the breach of Loyalty, etc. These Articles had the place of
the Husk, but the kernel of the enterprise contained other matter, First, To
deprive King Henry of his Crown and Life. Secondly, To advance the Title of
Lord Edmond Mortimer Earl of March, their nearest Ally (for Hotspurr had
married Eliza. this Earls Aunt, the daughter of Edmond Mortimer Earl of March,
by Philipe daughter of Lionel Duke of Clarence: and his Uncle Sir Edmond
Mortimer, had taken to Wife a daughter of Owen Glendour.) Thirdly, To take
revenge of King Henry for seeking to draw to himself the chief benefit of the
Victory at Halidown-Hill, whose principal Prisoners he required. Fourthly, To
share the Kingdom between Mortimer, Percy, and Glendour, according to
Indentures Tripartite, allotting South England to Mortimer, North England to
Percy, and to Glendour, Wales beyond Severne.

King Henry on the other side defends his cause by Letters, Tho. Walsing. p.
368. n. 5.
and strongly puts the blame upon the accusers; and to create a right
understanding, and to take all fear from the Conspirators, sends to the Earls
of Northumberland and Worcester, and the Lord Percy, a safe Conduct under his
Royal Seal, which is by them rejected; whereupon the King, by the Council of
the valiant Earl of Dunbar, arms with all speed, and with his son, the young
Prince of Wales in the head of a puissant Force, appears within sight of
Shrewsbury, when the gallant Hotspurr stood ready to assault the Town; who no
sooner discovered the Royal Standard, but he left off that enterprise, to form
his Battle, consisting of 14000 hardy Bodies, for trial of his fortune against
a well tempered and experienced Adversary, Ypodigma Neust. p. 566. n. 14.
through whose tenderness Peace had yet ensued, had it not been for the
mischievous Earl of Worce^ster; who by misreporting and falsifying the Kings
Words did precipitate his Nephew into sudden Battle.

Anno 1403. Battle of Shrewsbury.
The Kings courage in this Fight was as great as his danger, Ypodigma.
Neustriae p. 560. n. 25.
and the Prince, being then first to enter himself into the School of War, gave
no small hopes of that perfection, unto which he aftewards attainede, being
wounded with an Arrow in the face.

These two valiant Champions also, the Lord Percy and Earl Douglas, instead of
spending themselves upon the multitude, set the point of their hopes upon
killing the King, as in whose death they knew Ten thousand would fall; but
their design being discovered by the Earl of Dunbar, Tho. Wall. p. 368. n. 53.
he drew King Henry from that place which he had chosen to make good, and
thereby in all probability saved the Kings life, for the Royal Standard was
overthrown, (and among many valiant Men) the Earl of Stafford, and Sir Walter
Blount: the Kings Standard Bearer (with ten new Knights) were slain with many
Esquires and Gentlemen, Ibid. n. 56.
and about 1600 private Soldiers: Douglas killed three that day, in the Kings
Coat Armor, many of whose Soldiers believing He had run the same fate, quit
the Field. But the King notwithstanding (an undaunted Captain) reinforces the
Fight, and performs marvails with his own hands. But that which put an end to
this tragic Scene was the death of Hotspurr, who riding in the heat of the
Battle, was killed by an unknown hand, drawing a ruin after him suitable to his
spirit and greatness; for there fell with him most of the Esquires and
Gentlemen of Cheshire, in number 200, and above 5000 common Soldiers, the rest
running out of the Field, were by the Kings order, unpursued. The Earls of
Worcester and Douglas, Sir Richard Vernon, and the Baron of Kinderton, were
taken Prisoners; Douglas, who had unhorsed the King, Tho. Wall. p. 369. n. 12.
and being himself dismounted, was by the Royal command carefully attended, and
had his liberty without Ransom, but the other three were on the Monday
following beheaded. This Battle was fought upon Saturday the 21 of July, and
Eve of St Mary Magdalen ( An. 1403.) to whose memory (in thankfulness to God
for this signal Victory) he founded a College on the place, and called it
Battlefield.

The Earl of Northumberland came in shortly after, Ypodigma Neust. p. p. 560.
n. 58.
and submitted to the Kings mercy, whose crimes were pardoned, but not
forgotten; and Glendour, then in Wales, after many Victories obtained against
the Marchers, Tho. Wall. p. 369. n. 26. and n. 53.
several depredations of their Country, an obstinate defense against the Royal
Army, and that of Prince Henry, more fortunate in obtaining Victories than in
making a right use of them, is at last abandoned by his followers (many whereof
were taken and put to death) either died of famine, or was (as some say) by one
of his near Kinswomen nourished privately till the time of his death; in whose
exit all the broiles of that Principality took an end. Yopodigma Neust. p. 561.
n. 16.
And now the Britains spoil the Town of Plymouth, and in revenge, the Western
Men, under the command of William de Wilford an Esquire, Tho. Wall. p. 369. n.
39.
put to Sea, land upon them in Britain, take 40 of their Ships, laden with
Wine and Oil, and burn as many more.

After which, Ypodigma n. 23.
the French land in the Isle of Wight, get together a great booty of Cattle,
which are by the Inhabitants quickly recovered, Tho. Wall. p. 369. n. 48.
and many of them forced to leave their Carcasses to be stripped by the Islanders.

Anno 1409.
Twice after this, Yopodigma Neustriae p. 564. n. 39.
between Christmas and Palm Sunday, the King assembled the Estates, first at
London, and then at St Albans, for the business of Money, but with much
distaste the Lords rise from the later Session; Tho. Wall. p. 373. n. 16.
and Thomas Moubray the Earl Marshal, one of the chief Men which disliked the
carriage of public Affairs, draws Richard Scroope Archbishop of York into a
Conspiracy, in full hope that Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland, the Lord
Bardolf, with the Citizens of York, and the common People, would assist their
cause, which was glossed with the specious pretense of redressing public
abuses, Ypodigma Neust. p. 565. n. 1.
happening through the Kings default. Ralphe Nevil Earl of Westmerland hearing
of this attempt, wherein the Archbishop and the Earl Marshal were leaders of
the People, gathers a force to encounter them, but finding himself too weak, by
faining to approve the quarrel, Tho. Wall. p. 373. n. 52.
gets them both into his power, and presents them as an acceptable oblation to
the King; who about Whitsontide comes to York (where, notwithstanding
Westemerland had promised them their lives) both the Archbishop and the Earl
Marshal were beheaded, Ibidem p. 374. n. 59.
the Pope excommunicating all such as had a hand in the Archbishops death.

Anno 1406.
The Earl of Northumberland and the Lord Bardolf being pursued by the King,
Ypodigma Neust. p. 565. n. 52.
with an Army of 37000; fly first to Barwick, and thence into Scotland, Tho.
Wall. p. 374. n. 20.
where they are entertained by David Lord Flemming; and where the King employs
his Treasure, upon secret practices with the Scots, that they might be
delivered into his hands, in exchange for some Scottish Prisoners; whereupon
Northumberland and Bardolf escape into Wales, Ibidem p. 375. n. 14.
and the Scots missing their purpose slay Flemming, for discovering their
intention to his distressed guests. This fills Scotland with civil discords: to
avoid the dangers whereof, and to better his education, the King of Scots sends
his son and heir into France; whom (together, with the Bishop of Orkney)
certain Mariners of Cley in Norfolk, surprise at Sea, and present to King
Henry, who commits him to the Tower of London: when Northumberland and Bardolf,
upon Owen's retreat into of the Mountains, forsaking Wales, Tho. Wall. p. 377.
n. 8.
and seeking to raise a force in the North, are encountered at Bramham Moore, by
Thomas Rooksby Sheriff of Yorkshire, who after a short conflict slew the Earl
in the Field, mortally wounded the Lord Bardolf, and routed their party.
Ypodigma Neust. p. 561. n. 40.


Presently upon this, the Admiral of Britain, with the Lord du Castle (and 30
sail of ships) attempt to land at Dartmouth but are repelled by the Country
People, Anno 1404.
du Castle and his 2 Brothers, Tho. Wall. p. 370. n. 12.
with 400 more slain, and 200 taken; of which number, the Lord Baqueville was
one. These Prisoners being presented to King Henry, their takers were rewarded
with good store of Gold and Silver, and sent merrily home into their own
Country. After which, the Earl of St Paul, with 500 Crossbows, and 1500 Men at
Arms, lays siege to the Castle of St Marck, near Calais, but is thence beaten
by Sir Philip Hall and Sir Richard Ashton, having most of his Men slain and
taken, himself flies to St Omer.

Not long after, Thomas Duke of Clarence, F. 9. fol. 8. lib. in Coll. Armorum.
the Kings second son, with the Earl of Kent, enter the Haven of Sluice, burn
four ships, and return to the relief of Calais, then besieged by the French,
taking in their passage three Carricks of Genoa richly laden, which they bring
into the Chamber of Rye.

The remaining five years Reign of this Prince were without trouble, unless of
mind for the much Blood he had spilt in England, F. 9. fol. 9. b. lib. M. S. in
Coll. Arm.
for expiation whereof, he resolves upon the Crusiado to Jerusalem, for which
great preparation was made, far more than needed for that Jerusalem which only
his destiny permitted him to see; for at his Prayers in Westminster Abbey,
before the Shrine of St Edward, an Apoplexy seized him, in which, being removed
to the Abbots House, and there coming to himself, he desired to know where he
was; which being told him, and that the Chamber was called Jerusalem, he said,
Lord have mercy upon me, for here must I die, His death.
(having been told by a Southsayer, that in Jerusalem he should end his days)
as indeed he did, Anno. 1412.
upon the 20th day of March, in the year of our Lord 1412. Ypodigma Neustriae
p. 573. n. 56.
Having all the time of his sickness (by his own command) the Crown lying by
him, which Prince Henry, supposing him dead, took away; but the King recovering
again his senses, asked for it, and had it restored by the Prince, wishing him
long life to wear it; whereat the King answered him sighing, What right I had
to it God knows: the Prince thereupon replies, But if you die, my Sword shall
maintain it mine: Well, said the King, I refer all to God; but on my Blessing,
be sure to administer Justice indifferently, and be not sparing in Mercy; and
so turning about, said, God Bless thee, and have Mercy on me; Tho. Wall. p.
382. n. 22.
with which monument Illustrissimo et Potentissimo Principi IACOBO Duci
Marchioni, et Comiti de ORMOND, Comiti de Ossory et Brecknock, Vicecomiti
Thurles. Baroni de Arclo et Lanthony, Domino Regalitatum et Libertatum
Comitatus Tiperarij. Archiepincer^ae Hiberniae, Cancellario Universe;itatis
juxta Dublin. Serenissimi Dm^: Regis Caroli Secundi Locum-tenenti Generali, et
Generali Gubernatori Hiberniae, Domino Praefecto Comitatus Somerset. Civitatis
et Comitatus de Bristoll et Civitatum de Bath et Mells, vni Dominorum privati
Consilij ejusdem Majestatis in Regnis Angliae Scotice et Hibarnice Dno^
Seneschallo Haspilij Regis, e'Cubiculo Regio Generoso, at Nobilissimi Ordinis
Gartarij Equin, hanc Yumuli Regis HENRICI IIII: figuram. submisso cultu
D.D.D.F.S.

COMME ^E TROUVE HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE words he expired; having Reigned 13
years, and 6 months, wanting 9 days, and in the 46 year of his age. His Body,
F. 9. fol. 9. b. M.S. in Coll. Armorum.
with all Funeral Pomp was conveyed by water to Faversham, and from thence by
land to Canterbury, and there solemnly interred; and his obsequies performed on
Trinity Sunday next following the time of his death, King Henry his son being
present thereat.

His Tomb (represented in the precedent page) is of Alablaster, parcel gilt,
and seems to have been erected by Queen Joane of Navarre, his second Wife,
whose Effigies lies upon his right hand, and is placed betwixt two Pillars on
the North side the Chapel of St Thomas Becket, opposite to the Monument of
Prince Edward, commonly called the Black Prince. At the head of the Tomb stands
an Angel, supporting a long square Escocheon, of the Arms of France and
England, quarterly, Impaling, quarterly, Evereux and Navarre. On the inside of
the Canopy are also three Shields, the first containing the Arms of France and
England quarterly; the second, of France and England, quarterly, Impaling
Evereux and Navarre: and the third, of Evereux and Navarre quarterly. The
Canopy is also diapred with Eagles volant crowned, within the Garter,
(underwritten with the word Sovereign, which Motto is also painted in gold
Letters on the Frees) and with the Queens Device, being, An Ermine, collered
and chained, subscribed with the Motto A Temperance. On the Cornish are placed
several Escocheons of Arms of the Nobility of that Age.

He wrote in his Style Henricus Dei Gracia Rex Anglie and Francie and Dominus
Hibernie: and on the circumference of his great Seal, Henricus Dei Gracia Rex
Francie et Anglie et Dns Hibernie, placeing England before France in his
Charters, and France before England in his Seal.

Children of HENRY Earl of Derby (afterward King HENRY IV.) by MARY DE BOHUN
his first Wife.
12. HENRY of LANCASTER, surnamed of Monmouth, Prince of Wales, eldest son of
King Henry IV. succeeded his Father in the Kingdom, by the name of Henry V.
vide Chap. 3.

12. THOMAS of LANCASTER, Duke of Clarence, second son of Henry IV. of whom,
see more in the fifth Chapter of this fourth Book.

12. JOHN of LANCASTER, Duke of Bedford, and Regent of France, third son of
King Henry IV. and Mary de Bohun his first Wife, whose History succeeds that of
his Brother Duke Thomas, vide Book 4. Chap. 6.

12. HVMPHREY of LANCASTER, Duke of Gloucester, and Protector of England, fourth
son of King Henry IV. The seventh Chapter of this fourth Book contains his
History.

12. Bavaria, viz. Paly, Bendy, Lozengy, Argent and Azure, Impaling Lancaster.
BLANCH of LANCASTER, Tho. Wall p. 365. n. 47.
Duchess of Bavaria, elder daughter of Henry Earl of Derby (afterward King of
England, Ypodigma Neust. p. 558. n. 3.
by the name of Henry IV.) was in the year 1402. most nobly attended to Colen,
and there married to Lewis, surnamed Barbatus, F. 9. M. S. fol. 8. a. in Coll.
Arm.
afterward Duke of Bavaria; after his death she was espoused to the King of
Aragon, and outliving him also, took to her third Husband the Duke of Baar; but
deceasing without Issue by them all, there is little mention of her in History.

12. Denmark, which is, Or, semee of Hearts Gules, and three Lions passant in
pale, Azure, quartering, Norway, viz. Gules a Lion Rampant crowned Or,
sustaining a Battel-Axe Argent. With which the Arms of Lancaster are impaled.
PHILIPE of LANCASTER, Tho. Wall. p. 374. n 46.
Queen of Denmark, younger daughter of King Henry IV. was in the year 1405. and
fifth of her Fathers Reign, F. 9. M.S. fol. 8. b.
sent into Denmark, with a sumptuous Train of Lords and Ladies, and there
espoused to John King of Denmark and Norway, and died without Issue.

12. HENRY V. KING OF ENGLAND and FRANCE, An. Dom. 1412. March 20th.
and LORD of IRELAND, Surnamed of MONMOUTH.
CHAP. III.
This Henry being Prince of Wales (as appears by his Seal ( vide page 239.)
annexed to two several Indentures, the one dated the 6th day of March, an. 6th;
and the other on the 7th of May, an. the 8th of Henry the 4th, his Father,
betwixt him and the said King, whose Lieutenant he was constituted, both for
raising Forces, and the suppression of the Rebels of North Wales) did bear,
Azure 3 Flowers de Lys, Or, for the Kingdom of France, (reducing them from
semee, to the number three, as did Charles VI. the present French King)
quartered with 3 Lions of England; which makes me of opinion, that King Henry
IV. this Princes Father (although he made use of no other Seal than that in
which the Flowers de Lys were semee) was the first King of England that in
imitation of his said contemporary, Charles VI. reduced that number to 3
Flowers-de-luce; for I find them so in his Escocheon, impaling, the Arms of
Joane of Navarre his second Wife, at the head of his Tomb at Canterbury. But by
this Seal of Prince Henry it most certainly appears, that he (so early as the
sixth year of Henry IV. his said Father) bare in his Achievement only 3 Flowers
de Lys; which is supported with two Swans, each holding in his Beak an Ostrich
Feather, and a Scrole. About the Seal is this circumscription, S: Henrici
principis Wall: ducis aquiran: Iancastr: rornub: co^itts ce^^r: Ex Registro
Westmonast.

The 239 page of this 4th Book presents you with the Royal Seal of this King
Henry V. which is very Historical; on the one side whereof, he sits on his
Throne, with the Scepter of the Flower-de-luce in his right hand, and the Mound
and Cross in his left; in three Niches over his head are placed the Trinity and
our Lady. On each side the Throne in several Niches the Statues of King Edward
the Confessor, and King Arthur, whose Arms are there represented: The Banner of
France and England quarterly, and the Banner of England alone. Without these
stand the Symbols of the four Evangelists, St Matthew, St Mark, St Luke, and St
John; viz. the Angel, the winged Lion, the flying Ox, and the Eagle. And at
the foot of the Throne (on three pannels) are the Arms of his Principality of
Wales, Dukedom of Cornwall, and Earldom of Chester.

On his Counter-Seal is his Effigies on Horseback, his Shield, Surcoat, and the
caparisons of his Horse adorned with the 3 Flowers de Lys, and the 3 Lions
quarterly. And Sans complement to France, in the circumference of his Seal,
Reverse, and this his Charter (dated 15 May an. 4 H. 5.) he writes himself
Henricus dei gratia rex Anglie et Francie et dns Hibernie. He was the first
King of England that in his Seal did-bear the 3 Flowers of France, and that
placed England before it, in his circumscription. Ex Registro Westminster.


THIS Most Heroic Prince, Henry, Edw. Hall Chron.
(whose birth at Monmouth in the Marches of South Wales bears date in the year
of Christ's Nativity 1388. An. 11 Rich. 2. from which place, he took his
Surname) was the eldest son of Henry of Bullingbrook, then a Subject, and Earl
of Derby, Leicester, and Lincoln; afterward Duke of Hereford, in the right of
his Wife Mary the second daughter and coheir of Humphrey de Bohun, Earl of
Hereford, etc. and Constable of England; then Duke of Lancaster, by the death
of his Father John of Gaunt, fourth son of King Edward III. and lastly, (
Richard II. being deposed) made Sovereign of England.

In vita Henrici Beaufort Cardinalis, etc.
His young years were employed in Literature in the Academy of Oxford, where,
in Queens College, he was a Student under the Tuition of his half Uncle Henry
Beaufort, Chancellor of that University. Afterward, in the time of his Fathers
Exile, King Richard II. took this Henry with him into Ireland, and caused him
to be imprisoned in the Castle of Trym. But his Father deposing that King, and
obtaining the Crown, and himself come to the age of 12 years, had the
succession thereof entailed on him in Parliament, and accordingly was created
Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester; and immediately after,
had the Title of Duke of Aquitaine conferred on him, in order to his obtaining
a Marriage with the young Queen Issabel, late Wife to the murdered King
Richard.

From Oxford Prince Henry was called to Court, and Thomas Percy Earl of
Worcester appointed his Governor; whose hostile attempts in Shrewsbury Field,
Ypodigma Neust. p. 559. n. 14.
cost that disloyal Earl his head, Anno 1403.
and had almost done this Prince his life, who confronting the Percy's in
Battle, was wounded in the Face with an Arrow; but this mark of Honor, with
the overthrow of Hotspurr, in that bloody dispute, were hopeful signs of the
following successes against Owen Glendour, that Arch-enemy to England's peace,
whom the Prince so smartly pursued through the vast Mountains of Wales, that
from the Dens of those deserts he durst not show his face, but therein
perished, though the Prince had then scarcely attained to his sixteenth year.

But grown from under the command of his Tutors, as his youth stood effected,
so were his Consorts, and those often, whose inclinations were none of the
best; whether led by inclination of youth, or to know that by experience which
other Princes do by report, is uncertain; but many actions he did far
unbefitting the grandeur of his Person; and among others, is taxed with no
better than Theft, consorting with such as spent their Wits upon other Men's
Labors; lying in wait for the Receivers of his Rents, and robbing them of that
which was really his own, receiving of them often many blows, which he freely
forgave, ever abating their losses in the foot of their Accounts.

His striking the Lord Chief Justice, was a crime incontinently expiated by a
quiet submission to his judgment, and a formal imprisonment; notwithstanding
which, the King resenting this affront done to his Representative, dismissed
his son from the office of President of his Privy Council, and placed therein
his second son Thomas Duke of Clarence, to the no small grief of Prince Henry,
who having drawn upon him (by these licentious courses) the discontent and
jealousy of his Father, found out an extraordinary way of reconciling himself
to his love, and entering into a due consideration of his former dissolute
manners; they appeared unto him in such deformity, that he banished all his
idle companions from about him; (and yet, upon their better conformity, gave
them sufficient maintenance) and thereby became not only restored to the Royal
Favor, but gained a Sovereignty over the hearts of those subjects: who (after
King Henry's death) made it appear how willing they were to submit to his
Empire, by swearing Allegiance to him before his Coronation (which was
performed at Westminster, Yopodigma Neust. p. 573. n. 58.
the 9th of April, His Corona^ 1413.
An. 1413. by Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, with all accustomed
Rites) and by granting him a Subsidy without asking, Tho. Wall. p. 382. n. 24.
in his first Parliament. In which Parliament his right to the Crown of France
was showed him (in an Elegant Oration made by the said Archbishop) as
descending by a direct Line from Issabel, daughter to Philip IV. King of
France; and that nothing appeared to his hinderance, but their pretention to
the Salique Laws, which by no Law of God, or first institution of that
Country, he was bound to observe; with which heroic enterprise, young King
Henry was quickly inflamed; and in order thereunto, reduced his Flowers delize
to the number 3. as did Charles VI. the then French King.

And dispatching his Ambassadors for France, demanded that Crown from Charles
VI. offering, that if the same were willingly granted, he would take his
daughter Katherine to Wife; but the same being rejected, he immediately
prepares for War; his Men shipped, and the King himself ready to go on board: a
Conspiracy against his life is discovered, Tho. Wall. p. 389. n. 24.
forged by Richard Earl of Cambridge, Henry Lord Scroope of Masham, Ypodigma
Neust. p. 580. n. 54.
the Lord Treasurer, and Sir Thomas Gray of Northumberland, who being suborned
by the French for a Million of Gold, as upon their apprehension they confessed
(though their Indictment contains other matter) were all three put to death:
which was no sooner performed, but that the Wind blowing fair, King Henry
weighs Anchor, Ibid. p. 577. n. 20.
and with a Fleet of 160 ships, sets sail on Lady Day, Anno 1414.
An. 1414. and landing at Caux, his force consisting of 6000 Horse, and 24000
Foot, from ^hence marches to Harflew, which after some days siege is surrendered
unto him; into which he entered, not in Triumph, but in an humble manner,
passing along the streets barefooted, to the Church of St Martin, where, with
great Devotion, he gave thanks to God for this his first achieved Enterprise.
The Government of this Town he committed to the Duke of Exceter, Tho. Wall. p.
391. n. 28.
who substituted Sir John Fastolf his Lieutenant of the same, with a Garrison of
1500 Soldiers. And from thence with 2000 Horse and 16000 Foot, he marches
toward Calais, through the Countries of Caux and Eu.

The French Court (under a brainsick Prince) swarms with Factions; yet all
unite to disturb the common Enemy; in order to which, King Charles, the
Dauphin, his Brother of Ponthieu, the King of Sicilie, the Dukes of Berry and
Britain, with the whole force of France assemble at Roan, and in Council
conclude, that the English should be fought with before they got to Calais, and
impeded in their march by continual skirmishes, breaking down of Bridges,
staking of Foords, guarding of Passes, Tho. Wall. p. 392. n. 1.
and conveighing all Provisions out of the Country: King Henry intending to
pass the Soame first at Blanchetagne, and then at Pont le Remy, finds both
places guarded, so that keeping along the River side to Hargest, the French
Army march on the other bank, led by Charles de Albret, Constable of France, At
last, through the negligence of them of St Quintin, King Henry foords the Soam
at Bethencourt, his Soldiers weary, faint for want of Provisions, and many of
them sick; from whence he sends to the assembled Princes, to profer a surrender
of Harflew, and what more he had won, so as without disturbance he might depart
for Calais. To this, the Constable and Marshal consent, but the other young
Princes despising the small numbers of the English, do not only refuse all
conditions of Peace, but with an assurance of victory, divide the spoil,
dispose of Prisoners, and prepare a Chariot to carry the captive King in
Triumph. They sent also to King Charles and the Dauphin, residing at Roan, to
be present at the Battle, that they might have the honor of the day; whereat
the Duke of Berry was highly offended, having had experience of the English
valor at the Battle of Poictiers, where King John of France was taken Prisoner.

King Henry continued his march, Ypodigmae Neust. p. 583. n. 53.
till upon the 24th of October, Battle of Azincourt.
he came to Azincourt, near to which place the French had pitched the Royal
Standard, and drawn up their Army, exceeding the English above six to one in
number; their Vanguard was led by the Constable, the Dukes of Orleance and
Bourbon, the Earl of Eu, and Bouchiqualt the Marshal, Dampier the Admiral,
Guychard Daulphin d' Avergne, and Clunet of Brabant; The main Battle by the
Dukes of Bar and Alenzon, Earls of Nevers, Blaumont, Salines, Grandpre, and
Rousse. The Rear-guard by the Duke of Brabant, Earls of Marle, Forquenberge,
and Monsieur de Lorney. The right Wing had for Commander Arthur Earl of
Richmond, and the Left, Lewis de Bourbon Earl of Vendosme.

In the mean time, King Henry having made choice of a ground half fenced on his
back with the Village wherein he had rested the night before, having on both
sides strong hedges and ditches, began there to order his Battle, but first
appointed an Ambush of 200 Bowmen, who, upon the sign given, should discharge
their whole flight upon the flank of the Enemies Horse; these were commanded by
Sir Thomas Erpingham. Ypodigma Neust. p. 584. n. 17.
The Kings Vanguard consisting also of Archers, was led by Edward Duke of
York, assisted by the Lords Beaumont, Willoughby, and Fanhop; the main Battle
headed by the King himself (was composed of Billmen and some Bowmen)
accompanied by his Brother Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, the Earls Marshal,
Oxford, and Suffolk; and the Rearward, consisting of diversity of Weapons, was
commanded by Thomas Earl of Dorset the Kings Uncle; the Horsemen, as wings,
guarding the Foot on both sides. To prevent the fury of the French Cavalry, the
King had appointed stakes of six foot long sharpened at both ends, to be pitched
behind the Archers, and Pyoneers to attend their removal according to
direction. Things thus ordered, and public Prayers performed, the onset was
immediately given by the French Horsemen, Tho. Wall. p. 392. n. 54.
upon whom Erpingham gave his Bowmen the Sign to let fly their Arrows, which
taking place upon the flank of the French Horse, so gauled them, that their
Vanguard was instantly distressed, and disordered in such a confused press, that
they were not able to use their Arms to any advantage. Their Wings likewise
essayed to charge the English, but Monsieur de Lignie in the one (not well
seconded by his Squadrons) was forced back; and Guillaume de Surrenes charging
home in the other, fell in the attempt. The Battalions thus broken, fled to the
Body, where they brought both terror and confusion by the unruliness of their
gauled Horses, when a Body of the French Horse, exquisitely appointed, intended
to have broke through the English Archers; but they retreating behind their
sharpened Stakes, the French advanced upon the spur, and by Troops falling upon
them, were miserably overthrown and paunched to death.

The English Arrows and Bills were mortally employed, Ypodigm^ Neust. p. 584.
n. 38.
and vied this day for execution; against whom, the Duke of Brabant, hoping by
his example, to encourage others (followed by a few) faced about, and having
broken into the English Body, courageously fighting, was there slain.

With the like Manhood, John Duke of Alenzon, forced his passage into the Kings
Battallion, and with his Axe, cut off part of his Crown; with which stroke, his
Casque was battered to his brow; but enraged Henry redoubling his strength,
threw him to the ground; (slew two of his Seconds) but would have saved his
life, had the Victory been at that time out of dispute.

With Alenzon's fall the main Battle of the French first gave ground, then
turned their backs, and lastly, threw away their Arms, and fled. But then some
Troops that first ran away, led on by Robinet of Bonvil, and the Captain of
Azincourt, intending to wipe away the stain of running away from Soldiers, by
fighting with Boys, set upon the Pages and Landresses in the Camp; who gave
such a lamentable shreek, that King Henry verily believing some fresh Forces
had been come, caused all the Arrows that were sticking in the Field to be
gathered, and the Stakes to be plucked up, and made ready for a second
Encounter; among which, the Duke of York's Body was found miserably hacked and
defaced; Tho. Wall. p. 293. n. 23.
the sight whereof, together with the danger of a second charge, caused the
King to command the Prisoners should be slain, except some principal Men, which
were secured by being bound back to back.

With what moderation and devotion King Henry managed this great Victory all
Histories are full. The next day after the Battle he caused the 113 Psalm to be
sung by his whole Army, Ypodigma Neust. p. 584. n. 50.
commanding all the Foot, at the Verse, Non nobis Domine, non nobis, sed nomini
tuo da Gloriam, to fall on their knees, and those on horseback, to make a
reverend bow.

The same day, the Heralds appointed to make search, made return, that there
was slain of the French above 10000, whereof 126 were of the Nobility bearing
Banners; Paulus Emilius.
of Knights and Gentlement of Coat Armor, 7874, and of common Soldiers about
1600. Of the Nobility there died that day Charles d' Albret Constable, and
Jaques de Chastillon Admiral of France, etc. the Dukes of Alenzon, Brabant, and
Bar; the Earls of Nevers, Marle, Coxton.
Vaudemont, Beaumont, Grandpre, etc. The Prisoners taken were Charles Duke of
Orleance, John Duke of Bourbon, Arthur Earl of Richmond, Ibidem.
Lewis de Bourbon Earl of Vendosme, and Charles Earl of Eu, etc. to the number
in all of 1500. On the English part were killed Edward Duke of York, and the
Earl of Suffolk, and not in all full 600.

At his return into England (which was the 16th day of November following. Tho.
Wall. p. 393 n. 35.
) He forbad all Ballads to be made or sung in disgrace of the French. And upon
his entrance into London, the City presented him with 1000 l. and two gold
Basins, valued at 500 l. more, as an expression of their joy for his happy
return and glorious success. Ypodigma Neust. p. 585. n. 46.


About this time the Emperor Sigismond came into England, Anno 1416.
where landing, at Dover, he was with much honor received by Humphrey Duke of
Gloucester, and attended, together with Albert Duke of Holland, to Windsor,
where they were elected Knights of the Garter, Tho. Wall. p. 394. n. 30.
and sat in their Stalls at the Feast.

The Emperors business was chiefly to mediate for a Peace with France, which he
doubtless had obtained, but that the French at the time of Treaty, had laid
siege to Harflew, and then nothing but War would King Henry hear of, Ypodigma
Neust. p. 586. n. 4.
immediately sending his brother John Duke of Bedford, with the Earls of March,
Oxford, Huntingdon, Warwick, Arundel, Salisbury, and Devonshire, in 200 ships;
Tho. Wall. p. 394. n. 43.
who, upon the Feast of the Assumption of our Lady, land in the Mouth of Seine,
where they sunk near 500 French ships, and bravely relieved the Town; Tho. Wall.
p. 394. n. 47.
whereupon, the Emperor entering into a League offensive and defensive with King
Henry (the Popes concerns, with whom the Emperor now or lately was at War only
excepted) the 29th of October departs toward Germany. But the French not yet
desisting, enforce their Fleet with several Carricks of Genoa, and blocking up
again the River of Soame, are likewise by the Earl of Huntingdon taken and
dispersed: In one of these Carricks was the whole half years pay for the French
Fleet, together with Jaques bastard of Bourbon its Commander; with which rich
Prize the Earl returns to Southampton, A. 52. fol. 300. Penes H. St. George
Arm. Richmond.
where then King Henry lay; who by his Proclamation dated at New Sarum, the 2d
day of June last past, had commanded, that no person retained in this present
expedition, of what quality soever, should presume to wear any Coat Armor, to
which he had not right from his Ancestors, or by grant from a sufficient Deputy
empowered therein, upon penalty of being cashiered, loss of wages, and the
having his Coat of Arms rased and torn off his back; except those which did
bear Arms with him at the Battle of Agincourt; thereby rewarding his veterane
Soldiers with a mark of Honor, who had achieved it in his last bloody
Victory; and punishing those Soldiers who were their own Carvers, and laid in
common the reward of Valor, Clausae an. 5. H. 5. in d^rso.
before they had opportunity to show it, or to receive the Royal approbation
and authority for the same. These are the words of the Record:

Rex vicecom. Suth. Salutem, quia prout informamur, diversi homines qui in
viagiis nostris ante haec tempora factus Arma and Tuninicas Armorum vocat Cote
Armures in se sumpserunt, A. 52. fol. 300. Penes Hen St. George Arm. Richmond.
ubi nec ipsi nec eorum A^tecessores hujusmodi Armis ac tunicis Armorum
temporibus retroactis usi fuerunt and ea in presenti viagio nostro in prox. deo
dante faciend' exercere proponunt: Et quamquam omnipotens suam gratiam disponat
prout vult in naturalibus equaliter, diviti atque pauperi, volentes tamen
quemlibet ligeorum nostrorum predictorum juxta status sui exigentiam modo
debito pertractari and haberi, Tibi precipimus quod in singulis locis infra
balivam tuam ubi per Breve nostrum nuper pro monstris faciend proclamari
demandavimus public ex part nostra proclamari facias; quod nullus cujuscunque
status gradus seu conditionis fuerit hujusmodi arma sive tunicas armorum in se
sumat nisi ipsi jure antecessorio vel ex donatione alicujus ad hoc sufficientem
potestatem habentis ea possideat aut possidere debeat, and quod ipse Arma (sive
Tunicas) illa ex cujus dono optinet die monstrationis suae personis ad hoc per
nos assignatis seu assignand manifest demonstret, exceptis illis qui nobiscum
apud bellum de Agincourt arma portabant, sub penis non admissionis ad
proficiscendum in viagio predicto, sub munere ipsius cum quo retentus existet
ac perditionis vaduorum suorum ex causa predicta preceptorum, nec non rasurae
and rupturae dictorum Armorum and Tunicarum vocat. Cote Armures tempore
monstrationis sue predicte si ea super illum monstrata fuerunt seu inventa, and
hoc nullatenus omittas T. R. apud Civitatem nove sarum secundo die Junii.

Per ipsum Regem. Anno 1417. King Henry's second Expedition into France.
Upon the 23d of July, in the fifth year of his Reign, Tho. Wall. p. 397. n. 5.
King Henry, with the Dukes of Clarence and Gloucester, most of his Nobility,
and an Army of 25628 fighting Men, Ypodigma Neust. p. 588. n. 58.
besides 1000 Artificers and Pioneers, took shipping at Portsmouth, and landed
the first of August in Normandy near Tongue; which Castle was the 9th day after
surrendered unto him: The Castle also of Abbeville was at the same time taken by
Thomas Mountague Earl of Salisbury; and King Henry next sits down before Caen
with his Army, which is shortly after delivered upon Terms; and from thence to
Roan, which City, after a brave resistance, being forced by famine, he likewise
obtained by surrender.

Anno 1418.
This prosperous proceeding of Henry V. caused John Duke of Burgundy, for his
own ends, Tho. Wall. p. 401. n. 35.
to mediate for a Peace between the two Crowns, and Ambassadors being sent, a
meeting of reconciliation was appointed, whereunto King Charles VI. being
troubled with a Frenzy, did not repair, but his Queen and beautiful Daughter
the Lady Katherine came; with whose person, at first fight, though King Henry
was wonderfully taken, yet made he no show thereof, only that at parting (since
nothing was that time effected) he told the Duke of Burgundy, he either would
enjoy the Lady Katherine, together with all his demands, or drive the King of
France out of his Kingdom, and him from his Dukedom.

Burgundy was shortly after (viz. 2 Sept. 1419.) most barbarously murdered by
the Dauphin Charles (who had a long time born him a spleen) as he made his
submission to him on his knee, Tho. Wall. p. 402. n. 37.
in the presence of his Peers; Anno 1419.
which his son Philip, Earl of Charolois sadly resenting, yet thought it better
to mediate for a Peace between the two Kingdoms than to seek revenge. He
therefore caused Ambassadors to be sent to King Henry, both from the King of
France and himself, who were kindly received, though King Henry intimated unto
them, that their propositions were not acceptable unto him, unless the Lady
Katherine would join with them, whose innocence he knew would not abuse him:
The Kings desire was granted; but in the interim, the Earl of Salisbury takes
Fresnay, and the Earl of Huntington, Main, who marching toward Ments, was
encountered by the Forces of the Dauphin, whereof he put 5000 to the Sword, and
took 200 Prisoners; for which Victories King Henry gave public thanks to God
at Roan: Thither other Ambassadors arrived from the King and Queen of France,
and a Letter from the Lady Katherine; which was secretly delivered to the King
of England by the Bishop of Arras; the substance of their business was to
invite the King to come with all speed to Troyes in Campaigne; there to receive
satisfaction to his demands, and be espoused to the Lady Katherine; whereupon,
with a guard of 15000 Soldiers, accompanied with all his Nobility; he arriving
there, was met by (the Queen of France, the Duchess of Burgundy, Histoire de la
Maison de France Tom. I. p, 504. and 505.
and) the Lady Katherine; whom on the 20th of May, 1420, King Henry affianced,
and was declared Regent of France, Anno 1410.
and Heir to that Crown (King Charles during his life to style him, Nostre
treschier filz Henry roy d'Engleterre Heretier de France) whereof proclamation
being made in both Kingdoms, the Nobility is sworn to observe them; as also the
Duke of Burgundy, with all the Subjects of account throughout each of their
Dominions. These were the chief Articles concluded by the two Kings (Queen
Isbel, the Duke of Burgundy, the Prince of Orange, and several Noblemen being
present.) So that upon the 3d of June following, His Marriage.
(being the morrow after Trinity Sunday) the Marriage of King Henry and the
Lady Katherine, with all pomp^ous solemnity was celebrated in the Church of St
Katherine at Troyes, by Henry de Sauoisy Archbishop of Sens.

This Queen, as appears by Charter, dated at her Castle of Hertford, is
styled, Katherine par la Grace de Dieu Royne d'Engleterre and de France, and
Fille a Charles Roy de France and Dame d' Ireland. To which is appendant her
Seal of red Wax (delineated in the 239th page of this fourth Book) on which is
impressed an Escocheon charged with the Arms of King Henry V. her Husband, viz.
Quarterly Azure, 3 Flowers de Lize Or, for the Kingdom of France and Gules, 3
Lions passant guardant, Or, being the Ensign of England; Impaling the Arms of
this Katherine, who did bear also Azure, 3 F^owers de Lize, Or, King Henry V.
having reduced the seme^ of Lizes to the number 3. in imitation of her Father
King Charles VI. of France. This Shield is crowned with a Royal Diadem, and
supported by two Antilopes, both gorged with Coronets, chained and linked
together under the base point of the Escocheon; being the first Supporters that
I have found born by any Queen of this Realm. The Seal is circumscribed
Sigillum Ratherine fi^e ^^rol^ ^egis France. Re^^^^ (...) Domine Hibernie. The
like Impalement (but without Crown or Supporters) stood painted in the Windows
of Christ-Church, near Newgate, London; and in many other places.
This Queen Katherine born upon the 27th day of October, Ibid. p. 497
An. 1400, was the youngest daughter of the said King of France, Charles VI.
and of Queen Issabel his Wife, daughter of Stephen Duke of Bavaria, Count
Palatine of the Rhine, and Lord of Ingolstade; she was upon the 14th of
February, in the year 1420, most magnificently Crowned at Westminster, by Henry
Chichley, Archbishop of Canterbury, whereat James I. Tho. Wall. p. 403. n. 60.
King of Scots was present; and at the Feast sat on her left hand, the Bishops
of Canterbury, and Winchester on her right; were served with silver covered
Messes, all of Fish, in devout observation of the Lent Season: surviving King
Henry (to whom she brought his only son named also Henry. Her second Marriage.
) This Queen was afterward espoused to Owen ap Merideth ap Tudor, a Welsh
Gentleman, and of the Court; Tho. Mille^ p. 612.
descended by Issue Male from Kenan, Tudor. Gules, a Cheveron inter 3 Helmets,
Argent.
the son of Coel King of Britain, and Brother to Hellen, Mother of Constantine
the Great. The meanness of whose Estate, was recompensed by the delicacy of his
Person, so absolute in all the lineaments of his Body, that the only
contemplation of it might make a Queen forget all other circumstances; by him
she had Issue three sons, Edmond, Jasper, and Owen, and a daughter that died in
her infancy. Stows Chron. p. 375.
Queen Katherine also departed this mortal life (upon the 3d day of January,
Her death. Ann 1437.
1437, in the 16th year of the Reign of Henry VI. her son, and of her age the
38th) in the Monastery of Bermondsey in Southwark; where she either took
sanctuary, or for devotion repaired. And on the 8th of February next following,
her Body was brought to St Katherines by the Tower, from thence to St Paul's,
and so to Westminster Abbey, where it was Interred, in the Chapel of our Lady;
but her Corpse being taken up in the Reign of King Henry VII. her Grandson, when
he laid the foundation of his new Chapel there, she was never since buried;
but remains still above ground in a Coffin of Boards, near the Sepulcher of
Henry V. her first Husband, by her erected in the Chapel of the Kings; (the
figure of which Coffin is marked with the Letter B. in the 281 page of this 4th
Book) near unto which, on a Tablet these Verses in Latin and English are
pencil'd.

Here lies Queen Katherine closed in Grave,
The French Kings daughter fair:
And of thy Kingdom ( Charles the Sixth)
The true redoubted Heir.
Twice joyful Wife in Marriage Matched,
To Henry Fifth by name:
Because through her he nobled was,
And shined in double fame,
The King of England by descent,
And by Queen Katherines right
The Realm of France he did enjoy,
Triumphant King of might.
A happy Queen to English Men
She came right grateful here:
And four days space they honored God,
With mouth and reverent fear.
Henry the Sixth this Queen brought forth,
In painful labors plight,
In whose Empire a French Man was,
And eke an English wight.
Under no lucky Planet born,
Unto himself nor Throne:
But equal with his Parents both,
In pure Religion.
Of Owen Tidder after this,
The next son Edmund was,
O Katherine, a renowed Prince
That did in glory pass.
Henry the Sevenh a Britain Pearl,
A gemme of Englands joy,
A Peerless Prince was Edmunds son,
A good and gracious roy.
Therefore a happy Wife this was,
A happy Mother pure,
Thrice happy child, but grandam she
More than thrice happy sure.
Hic Katherina jacet Francorum filia Regis, In Capella Regum p. 13. and 14.

Here Is et Regni (Carole Sexte) tui,
Henrici quinti thalamo bis leta jugali,
Nam sic vir duplici clarus Honor fuit:
Iure suo Anglorum, Katherine jure triumphans
Francorum obtinuit, jus decus imperii.
Grata venit letis felix Regina Britannis,
Perque dies celebrant quatuor ore Deum.
Edidit henricum gemebunda puerpera Regem,
Cujus in imperio Francus et Anglus erat.
Non sibi nec Regno felici sidere natum,
S^d patri et matri religione parem.
Post ex Owino Tuddero tertia proles,
Nobiles Edmundus te Katherina beat:
Septimus henricus quo non prestantior alter,
Filius Edmundi, gemma Britanna fuit.
Felix ergo uxor, matter, ter silia felix.
Ast Auia hec felix terque quaterque fuit.
OTIUM FUGE. The Salique Law thus broken, the very next day after the Marriage,
being the 4th of June, King Henry, with the French King, the King of Scots, the
Duke of Burgundy, and Prince of Orange, 21 Earls, 45 Barons, many Knights and
Gentlemen, with an Army consisting of English, French, Scotch, Irish, and
Dutch, to the number of 60000, marched in quest of the Dauphin; and on the 7th
day of June, Tho. Wall. p. 406. n. 49.
laid siege to the Town of Seine, Anno 1422.
which after four days was yielded; thence to Monstreu, which by force was
taken, the Castle only held out; during the Siege whereof, King Henry created a
new King of Arms, to be principal Herald of the Order of St George, which he
styled Garter, whom he sent with offers of mercy to the Castle; but returning
with nothing but reproaches, a Gibbet was erected in sight of the Captain,
whereon 12 of his friends were executed: This Siege continued six weeks; when
enforced by famine, the Besieged delivered it upon mercy.

The King from hence marched to Melan upon Seine, and the 30th of July laid
siege to it; which was most valiantly defended by one Barbason, a Gascoigne,
who fought at Barriers hand to hand with King Henry; yet through Pestilence and
Famine Barbason was forced to yield; and being suspected to have had a hand in
the death of John Duke of Burgundy, was sent Prisoner to Paris; whither both
Kings with their Queens, the Duke and Duchess of Burgundy, and a Royal Train
immediately followed: where the three Estates of France, under Hand and Seal,
ratified again King Henry's succession to the Crown of France, the Instruments
whereof were by him sent to be kept in the Treasury at Westminster.

King Henry now begins to exercise his Regency; causes a new Coin to be made
called a Salute, whereon the Arms of France and England were quarterly stamped:
appoints the Duke of Exceter with 500 Men for the guard of Paris; and sends out
his Process against the Dauphin to appear at the Marble Table at Paris; which
he not obeying, is by Sentence of Parliament banished the Kingdom, as guilty of
the Duke of Burgundys death. And on the 6th of January following (having
constituted his Brother the Duke of Clarence, his Lieutenant General of France
and Normandy) departs with his Queen from Paris to Amiens, thence to Calais,
and landing at Dover, passes through London to the Palace of Westminster.

Mean while, in France, the Duke of Clarence having made an inrode into Anjou,
and returning home laden with Prey, was betrayed by his Scout-master into an
Ambush of the Duke of Alenzon; where, Tho. Wall. p. 404. n. 45.
with the Earls of Tanquerville and Angus, the Lord Roos, and above 200 English
more, he lost his life, though most valiantly disputed.

This sad disaster happened upon Easter Eve, An. 1422. whereof King Henry
having advice, Anno 1422.
being upon his progress for the Queens divertisement at Beverly, presently
dispatches the Earl of Mortaign into Normandy; and about the middle of May
himself follows; and landing at Calais, hastens to the relief of Chartres,
which the Dauphin Charles with 7000 Men had besieged; who hearing of the Kings
approach, retires to Tours: mean while, the King of Scots and Duke of Gloucester
about the 8th of July take Dreux by surrender; King Henry pursuing the Dauphin
from one place to another; though he could by no means overtake him; yet in his
way gained all the Fortresses which had withstood him in the Isle of France,
Lovaine, Brie, and Campaigne.

The Dauphin about this time sits down before a Town of the Duke of Burgundy's,
Tho. Wall. p. 406. n. 53.
called Cossney; which King Henry endeavoring by hasty marches to relieve, so
much overheated himself with Travel, that he fell sick (at a place named
Suley) of a Fever and Flux; from whence he sent John Duke of Bedford to raise
that Siege; upon whose appearance the Dauphin flies to Berry; and the King of
England is removed to Bois de Vincennes; where growing worse and worse, having
made the Duke of Bedford Regent of France, and Governor of Normandy, the Duke
of Gloucester Protector of England, and of his Infant son Prince Henry's Person,
exhorting all his Nobles to be faithful unto him, Tho. Wall. p. 407. n. 6.
and serviceable to the Queen. He departed this life, St Marthe p. 505.
(repeating a Psalm of David) upon the last day (St Marthe says the 29th) of
August, 1422, His death. Anno 1422.
in the 34th year of his age, having Reigned 9 years, 5 Months, and 14 days.

Immediately after the Kings death, Stowe Chron. p. 362. and 363.
his Bowels were Interred in the Church of St More de Fosses, and his Corpse
being imbalmed, was enclosed in Lead, and accompanied solemnly to Paris, and
there deposited in the Church of Nostre Dame, where his Exequies were
performed, from whence he was brought to Roan, and there remained till all
things necessary for the conveyance of his Body into England were prepared. He
was laid in a Chariot drawn by four Horses; and above the Corpse was his Figure
made of boiled Hides or Leather, representing his Person; and painted to the
life: upon whose Head, was set an Imperial Diadem of Gold and precious Stones;
on his Body, a Purple Robe, Furred with Ermine; in his right Hand he had a
Scepter Royal, and in his left a Ball of Gold, with a Cross fixed thereon. As
the Chariot passed through any Town of Note, there was born over it a Canopy of
great value, by Persons of Quality. In this manner, being accompanied by the
King of Scots, besides other Princes, Lords, and Knights of his Household, he
was brought from Roan to Abbeville; from whence, resting at Hedin Monstrevil
and Bulloigne, they came to Calais, the Queen-Dowager still following at two
Miles distant with her Retinue.

From Calais they set sail, Tho. Wall. p. 406. n. 53.
and about the 10th of November arrived at London, where the Body was reposed
in the Cathedral of St Paul. Upon the covering of the foremost of the four
Horses that conveyed the Chariot, were embroidered the Ancient Arms of England;
upon the second, the Arms of England and France in one Shield quarterly; upon
the coverture of the third Horse, was embroidered the Arms of France alone, and
on the monument Illustrissimo Domino^, D^o. GVLIELMO Comiti BEDFORDLE, Baroni
RUSSEL, et Baroni Russel de Thornhaugh, Nobilissimi Ordinis Garterij Eguiti
Sacellum hoc HENRICI V.t Regis; HD. F S.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE F Barloi^ Delin
R Gaywood fecit
fourth, were the Arms of King Arthur, viz. Three Crowns Gold in a Field Azure.

His Exequies being solemnized in St Paul's, he was brought from thence and
Interred in the Abbey of St Peter at Westminster, at the Feet of King Edward the
Confessor, in a little Chapel, since enlarged and beautified with several
Statues, and fenced with two Iron Grates, by King Henry VII. according to the
Figure inserted in the preceding page.

In which a Royal of Image Silver gilt, was placed upon his Tomb, erected by
Queen Katherine his Widow; but about the latter end of King Henry VIII. the
head of the Kings Image (being of Massy Silver) was broken off, and conveyed
away, with the Plates of Silver that covered his Trunck, which now only remains
(of heart of Oak) to witness against those that sacriligeously stole it away;
and his Epitaph defaced, which was but these two silly Verses:

Dux Normanorum, Verus Conquestor eorum
Here Is Francorum decessit, et Hector eorum.
monument Honoratissimo et Nobilissimo Domino Dno^ IOHANNI BELASYSE Baroni de
WORLABYE, Capitaneo-Generali et Gubernatori Civitatis de Tangier in Africa
Comitatus Eboracensis lo cum-tenentium vni Regiae Majestatis D. Caroli Secundi
no bilium Stipatorum Duct, et Gubernatori villoe de Hull -- Tumuli hanc HENRICI
V.ti Regis Imaginem H.D.F. S.

HONE ET BELLE ^ASSEZ


Here you have the Form of his Monument of Gray Marble, as it now remains; but
the head of his Effigies, covering of his Trunck, and his Regalia (having been
all of Silver and stolen away) are supplied by this shadow, copied from an
original Picture of him in the Royal Palace of Whitehall.

From King Henry's Acts of Valor, proceed we now to his Works of Piety and
Magnificence; which were, the rebuilding his Mannor-House of Sheene, now called
Richmond; his Foundations of the two Monasteries, Ypodigma Neust. p. 578. n.
47. Tho. Wall. p. 387. n. 13.
(not far from it) one of Carthusians, which he called Bethlem; the other of
Religious Men and Women, of the Order of St Bridget, which he named Syon. The
Brotherhood of St Giles without Cripple Gate, was also of his Foundation.

A Son of King HENRY V. by Queen KATHERINE of France his Wife.
13. HENRY of WINDSOR, only Son of King Henry V. was Prince of Wales, Duke of
Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, He succeeded his Father in the Kingdom of
England, being yet a Child; and was not long after, Crowned King of France, at
Paris: vide, the following Chapter.

Children of KATHERINE of VALOIS, Queen of England, by OWEN TUDOR, her second
Husband.
13. This Edmond leaving off the Arms of the family of Tudor, did bear the
Royal Arms of King Henry 6. his half Brother, with the distinction of a Border
Azure, charged with Flowers de Lys and Martletts, Or. The Flowerde-luces
showing him to be descended from the Blood Royal of France; and the Martletts,
being the Arms of King Edward the Confessor, were born by King Richard 2. in
Pale, with his Royal Coat, and granted in augmentation to several of his
Nobility; whose example, no doubt was followed by this Pious King Henry VI.
Edmond's half Brother, in the grant of this distinction of the Martlets to him.
Which Coat is Impaled with the Arms of his Wife Margaret Beaufort, at the head
of her Tomb in King Henry VII. his Chapel in Westminster Abbey; and also on
the Monument of Queen Elizabeth, their great granddaughter.
EDMOND TVDOR, Earl of Richmond, Surnamed of Hadham, the Queen his Mothers
Mannor-House and place of his birth, was the eldest Son of Owen Tudor, and
Queen Katherine of Valois, Dowager to King Henry V. and so consequently half
Brother to Henry VI.

He was created into the Dignity of Earl of Richmond, per cincturam gladii,
etc. and to have place in Parliament next after Dukes, by Creation dated at
Reading on the 23 of November (the Parliament Role says the 6th day of March)
An. 31 H. 6. in the year 1452; Chart. an. 31 H. 6.
notwithstanding that Arthur Duke of Britain, was then living and did use that
Title. He departed this life the first of November, in the year 1456. An. 35 H.
6. having not enjoyed this Honor of Earl much above four years; and was buried
in the Gray Friars at Caermardin in Southwales; Penes Tho. Canon equit. aurat
from whence, his Remains (it seems) upon the suppression of that Abbey were
removed; for Sir Thomas Canon of Pembrokeshire, informs me, that his Tomb (from
the Verge of which he transcribed the following Epitaph) is in the Cathedral
Church of St David.

Under this Marble Stone here enclosed, rests the Bones of that most Noble
Lord Edmond Earl of Richmond. Father and Brother to Kings. The which, departid
out of this World in the year of out Lord God 1456. the first of the month of
November, on whose Soul Almighty-Ieshu have mercy, Amen.

This Edmond married Margaret the sole Daughter and Heir of John Beaufort Duke
of Someset, son of John Earl of Somerset, a son of John Duke of Lancaster,
fourth son of King, Edward III. and by her had Issue their only son Henry Earl
of Richmond; who having slain Richard III. the last Plantagenet King at
Bosworth Field, had the Crown set on his head, by the name of Henry VII. and
first King of England and France of the Surname of Tudor.

13. Having made some observations upon the Arms of his elder Brother Earl
Edmond. I now come to those of this Jasper, which were, quarterly, France and
England, a Border of St Edward the Confessor, viz. Azure, 8 Martletts Or,,
which are painted in the Hall-Window of Saxham in the County of Suffolk, with
this Motto written obliquely in the same Windows, Change Truth for Maistery.
Penes Johannem Knight in Medicina Doctorem.
JASPER TVDOR, Duke of Bedford, and Earl of Pembroke, second son of Owen Tudor,
and Queen Katherine, Surnamed of Hatfeild, from her Mannor-House of that Name
in Herfordshire, where he had his birth; was by King Henry VI. his half
Brother, created Earl of Pembroke, Chartae 31 H. 6.
in the 31 year of his Reign, An. 1452. and to have place in Parliament next
after his Elder Brother Edmond Earl of Richmond. But after that King Edward IV.
had forced King Henry VI. out of his Kingdom, this Jasper was attainted, and
William Lord Herbert, created Earl of Pembroke in his room, An. 1462. which
Honor (his Patent mentions) was granted him, in consideration of his expelling
Jasper the Rebel. Upon the death of this William, slain at Banbury, his son,
named also William, succeeded him in the Earldom of Pembroke.

Afterward Henry VI. by the assistance of Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick,
recovering the Crown, Jasper was again restored to be Earl of Pembroke in the
year 1470; but being taken Prisoner at Burnet Field, in April following, An
1471. he lost this Earldom the second time; which being surrendered by the
second William Lord Herbert to King Edward IV. he gave it to Prince Edward his
son, who enjoyed it during his life.

King Richard III. held also this Earldom, till, at the Battle of Bosworth, he
lost his Crown and life to Henry Earl of Richmond, who succeeding Richard by
the name of Henry VII. not only restored this Jasper his Uncle to the Earldom
of Pembroke (the third time) by creation, Chart. an. 1 H. 7. p. 1
bearing date at Westminster the 27th of October, in the first year of his
Reign, Pat. an. 4. H. 7.
An. 1485. but also advanced him to the Dignity of Duke of Bedford. The same
King constituted Duke Jasper, Steward, Pat. an. 4. H. 7.
at the Coronation of his Queen, Elizabeth of York, on the 10th of November, in
the third year of his Reign: and on the first of October, An. 4th of H. 7th, he
was made Lieutenant of Ireland for one year; Pat. an. 5. H. 7.
and on the 17th of February in year following this Duke had the Office of Earl
Marshal of England granted to him, and the Heirs Male of his Body, with an
Annuity of 20 l. per annum. Pat an. 1. H. 7.


The Arms of of this Jasper and this Katherine Woodvile his Wife, are impaled
in a Book in the College of Arms marked M. 14. Hers being Argent, a Fesse and
Canton Gules. They are in a Lozenge Crowned Or.
He took to Wife Katherine daughter of Richard Woodvile Earl Rivers (the Widow
of Henry Stafford Duke of Buckingham, Inq. an. 11. H. 7. n. 172.
Constable of England) and deceased (without lawful Issue) on the 21 day of
December, Vox. 33. in Officio Praerogat.
in the 11th year of Henry VII. and according to his last Testament, was
Interred in the Abbey of Keynsham; where he founded a Chantry for four Priests,
to sing Mass for the Souls of his Father, of Katherine sometime Queen of
England his Mother, and of Edmond late Earl of Richmond his Brother.

14. The Arms of Gardener are, Sable, a Cheveron inter three Bugle Horns
Argent, garnished, Or, which are impaled with the Coat of this Helen, viz.
Quarterly France and England, a Border Azure charged with 8 Martletts Or, a
Baston senister Or, vide D. 4. p. 31 in Coll. Arm.
HELEN, D. 4. fol. 31 in Coll. Armorum.
the Natural Daughter of Jasper Duke of Bedford, was married to William
Gardener of London Esquire and they had Issue Stephen Gardener, Lord Prior of
Tinmouth, afterward Bishop of Winchester.

13. OWEN TVDOR, third son of Owen and Queen Katherine, took upon him a
Religious Habit in the Abbey of Westminster.

13. HENRY VI. KING of ENGLAND and FRANCE, An. Dom. 1422. Aug. 31.
and LORD of IRELAND, Surnamed of WINDSOR.
CHAP. IV.
Affixed to a Charter (of this King Henry VI. dated the 9th day of July, an.
23. H. 6.) is his Seal of green Wax, so exactly agreeing in all particulars
with that of his Grandfather Henry IV. (if not the same) that I need not insert
the Figure thereof here, but refer my Reader to the former; the Surcoat of the
King, his Shields, and the Caparirisons of his Horse being also charged with
semee of Flowers de Lys; whereas his Father Henry V. reduced them to three
Flowers, as in apparent in his Seal. In Registro Westmonast. In his other great
Seal, ( vide p. 240.) he is figured on his Throne in Royal Robes, with his
Crown on his Head (not arched) holding in his right Hand the Golden Scepter of
the Flower-de-Luce, and in his Left, the Ivory Rod and Hand of Justice, betwixt
two Shields crowned; (which are the first Escocheons that I find adorned with
Coronets, in the Royal Seals) that on the right side containing the Arms of
France alone, and that on the left side, the Coats of France and England
quarterly. He treads upon two Lions, and the Seal is circumscribed, HENRICUS
DEI GRACIA FRANCORUM ET ANGLIE REX. The Counter-Seal is not above two inches
diameter, containing the two Shields before-named (but not crowned) and the
Scepter and Rod sustained by an Angel, according to the manner of the French
Royal Reverses, who never charge them with their Figures on Horseback, as do
the Kings of England.

His Rose Noble (vide Speed p. 810.) so called, because upon the Reverse was
stamped his Arms upon that Rose) shows you his Royal Effigies crowned with an
Arched Diadem, and him to be the first of our Kings that wore it, which has
been ever since continued by our succeeding Kings.

His Arms were supported by two Antilopes Argent, attired, accolled with
Coronets and chained, Or, and are so carved over the Gate at Eaton College,
and were so painted in a North Window of St Stephens Church in Walbrook, London.

The Devise of King Henry VI, was, two Feathers in Saltire.


HENRY VI. of the Name (only Child of King Henry V. and Katherine of Valois,
youngest daughter of Charles VI. the French King) was born at Windsor, upon St
Nicholas's day, Tho. Wa^. p. 406. n. 13.
in the year of our Lord 1421. and baptized by the Duke of Bedford, Bishop of
Winchester, and Countess of Holland, whereof the King his Father (being then in
France) having information, Prophetically spoke to this purpose, I Henry of
Monmouth shall gain much in my short Reign, but Henry of Windsor will Reign
much longer and loose all, but Gods Will be done.

He was Proclaimed King, being not yet aged 9 Months, Titus Livius.
Exceter and Winchester his great Uncles appointed his Guardians; who so
carefully appeared in their Loyalty to the Son, that their love to the Father
was evidently seen. The Duke of Bedford was appointed Regent of France, having
two valiant assistants, Thomas Mountague Earl of Salisbury, and John Lord
Talbot; and among the French themselves, the Duke of Burgundy, a friend no less
powerful than firm to him. The Dauphin likewise had on his side the Duke of
Alenzon, with several other Peers of France; by which means, the uncertainty of
Fortune was seldom or never more seen than in the daily transactions between
them.

The French King Charles deceasing within little more than a Month after King
Henry, Ibidem p. 407. n. 31.
the Dauphin at Poictiers caused himself to be Crowned King of France, by the
name of Charles VII. while the Regent called a Council at Paris, to whom he
made so effectual a Speech, Polid Vir. Hist. Lib. 23.
that the young King Henry VI. is there Proclaimed King of France and England,
all the French Lords present, doing their Homage and taking their Oaths of
Fidelity.

Stowes Annals.
The Dukes of Burgundy and Britain renew their old League with the Regent at
Amiens, Anno 1423.
where he marries the Duke of Burgundy's sister, and the Parisians taking
advantage of his absence, resolve to betray that City to the King Charles, but
are prevented by the Regents entrance into Paris the night before it should
have been delivered, who put the Conspirators to death, furnishing all the
strong Holds with English, and taking in Tranels and Bray upon Seine, whilst
Sir John Fastolf mastered Pacy and Coursay.

The Constable of France, with the new Kings Forces laying siege to Cravant in
Burgundy, were set upon by Salisbury, who, after a long Fight, slew 1800
Knights and Men of Name, and 3000 common Soldiers, took the Constable Prisoner,
with the Earl of Ventadour, and 2200 Gentlemen. Of the English were slain Sir
John Gray, Sir William Hall, Sir Gilbert Hassal, and 2100 Soldiers; from thence
the Earl led his Forces to Montaguillon, which after five Months siege he took.
The Earl of Suffolk at the same time forcing the strong Castles of Cowcy and le
Rethe.

About this time John Duke of Britain and his Brother are wrought upon
(notwithstanding their Oath) to deliver up to the French the Castles of Crotoye
and Yerny. And the Regent being reinforced with 10000 fresh Soldiers, not only
wins many Towns and Places of strength, but falls upon Crotoye before the
French were well settled, recovers it, and besieges Yerny. To the relief of
which, comes the Duke of Alanson, with 16000 French; but seeing the English
prepared to receive them, about he wheels to Vernoil, Paul Aemil.
swearing he had defeated the Regent, and had that Town delivered unto him.
Battle of Vernoil. Anno 1425.
Upon which, the Regent follows him thither, Hector Boethius lib. 16
and engaging him in a pitched Battle (with the loss of the Lords Dudley and
Charlton, and 2100 English) slew of the French 5 Earls, 2 Viscounts, 20 Barons,
beside private Soldiers. The Duke of Alanson their General, with several other
Noblemen were made Prisoners. This Battle was fought upon 7th of August, 1425.

Vernoyle hereupon re^delivered; the Earl of Salisbury with 10000 Men, took the
strong Towns of Maunts, St Susan, Port St Bernard, Rob. Fabian. Chron.
and others, whence marching into Anjou, he performed such heroic Acts, that
his name grew terrible to all France, evidenced at St James' in Bueron, where
the Garrison consisting only of 600 English, besieged by the Constable of France
with 40000, being driven to extremity, made a Sally, and crying St George a
Salisbury, the whole Army supposing him to be come to their rescue, throwing
away their Weapons, ran away, leaving their Tents, Provisions of War, and some
Treasure behind them. Sir John Mountgomery and Sir John Fastolf take several
Castles, and the Earl of Salisbury forces above 40 more to surrender.

At which time, an unkind variance fell out between the Nephew and the Uncle,
Fox his Martyrologie in H. 6.
the Lord Protector and the Bishop of Winchester, which the Regent came
purposely from France to appease, and in Parliament performed; for joy whereof,
the young King making a great Feast, and being first Knighted himself by the
Regent, not yet aged four years, honored several others therewith, and created
Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York, and John Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk.

All things thus peaceably settled in England, Anno 1427.
the Regent with his Uncle the Bishop of Winchester return into France; where,
by mediation of the Duke of Burgundy, the Duke of Alenson is ransomed for
200000 Crowns, and the Bishop returning for England, is at Calais invested with
the Hat of a Cardinal, which the Regent first put upon his Head. Humphrey Duke
of Gloucester the Protector, blemisheth much his reputation, by marrying
Jaqueline Duchess of Heynalt, another man's Wife, who had been espoused to the
Duke of Brabant, and lived with him 10 Months. And now in France, the Earl of
Warwick and Lord Scales slay many hundreds of the French. Sir John Fastolf
likewise besieging the strong Town of Gravile, had Pledges given him, that if
within 12 days relief came not, the place should be surrendered; whereof the
Besieged failing, had their Pledges hanged under the Walls of the Castle. The
Town of Maunts, by conspiracy of the Clergy and some Citizens was at midnight
(the guard of English slain) set open to the Marshal of France; who entering the
Town with 500 Men: whilst they pillaged the houses, and rejoiced at the
surprise, were by the Earl of Suffolk and Lord Talbot from the Castle,
surprised themselves, 400 of them slain, and the rest taken; 30 Citizens, 15
Friars, 20 Priests, all Conspirators, condemned and executed.

Whilst things thus prospered in France, Anno 1428.
Thomas Duke of Exceter dies in England, whose Office of Guardian to the young
King is supplied by the Earl of Warwick, and his Place in France, by Tho.
Mountague Earl of Salisbury; who besieging Orleance, won the great Fort, where,
looking out of a Window upon the Town, Paul Aemil.
was unfortunately wounded with a great shot by a splinter, in his head, Polid.
Vir. lib. 23.
whereof within eight days he died, and with him, much of the English good
Fortune in France: for though by the Lord Talbot and Sir John Fastolf, many
notable services were performed at that place, yet the siege at last was forced
to withdraw; besides this, the Town of Jarjeux is taken by the Duke of Alenson,
and in it, the Earl of Suffolk; to second which disaster, the Lords Talbot,
Scales, and Hungerford, going to fortify Meum, were set upon by the Duke of
Alenson, and Arthur Duke of Britain with 23000 Men; where, valiantly fighting,
but oppressed with multitude, they were all three made Prisoners, and 1200 of
their companions slain.

Salisbury thus slain, and Talbot taken, whose very names were often approved
sufficient to overthrow great Armies of the French, did, as needs it must,
create a great ferocity in them, as in the English the contrary: yet the Duke
of Bedford the Regent, to let them see that all the English Courage remained
not only in those two heroic Men, with 10000 English and some Normans sets
forth from Paris, and bids defiance to the French King to join Battle if he
durst; but all would not provoke him to it; wherefore matching toward him with
what speed he could make, King Charles as fast fled away, whom the Regent as
vigorously pursued from place to place; yet afraid of being drawn too far from
Paris, not without great cause, doubting their fidelity there; since the French
King could by no means be gotten to fight, he returned thither.

Anno 1429. His Coronation at Westminster.
King Henry VI. having not yet arrived to the eighth year of his age, is upon
the sixth day of November, An. 1429. with great solemnity Crowned at
Westminster, by Henry Chichley Archbishop of Canterbury, where he created 36
Knights of the Bath.

About which time, Polid. Virg.
in France, began that strange Virago the Puselle d'Orleance to appear, taking
upon her to be one sent from God for the expulsion of the English from thence;
Serres Invent.
and by subtle Stratagems, obtained that many Towns in Campaigne were
surrendered to the French King; who, now, in the Regent's absence, drew all his
Forces to Paris, which he fiercely assaulted, but was as strongly repulsed, and
forced to quit the place, leaving all his slain and maimed Soldiers behind him.
After which, some services are performed by the Earl of Suffolk and Sir Thomas
Kyrriel on the English part, and by the Bastard of Orleance for the French,
till, at last, the Puselle, by Sir John of Lutzemberge was taken, and by the
Regent sent to Roan, where she was burnt for a Witch. And now the Regent, to
advance the interest of young King Henry, his Nephew, sends for him to come to
Paris; into which City, he was solemnly received on the 17th of November, Anno
1431. He is Crowned in Paris.
1431. and magnificently Crowned King of France, Paul. Aemil.
in the Church of Nostre Dame, John Fillet Chron.
by his great Uncle Henry Cardinal of St Eusebius; and had Homage, and Fealty
sworn unto him, by all the French Nobility there present; the places adjacent
following the example of Paris did the like. After whose Coronation, there grew
much division between the two Nations; but after many Councils called, and all
things agreed, the King returns into England.

But now began the English Fortune in France utterly to sink down, wounded by a
fatal dissension, Anno 1435.
falling out betwixt the Dukes of Burgundy and Bedford the Regent; whereupon,
the first revolted to the French, and the other, in the height of all his
valiant Acts, dying at Paris, had his place of Regency supplied with no less
contention, between the Dukes of Somerset and York, the first desiring, but the
latter obtaining it; Holi^sh.
which bred so much envy in Somerset, that in all things laboring to cross
York's designs, was a means of keeping him so long from his charge, that Paris
revolting, was yielded to the Constable of France, Anno 1436.
after it had been possessed by the English seventeen years; Stowes Chron.
many Fortresses afterward following the same example.

Which also, even in Normandy had been done, had not the Lord Talbot awed them
with the slaughter of 5000 of those that inclined to a defection, whilst in
Picardy and all other parts of France, Bribery was so common, that it grew a
Trade, and at last, a Town or Castle yielded but very little Money to the
Betrayer, notwithstanding the severity used by the Lord Talbot to all such whom
he could take and find guilty. The Earl of Mortaign, son of Edmond Duke of
Somerset, with 200 Archers, and 300 Spears being sent him; and afterward Sir
Richard Woodvile, Sir William Chamberlain, and William Peto, with more force,
to stop the current of corruption.

The English now having their hands full of employment only in keeping what
they had, and regaining somewhat of those great losses which by treachery they
had sustained, and with the expense of much blood purchased. Ponthois had the
fortune indeed to be taken by a stratagem of the Lord Clifford without blood of
the English, Anno 1438.
but is seconded with a greater misfortune by the death of Richard Beauchamp,
Earl of Warwick at Roan. After which, a Treaty of Peace at Calais procured by
the Duchess of Burgundy, produced no other effect than the releasement of the
Duke of Orleance for 300000 Crowns (of the Duke of Burgundys Money) who had been
Prisoner in England 25 years: much to the dissatisfaction of the Duke of
Gloucester, Rot. Patent de an. 18. H. 6.
who not only protested against his enlargement, but caused his reasons to be
Registered on Record, that they might remain for a Testimony and discharge of
his duty in that behalf.

Thus long, though possessed of much, yet with little benefit in France, and
every day loosing twice more than is gained. In England, a more unnatural
discord is fomented between the Cardinal and the Duke of Gloucester; the Duke
accusing the Cardinal with affecting Preheminency, contempt of Laws, and
derogation of the Kings Prerogative. And he again, Stowes Annal.
finding nothing wherewithal directly to accuse the Duke, finds enough against
the Duchess Eleanor his second Wife, how that by Magic, she had endeavored
the Kings death, for which she was doomed to perpetual banishment in the Isle
of Man, and her Accomplices condemned to death, and some of them executed.

A Marriage is proposed between King Henry and the Earl of Armignacks daughter,
with whom her Father offers the possession of all such Towns and Castles as
were by him kept in Aquitaine, formerly to the Kings of England belonging, with
a large Sum of Money; which to prevent, the King of France sends the Dauphin
with a great Army, who not only took the Earl himself, and his son, with his
two daughters, but most of his Country; whereby that Match became wholly
suspended.

Shortly after which, the Kings of Spain, Denmark, and Hungary, becoming
Mediators of Peace betwixt the two Crowns of England and France, a Truce of 18
Months is agreed on. And further, William de la Pole Earl of Suffolk, beyond
his Commission, and without acquainting the rest of his fellow Commissioners,
Speed p. 684.
takes upon him to propose a Marriage between King Henry VI. and Margaret
daughter of Reyner Duke of Anjou, Anno 1444.
(Titular King of Jerusalem, Sicilie, Aragon, Valence, etc.) and Issabel his
Wife, third daughter of Charles Duke of Lorraine) in the City of Nancy, 1444.
in presence, and with the consent of the King of France Charles VII. and Queen
Mary of Anjou, Aunt by the Fathers side to the said Margaret: in which, Suffolk
proceeds so far with the King his Master, by proposing the great beauty of the
Lady, and some supposed advantages, that notwithstanding the opposition of the
Duke of Gloucester the Kings Uncle, the Earl of Suffolks affirmation takes
place: whereupon, he is created Duke of Suffolk, and sent into France to fetch
the Bride; His Marriage. Anno 1445.
who within a short time after, is conveyed into England, and at Southwick in
Hampshire, solemnly married to King Henry, upon the 22 of April, The Arms of
this Margaret, Wife to King Henry VI. are carved in Stone over the inner Gate
of Queens College in Cambridge, by her Founded, being Quarterly of six pieces,
viz. 1. Barry of 8 Argent, and Gules, Hungary. 2. Azure, semee of Flowers de
Lys Or, a Label of 3 points, Gules, Naples. 3. Argent a Cross crouche inter 4
Crosselets Or, Jerusalem. 4. Azure, semee of Flowers de Lys Or, a Border Gules,
Anjou. 5. Azure, semee of Crosse-croslets fitche, and 2 Barbells adorsee Or,
Bar, and 6, Or, on a Bend Gules 3 Eaglets, Argent, Lorrain. The same six
Quarterings are impaled with those of King Henry her Husband (being quarterly
France and England) in a Chancel-Window of Ricot Chapel in the County of
Oxford. Penes H. St George Ar. Richmond I. 33 p. 52. b. From whence I observe,
that although Edward IV. was the first King of England from the Conquest, that
made a Queen of his Subject, Elizabeth Woodvile Lady Gray, and she the first
Subject which multiplied Quarterings; yet had she president or example from
this Queen Margaret of Anjou, the Wife of her Husbands Predecessor; as is
evident by the six several Quarterings beforementioned.


1445, and upon the 30th of May following, magnificently Crowned at Westminster
by John Stafford Archbishop of Canterbury; upon which, in the place of a
benefit, inconveniences follow; Normandy is lost, and the English quite shut
out of Aquitaine.

And now, not to trouble our selves with France, we have more than enough to do
at home; most of which proceeding from the envy of the Duk of Somerset, against
Richard Duke of York's Regency; from which, now by the Marquis of Suffolk's
means (through whose hands all favors both from King and Queen pass) he is
discharged, and the Duke of Somerset received; York wisely forbearing to
discover his discontent, suffers Suffolk with his Faction to go on in their
way, which he well observes is so full of Pride and Ambition, that it cannot
last long. Besides, the Duke of Gloucester, being now called to account, and
committed to Prison (all his servants taken from him, and himself at last
privately murdered; in whose welfare only, though neither the King nor Queen
saw it, consisted the whole welbeing of them and all their partakers) had the
fate to be removed without any hand of the Duke of York, but theirs, in whose
destruction they wrought their own.

Thus York, obscuring his intended design of obtaining the Crown, saw all
things of themselves run directly toward the perfecting of his intended Work:
for now happened the death of the great and rich Cardinal the Bishop of
Winchester; the Dukes Somerset and Suffolk continuing in their greatness, came
at last to be envyed by the Commons; Halls Chron.
to whose charge (in a Parliament assembled in the Black Friars) is laid the
loss of Normandy, Anjou, and Maine; and Suffolk to have been chief in the Duke
of Glocester's death; with many other high crimes; by which continual
accusation of both Houses, the King at last is forced to sign his Banishment
for five years; in pursuance of which, as he sailed for France, Duke of Suffolk
beheaded.
he was taken by an English Ship of War, and on Dover sands beheaded.

The Duke of York now in Ireland, Anno 1451.
began to declare to his friends there his Title to the Crown; whose first
advantage was to create, Stowes Annals.
by one Mortimer a creature of his, commonly called Jack Cade, an Insurrection
in Kent; Cades Insurrection in Kent.
upon pretense of reformation of Taxes and Abuses in the State; who calling
himself Captain Mendall, came to Black Heath, where he drew up his Forces, and
staying sometime there, peremptorily commanded the City of London to send him
whatsoever necessaries he wanted; whereupon, the Queen sending the two
Staffords, Sir Humphrey and Sir William, with some other resolute Courtiers to
follow Cade; who, before, upon the Kings appearance with an Army, had withdrawn
himself into Seaven-Oak-Wood; contrary now to expectation, when the Staffords
came, they found him in a good posture to receive them; so that upon their
first Encounter, they were both slain, and all the rest put to flight; whereof
King Henry being advertised, having before, for satisfaction of the Rebels, who
demanded it, sent the Lord Say to the Tower, and committed the Government
thereof the Lord Scales, fled himself to Killingworth Castle. Of whose absence
Cade taking advantage, marches into London, and coming by London Stone, strikes
it with his Sword, saying, Now is Mortimer Lord of London. He acted nothing in
this his first visit to the disquiet of the City, but marched to Black Heath
again; from whence, as Chief, he sent out his Letters of Safe Conduct to whom
he pleased. In his next appearance in London, which was the 3d of July 1446, he
began to exercise his cruelty; when sending to the Lord Scales to bring his
Prisoner the Lord Say to Guildhall, he caused him to be arraigned before the
Lord Mayor and his Brethren; but pleading to be tried by his Peers, he is
immediately brought to the Standard in Cheap, and there beheaded, Cade causing
his head to be carried before him to Mileend; where meeting Sir James Cromar,
the Lord Says Son-in-Law, his head is likewise taken off, to keep his Fathers
company; and like Maces they are born before the Commander of this tumultuous
Rabble. The next morning returning again into London, he makes examples of some
of his Followers for breach of his Proclamation; seises on the goods of
Alderman Malpas, and fines Alderman Horn in 500 Marks: by which the Citizens
finding that he who pretended to redress Grievances, was the greatest Grievance
himself; they Petitioned the Lord Scales to send them a party of the Tower
Soldiers, with good store of Ammunition and Harness; wherewith arming
themselves, they withstood Cade at his next entrance into the City; who,
nevertheless, brake through them, and set fire to several Houses; whereupon a
fresh supply advancing, he was forced to retire beyond the Stoop in Southwark;
upon which check, Cade's Followers having time till next morning to consider
into what danger their Captain had drawn them; upon promise of Pardon by the
Archbishop of Canterbury and Bishop of Winchester, they almost all left him,
and returned home; himself, with some few, fled to Quinborrow Castle; but being
denied entrance, he disguised himself, passed into Sussex, and was taken by one
Alexander Eden, and making some resistance, by him slain: his body sent to
London, was divided into quarters, and disposed of into several parts of the
Country.

Upon this Insurrection, Charles VII. taking advantage, Anno 1451.
seizes upon all that the English had left in France, Calais only excepted,
with the two Castles of Hames and Guisnes; by which, Edmond Duke of Somerset's
Regency of France terminated; whereupon, coming for England, he is in a
Parliament held at Westminster arrested: at which, the Duke of York (now in
Ireland) under pretense of appearing, came to London, and had private
conference with John Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, Richard Nevil Earl of Salisbury,
and others his assured friends; by whom it is resolved, that the Duke of York
do as yet obscure his claim to the Crown, and their pretense to be only the
removal of the Duke of Somerset and other evil Counselors from about the King.
And in order thereto, Anno 1452.
York retires into the Marches of Wales, and there raises an Army; whereof
King Henry having notice, puts himself in the head of another, and with the
Duke of Somerset marches toward Wales; the Duke of York being informed of the
Kings approach, takes a by-way toward London; but finding the Citizens would
not admit him, he passed the Thames, and came into Kent, and at Burnt Heath
pitched his Camp; where the King following, drew up his Army upon Black Heath;
from whence he sent to the Duke to know the cause of this commotion, who
declared, That it was not against his Majesty, but his ill Counselors, whereof
the Duke of Somerset was chief, protesting, that if the King would so please,
that he might come to a Trial by his Peers, for several Treasons, which he and
others had to lay to his charge, that then he would not only dismiss his Army,
but present himself in person at the Kings Feet; which, being by the King
promised, the Dukes Forces were disbanded, Polyd. Virgil 23.
and the Duke accordingly appeared before the King: where, contrary to his
expectation, he found the Duke of Somerset; whom he presently charged with
Treason, which the other as firmly recriminates upon him: during which debate,
news is brought, that Edward Earl of March the Duke of York's eldest son, was
with a great Army on his way toward London; whereupon it is agreed, that the
Duke of York, before the high Altar of St Paul's, should swear Allegiance to
King Henry, which he did; and had thereupon his liberty to depart to his Castle
of Wigmore.

At the same instant, arrived the Earl of Kendal, and the Lord Espar,
Ambassadors from Bourdeaux, offering obedience to the Crown of England, upon
condition of Protection; whereupon John Lord Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, is
forthwith sent with 3000 Men into Gascoigne; where, Camden in Shropshire, p.
899. C
after many brave exploits by him achieved, not only now, but in Four and
twenty years service before, he was unfortunately slain, Inq. capta apud Wenlok
in Com. Sal. 18. October. an. 25 H. 6.
at Chastillon upon Dordon near Bourdeaux, Anno 1453.
the 20th day of July, in the year 31 of H. 6. An. 1453. together with his son
John Viscount Lisle, Sir Edward Hall, and many other Gentlemen of Name.

The Duke of York still laboring to disgrace the Duke of Somerset with the
Commons, Anno 1454.
at last so far prevails, that in the Queens Chamber he was arrested;
whereupon, the King lying dangerously sick at Clarendon, is by her means
brought to London; where by dissolving the Parliament he set Somerset at
liberty again, and constituted him Captain of Calais and Guisnes, the only
remainder now left in France; upon this, York, with a strong party, marches
toward London, The first Battle of St Albans. Anno 1455.
and at St Albans, the King, with the Dukes of Somerset and Buckingham and
others, and an Army of 8000 Men, meets him, where (the 22 of May, An. 33 H. 6.
1455.) both Armies joining Battle; on the Kings party were slain Edmond Duke of
Somerset, Henry Earl of Northumberland, Humphrey Earl Stafford, and Thomas Lord
Clifford, and about 5000 others, the King shot in the Neck with an Arrow,
Humphrey Duke of Buckingham, and Thomas Lord Scales in the Faces, Henry
Beaufort Earl of Dorset so wounded, that in a Cart he was forced to be carried
away. The whole Army thus defeated, the King fled to a poor house near-hand;
whereof the Duke of York having notice, with the Earls of Salisbury and
Warwick, the Father and Son, came to him on their knees, humbly craving his
Royal Pardon; declaring, now since the common Enemy was dead, they had no more
to require: whereunto the King affrighted, answered, Let there be no more
killing, and I Will do what you will have me. Whereupon the Duke in the Kings name,
commanding a Cessation of Hostility; King Henry is conveyed to London; and on
the 9th of July, Anno 1457.
An. 1457. Polyd. Vi^^ in H. 6.
A Parliament is called at Westminster, wherein Richard Duke of York is made
Protector of the Kings Person, Richard Nevil Earl of Salisbury Lord Chancellor,
and Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick, Captain of Calais.

But these proceedings not at all pleasing to Queen Margaret, she labors, with
the Lords of her party, that the King take again the power into his own hands;
Salisbury to be displaced, and summoned with York and Warwick to appear before
the Council Table at Greenwich; which Summons the Lords disobeyed; affirming,
that no power could call them to account: whereupon the Queen seeking to
accomplish that by policy which she could not obtain by force, advises the
King for his healths sake to make a progress into Warwickshire, and from thence
invites the Triumviri of Richards, by kind Letters to meet her at Coventry,
intending to surprise them. But here again they failed her expectation, the
Duke going to his Castle of Wigmore, the Earl of Salisbury to Middleham in the
North, and the Earl of Warwick to his Government at Calais.

The King not knowing of this Plot of the Queen against the Duke of York and
his Friends, returns to London, where calling a Council of himself he proposes
an accommodation between all Parties; which, by Mediation of the Reverend
Archbishop of Canterbury, is agreed on, and ratified under the Great Seal; for
which, a Solemn Procession was made at St Paul's, in March An. 36 H. 6. at which
the King was present, with his Crown on his head; before him went Henry
Beaufort Duke of Somerset, and Richard Nevil Earl of Salisbury, hand in hand;
so likewise John Holand Duke of Exceter, and Richard Nevil Earl of Wawick, and
so one Competitor with another. After the King, followed the Queen, led by the
Duke of York, with show of a perfect reconciliation; but on all sides
dissembled, as afterward appears upon this small occasion, A Servant of the
Earl of Warwick falling out with a Courtier, wounded him; whereupon, the Earl
as he came from the Council, is set upon by the Kings Servants; where Warwick
defending himself, hurt some more of them, and by Water escaped into London,
from whence the Queen commanded him to be sent to the Tower; which he
foreseeing, fled into Yorkshire, where he acquaints the Duke of York and his
Father the Earl of Salisbury with the Queens malice against them; advising them
to stand upon their guard, whilst himself (being Admiral) hastes to Calais,
taking all the Kings Ships which he could get in a readiness; and in his
passage, makes Prize of two Spanish Carricks, which upon their unlading at
Calais, Rob. Fabin.
he found to be worth 10000 pounds.

In the mean time, Salisbury with 5000 Men marches through Lancashire toward
the King, to inform him of those indignities the Queen had put upon his son;
whereof the Queen having notice, sent James Touchet Lord Andley, with a force
raised in Cheshire and Shropshire to intercept him; which upon Blore Heath,
Battle of Blore Anno 1458.
near Muckelton endeavoring to do, he is there slain with 2400 of his company.

This done, York no longer concealing his design, with Salisbury takes the
Field, to whom, from Calais repairs Warwick, bringing with him most of the
Forces there, with two eminent Soldiers, John Blount and Andrew Trollop; the
King likewise with the Dukes of Somerset and Exceter draws to Worcester; from
whence, the Bishop of Salisbury is sent to the Yorkists, with a general Pardon
to all that would submit; who returned this Answer, That the Kings Indemnity
signified little, so long as the Queens predominant Power in all things so
overswayed him: whereupon the same being again offered to all that would come
into the King, Trollop was the first that accepted it; from whom, all the Duke
of York's designs are discovered; Grafton Chron.
which so much discouraged the Duke, that with his youngest son Edmond Earl of
Rutland he flies into Ireland; Edward Earl of March his eldest son, with the
Earls of Salisbury and Warwick into the County of Devon; where, by means of one
John Dynham an Esquire, they all got shipping and fled to Calais.

Thus was Henry once more absolute King, and Somerset made Captain of Calais,
whereof being sent to take possession, he is shot at from the Risebank, and
forced to retire; upon which, the Queen giving order that the Kings Ships then
lying at Sandwich, should be made ready, they are boarded by the said Dynham,
and brought to Calais, together with Richard Woodvile Earl Rivers, their
intended Admiral; from whence Salisbury sets sail for Ireland, and after some
consultation with the Duke of York, returns again, the Kings Admiral the Duke
of Exceter not daring to intercept him.

Warwick, though opposed by Sir Simon Monford (whom he took Prisoner) lands at
Sandwich, and ransacks it; and upon his return, hearing of the good
inclinations the Kentish Men had to him, landed there again; and by the
accession of the Lord Cobham, and many of the Kentish Gentry, has his Army
increased to the number of 2500; with which he marches by London (of whose
favor he was partly assured) and hearing that his Father was upon his march
without impeachment, joined with his friends at Exceter; against whom went the
King with the Dukes of Somerset and Buckingham, Battle of Northampton. Anno
1460. 38 H. 6.
in the head of a great Army, and near Northampton engaged Edward Earl of
March, where after a doubtful Fight of two hours, upon the fall of Humphey
Stafford Duke of Buckingham, the Kings Army was put to flight, himself made
Prisoner, and sent to the Tower of London; the Government of which is committed
to the Earl of Warwick; from whence the Lord Scales endeavoring to make his
escape to Westminster for sanctuary, is most wickedly murdered on the Thames,
Stowes A^nals.
by Wherry-men belonging to the Earl of Warwick.

Upon this good success the Duke of York speedily Posts from Ireland to London,
and in the Kings Name summons a Parliament, and there, in presence of the
Lords, seats himself in the Imperial Throne, boldly laying his claim to the
Crown, as descended from Philippa sole Daughter and Heir of Lyonel Duke of
Clarence, third son of King Edward III. elder Brother of John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster, Father of the Usurper Henry IV. Grandfather to Henry V. Father of
him who at present styles himself untruely King Henry VI. whereupon it was in
Parliament concluded, that Henry should remain King during his life, and the
Duke of York be Proclaimed Heir to the Crown; and withal, that if during King
Henry's life, this act should be by any attempted to be disannulled, that then
the Duke of York should immediately have possession of the Kingdom.

The Queen, after this, from Scotland, Stowes Annals. Graftons Chron.
with Henry Duke of Somerset, and an Army of English and Scots to the number of
18000, enters England; against whom York and Salisbury advance with their
Forces, (leaving the King in custody with John Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, and the
Earl of Warwick) but approaching near the Queens Army, the Duke is advised by
Salisbury to retire, and stay for the Earl of March his son, Ibidem.
then raising Forces in Wales; Battle of Wakefield.
but good council not prevailing, he went on, and on the last day of December,
An. 1460. encountering at Wakefield-Green, Anno 1460.
is there slain, and his whole Army routed; The Queen Victorious.
his young son Edmond Earl of Rutland begging upon his knees, is stabbed to
death by John Lord Clifford, the Earl of Salisbury made Prisoner, and in cold
blood beheaded at Pontfrect, with all the Captives that were there taken; whose
Heads the Queen caused to be set upon Poles and placed about the Walls of York.
The dead Body of the Duke was with much derision abused, and his Head Crowned
with a Paper Diadem; but this scorn is soon repayed to the full upon their
Heads that caused it.

Edward Earl of March now laboring for himself, having secured Shrewsbury to
him, Battle of Mortimers Cross. Anno 1461.
and increased his Army to the number of 23000, took the Field, and upon
Candlemas day An. 1461. at Mortimers Cross near Ludlowe, was encountered by
Jasper Tudor Earl of Pembroke, and James Butler Earl of Ormond, and Wiltshire,
whom he put to flight, and slew of them about 3800, taking Sir Owen Tudor,
Graftons Chron.
and several other Welsh Gentlemen Prisoners; all which he beheaded at Hereford.

While thus the Earl of March was employed, the Queen also with her victorious
Army marches toward London; The second Battle of St Aban; where the Queen is
victorious and recovers the King. Anno 1461.
but passage being denied her at St Albans, Robert Fabian.
she there gave Battle on the 17th of February to her Enemies, Norfolk and
Warwick, and putting them to the rout, had the King brought to her, whom she
received with great joy. But the Northern Soldiers at this time grew so unruly,
that notwithstanding both the King and Queens prohibition, they in a horrible
manner ransackt and pillaged the Country, affirming, that all on the
South Side of Trent was theirs by agreement; upon which, the Londoners fearing
to be so served, whilst they stood upon their guard, denied not only their
entrance, but the Commons rising at Cripple Gate, stopped the Provisions which
the Lord Mayor was then sending to the King, when suddenly news was brought
them that Edward Earl of March, with Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick, (who having
gathered his scattered Troops together, and joined with him) were now not far
off, and coming to them, which gave them encouragement to stand out with more
vigor; till on the 20th day of February, with great joy they received them
into the City, where, on the second day of March, Warwick mustering his Army in
St John's Field, casting his Men into a Ring about him, read the agreement of
the last Parliament, demanding whether they would have King Henry to Reign
still, to which they all answered No, No, Then being asked if Edward Earl of
March, eldest son of Richard Duke of York, should be their King, they all with
a greater clamor cried Yea, Yea. Whereof word being brought to the Earl of
March at Baynards Castle, he seemed to refuse the charge, till persuaded by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishops of London and Exceter he accepted it;
and the next morning went in Procession to St Paul's, and Offering there, after
Te Deum was sung, proceeded in great State to Westminster, and in the great
Hall, was placed in the Kings Seat, with St Edwards Scepter in his Hand,
receiving ^he Homage of the Nobility, and Voices of the People there present.
From whence he removed to the Abbey with the same solemnity, and seated himself
on the Throne there, whilst the Antheme was performed; after which, having
Offered at St Edwards Shrine, he returned again by Water to St Paul's, lodged in
the Bishops Palace, and on the 4th of March was Proclaimed King.

And thus ended the Reign of this religious and easy Prince Henry VI. (a
perfect Emblem of the instability of Fortune) having continued 38 years, 6
months, and 4 days, although his life endured 12 years longer; in which time,
he was by his grand Enemy Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick, called Make-king,
restored to the Crown of England; who dying in his quarrel at Barnet Field,
left him to be again deposed by King Edward IV. and imprisoned in the Tower of
London. In which place (at his Devotion) he was cruelly murdered by Richard
Duke of Gloucester, King Edwards Brother, upon the 21 day of May 1472. in the 51
year of his age. His death May 21. 1472.
Who thereby finished that bloody design of extinguishing the Royal Line of
Lancaster, which not long before he began in the death of Edward Prince of
Wales, King Henry's only son, by him stabbed to the heart at the fatal Battle
of Tewkesbury; from which conflict Queen Margaret his Mother flying, and taking
sanctuary in a poor Religious House, is from thence brought Prisoner to London,
Hist. de la Maison d^ France. Tome 1. p. 702.
and out-living the Murder of her Husband and Son, sent home into France to
her Father Duke Reynar, being Ransomed by King Lewis XI. for 50000 Crowns.

King Henry's Corpse, the day after his death, was brought to St Paul's Church,
in an open Coffin, barefaced, where he bled, thence carried to the Black
Friars, where he also bled; from thence in a Boat to Chersey Abbey, without
Priest or Clerk, Torch or Taper, and there buried; but afterward, by the
appointment of King Edward IV. was removed to Windsor Castle, and there
Interred, in St Georges Chapel, under a fair Monument, of which there are at
present no remains. The Arch on the South Side of the Chapel (between the
Choire and the Altar) under which he was deposited, is gilt and painted with
the several Devises of this King, on the Key-stone of which, are carved his
Royal Arms, Ensigned with a Crown, and supported by two Antilopes, collered and
chained together. In the South-window of which Arch, was pencilled the History
of his Life in colored Glass; which, with many more Windows in the same
Chapel, was defaced in the late Rebellion. This King was the Founder of two
Colleges, the one in Cambridge dedicated to our Lady and St Nicholas, called
the Colledge-Royal or Kings-Colledge; the other at Eaton near Windsor, named of
our Lady; to the maintenance whereof, he gave 3400 pounds by the year. In his
Reign also, Queen Margaret his Wife began the Foundation of Queens-Colledge in
Cambridge.

A Son of King HENRY VI. by Queen MARGARET of Anjou his Wife.
14. The Arms of this Edward Prince of Wales are painted under his Effigies on
the Tomb of Oliver King, sometime his principal Secretary, etc. on the
South Side of the Choire, in the Chapel of St George in Windsor Castle, being
France and England, quarterly, a Label Argent, and are supported on the right
side with an Antilope Argent, attired Or, accolled with a Ducal Coronet, and
chained Gold; and on the left, with a Swan proper, gorged also with a Coronet
proper, and chained Or. The Nich, in which this Princes Figure is painted, is
diapred with Swans and Ostrich Feathers.
EDWARD of LANCASTER, Duke of Cornwall, the only Child of King Henry VI. born at
Westminster upon the 13th day of October, Thomas Milles p. 48.
in the 31 year of his Fathers Reign, An. 1453. was created Prince of Wales and
Earl of Chester, by Patent bearing date at the Kings Palace at Westminster,
Orig. 35. H. 6.
the 15th day of March, Penes Ed. Walker Eque aurat Gart. R. Arm.
An. 32 H. 6. For the Dukedom of Cornwall (as is warranted upon Record) is
reputed unto the Kings eldest Son, the very day of his Nativity; and by virtue
of a special Act, is presumed and taken to be of full and perfect Age, so as he
may sue that day for his Livery of the said Dukedom, and ought by right to
obtain the same, having his Royalties in the Stannary, Wrecks at Sea, Customs,
etc.

In his grant of the Chamberlainship of North Wales to John Lord Duddeley,
dated at Salisbury, upon the 18th day of March, An (...) H. 6. he is styled
Edwardus primogenitus Henrici sexti Regis Anglie and Francie Princeps Wall.
Dux. Cornubie and Comes Cestrie; to which, his Seal of pale-yellow Wax (the
Figure thereof being exhibited in the 240 page of this fourth Book) is annexed:
on the one side, containing his Effigies on Horseback, his Surcoat, Shield, and
Horse Caparisons, being charged with the Arms of France and England quarterly,
differenced with a Label of three points, and for his Crest, upon a Chapeau, a
Lion passant guardant crowned, and accolled with the like Label. On the
Counter-Seal is a large Escocheon of the same Arms (between two collateral
Feathers and Scroles, containing the words Ich Dien) and over it, a Swan, with
the Wings expanded, gorged with a Coronet and Chain. The Seal is circumscribed
on both sides thus, Sigillum Edwardi Regis Anglie et Francie primogeniti
Principis Wallie Ducis Cornubie et Comitis Cestrie.

He proved a Prince of great hope and forwardness, Ibidem.
being skillful in Martial Knowledge, matters of Government, and Laws of the
Realm. At the age of seventeen, the better to bandy against his Fathers
Competitor King Edward IV. he affianced (in France) Anne Nevil, the second
Daughter and Coheir of Richard Earl of Warwick, called Make-king; who having
set up King Edward, and as earnestly laboring now at the Battle of Barnet to
pull him down again; there with great courage lost his life. When Queen
Margaret, and this Prince her son arriving too late from France to come to the
Earls assistance, were by King Edward's Forces defeated at Tewkesbury, and put
to flight, the Queen and himself taken Prisoners; where he being by Sir Richard
Crofts brought before the King; who asked him, How he durst presume to enter
his Dominions in Arms. His resolute Answers so enraged the Conqueror, that he
dashed him on the Mouth with his Gauntlet, and Richard Duke of Gloucester ran
him into the Heart with his Dagger. His Body was buried without any solemnity,
(among the mean and poor persons slain) in the Monastical Church of the Black
Friars in Tewkesbury. His Widow, the Princess Anne Nevil being afterward
married to the Duke of Gloucester his Murderer.

12. THOMAS DUKE of CLARENCE, and EARL of ALBEMARLE, PRESIDENT of the Kings
COUNCIL, and CONSTABLE of his HOST, LIEUTENANT GENERAL of his ARMIES in FRANCE
and NORMANDY, etc.
CHAP. V.
He did bear, France semee and England, quarterly, a Label of 3 points Ermine,
each charged with a Canton gules, to distinguish him from Lyonel the first Duke
of Clarence, his great Uncle, who bear his Label, Argent, with the said
Cantons, vide his Plate on his Stall in St Georges Chapel at Windsor.
THOMAS of LANCASTER, Yopo^igma Neus^. p. 555. n. 23.
Duke of Clarence, second Son of King Henry IV. Steward of England the 13th of
November, Pat. an. 5. H. 4. p. 2. m. 14.
An. 1 H. 4. was constituted Lieutenant of Ireland for the term of three years,
by his said Father, Pat. an. 1. H. 4. p. 2. m. 32.
on the first of October, in the fifth year of his Reign, An. 1403. and
afterward created Earl of Albemarle, Origin. an. 13 H. 4. Rot. 45.
and Duke of Clarence at Retherhithe, the 9th of July, in the 13th year of H 4.
An. 1412. He was likewise President of the Kings Council after that Prince
Henry his Brother was dismissed from that Office, Chart. an. 13. H. 4. n. 3.
for striking the Lord Chief Justice. In the Reign of King Henry V. his
Brother, he had also the Offices of Constable of the Kings Host, and
Lieutenant General of his Armies in France and Normandy. And although this
Thomas Duke of Clarence had borne forth his youth with better temper than
Prince Henry his Brother, yet nevertheless, his Father feared that his hasty
distempered humor would much disturb the Government, being a Man of a violent
and self-willed disposition, neglecting at last the grace advice and counsel of
his own Country Men and Commanders. For being betrayed by Andrew Forgusa, a
Lombard, his Scout-master, who reporting the numbers of the Enemy to be far
inferior to what they were, he leaving his Bill-men and Archers behind him, in
which his chiefest strength consisted, Tho. Wall. p. 404. n. 45.
precipitates himself into Battle at Baugy, upon Easter Eve, Anno 1421, with
the Duke of Alenson, John Earl of Buchquhanan, and Archibald Douglas, two
valiant Leaders of 700 resolute Scots. The sudden and unexpected approach of
the Duke of Clarence forced the Scots into the Church of Baugy; where, whilst
they were making their defense, the rest took the alarm, and the Earl of
Buchquhanan manned the Bridge; to whose aid Hugh Kennedie with 100 Horse
presented himself. The Duke of Clarence seeing no possibility of freeing the
passage, with his small party of Horse, dismounted, and came to blows with
Buchquhanan, who was followed with 200 Horse; where either side fighting with
equal courage, Clarence gave singular testimony of his great Valor, until, as
he was remounting, one John Swinton, a Scot, wounded him in the Face with his
Lance, and threw him to the ground, Clarence slain at the Battle of Baugy, an.
1420.
being the first English Man that was there slain; Weever p. 212.
having that day upon his Helmet, a Circlet enriched with precious Stones;
which being taken from his Crest by a Scot, was sold to John Steward of Derby
for 1000 Angels. The Earls of Tanquervile and Angus, with the Lord Roos, Sir
John Lumley, and Sir John Verend, though they approved not this rash design,
yet made proof of their duty and their valor, not only in obeying their
General in his life time, but accompanying him in his death; with whom died
also 2000 private Soldiers. The Earls of Somerset, Suffolk, and Perch, the Lord
Fitz-Walter, Sir John Berkley, Sir Ralph Nevil, Sir Henry English, Sir William
Bows, Sir William Langton, and Sir Thomas Borough, and monument Viro
Honorabili Domno EDWARDO NICHOLAS Equiti Aurato Serenisimis, Regibus CAROLO
primo, et secundo. Secretariorum vni principalitium, et e Secretioribus
Consilijs. Figuram hanc Tumuli Thoma^ Ducis Clarenciae, Iohannis Comitis
Somersetiae, et Margaretae ^orundem (...) D.D.D.F.S.

diverse others, being depressed by a numerous Enemy, were taken Prisoners; and
of the French were slain above 1200 of their best Men at Arms.

The English Army, under the command of Thomas Montacute, Earl of Salisbury,
coming somewhat too late to this overhasty Enconnter, resolved to requite the
loss; but upon their advance, the French gave ground, whereby the Body of
Clarence was recovered, and with the rest, conveyed into England, and buried in
St Michael's Chapel, on the East side of the South Cross, below the Choire, in
the Chathedral Church of Canterbury, (where his Father was Interred) There his
Effigies in Armor, is to be seen carved in Alablaster, Tho. Wall. p. 405 n. 6.
lying on the right Hand of the Duchess Margaret his Wife, the relict of John
Beaufort Earl of Somerset, Lancaster, Clarence, Impaling Holand, viz. Gules, 3
Lions passant guardant Or, a Border, Argent.
who is there also Entombed, his Portraiture lying on her left side.

This Margaret was the third Daughter of Thomas Holand, and Sister and Coheir
of Edmond Holand, both Earls of Kent; who surviving these her two Husbands
(having had no Issue by the Duke of Clarence) erected the Monument in the
preceding page to their Memory.

The following distick has been read for the Dukes Epitaph; but whether carved
on the Verge of this Tomb or not, Harding C. 220.
I cannot learn, the Fillet of Brass being torn away.

Hic Iacet in Tumulo Tho. Dux Clax. nunc quasi nullus,
Qui fuit in bello clarus, nec clarior ullus.
13. Party per Cheveron, Gules and Azure, in chief two Lions rampant guardant,
the one respecting the other Or, in base a Flower de Lys of the third Penes
Edw. Walker Gart. Prin. Regem Arm.
Sir JOHN of CLARENCE, commonly called in Records by the name of John the
Bastard of Clarence ( Johannes Bastardus Clarenciae) was a Natural Son of this
Duke, and one of those who attended his Corpse from the Battle of Baugy, to his
Interment at Canterbury. Pat. an. 7. H. 6. p. 1.
And to this John, King Henry VI. made a grant of the Manors of Esker,
Newcastel, Lions, Cromelyn, and Tassagard in Ireland; by Letters Patent, dated
the 11th day of July, in the 6th year of his Reign.

12. JOHN REGENT of the Kingdom of FRANCE, DUKE of BEDFORD, ANJOV, and ALENSON,
EARL of MAYENNE, RICHMOND, and KENDAL, and CONSTABLE of ENGLAND, etc.
CHAP. VI.
JOHN of LANCASTER, The Figure of this John Duke of Bedfords Seal (of red Wax)
is exhibited in the 240 page of this 4 Book; on which is engraven his Shield,
hanging corner-wayes, containing the Arms of France and England, quarterly,
over all a Label of 5 points, those 2 toward the Dexter-side of the Escocheon,
are composed of Ermine, to signify that he was a descendant of John Duke of
Lancaster, and the other three charged with Flowers de Lys, to show his
Pedigree from Henry Duke of Lancaster; whose Ancestors being of the first Line,
did hereditarily bear them. His Crest thereon is a Lion passant gardant
crowned, and gorged with the said Label of 5 points, standing on a Chapeau
doubled Ermine; which with his Helmet is placed betwixt two collateral
Feathers, wreathed with Scroles, containing some illegible Characters. Those
parts of the Seal which contain his Supporters, are broken off, there appearing
on the left side of the Shield a cloven hoof only. Which makes me of opinion,
it was an Antilope. This Seal is appendant to an Instrument dated at Leicester
on the 26 of May, an. 4 H. 6. In St Stephens Church Walbrook in London, in a
South-Window of the Choire, was painted in Glass, the Shield of this John Duke
of Bedford, supported with two Eagles Argent, gorged with large Coronets,
composed of Roses Or. It is Ensigned with a Ducal Capp, Gules, enriched with a
Coronet composed also of Roses, Or.
Duke of Bedford, Pat. an. 4. H. 4. p. 2. m. 10.
was the third Son of King Henry IV. to whom, his said Father granted the
Office of Constable of England, upon the 10th day of September, the fourth year
of his Reign, by Letters Patent dated at Worcester; Pat. an. 11 H. 4. p. 2. m.
9.
which Office, I find confirmed unto him for term of Life, in the eleventh of
Henry IV.

In a Parliament held at Leicester, on the 16th of May, Rot. Parl. tent. apud
Leicest. ultimo Aprilis an. 2. H. 5. p. 2. m. 7. Pat. an. 11. H. 6. p. 2. m. 2.
An. 2 H. 5. his Brother, he was created Earl of Kendal, and Duke of Bedford,
during his life only. But upon surrender of those Letters Patents to King Henry
VI. his Nephew, he regranted him those Honors ( An. 11 H. 6.) Habendum to him
and the Heirs Male of his Body for ever.

Upon King Henry V. his Expedition into France, to recover his Rights there, he
appointed this his Brother John, Protector and Lieutenant of the Kingdom of
England, during his stay beyond the Seas, by Commission dated at Portsmouth,
Pat. an. 3. H. 5. p. 2. m. 41.
on the 12th day of August, in the 3d year of his Reign, An. Dom. 1415.

He Knighted King Henry VI. his Nephew An. 1425. in the 5th year of whose
Reign, he was made Regent of France, using in his Style these several Titles,
John Regent of the Realm of France, Duke of Bedford, Anjou, and Alenson, Earl
of Mayenne, Richmond, Kendal, and Constable of England.

His first Marriage. The Arms of the Duchess were quarterly; on the first and
fourth, Azure, 3 Flowers de Lys, Or, a Border gobony Argent and Gules Burgundy
Modern. And on the 2 and 3, Bendy of six pieces Or, and Azure, a border Gules,
Ancient Burgundy. Over all on an Inescocheon Or, a Lion Rampant, Sable,
Flanders. The^e Arms are Impaled with the Coat of John Duke of Bedford her
Husband, on her Monument in the Celestines at Paris.
He married two Wives, the first of which was Anne, Histoire de la Maison de
France Tome 1. p. 736 and 737
Daughter of John Duke of Burgundy, and Margaret his Wife, Daughter of Albert
of Bavaria, Earl of Henault, Holand, and Zeland, whom he espoused in the year
1423. not many days before which Marriage (in the Month of April) John Duke of
Bedford, Philip Duke of Burgundy, his Wives Brother, with John Duke of Britain,
being assembled in the City of Amiens, Treat of an Alliance and Confederacy
with the English; at which time, the Duke of Burgundy grants to Anne Duchess of
Bedford, his sister, the Earldom of Artois, in case he should decease without
Heirs of his Body lawfully begotten.

She was his Wife about 9 years, and then died in childbed at Paris (her
Infant not much surviving her) upon the 14th of November, Penes Will. Dugdale
Arm. Norroy Regem Armorum an. 1648.
An. 1432. and was Interred in the Church of the Celestines in that City, near
the Chapel of Orleance; where is to be seen her Monument of black Marble, with
her Portraiture placed thereon; about the Verge of which is this Epitaph: Cy
gist noble dame madame Anne de Bourgongne espouse de tresnoble prince
Monsiegneur Iean duc de Bethfort et Regent de France, et fille de tresnoble
prince Iean duc de Bourgongne, laquelle trespassa a Paris le 14 de Novembre
l'an 1432.

The second Wife of John Duke of Bedford was Jaquetta, His second Marriage.
Jaquetta Duchess of Bedford, did bear, quarterly, there. and 4. Argent a Lion
rampant queve forche, Gules, crowned Or, being the Coat of Luxemburg. The 2.
and 3. Gules, a Starr of 12 points, Argent. The Arms of Baux de Andree. vide F.
3. fol. 60. usque 65. in Col. Arm.
daughter of Peter of Luxembourg, Earl of St Paul; a Lady aged about seventeen
years; Hollingsh.
whom he espoused at Turwin; but had not by her any Issue: she was after his
death re-married unto Sir Richard Woodvile Knight. (afterward Earl Rivers) for
which the said Sir Richard had a pardon from King Henry VI. ( An. 15 H 6.) and
by him, Pat. an. 15. H. 6. m. 20.
besides other Children, was Mother of Anthony Woodvile Earl Rivers, and
Elizabeth Woodvile, first married to Sir John Gray Knight. by whom she had Issue
Thomas Gray Marquis Dorset; and afterward to King Edward IV. having also Issue
by him King Edward V. and Richard Duke of York; both murdered by the command
of their unnatural and cruel Uncle Richard III. Penes Will. Dugdale Ar. Norroy
Regem Armorum D. 32.
This Jaquetta Duchess of Bedford, deceased upon the 30th day of May, in the
12th year of King Edward IV. her son in Law, An. 1472. Her death.
Anthony Woodvile Earl Rivers her Son and Heir, Anno 1472.
being aged above 30 years at the time of her death.

This John Duke of Bedford, as Constable of England, determined the
controversy between Reginald Lord Gray of Ruthyn, and Sir Edward Hastings Knight.
for the bearing of the Arms of Hastings. And at the winning of Vernoyl, Battle
of Vernoil.
took the Duke of Alenson Prisoner; and with the loss of 2100 of his Soldiers,
slew of the Enemy, 5 Earls, 2 Viscounts, 22 Barons, 7000 French, and 2500
Scots. And upon the 7th day of September 1432, Crowned Henry VI. his Nephew in
Paris; about a year and three quarters after which, Escheat an. 14 H. 6. n. 36.
this renowned Prince deceased in that City, His death.
upon the day of exaltation of the Holy Cross (being the 14th of September) in
the year 1435. An. 14 H. 6. whose Corpse being from thence solemnly conducted to
Rouen, was there buried in the Cathedral Church of our Lady, in a Tomb of black
Marble (without any Figure or Inscription thereon) standing between two Pillars
of the Church, on the North-part of, and parallel with the High Altar; but the
Churchmen report, that in the year 1462, the Hugonots having by surprise made
themselves Masters of that City, defaced almost all their Monuments and Images;
among which, they say, they broke away the Portraiture of the Duke of Bedford,
though it does not appear that there ever was any. Nevertheless, there still
remains a Tablet of Brass, affixed to the Pillar, at the foot of the same Tomb,
containing his Epitaph; over which, stood his Escocheon of Arms (of Silver,
which is torn away) within the Garter, betwixt two Ostrich Feathers; and
underneath a Root is represented, which the Priests call La Racine de Betford,
all which, being comprehended in the said Brass Tablet, I have here exhibited
the Figure thereof.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE Cy gist feu de noble memoire treshaut et puissant
pruice Johan en son vivant Regent le Roialine de france Due de Betford pour le
q. est fondre vne Mess eslre eun jour perpetuelle m^et celebree a ceste autel
per le college des cleme^ tins inco^tine^t aps prm^e et t^spasla le xiiii jor.
de Septe^b^l'an ^ill CCCCxxxv. au quel xiiii jor. semblableme^t est fond
por^uy i od. sole^pnet en ceste eglise. Dieu face perdon a son ame^ Delineated
by Will. Dugdale Esquire Chester Herald (now Norroy King of Arms) 30 July 1648.


Viro Generosiss: Dno: THOMAE CREW Equiti Aurato; Honoratissimi Done IOHANNIS
Baronis CREW de Stene in agro Northamp^. Primogenito et h^redihoc Monumentu^.
HD. FS



This Duke was justly accounted one of the best Generals that ever blossomed
out of the Royal stem of Plantagenet. His Valor not more terrible to his
Enemies than his memory Honorable; for (doubtful whether with more glory to
him or to the speaker) King Lewis XI. Camden.
being counseled by certain envious Persons to deface his Tomb (wherein with
him (says one) was buried all the English Men's good Fortune in France) used
these indeed Princely Words, What honor shall it be to us, or you, to break
this Monument, and to pull out of the ground the Bones of him, whom in his
lifetime, neither my Father, nor your Progenitors, with all their Puissance,
were once able to make fly a foot backward? Who by his Strength, Policy, and
Wit, kept them all out of the principal Dominions of France, and out of this
noble Duchy of Normandy? Wherefore I say first, God save his Soul, and let his
Body now lie in rest; which when he was alive, would have disquieted the
proudest of us all. And for his Tomb, I assure you it is not so worthy or
convenient as his Honor and Acts have deserved.

12. HUMPHREY DUKE of GLOUCESTER, EARL of HENAVLT, HOLAND, ZELAND, and PEMBROKE,
LORD of FRIESLAND, GREAT-CHAMBERLAIN of ENGLAND, PROTECTOR and DEFENDER of the
said KINGDOM and CHURCH of ENGLAND.
CHAP. VII.
HVMPHREY of LANCASTER, Nic. Vpton, in his Book Entitled de Militari Officio,
lib. 4. p. 238. informs us, that this Duke of Gloucester (whom therein he styles
his Lord and Master) did bear, Les Arms de France and d' Engleterre
quartelez, evesque ung Bordure gobone d' Argent and de Sable, it may be he gave
the Border gobone, in imitation of Philip Duke of Burgundy, surnamed the Hardy,
the youngest Son of John King of France (as this Humphrey was of King Henry IV.
of England) who encompassed the Arms of France, with a Border gobone, Argent
and Gules: Which Insignia being Marshalled with the Royal Arms of Spain, for
the Dukedom of Burgundy; stands as chief Leader and Introducer of the other
Dukedoms and Provinces of Belgium, there quartered; and is also the first
Dukedom mentioned in that Kings Style. From which is observable the ingratitude
of those of this last Age, to the memory of these two Illustrious Princes; who
have converted the Border Gobony to no other use than the distinguishing of
their spurious and illegitimate Issue, from those lawfully begotten; of which,
in these later times, there are too many instances The Border Argent (by
several instances) was afterward borne by Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, taken
from the examples of Edmond Earl of Kent, and Thomas Duke of Gloucester,
youngest of the sons of King Edward I. and King Edward III. The first of which
bare Gules 3 Lions passant guardant, within a Border Argent, and the later
encompassed the semee of Flowers de Lys, and the three Lions quarterly, with a
Border Argent; our Duke Humphrey distinguishing from him by reducing his
Flowers de Lys to the number three (as did his Brother King Henry V.) Which
Arms are carved in many places upon his Tomb (represented in the 310 page of
this fourth Book) alternately Ensigned with his Coronet on his Cap of Estate,
and his Crest, being, a Lion passant guardant crowned and accolled; every
Shield being supported with two Antilopes, with Collers also.


Duke of Gloucester, and Protector of England, etc. fourth Son of King Henry IV.
by Mary de Bohun his first Wife, was, at a Parliament held at Westminster, in
the second year of King Henry V. his Brother, Pat. an. 2 H. 5. p. 1.
created Earl of Pembroke, and Duke of Gloucester, upon the 16th of May, An.
1414. The reversion of which Earldom of Pembroke (in case the Duke of Gloucester
should dye without Heirs of his Body) King Henry VI. granted unto William de la
Pole Earl of Suffolk, Pat. an. 21. H. 6. p. 2. m. 1.
and Alice his Wife, and to the Heirs Male of their Bodies; which they, after
the death of Duke Humphrey enjoyed accordingly.

Upon the 23 of June, in the fourth year of King Henry V. he had the Offices of
Constable of Dover Castle, and Warden of the Cinque Ports, granted unto him for
term of life. Pat. an. 4. H. 5. m. 22.
And in the first year of King Henry VI. his Nephew, was, by Parliament, Pat.
an. 1. H. 6. p. 1.
made Protector of England, during the Kings Minority (which was 15 years.) And
upon the 30th day of November in the same year, viz. An. Dom. 1422, he was
constituted Chamberlain of England, during the Kings Pleasure. Pat. an. 8. H.
6. p. 1.
In the 8 year of whose Government and the 8th day of October, this Humphrey
Duke of Gloucester was appointed Steward of England (hac vice) for the
Coronation of the said King Henry VI. after which, on the 30th day of July,
Orig. Rot. 37 H. 6. m. 9. Seldom Titles of Honor p. 516.
in the 14th year of King Henry VI. he was created Earl of Flanders, durante
vita.

His first Marriage.
This Duke Humphrey married two Wives, the first of which was Jaqueline or
Jacoba, Daughter and Heir of William Duke of Bavaria; Gloucester impaling
Bavaria, viz. Quarterly, the 1. and 4 Paly, Bendy, Lozengy, Argent and Azure,
the 2 and 3. Quarterly, on the 1. and 4. Or, a Lion rampant Sable, Haynalt; and
the 2. and 3. Or, a Lion rampant Gules, being the Arms of Holand.
to whom belonged the Earldoms of Holand, Zeland, Henault, and many other rich
Seigneuries in the Netherlands; she had been (as it afterward appeared)
betroathed to John Duke of Brabant, and the suit of Divorce betwixt them still
depending, Histoire de la Maison de France Tome 1 p. 758 and 759.
which was one of the greatest causes that alienated the Duke of Burgundy from
the alliance with England; he being Brabant's Kinsman, and of the same Family.

She was after much ado divorced from Duke Humphrey, and by him left at her
Town of Monts in Henault, to return to her first Husband, that Marriage being
pronounced lawful by Pope Martin V. she was married a third time, and deceased
An. 1435. Upon this Match, Gloucester used these Titles, Humphrey, by the Grace
of God, Son, Brother, and Uncle to Kings, Duke of Gloucester, Vide L. 8. fol.
52. in Coll. Arm. for the Ordinances of this Duke of Gloucester, being Constable
of England.
Earl of Henault, Holand, Zealand, and Pembroke, Lord of Friesland, Great
Chamberlain of the Kingdom of England, Protector and Defender of the said
Kingdom and Church of England.

His second Marriage.
The Duke of Gloucester (having sustained many losses as well of Friends as
Treasure, in punishment of the Sin of taking another Man's Wife) is forthwith
after this Divorce, In the great Window of the Choire of Cobham Church in Kent,
are the the Arms of this Humphrey in two several places, dimidiated with those
of the Duchess Eleanor Cobham, viz. Gules, on a Cheveron Or, 3 Estoiles, Sable.
L. 17. fol. 197. in Coll. Arm.
married to Eleanor Cobham, daughter to Reginald Lord Cobham of Sterborough;
whereby he made her amends for that unlawful familiarity which had formerly
passed between them. The Duchess Eleanor about five or six years before the
murder of her Husband the Duke ( viz. An. 18 H. 6.) was convented for
Witchcraft and Sorcery; Leland Coll vol. 1. p. 708.
and afterward indicted of Treason in the Guildhall in London, before diverse
Earls; some part of her charge she confessed; for which, she was put to solemn
Penance in London, upon three several days, and afterward committed to
perpetual Prison, under the Ward of Sir Thomas Stanley, in the Isle of Man.

This Humphrey, for his virtuous Endowments, Polidore Virgil.
surnamed the Good, and for his Justice, Father of his Country, after he had
under Henry V I. his Nephew, governed the Kingdom Five and twenty years, with
great commendations; so that neither good Men had cause to complain of, nor bad
Men to find fault with his Regency; was by the envy of Margaret of Anjou his
Nephews Queen, Camden in Suffolk.
brought to his end in St Saviors Hospital in St Edmondsbury, An. 1446. where
at a Parliament there held, His death.
he was arrested of high Treason, Anno 1446.
by John Lord Beaumont High Constable of England; where certain of the Kings
Household were appointed to guard him; and not many days after, strangled to
death without Trial, and without Issue by either of his Wives (some say he died
with sorrow because he was denied to come to his Trial) at which time, his Body
was showed to the Lords and Commons, as if he had been taken away by a Palsy
or Aposteme. But whatsoever was the cause of it, certainly his death was the
stroke of an evil Angel sent to punish England, and to make way for the
practices of Richard Duke of York; who, immediately after Duke Humphrey's death
(that grand Prop of the red Rose Tree) began to set on foot his Royal Title, to
the destruction of the whole Lancastrian Family, though himself failed in the
attempt, yet went he so far, as to be declared Heir apparent to the Crown;
which was attained with much bloodshed by his son King Edward IV.

The Body of Duke Humphrey was interred in the Abbey of St Alban, on the
South Side the Shrine of that Protomartyr of England (though the common error
is, that he lies buried in St Paul's Cathedral in London (the Tomb of Sir John
Beauchamp being mistaken for his) where he has a stately arched Monument of
Freestone, adorned with the Figures of his Royal Ancestors, and of his Arms
and Supporters, according to the representation exhibited in the following
page, delineated from the original, An. 1663.

He built the Divinity School in Oxford, as also his Mannor-House of East
Greenwich in Kent, and was an especial Benefactor to the Abbey of St Alban, the
Abbot of which House John Wethamsted commends him in these two Hexameters.

Fidior in regno Regi, Duce non suit isto,
Plusve fide stabilis, aut major amator honoris.
Here is an Epitaph on the East Wall near to his Tomb, which was, as I have
been informed, pencill'd there about 60 years since, by Doctor Westerman Parson
of Sauntridge and Bushie; it comprehends much, and amongst the rest, an Item of
the Miracle he wrought on the blind Impostor; the Story is frequent.

MEMORIAE V. OPT. SACRUM.
Hic jacet Umphredus Dur ille Glocestrius, olim
Henrici Regis Protector, fraudis inepte
Detector; dum ficta notat miracula coeci.
Lumen erat Patrie, columen venerabile Regni:
Pacis amans, Musisque favens, melioribus; unde
Gratum opus Oxonio, que nunc schola sacra refulget.
Invida sed mulier Regno, Regi, sibi nequam,
Abstulit hunc, humili vix hoc dignata Sepulchro,
Invidia rumpente tamen post funera vivit.
DEO GLORIA. monument Illustrissimo Domino Dno: ROBERTO Comiti LEICESTRIAE
Viceconliti Lisle. Baroni Sidney de Penchurst, Serenissimoque Dno: Regi CAROLO
II.do e Secretioribus Consilijs Tumilli hanc HVMPHREDI Ducis GLOCESTRIAE
figuram. H.D.F.S.



A Natural Daughter of Humphrey Duke of Gloucester.
13. ANTIGONE, Countess of Tanquervile, and Lady Powis, base daughter of
Humphrey of Lancaster Duke of Gloucester, Antigone, did bear France and England
quarterly, a Border Argent, over all a Baston Azure, Impaled by Gray Lord
Powis, whose Arms were, Gules, a Lion rampant within a Border ingrayled, Argent.
was married unto Henry Gray, Pat. an. 11. H. 6. p. 2. m. 28.
Earl of Tanquervile, and Lord Powis, who deceased An. 28 H. 6. son of Sir John
Gray, Captain of Maunt, created Earl of Tanquervile upon the 31 of Jan. An. 6
H. 5. by Joane his Wife, Rot. Nor. an. 6 H. 5. p. 2. m. 41. n. 78.
Daughter and Coheir of Edward Charleton Lord Powis, who died An. 9 H. 5.

This Antigone and Henry, had Issue Richard Gray Lord Powis, and Elizabeth
Gray, the Wife of Sir Roger Kinaston Knight. which Richard Gray Lord Powis, was the
Father of John Gray Lord Powis, and Elizabeth Gray married to John Ludlowe of
Stokeshey and Hodnet in the County of Salop Esquire John Gray Lord Powis, took to
Wife Anne Daughter of William Herbert Earl of Pembroke, E. 13. fol. 68. a. M.
S. in Coll. Arm.
and they were Father and Mother of John Gray Lord Powis, who married Margaret
daughter of Edward Lord Dudley, and had Issue Edward Gray, the last Lord Powis
of that Family, who deceased without lawful Issue.

Elizabeth Gray, Visit. Sal. p. 22. D. 10. p. 42. in Coll. Arm.
great Aunt to the last Lord Powis, Gray, aforesaid, Impaled by Ludlowe, viz
Or, a Lion rampant Sable
married (as I said before) to John Ludlowe, had Issue John Ludlowe, their Son
and Heir, who died Issueless, Anne, and Alice. Anne Ludlowe the elder Daughter
was married to Thomas Vernon (second Son of Henry Vernon of Haddon in the
County of Derby Esquire) who had Issue Thomas Vernon of Stokeshey Esquire Father of
Henry Vernon of the same place Esquire the last of that Line. Ludlowe, in Pale with
Vernon, being, Argent, a Fret Sable.


Alice Ludlowe, the younger Daughter of John Ludlowe and Elizabeth Gray, was
espoused to Humphrey Vernon, the third Son of Henry Vernon Esquire beforenamed
(Brother to her Sisters Husband) and by him was Mother of George Vernon of
Hodnet in Shropshire, Visit. Salop. D. 10. p. 52. in Coll. Arm.
Father of John Vernon of Hodnet Esquire who by Elizabeth, Sister to Walter
Devereux Earl of Essex had Issue Sir Robert Vernon of Hodnet Knight, Vernon
Impapaling Devereux. Arg. a Fesse and 3 Torteaux in chief, Gules.
and Elizabeth the Wife of Henry Wriothesley Earl of Southampton, Fun. Cert. of
the Nobility 1. 8. fol. 52. b.
Father of Thomas late Earl of Southampton, and Lord High Treasurer of England,
Fun. Cert. of the Nobility, not marked fol. 15. ^.
who departed this life upon the 16th day of May An 1667.

Vernon impapaling Nedham, Argent a Bend ingrayled A^ure, inter ^ Bucks heads,
caboshed and attired Sable. Vernon impaling White, viz. Sable a Cheveveron,
between 3 Flowers de Lys Argent, Vernon in Pale with Cholmondley, Gules, 2
Helmets in chief Argent, and a Garb in base, proper.
Sir Robert Vernon, by Mary his Wife, daughter of Sir Robert Nedham of
Shavington in the County of Salop Knight. had Issue, Visit. Sal. C. 20. p. 404.
Sir Henry Vernon of Hodnet (created Baronet the 23 of July in the twelfth year
of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles II.) who departed this life upon the
day of April An. 1676. leaving Issue by Elizabeth his Wife Daughter and Heir of
Sir Richard White of Anglesey Knight. His only Son Sir Thomas Vernon of Hodnet
Baronet, who has taken to Wife Mary the eldest Daughter of Thomas Cholmondley
of Vale Royal in the County of Chester Esquire and Elizabeth Vernon his sole
Daughter, married to Robert Cholmondley Son and Heir apparent of the said
Thomas Cholmondley Esquire

A Genealogical Table of the Illustrious Family of BEAUFORT and SOMERSET.
10. JOHN of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster (fourth Son of King Edward III) by
Katherine Swinford (afterward his third Wife) had Issue three Sons, and one
Daughter, viz.
11. JOHN Beaufort Earl of Somerset, p. 313. MARGARET HOLAND, p. 315. 12. HENRY
Beaufort Earl of Somerset p. 315. JOHN Beaufort, Duke of Somerset, p. 317.
MARGARET Beauchamp, p. 317. 13. MARGARET Beaufort, Wife of Edmond Tudor Earl of
Richmond, p. 318. 14. HENRY VII. King of England, Book VI. Chap. II.

EDMOND Beaufort, Duke of Somerset, p. 321. ELEANOR Beauchamp, p. 322. HENRY
Beaufort, Duke of Somerset, p. 325. ELIZABETH Herbert, first Wife, p. 327.
15. HENRY Somerset Earl of Worcester, p. 332. ELIZABETH Brown, p. 332. 16.
WILLIAM Somerset, Earl of Worcester, p. 336. CHRISTIAN North, p. 336. 17.
EDWARD Somerset, Earl of Worcester, p. 338. ELIZABETH Hastings, p. 338. 18.
WILLIAM Somerset died S. p. p. 339. HENRY Marquis of Worcester, p. 342. ANNE
Russel, p. 342. 19. EDWARD Somerset, Marquis of Worcester, p. 344. ELIZABETH
Dormer, p. 344. 20. HENRY Somerset, Marquis of Worcester, p. 347. MARY Capel,
p. 348. 21. HENRY died young, p. 348. CHARLES, Lord Herbert, p. 348. EDWARD, p.
348. HENRY, p. 348. ARTHUR, p. 349. ELIZABETH, p. 349. MARY, p. 349.
HENRIETTAMARIA, p. 349. ANNE, p. 349.
ANNE, Lady Howard, p. 345. ELIZABETH, Countess of Powis, p. 346.
Sir JOHN Somerset, p. 343. MARY Arundel, p. 343. HENRY Somerset, p. 343. ANNE
Aston, p. 343. EDWARD-MARIA Somerset, p. 343. MARY Somerset, p. 343.
THOMAS Somerset, p. 343. CHARLES Somerset, p. 343. KATHERINE Baskervile, p.
343. CHARLES, p. 343. HENRY, p. 343. MARY. JOHANNA, p. 343.

WILLIAM, p. 343. HENRY, p. 343. THOMAS, p. 343. CHARLES, p. 343. FREDERICK, p.
343. FRANCIS, p. 343. JAMES, p. 343. ELIZABETH, p. 343. ANNE, p. 343. MARY, p.
343. ELIZABETH, Viscountess Mountague, p. 344.
THOMAS, Viscount Somerset, p. 339. CHARLES, p. 339. FRANCIS, p. 339. Sir
CHARLES, p. 339. CHRISTOPHER, p. 340 Sir EDWARD, p. 340. ELIZABETH, Lady
Guilford, p. 340. KATHERINE Lady Petre, p. ^40. ANNE, Lady Winter, p. 340.
FRANCES, p. 341. MARY, p. 341. BLANCH, Lady Arundel, p. 341. KATHERINE Lady
Windsor, p. 341.
ELIZABETH, Wife of Will. Windsor, p. 337. LUCY Wife of Henry Herbert, p. 337.
THOMAS, p. 334. FRANCIS p. 334. Sir CHARLES Somerset, p. 334. EMME Brain p.
334. ELEANOR, Lady Vaughan, p. 334. LUCY, Lady Latimer, p. 335. ANNE Countess
of Northumberland, p. 335. JANE Lady Mansel, p. 336.
ELIZABETH Somerset, Lady Savage, p. 330.
CHARLES Somerset, Earl of Worcester his Natural Son, p. 327. ELEANOR Sutton,
3d Wife, p. 328. ELIZABETH West, second Wife, p. 328.
Sir CHARLES Somerset Knight, p. 330. Sir GEORGE Somerset Knight, p. 330. MARY
Bowlays, p. 330. MARY Somerset, Lady Gray of Wilton, p. 331.

EDMOND Beaufort, Duke of Somerset, p. 326. JOHN Beaufort, THOMAS Beaufort, p.
323. ELEANOR, Countess of Ormond, p. 323. JOANE Lady Hoth, p. 324. ANNE Lady
Paston, p. 324. MARGARET Countess Stafford, p. 324. ELIZABETH, Lady Lewis, p.
324.
THOMAS Beaufort p. 316. JOANE Beaufort, Queen of Scots, p. 316. MARGARET
Beaufort, Countess of Devonshire, p. 316.
HENRY Beaufort, Cardinal of St. Eusebius, and Bishop of Winchester, p. 253.
THOMAS Beaufort Duke of Exceter and Earl of Dorset, p. 256. JOANE Beaufort,
Countess of Westmerland, p. 256.

11. JOHN BEAVFORT EARL of SOMERSET, CHAMBERLAIN of ENGLAND, CAPTAIN of
CALAIS, and KNIGHT of the GARTER.
CHAP. VIII.
The Arms both of this John Beaufort and of his Brothers Henry and Thomas
(before their Legitimation) stood painted in a Glass Window in Wanlip Church in
the County of Leicester. And were Party per Pale Arg. and Azure, over all, on a
Bend Gules, 3 Lions passant guardant Or, a Label of three, points of France;
the second Escocheon, for Henry is differenced with a Cressent, and the third
for Thomas Beaufort with a Mullet,, which differences began to be used for
distinctions, in the the Reign of King Rich. 2. of which I have seen many
instances. Penes H. St. George Arm. Richmond. But after the Act of Legitimation
of these three Brothers, their distinction of Bastardy was discontinued; for
this John Earl of Somerset did bear the whole Arms of France and England,
within a Border Gobony Argent and Azure, as appears on his Plate at Windsor,
which is subscribed le comre de Somerset, which kind of Border I have cleared
from the aspersion of Bastardy in my Marginal Annotations on the seventh
Chapter (last mentioned) of this fourth Book; Where I prove that not only
Hamphrey Duke of Gloucester, Nephew to this John, but also Philip of France Duke
of Burgundy, did (as they were the youngest sons of their Fathers) bear a
Border Gobony, the first Argent and Sable, and the later Argent and Gules.


COnstance of Castile, the second Wife of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, had
not been long in her Grave, when this Duke took to Wife Katherine Roett, Leland
Coll. Vol. 1. p. 191.
the Widow of Sir Ottes Swinford Knight, by whom he had Issue before Marriage,
this John Earl of Somerset, Henry the Cardinal, Thomas Duke of Exceter, and a
Daughter named Joane, espoused to Ralphe Nevil the first Earl of Westmorland
(all four surnamed Beaufort, from a Castle in Anjou so called, the place of
their birth; which came to the House of Lancaster, with Blanch of Artois, Queen
of Navarre, Wife of Edmond the first Earl of Lancaster) of the three youngest
of which Children, my Reader has had an account in the first Chapter of this
fourth Book.

This act of the Duke in marrying with Katherine, made a lawful Wife of an
unlawful Paramore; but could not wash off the stain of Bastardy from their
Issue, which was supplied by an Act of Parliament, obtained by Duke John,
bearing date the 9th of February, Parl. an. 20. R. 2. Feb. 9.
An. 20 R. 2. and afterward exemplified by King Henry IV. on the 10th of
February, in the 8th year of his Reign. Which Legitimation being applicable to
the descendants of this John Beaufort (his Brothers Henry and Thomas deceasing
without Issue) I have here inserted.

REx omnibus ad quos, Pat. an. 8. H. 4. pars 1. m. 14.
etc. Salutem. Constat nobis per Inspectionem Rottulorum Cancellar. Domini R.
nuper Regis Anglie secundi post Conquestum quod idem nuper Rex literas suas
patentes fieri fecit in hec verba: Ricardus Dei Gracia Rex Anglie et Francie et
Dominus Hibernie carissimis consanguineis nostris nobilibus viris Johanni
militi, Henrico Clerico, Thome Douncello, ac dilecte nobis nobili mulieri
Johanne Beauford Douncelle Germanis, precaris^imi Avunculi nostri nobilis viri
Johannis Ducis Lancastr. natis lige^s nostris salutem et benevolentiam nostre
Regie Majestatis, Pro Comite Somerset, de Exemplificatione.
dum interna consideratione pensamus quot incessanter et quantis honoribus
perut^li et sincera dilectione prefati Avunculi nostri et sui maturitate
Consilii undique decoramur congruum arbitramur et dignum ut meritorum suorum
intuitu vestrarum ac contemplatione personarum, vos qui magne probitatis,
ingenio vite, at morum honestate, fulgetis, et ex regali estis prosapia
propagati, pluribusque virtutibus munere insigniti divino specialis prerogative
munimine favoris et gracie fecundemus; hinc est quod dicti Abunculi nostri
Genitoris vestri precibus incunati vobiscum qui ut asseritur defe^^um natalium
patrium ut hujusmodi defectu quem ejusque qualitates quascunque presentibus
haberi volumus pro sufficienter expressis non obstante ad quecunque honores
dignitates (excepta dignitate regali) preeminentias status gradus et officia
publica et privata tam perpetua quam temporalia atque feudalia et nobilia
quibuscunque nominibus nuncupentur etiam si Ducatus Principatus Comitatus
Baronie vel alia fenda fuerint etiam si mediate vel immediate a nobis
dependeant seu teneantur prefici promoneri eligi assumi et admitti illaque
recipere retinere gerere et excercere perinde libere et licite valeatis ac ^i
legitimo thoro nati existeretis quibuscunque statutis consuedinibus Regni
nostri Anglie in contrarium editis seu observatis que hic habemus pro totaliter
expressis nequaquam obstantibus de plentitudine nostre regalis potestatis et de
assensu Parliamenti nostri tenore presentium dispensamus, vosque et vestrum
quemlibet natalibus restituimus et legitimamus. In cujus rei testimonium has
literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes. Test meipso apud Westminster. nono die Febr.
anno Regui nostri Vicesimo. Nos autem tenorem irrotulamenti literarum
predictarum ad requisitionem Carissimi fratris nostri Johannis Comitis
Somerset, duximus exemplificandum per presents. In cujus, etc. T. Rege apud
Westminster. 10 die Februar. In pursuance of these qualifications, Parl. apud Westminster.
post Exalt. Sanctae Crucis an. 21 R. 2.
Sir John Beaufort was advanced to the honor of Earl of Somerset, by creation
bearing date 20 R. 2. in a Parliament held at Westminster. And in the year
following ( viz. 21 R. 2.) in a Parliament held there, erected into the Dignity
of Marquis Dorset. I find him to be created also Marquis of Somerset, per
cincturam gladii, etc. Habendum sibi and heredibus masculis de corpore, etc.
upon the 29th of September in the said year, with the Annuity of 35 Marks:
Chart. 21 R. 2. m. 12. n. 18.
agreeing with which is Walsingham, in the year 1398. Nevertheless, he was
summoned to Parliament An. 21 and 23 R. 2. and 1st of H. 4. by the Title only
of Marquis Dorset; Tho. Wall. p. 355. n. 40.
and under that denomination had diverse grants made unto him, betwixt the time
of his creation and deposition, from the Titles of Marquis in the first year of
King Henry IV. who doubtless had not any prejudice to this John, or suspicion
of his Loyalty, nor had he reason, he being the Kings half Brother, and stood
allied rather in a degree of service than competition; but being that Sir John
Beaufort had received those Honors from King Richard II. and that the Title of
Marquis had been first granted by that King to his favorite Robert de Vere
Earl of Oxford, whom he created Marquis of Dublin; King Henry was willing this
should fall in the company of those of Albemarle, Surrey, and Exceter, erected
at the same time by the deposed King Richard; and in the place thereof, Pat. 1
H. 4. pars 3.
in the same year ( viz. 9th of February 1 H. 4.) constituted him Chamberlain
of England for term of life, Johannes Comes Somerset frater Regis H. 4.
constituitur Camerarius Anglie ad totam vitam suam per ipsum R. fratrem suum 9
Feb. 1. H. 4. and upon the first day of February in the 3d of H. 4. I find him
written Captain of Calais. The next year ( viz. 4 H. 4.) the Commons became
earnest Petitioners in Parliament for his restitution to the Dignity of
Marquis; Titles of Honor p. 217.
but because that Title was so new and strange in this Kingdom (he himself
being the second person honored therewith) he was altogether unwilling to be
restored thereto. Parl. an. 4 H. 4. m. 18. artic. 18.


In a Patent (dated 6 Junii An. 7. H. 4.) he is styled Johannes Comes Somerset
frater Regis, Pat. 7. H. 4. p. 1.
Camerarius Anglie, Vincent says he deceased the 16th of March.
Capataneus Ville and Castri de Calais, Pat. 11 H. 4. Inq. apud Tevelcest. in
Co. Some. 12 Junii 11 H. 4. n. 44.
which Titles he enjoyed till his death, happening upon the 21 day of April,
being Palm Sunday, in the 11th year of H. 4. An. 1410.

The Earl of Somerset took to Wife Margaret Holand, His Marriage.
the third daughter of Thomas, In Pale Beaufort, Quarterly Fance semee and
England, a Border Gobone Argent and Azure. and Holand, which is, Gules 3 Lions
passant guardant Or, a Border Argent. This Impalement is carved in a Copper
Escocheon on the North-side the Tomb of Margaret Countess of Richmond, in the
Chapel of Henry the Seventh.
and Sister and Coheir of Edmond both Earls of Kent; after whose death, she was
espoused to her second Husband Thomas Duke of Clarence, second son of King
Henry IV. whom also she survived, and afterward deceased full of years and
honor, on the last day of December 1440. having in her lifetime erected for
her two Husbands and her self (in the middle of the Chapel of St Michael, in
the South Side of the Cathedral Church of Canterbury) a Tomb of gray Marble,
with their three Portraitures of Alablaster lying thereon, without any
Inscription The Figure of which Monument is exhibited in the 302 page of this
fourth Book.

Weever in his Funeral Monuments, p. 211.
takes notice of several Escocheons of Arms placed about this Monument (now
defaced) by which he observes, that the Effigies on the right hand of the
Duchess Margaret, was there placed for Thomas Duke of Clarence; and that on her
left, for this John Earl of Somerset, the Coronets on their three heads being
all of the same form.

Children of JOHN BEAUFORT Earl of Somerset, by MARGARET HOLAND his Wife.
12. Beaufort, France and England, quarterly, a Border gobone Argent and Azure.
Being the Arms of his Father.
HENRY BEAVFORT Earl of Somerset, eldest Son and Heir of Earl John, Orig. an. 3
H. 4. bundello 1 Rot. 18.
was baptized the 16th day of October, in the third year of King Henry IV. An.
1401. to whom the said King was Godfather, and gave him his name, and also to
him and the Heirs Male of his Body, granted 1000 Marks yearly, etc.

He deceased young, and unmarried, upon St Katherines day, Esceat. an. 3. H. 6.
in the 6th year of the Reign of King Henry V. leaving his Inheritance to his
Brother John, who succeeded him.

12. JOHN BEAVFORT, second Son of John Earl of Somerset, succeeded his Brother
Henry in the Earldom of Somerset, and was afterward created Duke of Somerset,
vide the next Chapter.

12. EDMOND BEAVFORT, third Son, was Earl of Moriton in Normandy, Dorset in
England; and after the death of his Brother John, without Issue Male, was
created Duke of Somerset; whose History follows in the tenth Chapter of this
fourth Book.

12. THOMAS BEAVFORT, fourth Son of John Earl of Somerset, of whom no further
mention is made than only of his name.

12. JOANE BEAVFORT, Queen of Scots, Heninges.
eldest Daughter of John Earl of Somerset, Scotland, viz. Or, a Lion rampant
Gules, within a double Tressure Flowery counter Flowery, of the second. Impaling
Beaufort aforesaid.
and Margaret Holand his Wife, M. 14. p. 46. b. Lib. in Collegio Arm.
was with great solemnity Married to James I. King of Scots, in the Priory of
St Mary Overy in Southwark, upon the (...) day of February 1423. a Match
procured for her by Henry Beaufort the rich Cardinal, and Bishop of Winchester,
her Uncle, to strengthen and support this Family, by an alliance with that
Kingdom.

This King was most cruelly murdered by the Faction of Walter Earl of Athol
his Uncle, in the third year of his Reign, 1436. at which time (it is an act
worthy of everlasting remembrance) his Queen Joane so long shrouded him from
the assassins with her own Body, that she received two wounds before she could
be drawn off him.

Athol's punishment was answerable to his crime, for being conducted to be
tormented, bound fast, and seated stark-naked in a Carre, his head was
encircled with a Crown of burning Iron, with which torture he expired. James I.
by Queen Joane his Wife, Scotland impaling Geldres viz. Perpale, Azure, a Lion
rampant sinister, Or, and Or, a Lion rampant Sable.
left Issue James II. of the name, King of Scots; who marrying with Mary the
daughter of Arnold Duke of Geldres, left Issue James III. and was slain at the
Siege of Roxborrow, by the bursting of a piece of Ordnance, called a Paulcon,
in the year of our Lord 1460.

James III. his son, succeeded him in the Kingdom of Scotland, Scotland
impaling Denmark. Or, three Lions passant Azure, crowned of the first, and seem
of Hearts Gules.
and by Magaret his Wife, daughter of Christerne I. of the name, King of
Denmark and Norway, had Issue James, who (by the practices of the Scottish
Nobility, being insensed against his Father, slew him in a Battle fought upon
the 11th day of June, An. 1488, and) made his way to the Kingdom, by the name
of James IV. concerning whom, his marriage with Margaret daughter of King Henry
VII. Scotland impaling England.
of England, and their Posterity, my Reader may have recourse to the first
Chapter of the sixth Book.

12. MARGARET BEAVFORT, Courtney, viz. Or, 3 Torteaux, a Label of 3 points of
France impaling Beaufort, viz. France and England, quarterly, a Border gobone
Argent and Azure.
Countess of Devonshire, second daughter of John Earl of Somerset, was the Wife
of Thomas Courtney, seventh Earl of Devon, who siding with King Henry VI.
against the Yorkists, was, by King Edward IV. taken Prisoner at the Battle of
Towton, Escheat. an. 6 Ed. 4. n. 48.
and beheaded at York, the third of April ( An. 1 E. 4.) in the year 1461.
Their Children were, Thomas Earl of Devon, made Prisoner at the same Battle;
and being attainted in a Parliament at Westminster the 4th of November, An. 1
Ed. 4. soon after lost his Head. Henry Courtney second Son, had his Head cut
off in the same quarrel at Salisbury. And John Courtney, the third Son, fell in
the Battle of Tewkesbury. Joane Courtney, the elder Daughter, was espoused to
Sir Roger Clifford Knight. and Elizabeth the the younger, to Sir Hugh Conway Knight. so
that this Male Line of Courtney failing, the Earldom of Devon became
transmitted to another Branch of the same Family.

12. JOHN BEAUFORT, Duke and Earl of Somerset, etc. and Knight of the Garter.
CHAP. IX.
Beaufort, viz. France and England, quarterly, a Border gobone Argent and
Azure. Which Arms ( upon the North-side the Tomb of Margaret Countess of
Richmond at Westminster) impale those of his Wife Margaret Beauchampe, being,
Gules, on a Fesse Or, a Mullet Sable, inter 6 Martlets, three, two, and one, of
the second.
HEnry Beaufort, Earl of Somerset (the eldest Son of John Earl of Somerset)
dying young without Issue, this John his Brother succeeded him in the said
Earldom, and was by King Henry V. chosen Knight of the Garter. He assisted
Thomas Duke of Clarence at the Battle of Baugy in France ( An. 9 H. 5.) where
being out-numbred by the French and Scots, Elias Ashmole. Ar. Windsor. In his
Catalogue of the Kinghts of the Garter. fol. 711. a.
commanded by the Duke of Orleans, Clarence was slain, and this John Earl of
Somerset (with the Earl of Huntingdon, and others) taken Prisoner, where he
remained a long time in durance, till by large Sums of Money his redemption was
procured; and afterward, in the 21 year of King Henry VI. he was advanced to
the Dignity of Duke of Somerset.

Visita. of Devon and Cornwall in Coll. Arm.
He took to Wife Margaret Beauchampe, (the Relict of Sir Oliver St John Knight,
by whom she had Issue Sir John St St John of Ble^sho Knight. Ancestor of the Earl
of Bullinbrook; and Sir Oliver St John of Lidiard Tregos second Son, from whom
those of the same place derive their descent.) She was the Daughter of Sir John
Beauchampe of Bletshoo Knight. and Sister and Heir to John Beauchampe; by whom he
had Issue his only Daughter, named Margaret; and deceasing on the 27th day of
May, in the 22 year of King Henry VI An. 1444. Escheat. an. 22 H. 6. Glouc. and
Sussex.
lies Intombed with his Wife Margaret, under a Monument of gray Marble in
Wimborne Minster in the County of Dorset, situate in an Arch on the South Side
betwixt the Choire and the Altar; upon which, their Portraitures of Alablaster
are placed, holding hand in hand, as more particularly appears in the following
Figure.

After the death of John Duke of Somerset, this Margaret his Widow was
remarried to Lyonel Lord Wells (and had Issue John Viscount Wells, that wedded
Cecilie, second Daughter of King Edward IV.

monument Illustrissimo Domino Dno. GUILLELMO Comiti de DEVONSHIRE and Baroni
CAVENDISH de HARDWICK Tumuli hanc IOHANNIS Ducis SOMERSETIAE et MARGARETAE
Ducissae Consortis eius Imaginent H.D.F.S.

blazon or coat of arms

The Daughter of JOHN Duke of Somerset, by MARGARET BEAUCHAMPE his Wife
13. In her Charter dated the 3d of May, an. 20 H. 7. this Margaret styles her
self, Margareta Comitissa Richmond. matter Excellentissimi Principis Domini
Henrici Regis Anglie and Francie and Domini Hibernie, septimi, etc. Her Seal is
thereunto annexed (represented in the 240 page of this fourth Book) of red Wax;
on which is impressed an Escocheon of the Arms of her Family, viz. Quarterly,
France and England, a Border, Gobone Argent and Azure, supported with two
Antilopes, and Ensigned with a Coronet composed of Roses and Flowers de Lys,
out of which issues an Eagle displayed, gorged also with a Coronet, holding in
his Beak that Scrole which (encompassing the whole Seal) contains these
words, Sigi^^um Domine Margarete Comitisse Richmundie et Derbie fil^e et
heredis Iohannis Duris Somerser ac marris Henrici sentimi, Regis Anglie et
Francie. The like Achievement stands painted in the great Bay Window in the
Hall of St John's College in Cambridge, in which the Eagle and Coronets are
Gold, the Antilops Silver Besantie, their Horns, Hoofs and Manes Or.

Her Arms are impaled with her first Husband Earl Edmonds (at the head of her
Tomb ( vide page 316) which were France and England, quarterly; a Border Azure,
charged with Flowers de Lys, and Martlets Or.


MARGARET BEAVFORT, Countess of Richmond and Derby, only Daughter and Heir of
John Beaufort Duke of Somerset, by Margaret Beauchampe his Wife, was married to
Edmond Tudor, (the eldest Son of Owen ap Merideth ap Tudor, and Katherine of
France Queen of England, Dowager to King Henry V.) surnamed also of Hadham
(Queen Katherines Mannour-House) the place of his birth; Erected into the
Dignity of Earl of Richmond, and to have place in Parliament next after Dukes,
Chart. an. 31 H. 6.
by creation dated at Reading, in the 31 year of the Reign of King Henry VI.
his half Brother, An. 1452. The Countess Margaret, after the decease of this
Edmond Earl of Richmond her first Husband, Her second Marriage.
was espoused to Sir Henry Stafford a younger Son of Humphrey Duke of
Buckingham: Parl. an. 3. and 4. E. 4. m. 18.
whom surviving also, Pat. an. 4. E. 4. p. 2. m. 24.
she was a third time married, Her third Marriage.
to Thomas Lord Stanley and of Man, created Earl of Derby, upon the 27th day of
October, An. 1 H. 7. but not having Issue by either of them two, Stanley,
Quarterly, the first and fourth quarterly, first Argent on a Bend Azure, 3
Bucks heads caboshed, Or, Stanley. 2 Or, on a Chief indented Azure, three
Plates, Lathum. 3 Chequie, Or, and Azure, Waren, the fourth at the first. The 2
and 3 quarters are charged with Gules, three Legs triangular in Armor, couped
at the thigh, and conjoined in the center of the Escocheon Argent, their
garniture and Spurrs, Or. Isle of Man. Over all, on an Inescocheon Azure, a
Lion rampant, Argent, de Monte alto, or Monalt. These, Quarterings are impaled
with the Arms of the Countess Margaret his Wife at the foot of her Tomb.
as if she had been designed to be the Mother of a King only, lived to see the
Crown of England placed upon the Head of Henry VII. her son, by Earl Edmond her
first Husband; and after his victorious Reign, Henry VIII. her Grandson, in
possession thereof. In the first year of whose Reign, ( viz. 1 H. 8.) and year
of Our Lord 1509. upon 3d of the Kalends of July, she deceased; and was
Interred in the South I Will of the Royal Chapel (of her Sons Foundation) in the
Abbey of Westminster, Vide her Epitaph for the time of her death.
where her Monument of black Marble and Touch Stone is yet extant and entire;
whereon lies her Effigies of gilt Copper, in Robes doubled with Ermine, and the
Head encircled with a Coronet. The Arms of Edmond Earl of Richmond her Husband
are Impaled with hers in an Escocheon at the head of this Tomb, within a
Chaplet of Laurel, placed between four Roses, all of Copper; and at the foot,
are the Countess Margarets Impaled in the same manner with those of the Earl of
Derby her third Husband. The South Side contains three Escocheons, the first of
the Arms of King Henry VII. and Queen Elizabeth of York impaled: The second of
King Henry V. impaled with Queen Katherine of France: And the third, of Arthur
Prince of Wales. The North side presents you also with three Shields, all
Impalements; the first of King Henry VIII. and Katherine of Spain; the second
of John Duke of Somerset and Margaret Beauchampe; and the third of John Earl of
Somerset and Margaret Holand. The following Epitaph (beginning at the Head of
her Tomb, the Figure of which I have inserted in the following page) contains
her pious Foundations: the two chief of which were the Colleges of Christ and
St John, in Cambridge; by her built, and richly endowed.

MARGARETAE, RICHEMONDIAE. SEPTIMI. HENRICI. MATRI. OCTAVI. AVIAE. QVAE.
STIPENDIA. CONSTITVIT. TRIB: HOC. COENOBIO. MONACHIS. ET. DOCTORI. GRAMMATICES.
APVD. WYMBORN. PERQ: ANGLIAM. TOTAM. DIVINI. VERBI. PRAECONI. DVOB. ITEM.
INTERPRAETIB: LITTERAR: SACRAR: ALTERI. OXONIIS. ALTERI. CANTABRIGIAE. VBI. ET.
COLLEGIA. DVO. CHRISTO. ET. IOANNL. DISCIPVLO. EIVS. STRVXIT. MORITVR. AN.
DOMINI. M. D. IX. III. KAL. IVLII. monument blazon or coat of arms blazon or
coat of arms blazon or coat of arms blazon or coat of arms blazon or coat of
arms AVIAE QVAE STIPENDIAT etc.

Ad Caput. In boreali latere hujus Monumenti sunt hoec Insignia.

Ilustriss:ma Principi ALICIAE Ducissae Dudley, hanc Tumuli Margaretae
Comitissae Richmoritanae Regis Henrici I.mi Matris, Figuram submisso cultu
D.D.D.F.S.



The Countess Margaret ( an. 23 H. 7.) by the Commandment and Authority of King
Henry VII. her son, Intermenti I. 3. p. 52. in Coll. Arm. C. Margarets Statutes
for Reformation of Apparel. etc. vide I. 3. p. 52. in Col. Armorum.
made the Orders (yet extant) for great Estates of Ladies and Noble Women, for
their Precedence, Attires, and wearing of Barbes at Funerals, over the Chin,
upon the Chin, and under the same: which noble and good Order has been and is
much abused, by every mean and common Woman, to the great wrong and dishonor
of Persons of Quality.

12. EDMOND BEAUFORT, Duke of Somerset, Marquess Dorset, Earl of Somerset and
Dorset, Lord of Chirke and Chirkeland, and Knight of the Garter.
CHAP. X.
THis Edmond was the third Son of John Beaufort Earl of Somerset, and Margaret
his Wife, In St Andrews Church in St Alban, the Arms of this Duke Edmond,
Ensigned with a Coronet, were painted in Glass, viz. France and England
quarterly, a Border gobone Argent and Azure. Penes H. St. George Ar. Richmond
I. 33. p. 13. To a Commission also of this Duke dated 1 April an. 25. H. 6. a
small Seal of the same Arms is appendant. In which Instrument he is styled,
Edmundus Marchio Comes Somerset and Dorset and Dominus de Chirke and Chirkland
in Marchia Wallie Char^a in Coll. Arm.
of Kent; (to whom its probable his said Uncle Earl Edmond was Godfather.) He
had the Title of Earl of Moriton in Normandy, and the Lordship of Chirk and
Chirkland in the Marches of Wales, in the lifetime of John Duke of Someset his
Brother; and King Henry VI. (28 August 20 H. 6. An. 1442.) after the death of
Thomas Beaufort Duke of Exceter and Earl of Dorset his Uncle, Chart. ab. an. 1.
usque 20. H. 6. n. 3.
created this Edmond Earl of Dorset, in recompense of his good service done in
relieving Calais, against Duke of Burgundy, and his Accomplices and Favorers
Rebels; those are the words of the Patent.

In the next year the said King Henry, Chart. ab an. 20. usque 24. H. 6. n. 46.
upon the 24th day of June ( An. 21 H. 6.) 1443. conferred on him the Title of
Marquess Dorset. (The same Honor from which his Father had been deposed by
King Henry IV.) Upon the death of John Duke and Earl of Somerset his elder
Brother, without Issue Male (22 H. 6.) he came to be Earl of Somerset by virtue
of the grant of that Earldom, Esceat an. 22. H. 6. Glou^. and Sussex.
to his Father, and the Heirs Male of his Body by King Richard II. confirmed by
King Henry IV.

His Brother John's Dukedom also of Somerset was granted unto Earl Edmond,
Chart. ab an. 25. usque 27. H. 6. n. 9.
by Letters Patent bearing date at Windsor Castle, on the 31 day of March, in
the 26 year of Henry VI. 1448. which fell into the Kings hands for want of
Issue Male of the Body of the said John Duke of Somerset.

He had at several times the Regency of France, and Government of Normandy, and
with much valor and conduct behaved himself in that Kingdom, when by the
necessity of affairs at home, he was recalled by King Henry VI. and at the
first Battle of St Alban, against Richard Duke of York, on the 22 of May (33 H.
6.) in the year 1455, was slain in that Town under the Sign of the Castle;
Esceat. 33 H. 6. n. 38. Somerset, Dorset.
which seemed to fulfill a prophetic Caution given to Duke Edmond before the
conflict, To take heed of a Castle. The King was also there made Prisoner, and
brought to London, not more lamenting his own misfortune than the loss of this
Edmond Duke of Somerset his Kinsman; on whose faithfulness and ability he
highly depended; and in whose death, his Royalty and Power became much shaken
and eclipsed: and pity it was that so brave a Captain, and one that had behaved
himself with that honor abroad, should receive his death here at home, in a
Civil War, by the hands of his own Contrymen.

His Marriage. Beaufort Impaling Beauchampe, viz. Quarterly, the first and
fourth Gules a Fesse inter 6 Crosse-Croslets, Or, Beauchampe; the second and
third Chequie Or, and Azure, a Cheveron Ermine, Warwick. Over all, an
Inescocheon quarterly Argent, and Gules a Frett Or. Over all, a Bend Sab^e. le
Despenser.
He took to Wife Eleanor (born at Walkunstowe) second Daughter and Coheir of
Richard Beauchampe Earl of Warwick, G. I. Norf. in Collegio Arm. in fine Libri.
and Lord Lisle (Governor of Normandy, and Lieutenant General under John Duke
of Bedford, Regent of France, for King Henry V. who made him Captain of Calais,
and of the City of Meux in Brie,) and of Margery his Wife, Daughter and Heir of
Warren Lord Lisle and Teys. This Eleanor deceased at Baynards Castle on
Saturday the 12th of March, An. 1467. Ibidemin fine Libri.
The Portraiture of the Duchess Eleanor is painted in Glass in the East Window
of our Lady Chapel in the Collegiate Church of Warwick; which with the Figure
of Anne Nevil, the Wife of Humphrey Earl Stafford, in a North-Window of the
Cathedral Church of Lichfield, I have here delineated.

ELEANORA Soinersetiae Ducissae.
ANNA Staffordiae Comitissae.


In the Effigies of the Duchess Eleanor, it is observable, that the Arms of
Edmond Duke of Somerset, her Husband, are embroidered upon here Mantle or upper
Garment, and there placed, to signify that the Husband as a Cloak or Mantle,
is to shroud the Wife from all those violent storms against which her tender
Sex is not capable of making a defense. The Arms of her House are depicted upon
her Kirtle, which (being under covert of the Husband or upper Garment) are to
denote the Family of which she is descended. From which, take this for granted,
That wheresoever you find the Figure of a Woman painted or carved, in a Mantle
and a Kirtle of Arms. Those on the Mantle are the Arms of her Husband; and
those on there Kirtle the Ensigns of her Blood and Family; of which, (besides
the present one) there are very many examples.

The Figure of Anne Countess of Stafford is contrary to the former example, for
here the Arms of her Family (being Nevil) are upon her Mantle; but the reason
thereof is, because she has not any Arms on her Kirtle, and therefore the
Insignia of her Husband Humphrey Earl Stafford are depicted on the Lining of
her Mantle; which being turned back, represents you with an exact Impalement of
the Arms of Stafford and Nevil.

Where a Woman is painted in a Mantle of Arms only, they are always presumed
to be the Insignia of her Family; and if she be a Wife, you shall find her
Husbands Figure near to her, in his Coat Armor.

Children of EDMOND BEAUFORT, Duke of Somerset, by ELEANOR BEAUCHAMPE his Wife.
13. HENRY BEAVFORT, Duke of Somerset, eldest Son mentioned in the next Chapter.

13. EDMOND BEAVFORT, second Son, succeeded, his Brother Henry in the Dukedom
of Somerset, vide Chap. 12.

13. JOHN BEAVFORT, Leland 1. Vol. p. 724.
third son, of Edmond Duke of Somerset, lost his life at Tewkesbury, in a
Battle against the Yorkists, on Saturday the 4th of May ( An. 11 Ed. 4.) in the
year 1471. Ex bundel. de Bill. signat. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, and 19. H. 7.
and was Interred in the Church of that Monastery.

13. THOMAS BEAVFORT, fourth Son, died without Issue.

13. ELEANOR BEAVFORT, Ormond Butler, viz. Or, a Chief, indented Azure,
impaling Beaufort,
Countess of Ormond and Wiltshire, eldest Daughter of Edmond Duke of Somerset,
was the second Wife of James Butler Earl of Ormond and Wiltshire, by whom she
had not any Issue. After his death she was remarried to Sir Robert Spencer of
Spencercombe, in the County of Devon Knight: Captain of the Castles of Homet and
Tomelin in Normandy, and by him left Issue two Daughters their Heirs, viz.
Katherine and Margaret.

14. KATHERINE SPENCER, Spencer, viz. Sable 2 Bars nebulae Ermin^ impaling
Beaufort.
the elder Daughter and Coheir, was espoused to Henry Percy Earl of
Northumberland; from whom descended Joceline, the last Earl of the surname of
Percy, lately deceased, Father of the Lady Elizabeth Percy his only Child.

14. MARGARET SPENCER, Carry, viz. Arg. on a Bend Sable, 3 Roses of the first,
impaling Spencer.
the younger, Daughter and Coheir, C. 1. fol. 52. in Coll. Arm.
was the Wife of Thomas Carry of Chilton Foliot Esquire by whom she had Issue two
Sons, John and William. From John Carry, the Viscount Faulkland is descended:
and William was Ancestor of the Barons Hunsdon, Earls of Dover and Monmouth,
and the Lord Berkley of Berkley Castle in the County of Gloucester.

13. JOANE BEAVFORT, Lady of Hoth, the second Daughter of Edmond Duke of
Somerset, was first espoused to the Lord Hoth of Ireland; and after his death
to Sir Richard Fry Knight.

13. Paston, Arg. 6 Flowers de Lys Azure a Chief indented Or, impaling Beaufort.
ANNE BEAVFORT, Lady Paston, third Daughter, was wedded to Sir William Paston
of Norfolk Knight. and by him, had Issue Anne and Elizabeth; Anne Paston was the
Wife of Sir Gilbert Talbot Knight. and they were Father and Mother of two Daughters
their Heirs, viz. Elizabeth Talbot espoused to John Littleton of Frankley in
the County of Worcester Esquire Ancestor of of Sir Henry Littleton of the same
place Baronet; and Mary Talbot, the Wife of Thomas Astley of Pateshul in
Staffordshire Esquire from whom Sir Richard Astley of Pateshul Knight. is lineally
derived. Elizabeth Paston, their second Daughter and Coheir, was wedded to Sir
John Savile of Thornhil Knight. D. 14. fol. 146. b. in Coll. Arm.
by whom he had Issue Anne Savile, one of his daughters and heirs, married to
Henry Thwaytes of Lunde in the County of York Esquire and from them descended
Katherine Thwaytes, Visit. of York shire per Will. Dugdale Arm. Norroy f. 32. a.
married to George Clapham of Beamsley in the County of York Esquire Great
Grandfather to Sir Christopher Clapham of the same Place, Knight. now living, An.
1675.

13. MARGARET BEAVFORT, Beaufort, impaled by Stafford, viz. Quarterly, the 1.
and 4. quarterly France and England, a Border Argent, Woodstock. The 2. and 3.
Or, a Cheveron Gules, Stafford. Over all, for distinction, a Label Azure.
Countess Stafford, the fourth Daughter of Edmond Duke of Somerset, was twice
married, her first Husband being Humphrey Earl Stafford, who deceased in the
lifetime of his Father; she had by him Issue Henry Stafford Duke of
Buckingham, from whom Mary the present Viscountess Stafford derives her Descent.

The second Husband of this Margaret was Sir Richard Darrel Knight. by whom she had
Issue a Daughter named also Margaret, espoused to James Touchet Lord Audley;
and from this James and Margaret, In Pale Darrel, viz. Azure a Lion rampant Or
crowned Argent, and Beaufort.
James Lord Audley, and Earl of Castlehaven now living 1676, is lineally
descended.

13. ELIZABETH BEAVFORT, fifth and youngest Daughter of Edmond Duke of Somerset
and Eleanor Beauchampe, was the Wife of Sir Henry Lewis Knight. but whether there
was any Issue of this Marriage, I cannot find.

13. HENRY BEAUFORT, Duke of Somerset, Marquess Dorset, Earl of Somerset and
Dorset, Lord of Chirke and Chirkeland, and Lieutenant of Calais.
CHAP. XI.
Beaufort. Quarterly France and England a Boder Gobone Argent and Azure.
THis Prince Henry, eldest Son of Edmond Beaufort Duke of Somerset, among other
Services performed in France, is remembered for his desperate assault of the
Castle of St Anjou in Mayenne, in which he put to the Sword 300 Scots, and
hanged all the French found therein. Being by King Henry VI. recalled into
England to supply the command of his slain Father Duke Edmond; and to withstand
the growing Fortune of Richard Duke of York; he was General to Queen Margaret,
and had the leading of her main Battle at Wakefield, where Richard fighting
upon unequal terms, lost not only the day, but his life also; when Edward Earl
of March the Duke of Yorks eldest Son, revenged his Fathers death upon the
Lancastrians, at the Battle of Mortimers-Cross in the Marches of Wales.

This Henry Duke of Somerset was also Commander in Chief for Henry VI. at the
great and bloody Fight of Towton, where, after the loss of 36000 Men on both
sides, the said Edward was again Victorious, and Duke Henry forced to save his
life by flight; who not long after, finding the Red-Rose-Tree almost wholly
withered, he submitted himself to the mercy of the Conqueror (on whose Head
this Victory had placed the Royal Diadem, by the name of Edward IV.) for which
defection, he is hardly censured by Historians. But the Lancastrian Rose
budding again, by hope of assistance from Scotland, unwilling to outlive the
Prosperity of that House of which himself was a Branch, he espoused their
Quarrel, Inq. capt. apud Margate in Insula de Thaneto in Com. Kant. Ann. 8. Ed.
4. n. 54. Speed p.
and in a third Battle at Exham, was made Prisoner by John Nevil Marquis
Montacute, and there beheaded, upon the 3d day of April, in the third year of
Edward IV. An. 1463. Having in a Parliament begun at Westminster, 11 November
1461. been attainted and disinherited, leaving Issue by Joane Hill, or de la
Montaigne,

14. CHARLES, his only Child; by King Henry VIII. created Earl of Worcester. He
is Ancestor of the Illustrious Family of the Somersets Earls and Marquesses of
Worcester, Lords Herbert of Ragland, Chepstow, and Gower. Whose History begins
in the 13th Chapter of this 4th Book.

13. EDMOND BEAUFORT, Duke of Somerset, Marquis Dorset, and Earl of Somerset
and Dorset, etc.
CHAP. XII.
Beaufort, Quarterly, France and England, a Border Gobone Argent and Azure.
HE was the second Son of Edmond Duke of Somerset, slain at the Battle of St
Alban, and the Brother and Heir of Henry, also Duke of Somerset, taken Prisoner
at Exham, and beheaded there; and following the Lancastrian Interest, did also
partake with them in their Tragical Fortunes; for being made a Prisoner (with
Prince Edward, son of Henry VI.) at the fatal Battle of Tewkesbury, the last
dispute betwixt the Red and White Rose for Englands Sovereignty; where he
commanded Queen Margarets Vanguard (and with his own Hand slew the Lord Wenlock
for cowardice) was there taken Prisoner by King Edward IV. An. 1471. and after
two days lost his Head. He left his four Sisters (beforementioned) his Heirs;
and was Interred in the Abbey of Tewkesbury; Ex bund. billae signat. an. 14,
15, 16, 17, 18 and 19 H, 7.
to which Monastery and Convent King Henry VII. granted the Parochial Church of
Towton, to pray for the Soul of this Edmond, his Brother John, and others, that
there lost their lives in the Quarrel of Lancaster.

14. CHARLES SOMERSET, Earl of Worcester, Lord Herbert of Gower, Chepstowe, and
Ragland, Lord Chamberlain, and Knight of the Garter.
CHAP. XIII.
Charles Earl of Worcester did bear the Coat Armor of Henry Beaufort Duke of
Somerset his Father, viz. France and England, quarterly, a Border Gobone Argent
and Azure, with the distinction of Baston sinister Argent; and over all, on an
Escocheon of Pretense, the Arms of his Wife Elizabeth Herbert, which were, Per
Pale, Gules and Azure, 3 Lions rampant Argent; being so painted in the
Inescocheon within the Garter, at the head of their Tomb here represented; and
upon her Kirtle, although of late the Herberts bear them contrary, viz. Azure,
on the Dexter-side of their Escocheon, and on the Sinister, Gules. The Figure
of his Seal (exhibited in the 240 page of this fourth Book) presents you with
the Arms of Earl Charles (without the Escocheon of Pretense) hanging by the
corner, and supported by an Eagle gorged with a Coronet, and a Goat with a
Collar and Chain. The Crest being a Lion with a Collar and Chain also, and all
within this Circumscription, SIGILLUM. ARMORUM. KAROLI. COMITIS. WIGORNIAE.
HEnry Beaufort, Duke of Somerset, (eldest Son of Edmond Duke of Somerset,
third Son of John Beaufort Earl of Somerset, eldest Son of John of Gaunt Duke
of Lancaster, by Katherine Swinford (afterward his third Wife) had Issue by
Joane Hill, this Charles, whom King Henry VII. his near Kinsman (for that Kings
Mother and this Charles's Father, were Brothers Children) created Banneret, and
elected Knight of the Most Noble Order of the Garter; then made him
Vice-Chamberlain and soon after Chamberlain of his Household. And yet further,
the King, as a demonstration of his confidence in the Loyalty of this Charles
his Cousin, commissionated him Captain of that Guard, erected rather for the
defense of his person, than the State of his Royalty.

His first Marriage.
He was also by the Kings favor, enriched by one of the best Marriages of that
time, The Impalement of the Arms of Earl Charles, and this Elizabeth his
Countess, are yet extant on his Stall in St George's Chapel at Windsor, being
France and England quarterly, a Border gobone Argent and Azure. Over all, a
Baston sinister Argent, and party Perpale Gules and Azure, three Lions rampant
Argent; and the only example of a Knight of the Garters Arms impaling his
Wives; against the whole current of Practice. But seeing that no Escocheon
before that time upon the Stalls, was encircled with the Garter (it being a
sufficient proof that they were of that Order, by finding their Arms up there)
this appears not so irregular and praeposterous as those, which by giving their
Wives an equal share of their Escocheon within the Garter, by impaling their
Arms, seem to share that Order of Knighthood equally betwixt them. The Arms of
Queen Mary impaled by King Philip, can be no President for any less concerned
than herself; she being not only a Sovereign Queen, but also Sovereign of the
Most Noble Order of the Garter.
viz. Elizabeth the Daughter and Heir of William Herbert Earl of Huntington,
and Lord Herbert of Gower, ( Inq. cap. apud Cirencester in Com. Glou. 20.
Novem. an. 23. H. 7.
who deceased the 16th day of July, An. 6 H. 7. at what time the said Elizabeth
was above 30 years of age) and of Inq. cap. apud Dartford in Com. Kant. 7 H. 7.
4. die Feb.
Mary his Wife, Sister and Coheir of Richard Widevile Earl Rivers) in whose
right this Charles Somerset was Pat. an. 22 H 7. Novem. 26.
Lord Herbert of Gower and Chepstowe; for so he is styled upon the 26th of
November, An. 22 H 7.

After the decease of King Henry VII. this Charles came to be highly valued by
his Son and Successor King Henry VIII. who in a Parliament held at Westminster,
on the first of February, An. Pat. an. 5 H. 8. p. 2. M. 13.
5 H. 8. created him Earl of Worcester (on which day the King gave him the
White Staff of Lord Chamberlain for term of Life) and thus speaks his Creation,
Considerantes generis nobilitatem, Pat. 5 H. 8. p. 2. m. 30.
and praecipue nobis in sanguine propinquitatem probatissimi viri amantissimi
Consanguinei nostri Caroli Somerset militis Domini Herbert and Camerarii nostri
etc. de gratia nostra speciali etc. ipsum Carolum in Comitem Wigorn. erigimus
etc. and per cincturam gladii insignimus etc. Datum per manum nostrum apud
Westmon. primo die Februarii, Anno Regni nostri quinto.

This Charles, Herberts Hist. of H. 8. p. 58.
in the 10th of H. 8. surrendered and yielded up to Monsieur Chastillon, to the
use of the French King, the City and Castle of Tournay, for 460000 Crowns, to
be paid to King Henry; at which surrender, the said Chastillon was not suffered
to enter with Banner displayed, but rolled up; because the said City was not
won by force, but yielded up by composition: in the winning of which place,
Earl Charles had the command of 6000 Men; from whence the English Army marching
to Tournay, he had the conduct of their Rereward, and encamped on the West Side
of the Town. He also attended the Lady Mary King Henry's Sister upon her
Coronation at St Dennis by the Kings especial appointment; and in that
interview of King Henry VIII. and Francis I. of France, betwixt Guisnes and
Ardres ( An. 10 H. 8.) he was joined with Monsieur de Chastillon to lay out the
ground for those Triumphs, Ibidem p. 316.
which were there to be performed, and ( An. 13. H. 8.) was employed (with the
Bishop of Ely) to mediate a Peace betwixt the Emperor and the said King of
France.

His second Marriage.
The second Wife of Charles Earl of Worcester was Elizabeth West, Augustins
Vincent p. 614.
Daughter of Thomas Lord la Ware; whom Tho. Milles and Ralph Brook ( York
Herald) make to be his 3d Wife; In Pale Somerset, and Argent, a Fesse
dauncette, Sable, West Lord la Ware.
but by the last Testament of this Charles, dated upon the 12th of November,
Tho. Milles p. 1013.
An. 1525. whereunto a Codicil is annexed, dated the 10th of April, Praerogat.
Office Porch qu. 13.
1526. An. 17 H. 8. he bequeathes diverse Legacies to his Wife Eleanor; so that
she must needs be his last Wife, he deceasing upon the 20th of November 1526.
for then was his Will proved.

His third Marriage.
Eleanor then (as Austin Vincent Rouge Croix observes) was his third Wife; by
whom he had not any Child: Vincent p. 615.
she was the Daughter of Edward Sutton Lord Dudley; Somerset impaling Dudley,
viz. Or, a Lion rampant queve forche, vert.
and to her the Earl bequeathes 6000 Marks in Plate, all his Jewels, Chains,
Rings, Precious Stones and Broaches (his Collar of the Order of St George
excepted) and leaving her a Widow, His death.
departed this World upon the 15th day April, An. 17 H. 8: 1526.

Charles Somerset Earl of Worcester, erected for himself and his first Wife
Elizabeth Herbert, a Tomb in his Chapel of our Lady, in the South-West Corner
of the Royal Chapel of Windsor, whereon lie their Portraitures; His apparelled
in the Habit of St George; and Hers, having on Her Kirtle the Arms of Herbert
embossed and painted; and on her Mantle, the Coat Armor of her Husband. The
Monument is enclosed within a Rail of Brass, the Form of which is represented
in this Figure.

monument Honoratissimo et Nobilissimo Dno: CAROLO Domino HERBERT de Ragland.
(Illustrissmi Principis Henrici Marchionis Wigorniae filio et haeredi) Tumuli
hanc CAROLI olim Comitis WIGORNIAE antecessoris sui et ELIZABETHAE Conjugis
figuram, H.D.D.D.F.S.

MVTARE VEL TIMERE SPERNO

Children of CHARLES SOMERSET Earl of Worcester, by ELIZABETH HERBERT his first
Wife.
15. HENRY SOMERSET, Lord Herbert, eldest Son succeeded his Father Charles in
the Earldom of Worcester.

15. In a Glass Window of Huckna in the County of Derby are the Figures of this
Sir John Savage and Elizabeth Somerset his Wife, kneeling in their Mantles of
Arms; on his, he bears quarterly, the 1. Argent, 5 Fucils in pale, Sable,
which is the Coat of Daniers or Daniel (and since the Marriage of Sir John
Savage with Margaret the Daughter of Sir Thomas Daniers Knight. born by several of
his Descendants the Savages as their Paternal Coat) 2. Or, on a Fesse Azure, 3
Garbes proper, Vernon. 3. Gules, a Cheveron inter 3 Martletts Argent,
Walkington the 4. as the 1. viz. Savage. On her Mantle are painted quarterly,
1. Somerset on the Fesse, 2. Herbert, 3. Woodvile, 4. Somerset.
And under their Portraitures these Lines in old English Characters, Orate pro
bono statu Iohannis Sabage militis et Elizabethe uxoris ejus qui me fieri
fecerunt An. Dom. M. CCCC^. XXvjj. Visit. Derby C. 4. in Coll. Arm. p. 17.


ELIZABETH SOMERSET, E. 16. fol. 64. lib. in Coll. Arm. I. 8. fol. 50.
Lady Savage, eldest daughter of Charles Earl of Worcester, was espoused to Sir
John Savage of Clifton Knight. and they had Issue Sir John Savage of Rock Savage in
the County of Chester Knight. who deceased An. 1597. leaving Issue by Elizabeth
Manors, E. 16. in Coll. Arm. fol. 64.
daughter of Thomas Earl of Rutland, Sir John Savage of the same place Knight
and Baronet; who took to Wife Mary Daughter and Coheir of Sir Nicholas
Allington Knight. and was the Father of Sir Thomas Savage Knight. and Bar. Viscount
Savage (Chancellor and Councellor to her Majesty Mary the Queen Mother) who
departed this life the 20th of Novem. 1635. This Thomas Viscount Sovage married
Elizabeth Darcy daughter and Coheir of Thomas Earl Rivers, Viscount Colchester,
I. 8. fol. 81. M.S. in Coll. Arm.
and Baron Darcy of Chich; which Elizabeth died upon the 9th day of March, An.
1650. having been created Countess Rivers by Letters Patent, bearing date the
21 of April, An. 17 Car. 1. leaving Issue by her said Husband Thomas Viscount
Savage, John Earl Rivers Viscount Savage of Rock Savage, Vicount Colchester,
and Baron Darcy of Chich, who wedded Katherine Parker, second Daughter of Henry
Lord Morley and Mount-Eagle, and they had Issue Thomas Earl Rivers etc. now
living 1676.

Children of CHARLES Earl of Worcester, by ELIZABETH WEST his second Wife.
Quarterly, 1. Or, on a Fesse, France and England quarterly, within a Border
Gobone Argent and Azure. Somerset, 2. Herbert, 3. Woodvile, 4. Somerset, a
Cressent for distinction.
15. Sir CHARLES SOMERSET Knight, second Son of Charles Earl of Worcester, was
Captain of Rise-bank and Calais in France. J. 5. fol. 167. in Coll. Arm.
He subscribed a Certificate (entered in the College of Arms) after the death
of Anne Barret his Niece, the daughter of his Brother Sir George Somerset, by
which it appears, that he was living An. 1568.

15. Sir GEORGE SOMERSET Knight, D. 7. fol. 19. b. in Coll. Arm.
third Son of Charles Earl of Worcester, espoused Mary the daughter and heir of
Thomas Bowlayes of Penhow in the County of Monmouth Knight. and by her had Issue
Charles Somerset his eldest Son, Quarterly, 1. Somerset, 2. Herbert, 3.
Woodvile, 4. Somerset, as before, a Mullet for distinction. Impaling, quarterly
2 Gules a pair of Wings conjoined Or, and Or and Azure quarterly indented in
Fesse. Bowlays Cert. Fun. J. 5. fol. 167.
William Somerset, second Son, and Anne Somerset his only Daughter, the Wife
of Edward Barret of Belhouse in the Parish of Aveley in the County of Essex Esquire
by whom she had Issue Charles Barret, Edward, and Margaret.

Charles Somerset of Badmondesfield in the County of Suffolk Esquire Son and Heir
of Sir George, Somerset with a Cressent, impaling, Quarterly, Varry Argent,
gutte depoix, and Gules; and Sable a Lion rampant argent accolled Or. H. 19.
fol. 97. in Coll. Armorum
G. 14. fol. 19. in Coll. Arm. H. 13. fol. 29. ibidem.
married Elizabeth Daughter of Sir George Grysley of Colton in the County of
Stafford Knight. (by Katherine his second Wife daughter of Edward Lord Dudley) and
they were Father and Mother of George Somerset, Charles Somerset, and Mary
Somerset.

This Sir George Somerset Knight. third son of Charles Earl of Worcester,
Praerogat. Office Mellershe qu. 24.
made his nuncupative Will upon the 10th day of March 1555. An. 2 Eliz. by the
name of Sir George Somerset of Wickhambrook in the County of Suffolk Knight. by
which Testament it appears, that he had a Wife named Helen, to whom he
bequeathed all his Goods that were hers before he married her.

15. MARY SOMERSET Lady Gray of Wilton, Gray of Wilton, Barry of 6 pieces
Argent and Azure, impaling Somerset as before. Cert. Fun. I. 13. fol. 35. in
Coll. Arm.
the second Daughter of Charles Earl of Worcester (but only Daughter by his
second Wife Elizabeth West) was given in marriage to William Lord Gray of
Wilton, Burials I. 13. fol. 35. ^.
Lord Warden of the East Marches toward Scotland, Governor of the Town and
Castle of Barwick, and Knight of the Garter. He deceased at Cheston, near
Waltham in the County of Hertford, on Monday the 14 of December, An. 5 Eliz.
1562. and was Interred in the Chancel of that Parish Church, leaving his said
Wife Mary a Widow, and Issue by her Arthur Lord Gray, William Gray, and Honora
Gray, Wife of Henry Denny of Cheston aforesaid Esquire

Arthur Lord Gray of Wilton, Knight of the Garter, and Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland, Nevil qu. 30.
deceased upon the 14 of October, 35 Eliz. in the year of our Lord 1593. having
married two Wives, the first of which was Dorothy the Daughter of Richard Lord
Zouche of Haringworth, by whom he had Issue his Daughter Elizabeth, espoused to
Francis Goodwin Son and Heir of Sir John Goodwin Knight. His second Wife was Jana
Sibylla Morison, the Daughter of Sir Richard Morison Knight. and by her left Issue
Thomas Lord Gray of Wilton, Stowes Annals continued by House.
William Gray, and Briget Gray. Thomas Lord Gray of Wilton being one of those
Conspirators (with the Lord Cobham, Sir Walter Raleigh, and others, An. 2
Jacobi Regis) that designed to take the King and Prince to the Tower of London,
and thence to Dover Castle, thereby to obtain a Toleration of the Romish
Religion, and remove some Counselors of State (as 'twas then said) was
attainted of Treason; and upon the 6th of July 1614. died in the Tower, being
the last Lord Gray of Wilton.

15. HENRY SOMERSET, Earl of Worcester, and Lord Herbert of Gower, Chepstow,
and Ragland.
CHAP. XIV.
This Earl Henry, forsaking the Arms of Charles Earl of Worcester his Father,
did bear, Quarterly, 1. Or a Fesse, quarterly of France and England, within a
Border Gobony Argent and Azure. 2. Per pale Azure and Gules, 3 Lions rampant
Argent, by the name of Herbert. 3. Argent a Fesse and Canton Gules. The Arms of
Woodvile, the 4. as the 1. which is Somerset, and is thus Marshalled, on the
North-side his Tomb at Chepstowe, under a Marquisses Coronet, although Henry
Marquess of Worcester his great Grandson was the first that had that Dignity.
The Arms of Elizabeth Brown, his Wife, being Sable, 3 Lions passant in bend,
inter four Cotizes Argent, are impaled with the Earls on the Canopy at the head
of the said Monument.
THis Henry, eldest Son of Charles Earl of Worcester (and only Son by
Elizabeth his first Wife, Daughter and Heir of William Herbert Earl of
Huntington.) In the 12th of H. 8. (his Father then living) upon that famous
Interview betwixt Ardres and Guisnes of the said King, Stows Annals.
and Francis I. where several Feats of Arms were performed on Horse and on
Foot, during the space of forty days, betwixt the English and French, was one
of the Challengers; and afterward accompained the Duke of Suffolk into
France, Holingsh. p. 879. a. n. 50.
An. 15 H 8. by whom many places of strength were won. In which Expedition this
Henry merited so well from the said Duke, that he conferred on him the Honor
of Knighthood. Shortly after his Fathers death ( An. 17. H. 8.) this Henry Earl
of Worcester was appointed one of the Commissioners for concluding a Peace with
France; and in the year following had an especial Livery of all his Fathers and
Mothers Lands. Pat. an. 18 H. 8. p. 1.
He was also one of the Peers that subscribed that Declaration sent to Pope
Clement VII. ( An. 22 H. 8.) concerning the said Kings divorce from Queen
Katherine. Herbert p. 306.
And in An. 5 Ed. 6. accompanied William Parr Marquis of Northampton into
France, Hayward p. 123.
sent Ambassador to that King with the Order of the Garter. He took to Wife
Elizabeth, the daughter of Sir Anthony Brown Knight. Standard Bearer of England
(and Lucy his Wife, one of the Daughters and Coheirs of John Nevil Marquis
Montague) and by her leaving a numerous Progeny deceased (aged about 53 years)
on the 26th day of November, in the third year of Edw. 6. An. 1549. Inq. capta
apud Wotton under Edge in Com. Gloc. 21 Feb. an. 4. E. 6.
This Henry Earl of Worcester was buried in the Parish Church of Chepstowe in
the County of Monmouth, where, the Countess Elizabeth his Widow (who outlived
him about 16 years, for she deceased An. 1565) appoints by her last Will to be
Interred as near as may be to the place where the late Earl her Husband was
deposited, in the said Parish Church of Chepstowe, Morison qu. 28.
where their Tomb of Freestone, painted and gilt represents its self, the foot
thereof being placed contiguous to the East End of the Church; and on the
South Side and parallel with the Altar: thereon lie the Portraitures of the Earl
and Countess in their Robes, under a Canopy, supported by eight Corinthian
Pillars, according to the Figure inserted in the following page.

monument Tumulus HENRICI Comitis WIGORNIAE et Comitisae Elizabethae Consortis
s^^



Children of HENRY SOMERSET, Earl of Worcester, by ELIZABETH BROWN his Wife.
16. WILLIAM SOMERSET Lord Herbert, eldest son and heir, was Earl of Worcester,
after the death of his Father, and continued the descent, Chap. 15.

16. THOMAS SOMERSET second son of Henry Earl of Worcester, departed this life
in the Tower of London. Praerogat. Office Windsor qu^. 28.
He made his Will upon the 6th day of April in the year 1586. and deceased
before the 27th of the next Month being May, for then his said Testament is
proved, wherein he delegates William Earl of Worcester and Edward Herbert, his
Executors.

16. FRANCIS SOMERSET third son, Praerogat. Office Stevenson qu. 3.
lost his life at Musselborow Field against the Scots, in the year 15(...)
leaving Natural Issue, a son named Charles, and a daughter Eleanor.

16. Quarterly, 1. Somerset, 2. Herbert, 3. Woodvile, 4. Somerset, an Anulet
for distinction. Impaling Brain, viz Sable, on a Fesse Argent, a Hemp Brake
Gules, between 3 bugie Horns, stringed and garnished of the Second.
Sir CHARLES SOMERSET Knight, Fun. Cert. fol. 45. in Coll. Arm.
fourth son of Henry Earl of Worcester, was Standard Bearer of the Band of
Gentlemen Pentioners to Queen Elizabeth. He took to Wife Emme daughter and one
of the coheirs of Henry Brain Esquire (Widow of Giles Morgan of Newport Esquire) by
whom he had Issue Elizabeth Somerset his daughter and heir; first married to
Radcliff Gerard Esquire by whom she had four sons, Lib. Benefact. in Coll. Arm.
viz. Sir Charles Gerard Knight. eldest son, Father of Charles Lord Gerard of
Brandon, now living 1675. Edward and Sir Gilbert: Thomas Gerard second son of
Radcliff, Gerard, Argent a Saltire Gules, a Cressent for distinction impaling
Somerset.
Sir Gilbert Gerard Knight. third son, and Radcliff Gerard fourth son (a Twin with
his brother Sir Gilbert) who had Issue Sir Gilbert Gerard Bar. Radcliff, John,
Somerset, and Penelope.

This Elizabeth Somerset was afterward espoused to Sir Edward Fox of Gwernoga
in the County of Montgomery Knight. and by him had Issue Somerset Fox, G. 2. p.
299. in Coll. Arm.
Thomas and Henry. Fox, Argent, a Cheveron inter 3 Foxes heads errased Gules.
Impaling Somerset.


Somerset Fox Esquire, was of Kaynham in the County of Salop, and taking to
Wife Anne daughter of Sir Walter Long of Wraxal in Wiltshire, had Issue
Somerset Fox his eldest son, Walter, William and Richard, Elizabeth and Anne.

Sir Charles Somerset ended this transitory life at Chepstowe in the County of
Monmouth, l. 16. fol. 45. in Coll. Arm.
on the second day of March 1598. and was there Interred on the 8th day of May
next following.

16. Vaughan, viz. Sable, 3 Infants heads couped at tht Shoulders, each with a
Snake about the Neck, all Proper.
ELEANOR SOMERSET Lady Vaughan, eldest daughter of Henry Earl of Worcester, was
the Wife of Sir Roger Vaughan of Tretour in the County of Brecknock Knight. from
whom several of that Surname did descend.

16. LVCY SOMERSET Lady Latimer, second daughter, was married to John Nevil
Lord Latimer, Somerset impaled by Nevil Lord Latimer. viz. Gules, a Saltire
Argent, charged with an Anulet Sable. Which Arms are thus set forth on the Tomb
of this Lady Lucy Somerset at Hackney in the County of Middlesex.
who departed this life at his Manor of Snape in Yorkshire, the 22 of April,
An. 1577 aged 61 years; and lies buried with his Ancestors in his Church and
Town of Well. Praerogat. Office, Row, qu. 16.
The Lady Lucy his Wife deceased in the year of our Lord 1582. and was Interred
in the Parish Church of Hackney in the County of Middlesex; where by her last
Will, she ordained a Tomb of Alablaster to be set up (which was accordingly
done) over the place of her burial, with the Pictures of herself and her four
daughters, with the Arms of the late Lord Latimer their Father, and of the
several Husbands of her daughters, engraven about the said Monument; for the
erection of which she gave Five hundred Marks.

Percy, who did bear, Quarterly, Or a Lion rampant Azure, and Gules, 3 Lucys
haurient Argent; impaling Nevil aforesaid.
Katherine Nevil, eldest daughter and coheir to her Father the Lord Latimer,
was married to Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland, Ancestor of the eleventh and
last Earl of Northumberland, Cert. Fun. fol. 27. b. in Coll. Arm.
Joceline, Father of the Lady Elizabeth Percy, heir general of that Illustrious
Family.

Dorothy Nevil, second daughter and coheir, C. 14. p. 6. Lib. in Coll. Arm.
was the Wife of Thomas Cecil Earl of Exceter, Cecil, viz. Barry of 10 pieces,
Argent and Azure, Over all, 6 Escocheons Sable, charged with 6 Lions rampant of
the 1st. Impaling Nevil, which is Gules, on a Saltire Argent an Anulet Sable.
and deceased upon 22 of May 1608. leaving Issue by him (besides other
children) William Cecil Earl of Exceter (Father of William Cecil Lord Roos, I.
9. fol. 127. a. in Coll. Arm.
who died without Issue) and Sir Richard Cecil Knight. second son, the Father of
David Earl of Exceter, who had Issue, John Earl of Exceter now living 1676.
Father of John Lord Burleigh.

Lucy Nevil, L. 2 fol. 59. b. in Coll. Arm.
third daughter and coheir, was married to Sir William Cornwallis of Brom in
the County of Suffolk Knight. and by him had Issue four daughters her heirs,
Ibidem f. 60. a.
viz Frances, eldest daughter, Cornwallis, viz. Sable Gutte de l'armes on a
Fesse Argent, 3 Cornish Choughes, Proper. Impaling Nevil Latimer.
espoused to Sir Edmund Withipol of Gipwick Knight. Elizabeth, second daughter, was
the Wife of Sir William Sands Knight. son of Walter Sands Esquire Cornelia, third
daughter, was married to Sir Richard Fermer Knight. and Anne, fourth daughter, was
the Wife of Archambald Camphel Earl of Argile in Scotland.

Danvers, which is, Gules, a Cheveron inter 3 Mullets of six points Or.
Impaling Nevil Latimer.
Elizabeth Nevil fourth daughter and coheir of John Nevil Lord Latimer, L. 2.
fol. 59. b. and 60. a. in Coll. Arm.
was espoused to Sir John Danvers of Dantesey in Wiltshire Knight. by whom she had
Issue Sir Charles Danvers Knight. who lost his life for partaking with Robert Earl
of Essex, Tho. Milles p. 1014.
in that Insurrection by him made An. 43 Eliz. and Henry Danvers Earl of Danby,
and Knight of the Garter, who by a special Act of Parliament An. 3 Jacobi
Regis, was restored in blood as heir to his Father.

16. Percy and Lucy, quarterly. viz. Or, a Lion rampant Azure, and Gules, 3
Lucyes haurient Argent; impaling Somerset, being, Or, a Fesse quarterly France
and England, within a Border Gobony Argent and Azure.
ANNE SOMERSET, Countess of Northumberland, third daughter of Henry Earl of
Worcester, L. 2. fol. 59. Lib. in Coll. Arm.
was married to Thomas Percy Earl of Northumberland, beheaded at York in the
year of Our Lord 1572. by whom she had her only son Thomas Percy who deceased
young, and 4 daughters, Elizabeth Wife of Richard Woodrooff of Wolley in York
shire. Lucy espoused to Sir Edward Stanley of Winwick, in the County Palatine
of Lancaster, Knight of the Bath at the Coronation of King James, and Nephew to
Henry Earl of Derby. Jane married to the Lord Henry Seymour, brother to Edward
Earl of Hertford. And Mary Percy youngest daughter, Lady-Abbes of the English
Nunnery at Bruxels, An. 1621.

16. Mansel, whose Arms are Argent, a Cheveron between 3 Water bougets, Sable.
Impaling Somerset.
JANE SOMERSET, Lady Mansel, Augustine Vincent R. C. p. 615.
fourth and youngst daughter of Henry Earl of Worcester, was the Wife of that
worthy and valiant Knight Sir Edward Mansel of Margam in the County of
Glamorgan, I. 23. fol. 49. a. in Coll Arm.
and had Issue Sir Thomas Mansel of the same place Knight and Baronet who
deceased on Thursday the 20th of December 1631. I. fol. 111. and 112. in Coll.
Arm.
leaving Issue by his first Wife Mary daughter of Lewis Lord Mordaunt, Sir
Jews Mansel of Margam Knight and Baronet, who espoused to his third Wife
Elizabeth Mountagu daughter of Henry Earl of Manchester Lord Privy Seal, and
departing this life on Wednesday the fourth of April An. 1638. left Issue by
her, Sir Edward Mansel Baronet.

16. WILLIAM SOMERSET, Earl of Worcester, Lord Herbert of Gower, Chepstowe and
Ragland, and Knight of the Garter.
CHAP. XV.
OF the sons of Henry Earl of Worcester, This William Earl of Wercester ( as it
appears on his Plate at Windsor) did bear, quarterly 1. Or, a Fesse quarterly
of France and England, within a Border gobone, Argent and Azure. 2. Herbert, 3.
Woodvile, 4. Somerset.
Elizabeth Brown his Wife. This William was the eldest, being at his said
Fathers decease, Inq. cap. apud Wotton under Edge in Com. Gloc. 21. Feb. an. 4.
Ed. 6.
An. 1549. aged about 22 years, at which time ( viz. 3. E. 6.) he succeeded him
in his Earldom of Worcester, and Lordships of Ragland, Chepstowe and Gower; and
afterward, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, was Installed Knight of the
Garter; who in the sixteenth year of her Reign, Vide the Catalogue of the
Knights of the Garter.
sent him into Scotland, with a Font of pure Gold, for the christning of a
daughter of King James the V. as also to stand in the Queens stead, as one of
the Sureties; Somerset aforesaid, impaling North, viz. Azure, a Lion passant
Or, between three Flowers de Lis, Argent.
and An. 19 Eliz. Annal Eliz per Camden.
He was one of the Peers which sat on the trial of Mary Queen of Scots. He
took to Wife Christian Daughter of Edward Lord North of Cartelage in the County
of Cambridge: which Edward, Praerogat. Office Morison qu. 7.
by his Testament dated the second day of March, 1563. after several
remainders, intails his Lands upon his daughter Christian Countess of
Worcester, for term of life, and then to her son Edward Lord Herbert, etc. This
William Earl of Worcester departed this life at his house by St John's near
London, Inq. cap. 11 Sept. a. 31 Eliz.
on the 21 of February, in the 31 of Queen Elizabeth, An. 1588. and was buried
at Ragland the last day of April next following, where he ordained by his last
Will to be Interred, and there to lie alone, Praerogat. Office Leicester. qu.
89.
and to have erected over him a Tomb of Marble, and charge his son Lord
Edward Herbert to see it performed; which was done accordingly, and affixed to
the North Wall of their Chapel in the Parish Church of Ragland, but broken in
pieces in the late Rebellion, Anno 1667. April 20.
nothing remaining thereof at present but the Canopy of Alablaster, carved and
gilt, and part of the Figure of Earl William in Armor, with the Collar of St
George about his Neck, and the Garter on his left Leg.

Children of WILLIAM Earl of Worcester, by CHRISTIAN NORTH his Wife.
17. EDWARD SOMERSET, Lord Herbert, only son, of whom see more in the next
Chapter.

17. Windsor, viz. Gules, a Saltire Argent, inter 12 Crosse-crosletts, Or,
impaling Somerset as before.
ELIZABETH SOMERSET, Tho Milles p. 1015.
the elder daughter of William Earl of Worcester, was married to William
Windsor, the seventh and youngest son of William Lord Windsor of Stanwell and
Bradenham, E. 16. fol. 53. a. in Coll. Arm.
by Margaret daughter and heir of Williliam Sambourne of Southcotte his first
Wife.

17. Herbert, viz. Parti Perpale, Azure and Gules, 3 Lions rampant Argent, a
cressent and Label of three points Or, for distinction. Impaling Somerset as
above.
LVCY SOMERSET the younger daughter, Tho. Milles p. 1015.
was the Wife of Henry Herbert (son of Sir Thomas Herbert of Winestowe in the
County of Monmouth) by whom she had Issue a son named William, Ex codice M. S.
fol. 58. b. Penes D. Edw. Herbert Baronnem de Cherbury.
that died young, without Issue; and three daughters, viz. Eleanor married to
Giles Herbert of Hadnock near Monmouth Esquire son of Charles Herbert of Colebrook
Esquire Lucy espoused to (...) Lewis of St Pere near Chepstowe Esquire And(...) Wife of
(...) Rawlins.

17. EDWARD SOMERSET, Earl of Worcester, Lord Herbert of Ragland, Chepstowe and
Gower, Lord Privy Seal, Master of the Horse to Queen Elizabeth and King James,
Privy Councellor to Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles, and Knight
of the Garter.
CHAP. XVI.
HE was the only son of William Earl of Worcester, He was the first of the
Line of Somerset that left off the Fesse, and took to his Arms the Coat of
Beaufort, viz. France and England, quarterly a Border gobony Argent and Azure,
as appears in the Certificate taken after his death ( vide I. 8. fol. 16 in
Coll. Armorum) But on his plate at Windsor, in his younger years you will find
that he did bear the Fesse.
and Elizabeth North his Wife, and after his death, Vide his Plate at Windsor,
in the third Stall, on the Sovereigns side.
the fourth Earl of Worcester, Lord Herbert of Ragland, Chepstowe and Gower.
Installed he was Knight of the Garter at Windsor, upon the 26th day of June,
An. 1593. which Order he enjoyed above 35 years. He had been also Master of the
Horse to Queen Elizabeth and King James, being the best Horseman and Tilter of
those times; and of the Privy Council to that Queen, King James and King
Charles; he had the Office of Lord Privy Seal; was one of the Lords
Commissioners for exercising the office of Earl-Marshal of England; I. 8. fol.
16. and 17. in Coll. Arm.
and a great favourer of learning and good literature: After all which, he
deceased full of Honor and years, about the 79th year of his age, at Worcester
House in the Strand, and Parish of St Clement Danes, London, on Monday being
the third day of March, An. 1627. His Corpse being conveyed to Ragland, was on
Sunday the 30th of the same Month ( An. 1628.) deposited under a sumptuous Tomb
(erected in his lifetime) affixed to the South-Wall of his own Chapel,
adjoining to the Chancel of the Parish Church of Ragland aforesaid; upon which
were placed the Portraitures of this Earl Edward (in the Habit of the Order)
and his Countess, with thirteen of their Children. But the same Hammer of
Rebellion which defaced Earl William's Tomb, broke in pieces the Sepulcher also
of this Edward Earl of Worcester; when the Parliament Soldiers, being seized of
the Church, were as revengeful in destroying the Monuments of the dead Father
and Grandfather, as the living son Henry, the first Marquis of Worcester, was
loyal and resolved in defending against them his Castle of Ragland.

The Arms of Hastings this Earls Wife were, Argent, a Maunch, Sable, which I
find impaled in the front of the said Certificate, with these of Somerset.
He married Elizabeth Hastings daughter of Francis Earl of Huntington (by
Katherine his Wife, I. 8. f. 5. a. in Col. Arm. Ibidem fol. 16.
daughter and coheir of Henry Pole Lord Montague;) which Elizabeth departed
this life at Worcester House, aforefaid, upon the 24th day of August 1621. and
was immediately conveyed from thence to Ragland, and there Interred in the same
Vault where her Husband Earl Edward was afterward buried.

Children of EDWARD Earl of Worcester, by ELIZABETH HASTINGS his Wife.
18. WILLIAM SOMERSET, Ibidem f. 5. a.
Lord Herbert, eldest son, died unmarried, in the lifetime of his Father.

18. HENRY SOMERSET, second son (Lord Herbert after the death of his brother)
succeeded his Father in his hereditary Honors, and was created Marquis of
Worcester.

18. Somerset, impaling Barry, viz. Barry of 10 pieces, Argent and Gules.
THOMAS SOMERSET, Ibidem f. 16. b.
Viscount Somerset of Cassel, third son, was made Knight of the Bath at the
creation of Charles Duke of York (since our late most gracious King Charles I.)
the fifth day of January, M. 7. Knights of the Bath.
An. 1604. He was Master of the Horse to Queen Anne, and Viscount Somerset of
Cassel in Ireland, and married Eleanor Barry Countess of Ormond, the Relict of
Thomas Butler Earl of Ormond, and daughter of David Lord Barry, Viscount
Boutevan of Ireland (by Helena Roche daughter of David Roche Viscount de Rupe
and Fermoye in the same Kingdom) and by her had Issue Elizabeth Somerset his
daughter and heir, who was never married, and left her Estate to Lord Henry the
present Marquis of Worcester. This Thomas Viscount Somerset together with
Eleanor Countess of Ormond his Wife, and Elizabeth their daughter, lie buried
in the Parish Church of Ragland.

18. CHARLES SOMERSET, I. 8. fol. 16. b.
fourth son, died an Infant.

18. FRANCIS SOMERSET, Ibidem.
fifth son, deceased very young.

18. Somerset, viz. Or a Fesse of France and England quarterly, within a Border
Gobone Argent and Azure, a Mullet sable for distinction. Impaling Powel of
Lhanpylt.
Sir CHARLES SOMERSET, I. 8. fol. 16. b. in Coll. Arm.
the younger, sixth son of Edward Earl of Worcester, was made Knight of the
Bath at the Creation of Henry Prince of Wales, eldest son and heir apparent to
King James, M. 7. Knights of the Bath.
in the year of our Salvation 1610. He took to Wife Elizabeth the daughter and
heir of Sir William Powel of Lhanpylt in the County of Monmouth Knight. and by her
had Issue three daughters.

Elizabeth the eldest daughter, was married to Francis Anderton of Lostock in
Lancashire Esquire and has Issue Charles, Visit. Lanc. per W. D. Esquire N. fol. 91. b.
Henry and Christopher. Mary second daughter unmarried; and Frances the third
daughter, is the Wife of Sir Henry Brown of Kiddington in the County of Oxford
Baronet.

This Sir Charles Somerset deceased at Troy near Monmouth, upon the(...) day of
December An. 1665. and was buried at Ragland.

18. CHRISTOPHER SOMERSET, the seventh son of Edward Earl of Worcester, died
about the age of five years. I. 8. fol. 16. b. in Coll. Arm.


18. Somerset, as before, with a Martlet Sable, impaling Whitmore, being, vert,
fretty of 8 pieces, Or.
Sir EDWARD SOMERSET, I. 8. fol. 16. b. in Coll. Arm.
eighth son of Edward Earl of Worcester, was created Knight of the Bath at the
same time with his brother Sir Charles. M. 7. Knights of the Bath.
He took to Wife Bridget the daughter and heir of William Whitmore of Leighton
in the County of Chester Esquire (by Margaret his Wife, C. 6. fol. 39. b. in Coll.
Arm.
daughter and heir of Sir Hugh Beeston of Beeston in the same County Knight.) and
died issueless.

18. Guldeford, viz. Or, a Saltire inter four Martletts Sable, on a Canton
Argent an Apple of Granada Proper.
ELIZABETH SOMERSET, Lady Guilford, I. 8. f. 16. b. in Coll. Arm.
the eldest daughter of Edward Earl of Worcester, was married to Sir Henry
Guilford of Hemsted in the County of Kent, and left Issue Edward, Robert and
John, and a daughter married to Baynham Vaughan of Ruardene in the County of
Gloucester Esquire Edward Guilford the eldest Son, married the sister of Sir Francis
Petre of Essex Knight. and had Issue a son and three daughters. Robert Guilford,
second son, married (...) daughter of John Gifford Doctor in Physic, and died
without Issue. John Guilford, third son, now living, 1676.

18. Petre, viz. Gules a Bend Or. between 2 Escolleps Argent; impaling
Somerset: which is, quarterly, France and England, a Border Gobony, Argent and
Azure, vide I. 8. fol. 54. b. in Coll. Arm.
KATHERINE SOMERSET, Lady Petre, Ibidem f. 54. b.
second daughter, was espoused to William Lord Petre of Writtel in the County
of Essex, who departed this life upon the 5th day of May 1637. He was the son
of Sir John Petre created Lord Petre of Writtel in the first year of King
James. I. 8 fol. 10. b. in Coll. Arm.
This Lady Katherine deceased upon the last day of October 1625. leaving Issue
by her said Lord, Robert Lord Petre of Writtel, who died on the 11th day of
June, An. 1638. having had Issue by Mary his Wife daughter of Anthony Brown
Viscount Mountague, Ibidem fol. 82. a.
William Lord Petre of Writtle, now living 1675. who has married Elizabeth
Savage, the eldest daughter of John Earl Rivers.

18. Winter, viz. Sable a Fesse Ermine, and a Cressent Argent; impaling
Somerset, who did bear quarterly, 1 Or, a Fesse quarterly of France and
England; within a Border Gobony Argent and Azure, 2. Per pale Azure and Gules 3
lions rampant Argent, Herbert. 3. Argent, a Fesse and Canton, Gules, Woodvile,
the 4th quarter as the first. I. 19. fol. 14. in Coll. Arm.
ANNE SOMERSET, Lady Winter, I. 19. fol. 14. and I. 22. fol. 3. in Coll. Arm.
third daughter of Edward Earl of Worcester, was the Wife of Sir Edward Winter
of Lidney in the County of Gloucester Knight. who deceased at his house in the
Strand near London, on the 3 day of March 1618. and was Interred in the Parish
Church of Lidney, leaving Issue by her, six sons and three daughters, viz.
Edward, that died young, Sir John Winter Knight. second son and heir, who married
Anne daughter of Lord Will: Howard of the North, and has had Issue William and
Edward who died unmarried, and Charles his third son and heir. Robert third
son, William fourth, Edward fifth, and Henry Frederick sixth son. C. 25. fol.
39 b. in Coll. Arm.
Elizabeth Winter their eldest daughter, was married to Richard Monnington of
Sarnsfield in the County of Hereford Esquire and had Issue Edward, John and Anne.
Anne second daughter of Sir Edward Winter, was the Wife of Benedict Hall of
High Meadow in the County of Hereford, and had Issue Henry Hall, and others. And
Mary third daughter, died unmarried.

18. Morgan of Lanternam, Impaling Somerset.
FRANCES SOMERSET, I. 8. fol. 17. a. in Coll. Arm.
fourth daughter, was the Wife of William Morgan, son and heir apparent of
Edward Morgan of Lanternam in the County of Monmouth Esquire and by him had Issue
Sir Edward Morgan created Baronet by King Charles I. upon the 12th day of May
1642. who marrying Mary eldest daughter of Sir Francis Englefield of Wooton
Basset in the County of Wilts. Knight. had Issue by her, Sir Edward Morgan Bar. who
took to Wife (...) daughter of Thomas Morgan of Maughen in Monmouthshire Esquire
and has Issue by her, Edward Morgan Esquire his only child, who married one of
the daughters and heirs of (...) Baskervile of Pontrinas in the County of
Hereford Esquire

18. MARY SOMERSET fifth daughter, Ibidem.
died an Infant in the lifetime of her Grandfather William Earl of Worcester.

18. Arundel, viz. Sable, six Swallows, three, two and one, Argent. Impaling
Somerset.
BLANCH SOMERSET, I. 8. fol. 17. a. in Coll. Arm.
Lady Arundel, sixth daughter of Edward Earl of Worcester, was espoused to
Thomas Arundel (son and heir apparent of Thomas Lord Arundel of Wardour Castle
in the County of Wilts, who having highly manifested his courage in Hungary
against the Turks, was, as a reward of his valor, advanced to the Honor of a
Count of the Empire, by Rodulph II.) since his Fathers death Lord Arundel of
Wardour aforesaid; who deceasing in His late Majesty's Garrison of Oxford, An.
1643. left Issue (besides other children) Henry his son and heir, now Lord
Arundel; who married Cecilie (lately deceased) daughter of Sir Henry Compton
Knight of the Bath (the Relict of Sir John Fermour of Somerton, in Com. Oxon.
Knight.) and by her has had Issue two sons. Thomas who took to Wife Mary the
daughter of Thomas Spenser of Vfton, in Com. Warwick. Widow of Robert Lucie of
Cherlecote in the said County Esquire and Henry; and a daughter named Cecilie now a
Nun.

18. In Pale Windsor and Somerset.
KATHERINE SOMERSET the younger, Ibidem.
Lady Windsor, seventh and youngst daughter of Edward Earl of Worcester, was
the Wife of Thomas Lord Windsor of Bradenham, and died without Issue.

18. HENRY SOMERSET, Marquis and Earl of Worcester, Lord Herbert of Ragland,
Chepstowe, and Gower.
CHAP. XVII.
Somerset, viz. 1. quarterly France and England a Border Gobony Argent and
Azure. 2. Herbert, Party per pale Azure and Gules 3 Lions rampant Argent 3
Woodvile, Argent a Fesse and Canton Gules, and 4. Somerset as before.
OF the eight Sons of Edward Earl of Worcester, by Elizabeth Hastings, daughter
of Francis Earl of Huntington, this Henry was the second; and after the death
of his eldest Brother William, came to be his Fathers Heir; in whose lifetime
he was, for his early parts, summoned to the first Parliament of King James, by
the Title of Lord Herbert; and after his Fathers death, I. 8. fol. 16. a. in
Coll. Arm.
succeeded him in the Earldom of Worcester, etc. He was a Noble Man of great
Piety and Wisdom, of a generous disposition, and an ample fortune; and in
consideration of his Loyalty and large Supplies, our late Sovereign Lord King
Charles I. of ever blessed memory, advanced him to the Dignity of Marquis of
Worcester, Pat. an. 18. Car. 1. Regis.
by Letters Patent bearing date the 2d day of November, in the 18 year of his
Reign, An. 1642. He powerfully asserted the Royal Interest in the late
unnatural War; and with great resolution and gallantry defended his Castle of
Ragland, against the predominant party of the late long Parliament: which being
the last Garrison of the Kings that held out in England, and without any hopes
of relief, was at last delivered up upon honorable terms, in the Month of
August, An. 1646. But these conditions being basely violated, this first
Marquis of Worcester through grief thereof, not long after surrendered his life
also, in custody of the Parliaments Black Rod, in Covent Garden, London, in the
Month of December, and same year 1646. and was interred in the Vault at Windsor
the Christmas following, with his Ancestor Charles the first Earl of Worcester.

Somerset, as before, impaling Russel, viz. Argent a Lion rampant Gules, on a
Chief Sable 3 Escolleps of the First.
He married Anne, the only child of John Lord Russel, who died in the
lifetime of his Father, and Granddaughter and Heir of Francis Earl of
Bedford, who also deceased (before her Husbands creation into the Dignity of
Marquis) at Worcester House in the Strand, I. 8. fol. 63. in Coll. Arm.
on monday the 8th of April, 1639. Her Body being from thence conveyed to
Ragland, was there buried among the Earl her Husbands Ancestors.

Children of HENRY Marquis of Worcester, by ANNE RUSSEL his Wife.
19. EDWARD SOMERSET, Lord Herbert, eldest son and heir, succeeded his Father
in his Honors.

19. Somerset, with a Cressent impaling Arundel of Wardour, viz. Sable, 6
Swallows Argent, three, two and one.
Sir JOHN SOMERSET, I. 8. in Coll. Arm. fol. 58. a.
Knight, second son of Henry Marquis of Worcester, took to Wife Mary daughter
of Thomas Lord Arundel of Wardour, by his second Wife Anne, one of the
daughters of Miles Philipson of Crook in Com. Westmerland Esquire Widow of (...)
Thorogood; and by her had Issue three sons, Henry Somerset, the eldest, married
Anne (daughter of Walter Lord Aston of Forfare in Scotland) lately deceased,
Visit. Staff. C. 36. f. 22. a.
and has left Issue, Edward-Maria Somerset, and Mary. Thomas Somerset, second
son, deceased An. 1671. And Charles Somerset, the third son, married to his
first Wife Jane Thomas, the Widow of Aubry in Glamorganshire; and secondly,
Katherine Baskervile of Peaown of Herefordshire, Widow of George Sawyer Esquire
and had Issue by her Charles Somerset, Henry, and Mary-Johanna.

19. WILLIAM SOMERSET, third son of Henry Marquis of Worcester, died an Infant.

19. HENRY SOMERSET, fourth son (aged about twenty years) deceased unmarried.

19. THOMAS SOMERSET, fifth son, Somerset, with an Anulet.
now living at Rome.

19. Somerset, with a Flower de Lys for distinction.
CHARLES SOMERSET, sixth son of Henry Marquis of Worcester, was Governor of
Ragland Castle under his Father. He died a Canon of Cambray in Flanders.

19. FREDERICK SOMERSET, seventh son died all young.

19. FRANCIS SOMERSET, eighth son died all young.

19. JAMES SOMERSET, ninth son died all young.

19. ELIZABETH SOMERSET, eldest daughter died all young.

19. ANNE SOMERSET, second daughter of Henry Marquis of Worcester, died a Nun
in the Monastery of the English Carmelites at Antwerp in Brabant.

19. MARY SOMERSET, third daughter, died unmarried.

19. ELIZABETH SOMERSET, Mountague, viz. Sable 3 Lions passant in Bend Argent,
inter 4 Gemells of the Second. Impaling Somerset,
Viscountess Mountague, fourth and youngest daughter of Henry Marquis of
Worcester, is the Wife of Francis Brown Viscount Mountague, and has Issue
Francis Brown his eldest son and heir apparent; who took to Wife Mary daughter
of William Herbert Earl of Powis (Widow of Richard Molineux, Visit. Lanc. C.
37. fol. 129. b.
eldest son of Caril Viscount Molineux of Mariburgh in Ireland) Henry Brown,
second son, yet unmarried; and Elizabeth Brown his only daughter, the Wife of
Christopher Roper, Baron Tenham, by whom she has Issue two daughters,
Katherine and Elizabeth.

19. EDWARD SOMERSET, Marquis and Earl of Worcester, Lord Herbert of Ragland,
Chepstowe and Gower, and Lord Lieutenant of South Wales.
CHAP. XVIII.
This Edward, the second Marquis of Worcester, did bear, 1. France and England
quarterly, within a Border Gobone Argent and Azure, Somerset. 2. Per pale
Azure, and Gules, 3 Lions rampant Argent, Herbert. 3. Argent, a Fesse and
Canton Gules, Woodvile. 4. Argent a Lion rampant Gules, on a chief Sable 3
Escollops of the First, Russel. His Crest was a Portcullis Or, armed and
chained Argent. Which was the Devise of his Ancestors the Beauforts. His
Escocheon was supported on the right side, with a Panthar Argent, collered, and
chayned Or, spotted Sable, Azure, and Gules, and sending forth Flames at his
Mouth, Eyes and Ears Proper. And on the left, with a Dragon or Wiverne Vert,
devouring a Hand couped at the wrist Gules; and upon his Scrole, this Motto or
Word of his Family MUTARE VEL TIMERE SPERNO. All which, with many other
Trophies used at his Funeral (which my self had the honor to attend) are set
up over his Grave in the Somersets Chapel in the Parish Church of Ragland.
THis Edward Lord Herbert, was the eldest son and heir of Henry Marquis of
Worcester (by Anne Russel, Granddaughter and Heir of Francis Earl of Bedford)
and succeeded his Father in all his Honors; I. 8. fol. 48. a. in Coll. Arm.
and was by King Charles I. constituted Lord Lieutenant of South Wales. And to
him the said King directed also several Letters (in the lifetime of his Father
the Marquis, by the Title of Earl of Glamorgan; by which appellation he was
usually called: In the Signet-Office at Whitehall.
there now remaining in the Signet-Office, a Bill under the Royal Sign Manual
at Oxford (if a Patent did not thereupon pass the great Seal) in order to his
creation into the Honors of Earl of Glamorgan, and Baron Beaufort of Caldecot
Castle in the County of Monmouth.

He married to his first Wife, His first Marriage. Somerset impaling Dormer,
viz. Azure 10 Billets three, two and one, Or, on a Chief of the Second, a demi
Lion issuant, Sable.
Elizabeth the daughter of Sir William Dormer Knight. (who died in the lifetime of
his Father, Robert Lord Dormer of Wing) and sister to Robert Earl of
Caernarvon. This Elizabeth Lady Herbert departed this life at Worcester House
in the Strand, on Sunday the last of May An. 1665. and her Corpse was from
thence conveyed to Ragland in Monmouthshire, and Interred in that Parish
Church, leaving Issue by her said Husband a son and two daughters.

The second Wife of Edward Marquis of Worcester, His second Marriage. Somerset
impaling O Bryan, viz. Gules 3 Lions passant guardant, parted per pale Or and
Argent.
was Margaret O-Bryan, the second daughter and coheir of Henry Earl of Thomond
in Ireland; who has survived her Husband the Marquis, and is now living, 1676.

He deceased upon Wednesday the 3d of April, Burials of the Nobility fol. 14.
a. in Coll. Arm.
An. 1667. and was conveyed with funeral solemnity from London to his Barony of
Ragland, in the County of Monmouth, and there interred in his Chapel in that
Parish Church, upon Friday the 19th day of the same month of April, near to the
Body of Edward Earl of Worcester, Lord Privy Seal, his Grandfather (in a Vault
arched with Stone) on Friday the 19th of the same month; upon whose Coffin, in
a Brass Plate, this Memorial is engraven.

Depositum Illustrissimi Principis Edwardi Marchionis and Comitis Wigorniae,
Comitis de Glamorgan, Baronis Herbert de Ragland, Chepstowe, and Gower, nec non
Serenissimo nuper Domino Regi Carolo primo, Southwalliae Locum-tenentis: Qui
obiit apud Land. tertio die Aprilis, An. Dom. M. DC. LXVII.

Children of EDWARD Marquis of Worcester, by ELIZABETH DORMER his first Wife.
20. HENRY SOMERSET, Lord Herbert, only son of Edward Marquis of Worcester, of
whom see more in the following Chapter.

20. ANNE SOMERSET, Howard of Norfolk, viz. Quarterly. 1. Gules, on a Bend,
betwixt 6 Crosse-croslets, fiche Argent, an Escocheon Or, charged with a demi
Lion rampant Gules, shot through the mouth with an Arrow Argent within a double
Tressure flowery counter flowery of the First. 2. Gules, 3 Lions passant guardant
Or, a Label of three points, Argent, Brotherton. 3. Chequie Or and Azure,
Warren. 4. Gules a Lion rampant Argent Mowbray, Impaling Somerset.

the elder daughter of Edward Marquis of Worcester, was married to Henry
Howard, second son of Henry Earl of Arundel, Surrey, and Norfolk, Grandson of
Thomas Earl of Arundel, Surrey, and Norfolk, and Earl Marshal of England, and
brother to Thomas the present Duke of Norfolk, restored to the Name, Title,
Honor, Dignity and Precedence of Thomas the last Duke of Norfolk his
Ancestor, in a Parliament begun at Westminster the 8th of May, An. 13 Car. 2.

The present King, Earl Marsh. Book f. 100. b.
Charles, by Warrant under his Signet, dated at Whitehall, on the last day of
December, in the 20th year of his Reign, An. 1668. did grant unto this Henry
(for his loyalty and faithfulness unto him, and for diverse other considerations
His Majesty thereunto moving) that he the said Henry Howard should have and
enjoy the Style and Title, and be called by the name of Lord, as is usual and
accustomed for the second son of a Duke; as if Henry Earl of Arundel, Surrey,
and Norfolk his late Father, had been actually restored to be Duke of
Norfolk, etc.

And in the year following, Pat. an. 21 Car. 2.1669.
viz. An. 1669. this Lord Henry was created Baron Howard of Castle-Rising in
the County of Norfolk, upon the 27th day of March, An. 21. Caroli 2. to him
and the heirs male of his Body, etc.

And furthermore, Pat. an. 24. C. 2.1672.
His Majesty King Charles II. by Letters Patent dated at Westminster the 19th
day of October, in the 24th year of his Reign, An. 1672. advanced his Lordship
to the Dignity of Earl of Norwich, to him and his heirs male, and also, in the
same Patent, granted unto the said Henry Lord Howard the Office and Dignity of
Earl Marshal of England, with all Rights, Powers, Jurisdictions, Precedencies,
and Authorities thereunto belonging, etc. to him and the heirs male of his
Body; and for default of such Issue, to the heirs male of the Body of Thomas
Earl of Arundel, Surrey, and Norfolk, Grandfather of the said Henry Lord
Howard; and for default of such Issue, to the heirs male of the Body of Thomas
late Earl of Suffolk; and for default of such Issue, to the heirs male of the
Body of the Lord William Howard of Naworth, in the County of Cumberland,
youngest son of the late Duke of Norfolk; and for default of such Issue, to
Charles Earl of Nottingham, and the heirs male of his Body.

The Office of Earl Marshal of England being thus settled upon this Illustrious
Family, from which our College have received so many benefits, We the Officers
of Arms may hope, that as that most noble Prince Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk,
and Earl Marshal established good orders in this Corporation, and by his
powerful influence, restored them to Reputation, and a noble Habitation, after
they had been burnt out at Coleharbor; so the Right honorable and our very
good Lord and Patron, Henry Earl of Norwich, the present Earl Marshal
(following the example of his said Illustrious Ancestor, by confirming of his
orders, and by adding new ones for the better government of the Officers of
Arms) will be pleased, by his Power, Wisdom and Charity, to raise us up out of
the Ashes of this second Conflagration; and build us up, on the foundation of
Honor and Justice.

He had Issue by his said Wife the Lady Anne Somerset, who (to his Lodrships
extreme grief) deceased about the year 1660. and was buried at Arundel in
Sussex; Henry Lord Howard his eldest son, Thomas Howard his second son, and
three daughters, viz. Anne-Alethea the eldest, who died in her infancy,
Elizabeth second daughter, and Frances third, both now living 1676.

20. ELIZABETH SOMERSET, Herbert Powis, viz. Party per Pale Azure and Gules,
three Lions rampant, Argent a Cressent for distinction. Impaling Somerset.
Countess of Powis, the younger daughter of Edward Marquis of Worcester, was
married to William Herbert, son and heir apparent of Percy Herbert Lord Powis
(and Elizabeth his Wife, daughter of Sir William Craven Knight. and sister to
William now Earl of Craven, son of Sir William Herbert Knight. of the Bath, created
Lord Powis of Powis in the Marches of Wales, Pat. (...). 5. Ca^. 1. p. 14.
by Letters Patent dated 2 April 5 Caroli primi, by his Wife Eleanor, daughter
of Henry Percy eighth Earl of Northumberland) after whose death, happening on
the 19th day of January 1666. he succeeded him in his Barony. This William Lord
Powis, in consideration of his loyalty and great abilities, was by Letters
Patent dated at Westminster, Pat. an. 26. Car. 2.
the 4th day of April 1674. in the 26th year of King Charles II. created Earl
of Powis, and the same honor entailed on the heirs males of his Body for ever.
He has Issue by the Lady Elizabeth Somerset aforesaid, his only son William
Lord Powis, and five daughters; Mary, married to Richard son and heir of Carril
Viscount Molineux; Frances, Anne, Lucie, and Winifride.

20. HENRY SOMERSET, Marquis and Earl of Worcester, Lord Herbert of Ragland,
Chepstowe, and Gower. Lord President of Wales, one of the Lords of His
Majesty's Privy Counsel, and Knight of the Garter.
CHAP. XIX.
The Arms of this Marquis, upon his Stall at Windsor, are France and England
quarterly, a Border Gobone Argent and Azure, supported on the right side by a
Panthar Argent spotted Sable. Azure and Gules, sending forth Flames of Fire at
his Mouth, Eyes and Ears Proper, collered and chained Or. And on the left, with
a Wiverne, Vert devouring a hand couped at the Wrist, Gules His Crest is a
Portcullis Or, chained Argent, and this is his Motto, MUTARE VEL TIMERE SPERNO.
THis Henry Somerset, Lord Herbert, the 1only son of Edward Marquis of
Worcester, by Elizabeth Dormer his first Wife, succeeded his Father in the
Marquisate and Earldom of Worcester, and the Seigneuries of Ragland, Chepstowe
and Gower, in the year 1657. He was constituted Lord President of the Counsel
in the Principality of Wales, Vide his Plate at Windsor.
by Letters Patent, bearing date the 24th of the Reign of His Majesty King
Charles II.

And on the seventeenth day of April 1672. was sworn of His Majesty's most
honorable Privy Counsel, and afterward installed Knight of the most noble
Order of the Garter, at Windsor, upon the 3d day of June next following; and on
his Plate in his Stall at Windsor, is thus styled, Du tresnoble et puissant
Prince Henry Marquis et Comte de Worcester, Baron Herbert, Seigneur de Ragland,
Chepstowe and de Gower, President du Conseil en la Principante de Galls,
Consellier, d'Estate et prive, et Chevalier du tres^ noble Order de la
Jartiere, Enstalle au Chasteau de Windsor le troisiesme Jour de Juin 1672,

His Lordship derives his Genealogy by a Male Line, from Geoffry Plantagenet
Earl of Anjou (son of Foulk King of Jerusalem, and Grandson of Foulk Rechin
Earl of Anjou, Touraine, and Maine) by Maud the Empress his Wife, daughter of
Henry I. King of England, son of King William the Conqueror, seventh Duke of
Normandy, in descent from Rollo the Dane; whence it is observable, that his
Progenitors have flourished with the Titles of Kings, Dukes, Marquisses, and
Earls; and have not descended to a lower Dignity for above these 700 years.

He took to Wife Mary, Somerset Impaling Capel, viz. Gules, a Lion rampant
inter 3 Crossecros^ets fiche, Or.
the eldest daughter of that loyal Nobleman Arthur Lord Capel of Hadham in the
County of Hertford (beheaded by the Rebels upon the 9th day of March, An.
Funerals of the Nobility, fol. 14. b.
1648.) and sister to Arthur Earl of Essex, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland; she was
the Widow of Henry Seamour Lord Beauchampe, that died in the lifetime of his
Father William Marquis of Hertford, afterward restored to the Dukedom of
Somerset, An. 1660. by whom she had Issue, William Duke of Somerset, who
deceased at Worcester House in the Strand, the 12th of December 1671. Funerals
of the Nobility, fol. 31. a.
about his 20th year, generally lamented, being a Nobleman of great hopes and
expectation; Frances Seamour and Mary, both dead, and Elizabeth to whom his
Majesty by Warrant dated at Whitehall the 28 of June, in the 24th year of his
Reign, 1672. has granted the Title of Lady, and the place and precedence of a
daughter of the Duke of Somerset, Earl Mar. Book fol. 103. b.
notwithstanding her Father Henry Lord Beauchampe died in the lifetime of her
Grandfather William Duke of Somerset. This Lady Elizabeth Seamour, was upon the
last day of October, 1676. married to Thomas Lord Bruce, eldest son and heir
apparent of Robert Earl of Aylesbury.

Children of HENRY SOMERSET, Marquis of Worcester, by MARY CAPEL his Wife.
21. HENRY SOMERSET, eldest son, died an Infant, and was Interred at Windsor.

21. CHARLES SOMERSET, Lord Herbert, second Son and Heir apparent, to whom His
Majesty King Charles II. is Godfather, was born in the Parish of St Martin in
the County of Middlesex, in the month of December 1660.

21. EDWARD SOMERSET, third son, deceased very young, and was buried at Ragland.

21. HENRY SOMERSET, another of that Christian Name, fourth son, died about
three days before his Grandfather Edward Marquis of Worcester, and was also
interred at Ragland aforesaid.

21. ARTHVR SOMERSET, fifth son of Henry Marquis of Worcester, to whom his
Uncle Arthur Earl of Essex was Godfather, had his birth at Badminton in the
County of Gloucester, upon the Feast of St Michael the Arcangel, An. 1671.

21. ELIZABETH SOMERSET, the eldest daughter, deceased in her infancy, and was
buried at Ragland.

21. MARY SOMERSET, the second daughter of Henry Marquis of Worcester.

21. HENRIETTA-MARIA, the third daughter, was born at Badminton in the County
of Gloucester.

21. ANNE SOMERSET, the fourth and youngest daughter of Henry Marquis of
Worcester, was born at Badminton beforementioned.

BOOK V Plantagenets Divided: OR, The ROYAL HOUSE of YORK.

CONTAINING A Genealogical History OF THE KINGS OF ENGLAND, etc. From EDWARD
IV. to HENRY VII.

From the Year 1460. to the Year 1486.

s edwardi ducis eboract comitis can tabrugie rutt landie and coracie and dni^
de tindale


sigillum ricardi ducis ebor comitis mar^^^e et ^ttome domini de wiggmore et de
clare


Sigillum ricardi ducis ebor comitis marchie gubernatoris regni francie


sigillu^ dne^ cecili


Spectatissimo Generossissimo^^ viro GULIELMO ASHBVRNHAN Armigero Nec non
Cofferario et Custodi niagnae Gardero^ae Hospitij Domi. Regis Caroli 2.di
Sigillorum hanc Tabulam HD. F S



sigillum elizabeth dei gracie regine anglie et francie et domine hibernie


blazon or coat of arms

S. edmundi de ortuo mari coi^ ^^s marchie et vitonie dui^ wigmore et clare


sigillum Margarete ducisse burgundre et brabantie comitisse flandrie ar^^elie


Edwardus dei gracia Rex anglie et francie dominus hibernie


EDW IV.

Edwardus dei gracia Rex anglie et francie et dominus hibernie


Viro. Generosissimo Domino THOMAE VERNON de HODNET in agro Salopi^nsi
Baronetto Sigillorum hanc Tabul^m HD. F S.



blazon or coat of arms

* Sigillum Edwardi quarti dei gra regis anglie francie dni hibernie comitatus
sui marchie


blazon or coat of arms

Ricardus dei gracia Rex anglie et francie et dominus hibernie


RICH III.

Richardus dei gracia Rex anglie et francie et dominus hibernie


S MARGARETAE


KATHERINA COMITISSA DEVON FILLIA SOROR ET AMTT REGVM


Viro Honoratissimo D^^ PHILIPPO HOWARD Equiti aur^to, ad^arenis^ Domspcmacr
Rege^ Car^^ Satellitij Caballini Ducenario et C^ili^rchae. Sigillorum hanc
Tabulam HD. F S.

blazon or coat of arms



A GENEALOGICAL TABLE of the Fifth BOOK.
10 ISSABEL the younger Daughter and Coheir of Peter King of Castile and Leon,
first Wife, p. 360. EDMOND surnamed of Langley, Duke of York, Earl of
Cambridge, and Lord of Tindal, fifth Son of King Edward III. p. 357.=JOANE,
Daughter and Coheir of Edmond Holand Earl of Kent, second Wife, p. 360. 11
EDWARD Duke of York and Albemarle, p. 362. PHILIPPA Mobun, p. 364 and 365.
RICHARD Earl of Cambridge, surnamed of Conyngsburgh, p. 366. MAUD Clifford,
second Wife, p. 367.=ANNE Daughter of Roger Mortimer Earl of March, Son of
Philippe only Daughter and Heir of Lionel Duke of Clarence, third Son of King
Edward the Third, first Wife, p. 317. 12 RICHARD Duke of York, Earl of
Cambridge, Vister, March and Rutland, p. 368.=CECILY, the youngest Daughter of
Ralph Nevil Earl of Westmorland, p. 369. 13 HENRY died young p. 374. EDWARD IV.
King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland, p. 381. ELIZABETH Woodvile, p.
385. 14 EDWARD V. King of England etc. p. 400. RICHARD Duke of York, p. 393.
ANNE Mowbray p. 393. GEORGE Duke of Bedford, p. 395. ELIZABETH, Wife of King
HENRY VII. p. 395. 15 HENRY VIII. King of England, France and Ireland, Book 6.
Chap. 2.
CECILY, Viscountess Wells, p. 395. ANNE Duchess of Norfolk, p. 396. BRIDGET.
p. 396. MARY, p. 396. MARGARET, p. 397. KATHERINE Countess of Devonshire, p.
397.
EDMOND Earl of Rutland p. 375. WILLIAM, p. 375. JOHN, p. 375. GEORGE Duke of
Clarence, p. 411. ISSABFL Nevil p. 411. EDWARD Earl of Warwick p. 414. MARGARET
Countess of Salisbury, p. 416. Sir RICHARD Pole p. 416. HENRY Pole, Lord
Mountague, p. 417. JANE Nevil, p. 417. 16 KATHERINE Pole, the Wife of Francis
Hastings Earl of Huntington, p. 417. WINIFRIDE Pole married to Sir Thomas
Barrington Knight. p. 417.
Sir GEOFFREY Pole, p. 418. ARTHUR Pole, p. 418. HENRY Pole Cardinal, p. 418.
URSULA Pole Lady Stafford, p. 419.

THOMAS, p. 375. RICHARD 3. King of England, etc. p. 405. ANNE Nevil p. 405.
EDWARD Prince of Wales, etc. p. 410.
ANNE Duchess of Exceter, p. 375. ELIZABETH Duchess of Suffolk, p. 378.
MARGARET Duchess of Burgundy, p. 380.
ISSABEL of York was the Wife of HENRY Bourchier Earl of Essex, p. 367.
CONSTANCE married to THOMAS le Despenser Earl of Gloucester, p. 361.

Natural Issue of King Edward the Fourth.
14 ARTHUR Plantagenet, Viscount Lisle, a Natural Son, p. 421.=ELIZABETH,
Sister and Heir of John Gray, Viscount Lisle, p. 421. 15 BRIDGET, Wife of Sir
William Carden, Knight. p. 421. JOHN Basset of Vmberley, first Husband, p.
422.=FRANCES Plantagenet, second Daughter, p. 422.=THOMAS Monk of Potheridge,
second Husband, p. 422. ELIZABETH, married to Sir Francis Jobson, Knight. p 423.
ELIZABETH, Lady Lumley, a Natural Daughter, p. 399.
10. EDMOND PLANTAGENET, DUKE of YORK, EARL of CAMBRIDGE, LORD of TINDAL, and
KNIGHT of the GARTER, Surnamed of LANGLEY.
CHAP. I.
This Edmond did bear France semee and England quarterly, over all, a Labell of
three points Argent, each point charged with three Torteaux. These Arms are
upon his Stall at Windsor with his Crest viz. a Lion passant guardant crowned
Or gorged with a Label of his Arms, the Plate is subscribed with these words,
le duc de york edmond. The same Arms are carved on his Monument as you may see
in the 359 page, impaling those of his first Wife, Issabel of Castile viz.
quarterly, Gules a Castle, Or, for Castile, and Argent a Lion rampant, Purple,
for Leon. As John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, used a red Rose for his Devise,
in right of his Wife Maud of Lancaster; so this Edmond his Brother took for his
a white one, which the fautors and followers of their heirs did afterward bear
for distinction, in that bloody War between the Families of Lancaster and York;
long before which assumption, a white Rose Tree at Longleete, did bear upon one
branch a fair white Rose on the one side, and as fair a red Rose on the other,
which might be interpreted to have been a foretoken of that division. Camdens
Remains p 214. This Edmond of Langley did bear also, for an Impress a Faulcon
in a Fetterlock, implying that he was shut up from all hope and possibility of
the Kingdom, when his Brother John began to aspire thereto. Whereupon he asked
(on a time) his sons, when he saw them viewing this Devise set up in a Window,
what was Latin for a Petterlock, whereat when the young Gentlemen studied, the
Father said, Well if you cannot tell me, I will you, Hic, haec, hoc, taceatis,
as advising them to be silent and quiet, and therewithal said, Yet God knows
what may come to pass hereafter.

This his great Grandson King Edward IV. reported, when he commanded that his
younger son Richard Duke of York, should use this Devise, with the Fetterlock
opened, as Roger Wall, an Herald of that time reports, Camb. Rem. p. 215.


THis Prince was fifth son of King Edward III. by his only Wife Queen Philipe,
Tho. Wall. p. 149. n. 10.
daughter of William Earl of Henault. His Fathers Manor of Langley near St
Albans in Hertfordshire, gave him birth An. 1341. (15 E. 3.) from whence he had
his Sur-name, and was baptized by Michael then Abbot of St Alban. The first
Honor that I find granted to him was the Earldom of Cambridge, Chart. 36. Ed.
3. n. 8.
conferred on him and his heirs, by Charter bearing date the 13th day of
November, Orig. 1. H. 4. bund. 1.
An. the 36 of Edward III. 1362. At what time he was also Lord of Tindal, and
not long after Knight of the Garter. Upon the 12th of July, 1376. An. 50. of
King Edward III. his Father, he had granted unto him the Offices of Constable
of Dover Castle, Pat. 50 E. 3 pars 1. m. 18.
and Warden of the Cinque Ports, after whose death he was appointed one of the
Commissioners for the management of affairs during the tutelage of King Richard
II. his Nephew, which he performed with great temper and moderation. Then in
the year 1381. Leland p. 188.
we find him in the head of an Army sent into Portugal, to the aid of his
Brother John Duke of Lancaster, who claimed the Crowns of Gastile and Leon,
Ypodigma Neustriae p. 534. n. 59. an. 1381.
in the right of Constance his Wife, daughter and coheir of Peter surnamed the
Cruel; where, in a Battle fought by John King of Portugal, this Edmond and his
Brother John against John King of Castile (who challenged the Kingdom of
Portugal in the right of Beatrix his Wife (by whom he had no Issue) the only
daughter of Ferdinand King of Portugal) he with his English men obtained a
memorable Victory against the Castilians, is which they lost 10000 men, and for
two whole years valiantly assisted in the defense of the Portugueses: at which
time the English grew so famous there, and both the Kings of Portugal and
Castile so jealous of their power, that they conveyed them home at their common
charge.

Here Edmond gave a testimony of his valor, as well as policy, and that he was
a Soldier as much as a Statesman. The Poet John Harding gives us a character
of his deportment in the said Battle in these old Rhimes.

At which Battaill, Duke John of Gaunt indede, Harding cb. 184.

And his Brother Edmond then faught full sore:
Were never two better Knights then they indede
That better faught upon a feld before,
It was but grace that they escaped thore.
They put theimselfes so far forth ay in prees.
That wounded were they both full sore, no lees.
Not long after his return out of Portugal, he was (as a reward of his eminent
services) created Duke of York, Pat. an. 9. R. 2. p. 1. m. 10.
which was erected into a Duchy (in his person) the 6th of August, An. the 9th
of Richard II. 1385. For the Title of Earl of York had slept ever since that
Otho, son of Henry Leo Duke of Saxony (begotten of Maud daughter of Henry II.
King of England) had been girt with the Sword of the Earldom of York, in the
first year of King Richard I. his Uncle; which King afterward made an exchange
with this Otho for the County of Poicton. Then King Richard II. on the 29th of
September, in the 18 year of his Reign, upon his Voyage into Ireland, conferred
upon this Duke Edmond his Uncle the place of Custos and Warden of the Kingdom
of England during his absence. And in this Kings second fatal expedition, Pat.
an. 18 R. 2. m. 12.
undertaken into that Kingdom (for the revenge of Roger Mortimer's death (slain
by the Irish) whom he had nominated his Successor in the Kingdom of England) he
left this Edmond as his Lieutenant, who, faithfully to his power, endeavored
to withstand the force of Henry Duke of Hereford, son of John Duke of
Lancaster; which Henry, upon pretense of recovering his Patrimony (seized by
King Richard) with a powerful Army, did not only depose his lawful Sovereign,
but laid violent hands on the Royal Diadem.

How well this transmission of the Crown to the House of Lancaster was approved
by Duke Edmond we may find in the remaining part of his life, who from that
time abandoned the Court, and gave himself over to a solitary retirement, at
his Manor of Langley. Though he hated Henry of Bullingbroke the Usurper, yet
we find he hated Treason worse, though it were in his nearest Relations; for
Edward Duke of Aumarle his eldest son having with other Lords contrived the
death of King Henry at Oxford, was by this Edmond detected and reviled for
being twice a Traitor, first to King Richard, and then to King Henry.

He was neither the Father nor the Grandfather of a King, nor derived any right
in the Crown to his successors, yet had he the blessing of the Patriarch, Kings
descended from his Loins, and who from him as their source and original,
derived their appellation of Kings of England of the Royal House of York. Vbi
spiravit ibiexpiravit, Esc. an. 3. H. 4. n. 35.
Langley was the place of his birth, and also of his death, Ypodigma Neust. p.
558. n. 11.
where he deceased the first day of August, An. His death
the third of Henry IV. 1402. having lived to see Englands Scepter in three
several hands, Arundel vol. 2.194. b.
in which the Royal Stream never kept its immediate Channel. By his Will dated
the 25th of November ( An. 1400.) and second of Henry IV. he appointed to be
buried in the Friery Jllaystrissimo Domino ROBERTO Chi Comiti de AILESBURY and
ELGIN, Vicecomiti BRUCE de Ampthill, Baroni BRUCE de Whorleton, Skeleton, et
Kinlosse, Tumuli hoc EDMUNDI Ducis EBORACENSIS. Exemplum, H.D.D.D. FS.

of Langley aforesaid, near to the Grave of his late loving Wife Issabel, where
he was accordingly Interred, under a Tomb of Alablaster and black Marble
(adorned with several Escocheons of Arms, carved on the sides and ends thereof)
which upon the dissolution of the Religious Houses, was removed thence, and
placed in the North-East Corner of the Chancel in the Parish Church of Langley;
the Figure of which Monument is in the preceding page, as I took it from the
original upon the first of July, An. Dom. 1664.

This Duke Edmond married two Wives, His first Marriage. France semee and
England, quarterly; over all, a Label of three points Argent, each charged with
as many Torteaux, Impaling Castile and Leon, also quarterly, viz. Gules a
Castle Or, and Argent a Lion, rampant purpure; which impalement is carved on
the South Side of the Duke of Yorks Tomb at Langley depicted in the preceding
page. His second Marriage. At the foot of the said Dukes Tomb exhibited, in the
359. page is the Coat of Holand, carved, being, Gules, three Lions passant
guardant, Or, a Border Argent.
the first of which was Issabel, the younger daughter and coheir of Peter King
of Castile and Leon, called the Cruel, whom he took to Wife, An. 1372. Leland
Coll. p. 186
and by her had all his Issue; she declared her Will on the 6th of December,
Rous f. 49. a.
An. 1342. (6 R. 2.) appointing therein that her best Horse should be delivered
for her Mortuary: she also bequeathed to the King her Heart of Pearls, to the
Duke of Lancaster a Tablet of Jasper, to Edward Earl of Rutland (her son) her
Crown, to remain to his Heirs; to Constance le Despencer (her daughter) a Fret
of Pearls, and to the Duchess of Gloucester, her Tablet of Gold, with Images, as
also her Sauter, with the Arms of Northampton, Tho. Wall. p. 385. n. 40 and 530.
n. 45.
etc. It is said by an Historian that this Lady Issabel having in her younger
years been somewhat wanton, did yet afterward become an hearty Penitent; and
so departing this life in the year 1394. Ypodigma Neust. p. 547. n. 23.
(17 R. 2.) was buried in the Friars Preachers at Langley.

The second Wife of Edmond Duke of York was Joane the daughter of Thomas Holand
Earl of Kent, Catalogue of Nobility per R. B. York.
and sister and coheir of Earl Edmond, by whom he had not any Issue; and she
surviving him, was married to her second Husband William Lord Willoughby of
Eresby; whom also out-living, Esceat 10 H. 4. n. 51.
made way for her third Marriage, with Henry Lord Scrope, who leaving her a
Widow, Pat. an. 4. H. 5. m. 18.
she adventured upon her fourth Husband, Henry Bromflet Lord Vescy; for which
Marriage they had a Pardon dated the 14th of August, An. 4 H. 5. and yet at
last she died without Issue about the 12th of H. 6.

Children of EDMOND Duke of York, by ISSABEL of Castile his first Wife.
11. EDWARD PLANTAGENET, eldest son and heir, succeeded his Father in the
Dukedom of York, whose History follows in the ensuing Chapter.

11. RICHARD of CONINGSBOROW, second son, was Earl of Cambridge, and continued
the succession, whose Chapter follows that of his Brother Edward.

11. CONSTANCE of YORK, Countess of Gloucester, only daughter of Edmond Duke of
York, was the Paramour of Edmond Holand Earl of Kent, by whom she had been so
long courted, that at last she brought him a daughter named Eleanor, married to
James Touchet Lord Audley (of which Marriage the Audleys of Norfolk are
descended) that would fain have been legitimate, The Arms of this Constance
were, France and England quarterly, a Label of three points Argent, each
charged with as many Torteaux; which are Impaled with those of Thomas le
Despenser, in a Window of our Lady Chapel in the Cathedral of Peterborrow, who
did bear quaterly, Or, 3 Cheverons Gules, by the name of Clare, and quarterly
Argent, and Gules a Fret Or, over all, a Bendlet Sable, being the Coat of le
Despenser. In which it is observable, that according to the Rule of Quarterings
in that time, he preferred the Arms of Clare, in the first quarter, before his
Paternal Coat, as being the more noble Family.
thereby to have screwed herself into so fair an Estate (as could it have been
proved must have fallen upon her) but the right heirs discovering her
practices, preferred their Bill in Parliament, See Parl. an. 9. H. 6. Art. 27.
thereby proving her to be a Bastard, and so were freed from such an Intruder;
as you may see at large in Poulton's Printed Statutes, An. 9 H. 6. chap. 11.
for there the Case is at large, according to the Original in the Tower.

This Constance Plantagenet was after married to Thomas le Despenser, created
Earl of Gloucester on Saturday in the Feast of St Michael, An. 21 R. 2. (son of
Edward, son of Edward, son of Hugh Lord le Despenser the younger, and Elizabeth
his Wife, eldest sister and coheir of Gilbert de Clare, Rot. Parl. an. 21 R. 2.
the last Earl of Gloucester of that Surname) and by him had Issue, Richard Lord
le Despenser, that died without Issue, the Kings Ward, and two daughters;
Elizabeth that died young at Cardiff in South Wales, and Issabel le Despenser,
born seven months after her Fathers death; who had two Husbands, the first was
Richard Beauchamp, Earl of Worcester, and Lord of Abergavenny, by whom she had
Elizabeth their daughter and heir, Wife to Sir Edward Nevil Knight (younger son
of Ralphe Nevil Earl of Westmerland) who was summoned to Parliament by Writ, as
Baron of Abergavenny, An. 29 H. 6. from whom the present Nevil, Baron of
Abergavenny, now living 1676. is lineally descended, as also the present Earl
of Westmerland. Martinus Papa quintus an. Pontificatus sui sexto Id. Sept.
concessit duas Bullas super dispensationem maritagii inter Ricardum de
Bellocampo Comitem Warwici and Isabellam uxorem suam dominam le Despenser, an.
2 H. 6. Ex lib. Colleg. Sanctae Mariae Warwici, f. 1. a. C. 30.
Issabel le Despensers second Husband was Richard Beauchamp Earl of Warwick
(Cousin German to her former Husband) by whom she had Issue Henry Beauchamp
Duke of Warwick, Esc. an. 24. H. 6. post mortem Hen. Ducis Warw. in London.
that died without Issue, the 11th day of June, An. 23 H. 6. 1445. and Anne
Beauchamp espoused to Richard Nevil Earl of Salisbury, who in her right was
afterward Earl of Warwick; by him she had Issue two daughters their heirs,
married into the Royal Family; viz. Issabel Nevil Wife to George Plantagenet
Duke of Clarence, Brother to King Edward IV. and Anne Nevil first married to
Edward Prince of Wales (son of King Henry VI.) who was slain at Tewkesbury, and
then to Richard Duke of Gloucester, afterward King of England.

11. EDWARD PLANTAGENET, DUKE of YORK; EARL of CAMBRIDGE, RVTLAND and CORK,
LORD of TINDAL, CONSTABLE of ENGLAND, and KNIGHT of the GARTER.
CHAP. II.
Edward being only Earl of Rutland, did then bear France sesemee and England,
quarterly, a Label of 3 points Gules, each charged with as many Castles Or, to
show his descent from a daughter of Castile, and do distinguish his Coat Armor
from that of his Father Duke Edmond. After whose death, to an Indenture dated
the 20 of February, 5 H. 4. in which he is styled Edward Duc D'everwick ( viz.
Duke of York) his Seal of red Wax is appendant ( vide p. 352.) the ground
thereof is diapred with Roses; His Achievement thereon contains His Shield
hanging by one corner, charged with the Arms of his Father Duke Edmord, with
his Helmet, and his Crest, being on a Chapeau a Lion passant guardant crowned
and accolled with a Label of three points charged with nine Roundells; all
betwixt two Feathers and Scroles, with the words Ich Dien. The Seal is
circumscribed, S. edwardi duris evorari comitis cantabrugie rutlandie et
coracie et domini de tindale. Ex Registro Westmonast, the Flowers de Lys being
reduced to the number Three by H. 5. this Edward did so bear them, as appears
by his Arms placed on the side, and at the foot of the Tomb of the Duchess
Philipe Mohun his Wife, in the Chapel of St Nicholas in Westminster Abbey.
HE was eldest son of Edmond of Langley Duke of York, by Issabel his first
Wife, second daughter and coheir of Peter King of Castile. King Richard II. on
the 25th of February, Chart. an. 13 R. 2. n. 5 and Pat. 15 R. 2. par. 1. m. 11.
in the 13 year of his Reign, created this Edward Earl of Rutland, during Duke
Edmond his Fathers lifetime; after which he was elected Knight of the Garter.
Then in the 15th year of the said Kings Reign, he had given him the reversion
of the Office of Constable of the Tower of London, for term of life, after the
death of Thomas Holand Earl of Kent, the Kings half Brother; Pat. 15 R. 2. par.
2. m. 30.
and though I find no positive time of his Creation, into the Dignity of Earl
of Cork, yet in a Patent bearing date the 12th of August, An. 20 R. 2. he is
styled Edwardus Comes Rutland et de Cork Admirallus, Angliae et Hiberniae; and
on the 11th of September next following, Pat. an. 20 R. 2. par. 1. m. 20.
he had granted unto him the Office of Custos of Dover Castle, and Warden of
the Cinque Ports, for term of life, with the Privileges granted to Sir John
Beaumont (lately deceased) in the said Office: then, on the 8th of December
following (still in the same year) he leaves out the title of Admiral of
Ireland, Pat. an. 20 R. 2. par. 2. m. 2.
and is called Edward d'Everwic Count de Rutland et de Cork Admiral d'
Engleterre et gardein de Cinq Portz. Notwithstanding this accumulation of
Honors upon him by King Richard II. yet that King thought him not complete,
till he had placed him in the same rank with his Father, made him also a Duke;
Albemarle was pitched upon for the place, which from an Earldom was erected
into a Dukedom, and he made Duke thereof, upon the 29th day of September, 21 R.
2. Chart. 21. R. 2.
which being a foreign Title, and in possession of the French King, it is not
to be thought this Duke reaped much advantage thereby; yet it served as a
varnish to set off his other Honors and Offices with the fairer luster: then,
in the next month, being October (still An. 21 R. 2.) he is styled Constable of
England; which Office he executed at the memorable intended Combat at Coventry,
between Henry Duke of Hereford, and Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk. Pat. an. 1
H. 4. par. 2. m. 31.
The particular in which he is charged to be a Traitor to King Richard, was his
councelling him to stay so long in Ireland, till the Duke of Hereford, by
advantage of his absence, had made his way to the Crown in England; but whether
this advice proceeded from a good meaning, but erroneous, or a bad meaning, but
overshaddowed with colors, is hard to say; but sure it is, in this delay the
King lost so much ground, that he could never after recover it, being without a
blow forced to make a resignation of his Crown, to Henry of Bullingbrook,
afterward named Henry IV. In the first year of whose Reign, Duke Edward
(conscious to himself it may be, for being instrumental in King Richard's
deposition) seeks to deliver the imprisoned King out of the Tower, and to
reinthrone him; to which purpose, an Indenture of Confederacy is signed by him
and the Holands, with some others at the house of the Abbot of Westminster; the
Plot was to invite King Henry to a Tournament at Oxford, where they intended to
assassinate him. Though secrecy was kept on all hands, yet Fortune would not be
silent, for the Duke taking Langley in his way to Oxford, to visit his Father
the Duke of York, was by him detected, who snatching the Indenture out of his
Bosom, went immediately with it to Windsor to the King; but Edwards Spurs
being sharper than those of his old Father, he got thither before him, and
obtained his Pardon.

This Treason, and some former accusations, laid to this Duke of Aumarle's
charge (as words against his Majesty, when he was Duke of Lancaster, and the
death of Thomas Duke of Gloucester the Kings Uncle) the King forgave; yet not
so absolutely but that he was resolved to clip some of the principal Plumes
from this young soaring Fanlcon; Parl. an. 1 H. 4.
and therefore he began with the Dukedom of Aumarle; from which title, by Act
of Parliament ( An. 1 H. 4.) he deposed this Edward, in which year also, he
took from him the Constableship of the Tower; and upon the first day of
October, granted it to Sir Thomas Rempston, a person that had faithfully
adhered to the Lancastrian Faction. This was the Kings deportment to Edward,
when his Crown sat tottering on his Head; who being more firmly established
upon his Throne, by the murder of the late King, suffers Edward to enjoy the
Patrimony and Honors descended to him from his Father Duke Edmond, lately
deceased; so that in a Patent bearing date the 5th of November ( An. 4 H. 4.)
he is written Edwardus Dux Eboraci Comes Cantabrugiae, Pat. an. 4 H. 4. Nob. 5.
Rutlandiae et Coraciae, Locum-tenens Aquitaniae, etc. All which Honors he
enjoyed until his death, except that of Cambridge, which was granted to Richard
of Coningsborow his Brother, in the second year of Henry V. Ever after this, he
proved faithful to King Henry IV. who, as an earnest of his trust reposed in
this Edward, regranted him the Constableship of the Tower of London for life
(upon the first day of November, Pat. an. 8 H. 4. par. 1. m. 16.
An. 8 H. 4.) nor was he less active in the time of Henry V. his son, when at
the famous Battle of Agincourt, fought upon Friday the 25th of October, An.
1415 in the 3d year of H. 5. he had the leading of the Vantguard, consisting of
Archers (which place, out of an heroic courage, Esc. an. 3 H. 5. n. 45.
he had made sure for) he paid a part of the price of that notable Victory with
his life; his Corpse after the Battle being found among the spoils miserably
hacked and defaced, was brought into England, and buried in the body of the
Choire of Fotheringhay Church, in Northamptonshire, under a flat Marble, with
his Image inlaid in Brass (according to his Will.) After which, Chichley vol.
1.284.8.
the King returning into England, caused his Exequies to be performed at
London, Illustrissimo Domino, D^^ PHILIPPO Comiti de PENBROK et MONTGOMERY,
Baroni Herhert de Cardiff, Shirland, Ros de Rendal, Fitz- Hugh. Marmion, et St
Quintin. hane Turmuli PHLIPPAE, Ducissae EBORACI figuram HDD^

PHILIPPA FILIA ET COHAERES IOHANNIS DNI MOHVN DE DVNSTER VXOR EDWARDI DVCIS
EBORA

with great solemnity, upon the first day of December following, at which were
present diverse Bishops and Abbots, besides a very many other persons of
quality, Tho. Wall. p. 440. n. 20
both English and French. And leaving no Issue, Richard his Nephew (son of
Richard Earl of Cambridge his younger Brother) was found to be his next heir,
Esc. an. 3 H. 5 n. 45.
at that time aged three years. This Monument, upon the dissolution of the
Religious Houses, was destroyed; since which time, Queen Elizabeth caused a
Memorial to be written on the Wall of that part of the Church which is now
standing, signifying this Edward Duke of York to be there Interred.

He took to Wife Philipe, the second daughter and coheir of John Lord Mohun of
Dunster, but died without Issue; so that leaving her a Widow, Inq. an. 10 H.
6. n. 45. Suff.
she was afterward married to Sir Walter Fitz-Walter Knight, and had a son
named Walter Fitz-Walter, who died the 10th of H. 6. who by Elizabeth his Wife,
had Issue Elizabeth his daughter and heir, a year and an half old at her
Fathers death.

The Monument of this Philipe Duchess of York, stands on the right hand within
the Chapel of St Nicholas, in the Abbey of Westminster: which I suppose was
erected by Sir Walter Fitz-Walter, because I find his Arms impaled with this
Philipa's, in several parts of the Arch thereof.

Her Epitaph you may read on the Verge of the said Tomb, in these words,
PHILIPPA FILIA ET COHAERES JOHANNIS DOMINI MOHUN DE DUNSTER, UXOR EDWARDI DUCIS
EBORACENSIS. MORITUR AN. DOM. 1433.

Arms on the Tomb of PHILIPPA Duchess of York.
In Pale Or, a Fess between two Cheveronels Gules. Fitz-Walter. On the
South Side the Monument.
In Pale Or, a Cross ingrailed Sable. Mohun. In Pale Barry Nebule of 6 pieces
Argent and Gules, on a Bend Sable, three Plates. In Pale Or, a Cross ingrailed
Sable. Mohun. In Pale France and England quarterly, a Label of 3 points,
Argent, charged with 9 Torteaux. York. In Pale Or, a Cross ingrailed Sable.
Mohun. In Pale Or, a Cross ingrailed Sable. Mohun. In Pale Gules, a Lion
rampant queve forche Or. Burghersh. Or a Cross ingrailed Sable. Mohun. France
and England quarterly, At the Foot of the Tomb.
a Label of 3 points Argent, charged with nine Torteaux. York. Or, a Cross
ingrailed Sable. Mohun.
11. RICHARD Of YORK, EARL of CAMBRIDGE, Surnamed of CONYNGSBVRGH.
CHAP. III.
The Arms of this Richard Earl of Cambridge, were, France and England
quarterly, a Label of three points Argent, each charged with as many Torteaux,
within a Border Argent, charged with ten Lions rampant, Purple, The Label was
to demonstrate his being of the House of York the Border signified that he was
the youngest son of his Father, and the Lions Purple his descent from the Royal
House of Castile and Leon; his elder Brother (in the lifetime of their Father
Duke Edmond) having born his Label charged with Castles; both of them being the
sons of Issabel of Castile and Leon. Which Shield of Arms aforesaid, is carved
in the Roof of the Cloister, on the Northside the Cathedral Church of
Canterbury, and the same Arms observed to be in a Glass Window of
Christ-Church, by Sir Edward Dering Knight. and Bar. They are also painted in
Glass, in two Windows of the Cloisters at Fotheringhay in the County of
Northampton; where the Label is omitted.


He was the second Son of Edmond of Langley Duke of York (fifth Son of King
Edward III) by Issabel his Wife, second Daughter and Coheir of Peter King of
Castile and Leon, and Surnamed of Conyngsburgh, from the place of his birth, so
called, in the County of York. I do not find him honored with any addition,
till the second year of King Henry V. at what time that King in Parliament
created him Earl of Cambridge; Parl. an. 2. Hen. 5.
which Earldom had been before enjoyed by his Father and Borther: for which
Honor, this Richard in the following year, Tho. Wall. p. 389. n. 25.
viz. An. 1414. makes King Henry an ungrateful return, joining and conspiring
with Henry Lord Scroop of Masham, then Lord Treasurer, Ypodigma Neust. p. 580.
n. 55.
and Sir Thomas Gray of Northumberland Knight, to plot the Kings death at
Southampton, as he was there shipping his Army for France: Some are of opinion,
that Richard and his Accomplices were put upon this desperate He chose rather to
say so, to preserve the right of his Prosterity to the Crown vide Lamb. 461.
act by Charles VI. the French King, who had promised them a Million of Gold,
to betray King Henry into his hands, or to murder him before his arrival in
Normandy; but his Indictment at it stands on Record, includes matter of other
quality, viz. That Richard Earl of Cambridge of Conyngsburgh, in the County of
York, and Thomas Gray of Heson in the County of Northumberland Knight, for that
they on the 20th day of July, John Stow Annals.
and third of King Henry V. Reign, at Southampton, Leland Coll. vol. 1.701.
had conspired together with a power of Men, to have led away the Lord Edmond
Earl of March into Wales, and to have procured him to take the Government of
the Realm, in case that King Richard II. were dead; with a purpose to have put
forth a Proclamation in the name of the said Earl, as Heir to the Crown,
against King Henry, by the name of Lancaster Usurper; and further, to have
conveyed a Banner of the Arms of England, and a certain Crown of Spain set upon
a Pallet (laid in gage to the said Earl of Cambridge) into Wales; as also, that
the said Conspirators had appointed certain into Scotland to bring thence one
Trumpington, and another resembling in shape, favor and countenance King
Richard; and Henry Scroop of Masham in the County of York, was likewise
indicted, as consenting to the premises. Earl Richard being thus indicted and
found guilty; John Speed p. 774. Coll. 2.
by Letter became an earnest Petitioner for his life to King Henry, upon the
sixth of August, An. 3 H. 5. which not being granted, he, with Scroope and
Gray, were all three beheaded, and Earl Richards Head and Body Interred in the
Chapel of Gods-House in Southampton.

His first Marriage. Conyngsburgh, as before, Impaling Anne Mortimer, whose
Arms were, Quarterly, first, Barry of six pieces Or, and Azure, on a chief of
the First, two Paletts, betwixt as many Squares base dexter and sinister of the
Second, an Inescocheon Argent Mortitimer. And secondly, Or, a Cross Gules, by
the name of Burgh, the third as the second, the fourth as the first Which
Impalement is carved and gilt upon the Frees, on the Head of Queen Elizabeth's
Tomb in Henry the Sevenths Chapel at Westminster. See the Plate of Seals in
the 353 page of this fifth Book, and you will there find the Figure of the Seal
of her Brother Edmond Mortimer Earl of March; on which is his Escocheon hanging
corner-ways, whereon are the Arms of Mortime and Burgh, quarterly; and for his
Crest (upon a Helmet) a Plume of Feathers, issuing out of a Coronet, mantled,
and supported by two Lions rampant guardant, with their Tails passed betwixt
their Legs, and turned over their backs. Which Arms and Supporters were born by
King Edward IV. this Anne Mortimers Grandson, as the Ensigns of his Earldom of
March; and the Coat quartered by the younger Branches of the House of York
(with the Royal Arms) as the Insignia from which they derived their right to
the Crown.


He espoused Anne Mortimer, Monast. Angl. vol. 2. p. 229. a. n. 60.
sister (and afterward Heir) to Edmond Earl of March, and daughter of Roger
Mortimer Earl of March, son of Philipe, only Daughter and Heir of Lionel Duke
of Clarence, third son of King Edward III. This was that Princely Branch, by
the ingrafting of which into the Stock of York, that Tree brought forth not
only white Roses, but Crowns and Scepters also; and by virtue of which (though
in this Earls untimely death, the Trunck was cut off) the Royal Branches
remained unshaken; a Marriage no doubt which put aspiring thoughts into the
head of Cambridge; for had Edmond Mortimer Earl of March obtained the Crown,
and died without Issue, the Earl of Cambridges Children had been heirs thereto,
in right of their Mother, or at least Earl Richard had enjoyed the honor of
being the Brother-in-Law of a King.

The second Wife of Richard Earl of Cambridge, Mich. Ree. 25. H. 6. n. 21.
was Mand, His second Marriage.
the daughter of Thomas Lord Clifford, and Elizabeth his Wife, Coningsburgh, as
before, Impaling Chequie, Or, and Azure, a Fesse Gules. Clislord. Which Arms
were painted in a South-Window in the Church of Fotheringhay in Com.
Northampton, and in a Window of Aston Church in Yorkshire.
daughter of Thomas Lord Roos of Hamlake; who, after his death, was remarried
to her second Husband John Lord Latimer, Vide Inq. and Rec. and Termino Mich.
an. 25 H. 6. Rot. 1.
and deceased without Issue, about the 25th year of Henry VI.

Children of RICHARD of York Earl of Cambridge, by ANNE MORTIMER his first Wife.
12. RICHARD, Duke of York, and Earl of Cambridge, only son of Earl Richard,
continued the descent, see the following Chapter. I have seen the Arms of this
Issabel and Henry Bourchier her Husband, in a Church-Window of Kimbolton in
Com. Hunt. viz. Quarterly, 1. Argent, a Cross ingrailed gules, inter four
Waterbougets, Sable, Bourchier. 2. Gules, a Fess Argens,


12. ISSABEL, Cat. Nob. per R. B.
Countess of Essex, only daughter of Richard Earl of Cambridge, was married to
Henry Bourchier, Earl of Essex, Chart. an 1. Ed. 4. p. 2. n. 1.
and Viscount Bourchier, by whom she had a numerous Issue, several of whose
descendants are mentioned in the 233 and 234 pages of the third Book. Ex
collect. Tumulorum per Will. Lilly R. D. Purs. ad Arma.
The Tomb of this Henry and Issabel, is placed betwixt the Chancel and the
Bowsers I Will or Chapel, in the Parish Church of Little Easton in the County of
Essex, being of polished Marble, and curiously arched; in which is an Altar
inlaid with Brass, Argent betwixt 12 Billets, 4.3.3. and 2. Or, Louvain. the 3
as the 2, the 4 as the 1. Impaling France and England quarterly, a Label of 3
points Argent charged with nine Torteaux, York.
with the Effigies of the Earl in Armor, and his Robes of the Order of the
Garter, his head resting upon his Crest; the Countess of Essex is also depicted
in her Robes, with a Coronet on her head, the Surface of the Monument and the
sides of the Arch, being diapred with Bourchiers Knots and Fetterlocks.

12. RICHARD DUKE of YORK, EARL of CAMBRIDGE, VLSTER, MARCH, and RVTLAND, LORD
of WIGMORE and CLARE, LIEUTENANT of the KINGDOM of FRANCE, and DUKEDOM of
NORMANDY, and KNIGHT of the GARTER.
CHAP. IV.
HE was the only son of Richard of Coningsborow, I find that this Richard Duke
of York used two several Seals, the impression of the first being of red Wax
(now in the possession of the Right Honorable Robert Viscount Yarmouth)
contains his Achievement, viz. upon a Shield hanging cornerways, France and
England quarterly, a Label of 3 points charged with 9 Torteaux, upon his
Helmet, mantling, and Chapeau doubled Ermine, stands his Crest, being a Lion
passant guardant, crowned, and gorged with a Label of his Arms; all, betwixt
two Ostrich Feathers and as many Scroles; and in the Circle thereof, has this
Inscription, Sigistum ricardi ducis ebor: romitis marthie et ultrome domini de
colignemore et de clare, ( vide p. 352.) It is affixed to his Grant of 20 l.
per annum, to Sir John Fastolff Knight. Pro notabili and laudabili servicio ac bono
consilio, etc. bearing date at London 12 May. An. 19 H. 6. the very next year
after this Richard had the Regency of France; for besides those Titles of
inheritance circumscribed on his Seal, He is in his Grant styled, Locumtenens
generalis and gubernator Regni Francie and Ducatus Normanie; by which it
appears, that he had not then a Seal as Lieutenant General of France, etc. But
An. 1442. which was the 20th of H. 6. being the following year, a Seal of his
Regency was provided, circumscribed, Sigilum ricardi ducis ebor: tomitis march
tocumtenenris generalis er gubernatoris regni Francie et ducatus normannie. The
Shield of the Duke therein hangs in the same manner as that in the first Seal,
and contains the same charge, but differs somewhat in the form. The Healme,
Lambrequin and Crest agree therewith also. But here is added Supporters to the
Arms, viz. on the right side a Faulcon with Bells, which within the Fetterlock,
was the Devise of Tork, and on the left side with the Lion of the Earldom of
March. On cach side the Crest, is a Fetterlock, and beneath the Shield two
Branches of Roses, and behind the Supporters as many Feathers and Scroles ( seo
page 352.) This Seal is fixed to two Instruments in French, the one dated, An.
1442. and the other 1445. the former Registered in the College of Arms C. 10.
p. 83. where he writes himself, Nous Richard Due de York, Lieutenant et
Goverour General pour le Roy mon Sovereign Seigneur de ses Royaume de France
and Duche de Normandy, etc. and the latter entered in a Book noted, B. 20. fol.
6. b. in the custody of H. St George Esquire Richmond Herald; in which he is 0690
0716 V 3 Richart Due de York, Comte de la March et de Vulvestre Lieutenant
General et Governeur de France et Normandy. Afterward this Government ceasing,
he had no further occasion for this Seal, but signed his Instruments, with the
first, as appears by a Letter of Attorney dated 4. Octobris 27 H. 6. and an
Indenture bearing date 3 December, An. 28 H. 6. betwixt him and James Earl of
Desmond: in both which he used his former Titles, and first Seal.

In a Book in the College of Arms, marked M. 3. fol. 15. his Arms are thus
Marshalled, viz. Quarterly of four, the first quarterly of France and England,
over all, a Label of three points Argent, charged with nine Torteaux. 2.
Castile and Leon, quarterly. 3. Mortimer and Burgh also quarterly; the fourth
as the first: over all, Gules, three Lions passant guardant Or, a Border
Argent, Holand: being the Arms of his Grandmother Eleanor Countess of March,
the sister and coheir of Edmond Holand Earl of Kent.

His Figure in his baternal Coat Armor, near as large as the life, stands
neatly painted in an East-Window of the North I Will in Cirencester Church in
Glocestershire, having on the Pomel of his Sword the Arms of Mortimer Earl of
March; it may be thereby to signify that although he was forced to use the
Blade to dispute his right to the Crown, yet did he shroud himself under the
Shield or Hilt of a good Title.

At his Pompeous Funeral in the year 1466. An. 6 Ed. 4. his Father, his Chariot
was adorned with the Royal Arms (within the Garter) having at the foot a white
Angel bearing a Crown of Gold, to signify that of right he was King, vide l.
3. p. 8. in Coll. Arm.


Catal. of Bob. by R. B.
Earl of Cambridge, and Anne Mortimer his Wife, Sister and Heir of Edmond Earl
of March; by his Fathers side derived from Edmond Duke of York, fifth son of
King Edward III. and by his Mothers, from Lionel Duke of Clarence, third son of
that King; who, notwithstanding his said Father died for Treason against Henry
V. was by King Henry VI. his son, in a Parliament held at Leicester, in the
fourth year of his Reign, The. Wall. p. 435. n. 10. 20.30.
restored to the Dignities of Duke of York, Earl of Cambridge and Rutland, and
Lord of Tindal; which Honors had fallen to him after the death of Edward Duke
of York his Uncle, Ese. an. 3. H. 5. m. 45.
slain at the famous Battle of Agincourt without Issue: a great error in King
Henry's Councils to agrandize him, who, by the acquisition of the Earldoms of
March and Vlster, and the Lordships of Wigmore, Clare, Trim and Conaught
(falling to him as next heir, after the death of his Uncle Edmond Mortimer Earl
of March, deceasing also issueless, in the third year of Henry VI.) An. 1424.
had not only these Honors heaped upon him, but was also thereby furnished
with a Title to the Crown, in the right of Anne Mortimer his Mother, sister to
the said Earl.

Catal. of Nob. by R. E.
But wanting power to put that Title in dispute, His Marriage
he marries Cecilie Nevil, The Arms of Cicily Nevil Duchess of York, being
Gules a Saltire Argent, were Impaled with those of her Husband, Richard Duke of
York, in a Window of Hall at Fotheringhay in Northamptonshire, being France and
England quarterly, over all a Label of 3 points Argent, charged with 9
Torteaux. But in her Widdowhood, and in the third year of her son King Edward
the Fourth's Reign, the said Saltire is Impaled in her Seal (exhibited p. 352)
with the Royal Arms. viz. France and England quarterly (without any
distinction, for which the same reason may be given, as was; for this Dukes
having the Royal Crown born at his Funeral ( vide l. 3. p. in Coll. Arm.) where
my Voucher says, That of right he was King, meaning Duke Richard. This Seal is
annexed to her Letter of Attorney, in which she is styled, Cecilia
prechristianissimi Principis Edwardi Dei Gracia Anglie et Francie Regis ac
Domini Hibernie Matter, Ducissa Ebor. Penes E. Walker Mil. Gart. Prine. Regem
Arm.

The same Impalement was carved on the South-East Pillar of St Bennets Steeple
Paul's Wharfe (as I have noted in this Dukes History) Ensigned with a Coronet,
composed of Trefoyls, and Pearls upon Points, supported by two Angels, standing
upon as many Roses, within the Rays of the Sun; which was the Devise of King
Edward IV. after his Victory at Mortimers Cross in Herefordshire, and the death
of this Richard Duke of York his Father, where three Suns are said to appear
before the Battle. and to join in one; which from him has been made use of by
the succeeding Kings, as one of their Badges, as is evident in Windsor Castle,
Westminster Abbey, and many other places.


the youngest daughter of Ralph Earl of Westmerland, and Joane Beaufort his
second Wife, a daughter of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster; by which Match the
Duke of York became related to most of the greatest Nobility of the Kingdom,
but nearly allied to the uumerous and flourishing Family of Nevil: for this
Cecilie had to her Brothers, Richard Nevil Earl of Salisbury (father of Richard
Earl of Warwick, called Make-king) William Nevil Lord Fauconberg, George Nevil
Lord Latimer, Edward Nevil Lord Bergavenny, and Robert Nevil Bishop of Durham;
and to her half Brothers, Ralph Nevil Earl of Westmerland, and Nevil Lord of
Ousley; by whose assistance he was enabled to bandy for the Crown against the
House of Lancaster.

The Duchess of York, Tho. Mil. p. 351.
Cecilie Nevil, outlived Duke Richard 35 years, and then deceasing in the
Castle of Barkhamsted, on the last day of May, An. 1495. An. 10 H. 7. she was
(according to her Testament dated the first of April, Vox qu. 25.
An 10 H. 7.) buried by the Body of her Husband, in the College of Fodringhay;
her Arms Impaled with the Dukes, Ensigned with a Coronet, and Supported with
two Angels, standing upon as many Roses within the Rays of the Sun, were
carved in a Niche, upon the South-East Pillar of St Bennets Steeple near Paul's
Wharfe, according to the ensuing Figure, which I caused to be delineated before
the late Conflagration of London, An. 1666. see the following page.

Upon the passage of King Henry VI. into France, Pat. 8. H. 6. p. 1. m. 7.
to receive that Crown, he assigned by Patent to this Richard the Constableship
of England in the absence of John Duke of Bedford, which gave him a more
feeling of greatness; Pol. Virg. 483. n. 10.
and after the death of the said Duke of Bedford, he (with Edmond Beaufort Duke
of Somerset) succeeded in the Regency of France, Rot Fran. 18 H. 6. m. 10.
An. 1435. In the 18th of Henry VI. he was constituted Lieutenant and Captain
General of all France, whose advancement to that great command is opposed
depiction of relics Nobili et Egregio Vito Domino ROBERTO LONG Baronetto nec
non Serenissimo Domino Regi CAROLO 2^^ Receptae S^accarij Auditori; Haec
CECILIAE DUCISSAE EBORACE. SIS Insignia D.D.D.F.S.

by the said Edmond Duke of Somerset; by which, though he had better foresight
than the Protector Gloucester, and all the Counsel of England, yet his
opposition proved unseasonable and fruitless; for York's behavior had won so
many friends about the King, whom he meant by embracing to pull down, that
notwithstanding the disadvantage of his Title, which alone was a great cause to
have made him everlastingly incapable of so great power and trust, he
prevailed: But in this great command of Regent, it is not Duke Richard's design
(if he had been able) to effect much as to the reducing of France, but to keep
the two Kings in so equal balance, that that Kingdom might be in perpetual
want of supplies; under color of which Armies would be raising, which he, as
he found opportunity might make use of; but all his ill successes were laid
upon the Duke of Somerset, who, upon all occasions was his Rival, and the
Person that not long after got the Regency of France over his head.

After this the Duke of Gloucester is privately made away by the procurement of
Queen Margaret, so that York is rid of one of those mighty Pillars that
supported the House of Lancaster, and had occasion ministered of impeing more
Feathers into his aspiring Wings; for Ireland being in a tumult, he is
constituted Lieutenant thereof, An. 26 H. 6. during the space of ten years; and
thither passes, Pat. an. 26 H. 6.
where he not only appeaseth that Nation, but wins such favor among them, Anno
1447.8.
as never could be separated from his Family. York thus strengthened, declares
his Royal Title to his Friends, and several Governors of Cities and Towns, and
creates so great a faction among the Commons, that he procures the banishment
of William de la Pole Duke of Suffolk, Queen Margarets great Favorite, who in
his passage for France is wickedly murdered: This was followed by the
Insurrection in Kent, Pol. Virg. 499. n. 20.
under the conduct of Cade, one of the Duke of Yorks Firebrands (calling
himself Mortimer) who after the perpetration of many villainies, had the reward
of his Treason, his head set Sentinel upon London Bridge.

Things succeeding thus, Richard Duke of York arrives out of Ireland, and
consults with his Brother-in-Law Richard Nevil Earl of Salisbury, his son
Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick (which three, Ibid. n. 30.
were by King Henry's party called the Triumvirate) Thomas Courtney Earl of
Devon, Edmond Brook Lord Cobham, and others, how to obtain the Crown: Holingsh
Chron. p. 637. n. 50.60.
and finding that Suffolk perished in vain if Somerset enjoyed the same grace
and favor with King Henry, they are resolved to remove this great obstacle, and
therefore take Arms, under pretense, (as most Traitors do) of removing bad men
from about the King, and reforming the Government; and the more to blind the
good King, and gain credit with the people, the Duke issues forth a
Proclamation, in which he offers to swear upon the Blessed Sacrament, that he
is, has been, and ever will be the Kings true Liegeman: But the King (by the
advice of his friends (but principally of Somerset) sees the Snake through the
Grass, and therefore resolves to teach the Duke his duty by force; whereupon an
Army is raised to attend York's motion, who now not having London his friend,
encamps upon Brent Heath in Kent; Ibid. n. 30 and 40.
and King Henry pitches his Pavilion on Black Heath; but instead of blows, by
the mediation of friends sent betwixt the two Camps, a reconciliation is made;
whereupon the Duke pretends Loyalty, and the easy King embraces him as his
loving Subject; upon this capitulation, to satisfy York, Somerset is confined
Prisoner to his own House, and York is to disband his Army; which being done,
York exhibits a great complaint against the pride and avarice of the Duke of
Somerset, and Somerset face to face boldly accuses the Duke of York of High
Treason, as having conspired to depose the King, and take upon him the
Sovereignty, vehemently urging that York might be committed and arraigned, that
by his deserved death, and the disinabling of his Sons, Civil War might be
extinguished; finally praying that God would not suffer Enemy of the Kingdom to
escape the hand of Justice. This in all likelihood had been effected, but that
the public Faith stood engaged for the Dukes indemnity, he having come in upon
the Kings Word, and York's death would now have seemed rather effected to
gratify Somerset's revenge, than to secure the Peace of the Kingdom; besides,
Edward Earl of March the Dukes eldest son, was reported to be in the head of an
Army of Welsh to succor his Father: upon these, and other reasons, the Duke of
York is no longer restrained, as upon Somerset's most weighty reasons he had
been; who, Ibid. n. 40.
to assure the indulgent King of his Allegiance, makes his submission, and
solemnly takes his Oath, to be a true, faithful, and obedient Subject, in the
Cathedral of St Paul, the King and most of the Nobility being present; which
Oath he also took at Westminster, Coventry, and other places.

And upon this, ruleing all at Court, he takes advantage of the Kings sickness
at Sunnings, Holingsh. ut supra 642. a. n. 10 and 29.
to cause Somerset to be arrested in the Queens Chamber at Westminster, and
sent to the Tower of London; but upon his recovery, Somerset is set at liberty,
and made Captain of Calais: hereupon York and his Adherents levy an Army about
the Marches of Wales, with which they make way toward London; the object of
Pretenders. King Henry with another Force gives him Battle at St Albans, Battle
of St Albans.
upon the 22. day of May 1455. where the King looses the day, Ibid. 643. b. n.
10.
and is made Prisoner, and Somerset, Anno 1445.
Northumberland, Stafford, and Clifford are slain. Not long after, a Parliament
is called, Pat. 34 H. 6. m. 7.
in which Richard Duke of York is constituted Protector and Defender of the
Church of England, and the Kings principal Counselor, till Edward the Kings
eldest Son should arrive at the years of discretion; from which high Offices he
is shortly after degraded. Holingsh. 649. n. 30 and 40.
This was followed by Blore-field (near Drayton in Shropshire) disputed by the
Earl of Salisbury, Battle of Blore, 1458.
on the Duke's part, and by the Lord Audley for the King, who there lost his
life, and the Victory to the Yorkists; whereupon the Kings Army approaches that
of the Duke near Ludlowe, but finding himself too weak, both in number, and by
reason of the revolt of Trollop, who discovered his designs, provides for his
safety by flight into Ireland, and then in Parliament, Ibid. n. 20 and 651. a.
n. 60.
he, with his son the Earl of March, and others, are Proclaimed Traitors.

The Earls of March, Salisbury and Warwick, from Calais arrive in Kent, Battle
of Northampton, 1460.
and raise Forces, Holingsh. p. 654. a. and ibid. n. 20.
with which they fight the King at Northampton (on the 9th of July. An. 38 H.
6.1460.) where he is the second time made Prisoner, and the Earls continue
their admirable hypocrisies. The Duke of York returns out of Ireland, whither
he had fled, claims the Crown, which he publishes in Parliament, together with
his Pedigree, and sets himself in the Royal Seat, where after several
allegations on the part of the Duke, and also of King Henry, Ibid. 657. b. n.
10.
the Parliament conclude that Henry should Reign during life, the remainder to
rest in Richard Duke of York, and the Heirs of his Body in general Tail; who is
thereupon proclaimed heir apparent to the Crown, and Protector of England.

Queen Margaret, who with young Prince Edward her son, Ibid. 659. a. n.
30.40.50.
had fled Northward, and was not consenting to this Act, forms an Army of
Northern Men Scots and Irish, to the number of 18000, under the leading of the
Dukes of Somerset and Exceter, and marches toward London, against whom goes
the Duke of York, with the Earl of Salisbury; who advancing near the Queens
Army, sound himself far our-numbred by the Enemy, (he having in his Army not
above Five thousand) and therefore is advised by Salisbury to retire, and
attend the coming of the Earl of March his son, The Battle of Wakefield.
who was gathering a good Army on the Borders of Wales; Anno 1460.
but the Pride of his former Victory made him deaf to all counsel of declining
the Battle; and so precipitated by his own destiny, from Sandal Castle he
marches to Wakefield Green, where the Lord Clifford on the one side, and the
Earl of Wil^shire on the other, where placed in ambush. The Duke of York
supposing that Somerset who led the main Battle, had no more Forces than what
appeared with him, undauntedly advanced toward him; but being entered within
the danger of the Ambuscadoes, Catal. of Nob. by R. B.
they on both sides broke out upon him, His death.
and slew him, with 3000 of his Soldiers: the rest fled, Anno 1460.
Salisbury is taken Prisoner, and harmless Rutland, York's younger son (who
came thither only to see fashions) not aged 12 years, is made a sacrifice to
his Fathers transgression. Thus died Richard Duke of York, on the last day of
December, 1460. in the prosecution of a Golden Diadem (by Fate ordained for
his son, the revenger of his death) whose Head crowned only with a Paper one,
is presented to Queen Margaret, who makes her self merry with that ghastly and
bloody spectacle, of whom it was said by the beforementioned Duke of Somerset,
his greatest Antagonist, That if he had not learned to play the King by his
Regency in France, he had never forgot to obey as a Subject, when he returned
into England. Salisbury's Head also in cold blood being separated from his
Body, is with the Dukes and others set upon Poles, and placedon the walls of
York

These Heads were taken down by King Edward his son, immediately after his
great Victory at Towton, I. 11. p. 107. in Coll. Arm.
and the Duke his Fathers Head buried with his Trunck, and the Corpse of his son
Edmond Earl of Rutland at Ponfract; His solemn Burial at Fotheringhay.
from whence their Bones by the said Kings command, were with great solemnity
afterward removed and interred at Fotheringhay. In order to which, upon the 22
of July, I. 3. p. 8. ibidem.
1466. the said Bones were put into a Chariot, covered with black Velvet,
richly wrapped in Cloth of Gold and Royal Habit; I. 11. p. 107. in Coll. Arm.
at whose feet stood a white Angel, bearing a Crown of Gold, to signify, that
of right he was King. The Chariot had seven Horses, I. 15. p. 207.
trapped to the ground, and covered with black, charged with Escocheons of the
said Princes Arms; every Horse carried a Man, and upon the foremost rode Sir
John Skipwith, who bore the Princes Banner displayed. The Bishops and Abbots
went two or three Miles before, to prepare the Churches for the reception of
the Prince, in Pontificalibus. Richard Duke of Gloucester followed next after
the Corpse, accompanied with a number of Nobles, the Officers of Arms being also
present. In this equipage they parted from Ponfract, and that night rested at
Doncaster, caster, where they were received by the Convent of Cordeliers in
gray Habit; from thence by journeys to Bleide, to Touxford in the Clay, to
Newarke, to Grantham, to Stamford, and from thence on Monday the 29th of July,
to Fodringhay, where they arrived betwixt two and three of the clock in the
afternnon, where the Bodies were received by several Bishops and Abbots in
Potificalibus, and supported by twelve Servants of the defunct Prince.

At the entry of the Churchyard, was the King, accompanied with several Dukes,
Earls and Barons, all in Mourning, who proceeded into the heart of Fodringhay
Church, near to the high Altar, where there was a Hearse covered with black,
furnished with a great number of Banners, Bannerolls and Pencills, and under
the said Hearse were the Bones of the said Prince and his Son Edmond. l. 3. p.
8. in Coll. Arm.
The Queen and her two daughters were present also in black, attended by
several Ladies and Gentlewomen. Item, over the Image was a Cloth of Majesty of
black Sarcenet, with the Figure of our Lord sitting on a Rainbowe, beaten in
Gold, having on every corner a Scocheon of his Arms of France and England,
quarterly, with a Vallence about the Hearse also of black Sarcenet, fringed half
a yard deep, and beaten with three Angels of Gold, holding the Arms within a
Note that the Arms of Richard Duke of York were placed within the Garter.
Garter, in every part above the Hearse.

Upon the 30th of July, several Masses were said, and then at the Offertory of
the Mass of Requiem, the King offered for the said Prince his Father, and the
Queen and her two daughters, and the Countess of Richmond offered afterward;
then Norroy King of Arms offered the Princes Coat of Arms, March King of Arms
the Target, Ireland King of Arms the Sword, Windsor Herald of Arms of England,
and Ravendon Herald of Scotland, Henry Peacham his Complete Gentleman p. 189.
offered the Helmet, and Mr de Ferrys the Harness and Courser.

The Bones of the Duke of York and of his Son the Earl of Rutland, with the
Body of Duchess Cecilie lapped in Lead, being removed out of Fotheringhay
Churchyard (for the Chancel in the Choire where they were first laid, in that
fury of knocking Churches and Sacred Monuments in the head, was also felled to
the ground) were buried in the Church by the commandment of Queen Elizabeth,
and a mean Monument of Plaster, wrought with the Trowel erected over them,
very unbefitting so great Princes. Ibidem.


Mr Crenso, a Gentleman who dwelt in the College at the same time, told my
Author, that their Coffins being opened, their Bodies appeared very plainly to
be discovered, and withal, that the Duchess Cecily had about her Neck, hanging
on a Silk Riband, a Pardon from Rome, which penned in a fine Roman Hand, was as
fair and fresh to be read, as if it had been written but the day before.

Chidren of RICHARD Duke of York, by CECILY NEVIL his Wife
13. HENRY of YORK, eldest Son of Richard Duke of York, deceased, being very
young; we may suppose that King Henry VI. was his Godfather.

13. EDWARD of YORK, Earl of March, etc. second son of Duke Richard, deposed
King Henry VI. and was King of England, by the name of Edward IV. whose History
follows in the fifth Chapter of this fifth Book.

13. EDMOND of YORK, Catal. of Nob. by R. B.
Earl of Rutland (third son of Richard Duke of York and Cecily Nevil) being of
the age of about 12 years, His Arms were set up in several Windows of
Fotheringhay Castle, the Mansion House of the Duke of York viz. Quarterly, the
first quarterly, France and England, a Label of five points Argent, the two
dexter Labels charged with as many Lions rampant Purpure, and the three
sinisters, with nine Torteaux He did bear, in the 2 and 3 quarters, the Arms of
Burgh, viz. Or a Cross Gules; and in the fourth, the Coat of Mortimer. vide
Peacham 3d Edition p. 188.
was slain with his said Father at the Battle of Wakefield, on the last day of
December, An. 1460.39 H. 6. where (notwithstanding he fell down upon his knees
desiring mercy) he was cruelly stabbed to the heart by John Lord Clifford of
Westmorland, who overtook him flying: in part of revenge he said, for that this
Earls Father had slain his; a deed which much blemished the Author. But who can
promise any thing temperate of himself in the heat of martial sury, where it
was resolved not to leave any Branch of the Yorkish Tree standing. His Corpse,
was buried at Pontfract, and afterward An. 6th of King Edward IV. his Brother,
Henry Peacham, p. 139. in his Complete Gentleman.
his Bones were from thence removed (with his Fathers) and with great ceremony
interred at Fotheringhay in the County of Northampton.

13. WILLIAM of YORK, fourth son, and deceased both young.

13. JOHN of YORK, fifth son of Richard Duke of York.

13. GEORGE of YORK, Duke of Clarence, sixth son of Richard Duke of York and
Cecily Nevil; of whom see more in the eighth Chapter of this fifth Book.

13. THOMAS of YORK, seventh son, deceased in his Infancy.

13. RICHARD of YORK, Duke of Gloucester, eighth and youngest son of Richard
Duke of York, and Cecily Nevil his Wife, caused his Nephews King Edward V. and
Richard Duke of York, to be murdered, and usurped the Crown, by the Title of
Richard III. vide his Story in Chap. 7.

13. ANNE of YORK, Esc. 15. Ed. 4. n. 36.
Duchess of Exceter, Henry Duke of Exceter, on his Seal (annexed to an
Indenture dated the 9th day of April, an. 38 H. 6.) did bear in a Field (Gules)
3 Lions passant guardant (Or) on a Border (Azure) eight Flowers de Lys (of the
second.) Penes Guil. Pierpont Arm. M. S. 119. p. 58. The Arms of the Duchess
Anne, were. Party per Pale, on the dexter-side France and England quarterly,
and on the sinister Party per Fess, Burgh. and Mortimer. vide her Plate of
Brass in the following page.
eldest daughter of Richard Duke of York, was first married to Henry Holand
(son of John Duke of Exceter) to whom King Henry VI. was Godfather, Claus. 16.
E. 4. n. 10.
and granted to this Henry and his said Father and the longer liver of them
two, Pat. an. 24 H. 6.
the Office of Admiral of England, Ireland and Aquitaine for term of life, by
Patent dated the 14th of February, An. 24th of Henry VI. Upon the 7th of
August, in the 29th year of the said Kings Reign, Pat. 29. H. 5. p. 1. m.
James Lord Say the Kings Chamberlain had the Office of Constable of the Tower
of London, granted unto him during the minority of this Henry Holand, Ibid.
who much about the same time espoused this Lady Anne.

Afterward, in the 38th of Henry VI. he was styled Henricus Dux Exon: Comes
Hunt: et de Ivory, Admirallus Angl: Hibern: et Aquitanie, Dominus de la Sparr,
ac Conestab: Turris Land: He lived in great reputation as long as the
Lancastrians bore the sway; but King Henry VI. being deposed, this Duke of
Exceter was reduced to so great want, Philip de Comines lib. 3. p. 73.
that he was forced to receive a small Pention from the Duke of Burgundy his
Wifes Brother in Law; but King Henry VI. being again restored, and the Title to
the Crown laid upon the success of Barnet-field (where this Duke of Exceter and
Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick had the leading of the left Wing) he behaved
himself with much courage against Edward IV. and in battle was unhorsed and
left for dead, Stows Annals.
where in his bleeding wounds he lay most part of that day; but yet recovering,
and getting to Westminster, he there took sanctuary to save his life, for which
he became Suitor unto the King: but his Wife the Lady Anne, now King Edwards
Sister, sued as earnestly for a divorce; which with great instancy she at last
obtained against him, Ibidem.
the 12th of November, 1472. An. 12 E. 4. How he released himself from the
Kings anger is unknown, and how he came by his death is as uncertain, for his
Body was found cast upon the shore of Kent, as if he had perished by Shipwreck,
Esc. an. 15 Ed. 4. n. 36.
in the 13th year of Edward IV. having had by Lady Anne his Duchess, a daughter
named also Anne, who died in the lifetime of her Mother.

Her second Marriage.
The second Husband of Anne of York Duchess of Exceter, was Sir Thomas St
Leoger Knight. with whom she lived but two years after the death of her former
Husband: St Leoger did bear, Azure a Frett Argent, a Chief Or, and a Cressent
for a difference. Which charge appears upon his Surcoat and Shield engraven
on the Brass Tablet exhibited in the following page. In which are also the Arms
of the Duchess, being, Parted per Pale, on the dexter-side, France and England
quarterly, without any distinction; and on the sinisterside, Party per Fess,
Burgh and Mortimer.
for she deceased upon the 14th day of January, 1475, Inq. 29 Sept. an. 16 Ed.
4.
An. 15 E. 4. leaving by him a daughter also named Anne. Ibidem.
This Sir Thomas founded a Chantry in the North Cross of the Royal Chapel of
St George in Windsor Castle, with two Priests to say Mass, Pat. 21 Ed. 4. p. 2.
n. 19.
for the Souls of Anne his Wife, and himself, etc. where he lies interred,
with this Memorial on a Plate of Brass affixed to the Wall, containing their
Pictures kneeling, Arms and Epitaph, drawn from the original in the Month of
June, 1665, and represented in the following Figure.

Manners, viz. Or, 2 Barts Agure, a Chief Gules, Impaling St Leoger, being
Azure, Fetty Argent, a Chief Or, and a Cressent for distinction.
Anne St Leoger Lady Roos, only daughter and heir of Sir Thomas St Leoger Knight.
and Anne his Wife: Esc. an. 15 Ed. 4.
daughter of Richard Duke of York, sister to King Edward IV. and Widow of
Henry Duke of Exceter, Inq. 29 Sept. an. 16 Ed. 4.
was married to Sir George Manners Lord Roos; who, with his said Wife, lies
intombed in the North-Cross of St George's Chapel in Windsor Castle, with this
Epitaph, Here lyethe buried George Manners Knight, Lord Roos, who decesed the
xxiii day of Octobre, in the year of our Lord God M. Uc. xiii. and Lady Anne
his Wife, daughter of Anne Duchess of Exetur, suster unto King Edward the
fourth, and of Thomas Sentlynger Knight. The which Anne deceited the xxii day
of April, in the year of our Lord God M. Uc. xxvi. on whose soulls God have
mercy Amen. This George Lord Roos and Lady Anne his Wife, had Issue, Thomas
Manors, Earl of Rutland, the first of that Surname, so created by King Henry
VIII. upon the 28th of June, Ex autog. apud Belvoir.
An. 17 H. 8. who augmented his ancient Arms (in regard that he was descended
from a sister of King Edward IV.) which were, Catal. of Nob. by R. (...).
Gold, two bars Azure, and a Chief, Gules, (as you may observe upon his
Fathers Tomb in St George's Chapel in Windsor Castle) A chief quarterly, Azure
and Gules, on the first two Flowers de Lize, Or: in the second, a Lion passant
guardant, Gold, the third as the second, the fourth as the first.

blazon or coat of arms MEA GLORIA FIDES blazon or coat of arms Honoratissimo
et Nobilissimo Domino. D. EDWARDO Baroni ROCKINGHAM de ROCKINGHAM Hac ANNAE
EXONIAE Ducissae, et THOMAE de SANCTO-LEODOGARO militis. Consortis ejusdem
Iconia. H.D.F.S.

Within this Chapel lies buried Anne Duches of Exetor sustor unto the noble
King Edward the forte and also the body of Sir Thomas Sellynger knight her
husband which has fond wythi this College a chauntre with two presins sygyng
for eumore on whose soul god bane mercy The which Anne duches dyed in the year
of our Lord Athousande CCCC lxxv, the di^ucall letter S primu^ S xiiii xi day
of January.

(...)


This Thomas the first Earl of Rutland, espoused Eleanor daughter of Sir
William Paston of Norfolk Knight. and they had Issue two sons, Paston, A. 6 Flowers
de Lys 3, 2, and 1. B. a Chief indented; O.
Catal. of Nob. by R. B.
Henry and Sir John Manners Knight. Henry Manners was second Earl of Rutland, and by
his Wife Margaret daughter of Ralph Nevil, the fourth Farl of Westmorland, was
Father of Edward and John. Nevil, G. a Saltir A.
Vide his Inscription on his Tomb at Botsford.
Edward succeeded his Father in the Dignities of Earl of Rutland, Lord Roos of
Hamlake, Trusbut and Belvoir; Holcroft, Argent, a Cross and Border, both
ingrayled Sable.
and by Issabel, daughter of Sir Thomas Halcroft of Vale Royal in Cheshire, had
his only Child, named Elizabeth, who being married to William Cecil, Lord
Burleigh, son and heir apparent of Thomas Earl of Exceter, Cecil, viz. Barry of
ten pieces, Argent and Azure, on six Escocheons three, two and one, Sable, as
many Lions rampant of the First.
had Issue William Cecil called Lord Ros, who died in Italy An. 1618. unmarried.

John, son of Earl Henry, Ex autog. apud Beluoir.
and younger Brother of Edward Earl of Rutland (who died without Issue Male as
aforesaid) was the fourth Earl of Rutland. He married Elizabeth, the daughter
of Francis Charlton of Apley in the County of Salop Esquire and their sons were,
Roger, Francis and George, all three Earls of Rutland. Charlton, O. a Lion
rampant G.
Roger the eldest son was fifth Earl of Rutland, Sydney, O, a Pheon B.
and having married Elizabeth the daughter and heir of Sir Philip Sydney Knight.
died sans Issue.

Francis Manners brother of Roger, Catal. of Nob. by R. B.
was the sixth Earl of Rutland, Knivet, A. a Bend and Border ingrayled S.
Lord Ros of Hamlake, Trusbut and Belvoir. He espoused Frances daughter and
coheir of Sir Henry Knyvet of Charlton Knight. and had Issue their only child
named Katherine, married to George Villers Duke of Buckingham, Villers, A, on a
Cross G, 5 Escoleps Or.
and they were Father and Mother of George the present Duke of Buckingham, and
Mary Duchess Dowager of Richmond, now living, An. 1676. He died a the Savoy in
the Strand 24 March 1641. and was buried at Botsford.
George Manners, third son of John, succeeded his brother Francis (deceasing
without Issue Male) and was the seventh and last Earl of Rutland of this Line
(dying without Issue by his Wife Frances, Carry, A, on a Bend, S. 3 Roses A.
daughter of Sir Edward Carry of Aldenham in Buckinghamshire Knight.) so that the
Earldom of Rutland came to another Branch of this Family.

Note therefore, That Thomas Manners the first Earl of Rutland, besides Earl
Henry that succeeded him, Ex autog. apud Haddor.
had Issue Sir John Manners Knight. who marrying Dorothy, Vernon, A, a Fret S.
daughter and coheir of Sir George Vernon of Haddon in Derby shire Knight. had
Issue Sir George Manners of Haddon Knight. who by Grace daughter of Sir Henry
Pierpont of Holme Pierpont in the County of Nottingham Knight. had Issue, Pierpont,
A, a Lion rampant S, inter eight Cinqfoyles G.
John Manners Earl of Rutland, Lord Ros of Hamlake, Trusbut and Belvoir, now
living, 1675. His Wife was Frances daughter of Edward Lord Mountagu of Boughton
in Northamptonshire, and they had Issue (besides several daughters) John Lord
Ros, who is now married to his third Wife, Katherine the daughter of Baptist
Viscount Campden.

13. ELIZABETH of YORK, De la Pole, Azure a Fess inter 3 Leopards faces, Or.
Impaling York.
Duchess of Suffolk, Catal. of Nob. by R. B.
second daughter of Richard Duke of York and Cecily Nevil, was espoused to John
de la Pole Duke of Suffolk (son of William Duke of Suffolk, by Alice his
Wife, daughter and heir of Sir Thomas Chancer Knight. son of Sir Geoffry Chancer
the famous English Poet, buried at Westminster) to whom, and the heirs male of
his Body King Edward IV. by Letters Patent bearing date the 23 of March, Pat.
an. 3 E. 4. m. 1. n. 9.
An. 3 Ed. 4. confirmed the name, style, title and honor of Duke of Suffolk,
his Father having been created Duke of the same place by King Henry VI. Then,
in the 18th year of Edward IV. he was constituted Lieutenant of Ireland, Pat.
an. 1 H. 7. p. 1. m. 14.
for the space of 20 years; and An. 1 H. 7. had granted to him the Office of
Constable of Wallingford Castle. He departed this life in the year 1491. An 7
H. 7. and was interred in the Collegiate Church at Wing field, Catal. of Nob.
by R. B.
leaving Issue by Elizabeth his Wife, Cart. 5, 6 and 7 E. 4. n. 5.
five sons and four daughters, De la Pole, viz. Azure, a Fess inter three Lions
faces Or. a Label of three points Argent.
viz. John de la Pole Earl of Lincoln eldest son, who was by Letters Patent
dated the 13th of March, An. 7 Ed. 4 created Earl of Lincoln; which honor
(upon the loss of his former Patents) was regranted unto him the 4th of July,
An. 8 Ed. 4. being the year next following; Pat. 1. R. 3. n. 2.
which Patents were followed with a confirmation of King Richard III. on the
14th of February, An. 1 R. 3. Pol. Virg. 572. n. 10 and 20.
This Earl John married Margaret Fitz-Alan, daughter of Thomas Earl of Arundel,
and was slain (without Issue) at the Battle of Stoke in the County of
Nottingham, taking part with Martin Swarth against King Henry VII. on the 20th
day of June, Ibid.
and second year of the said Kings Reign, 1487.

Edmond de la Pole Earl of Suffolk, second son of John Duke of Suffolk and
Elizabeth of York, De la Pole, viz. Azure a Fess inter three Leopards faces Or,
Impaling Azure, a Bend Or, Scrope.
was the last Earl of Suffolk of this Family (a bold, stout and courageous
Man, but very intemperate in his anger) he happened to kill a mean Man; Pol.
Virg. p. 609.
which fact King Henry VII. pardoned, but yet suffered him to be arraigned for
the same; which this Edmond took so ill, that he shortly after departed the
Realm, without the Kings leave, and went into Flanders to his Aunt Margaret
Duchess of Burgundy; but upon his return, Ibid.
so excused himself, that he obtained the Kings Pardon; but not long after,
while Prince Arthur's marriage with Katherine of Spain was in agitation, and
the peoples heads were busied with delights, Ibid. n. 30 and 40.
he, with his brother Richard departed the second time into Flanders, against
the Kings Will and Knowledge, Herbert Hist. of H. 8. p. 35 and 36.
where he remained as an Exile; but hearing that some of his friends were put
to death, and others committed to perpetual imprisonment, he wandered up and
down, both in France and Germany; Catal. of Nob. by R. B.
where finding no place of rest or safety, he yielded himself into the hands of
Philip Duke of Burgundy and Earl of Flanders, and was at last brought into
England, and beheaded on Tower Hill for Treason, on the 5th of April, in the
year 1513. An. 5 H. 8. His Wife was Margaret daughter of Richard Lord Scroope,
by whom he had Issue a daughter named Anne, a Nun in the Minoresses without
Aldgate in the Suburbs of London.

Humphrey de la Pole, third son of John Duke of Suffolk and Elizabeth of York,
was of the Church. Edward fourth son, was Archdeacon of Richmond. Richard fifth
son, was slain at the Battle of Pavie in Italy, fought An. 1525. Katherine de
la Pole eldest daughter, was married to William Lord Stourton. Anne second
daughter, a Nun at Syon. Dorothy third daughter: and Elizabeth fourth daughter,
was the Wife of Henry Lovell Lord Morley.

13. The Figure of the Seal of this Margaret, expressed by Olivarius Vredius in
Sigilla Commit. Flandrie p. 125. is exhibited in the 353 page of this fifth
Book: On which, her Arms, being France and England quarterly, are impaled on a
Lozenge with those of Charles Duke of Burgundy her Husband, who did bear
Quarterly of four, the first Azure 3 Flowers de Lys Or, a Border gobony, Argent
and Gules, Burgundy Modern. 2 Party per Pale, Bendy of 6 Or and Azure a Border
Gules, Ancient Burgundy, and Sable a Lion rampant, Or, Brabant. The third
quarter as the second, the fourth as the first. Over all, on an Inescocheon Or,
a Lion rampant Sable Flanders. On the sides of which Lozenge are the Letters C.
for Charles and M. for Margaret, tied together with true Love-Knots, the Seal
being circumscribed Sigillum Margarete durisse burgundy brabancie comitisse
flandrie et atthesie.
MARGARET of YORK, Duchess of Burgundy, the third daughter of Richard Duke of
York and Cecily Nevil, Histoire de la Maison de France Tom. 1. p. 751 and 752
was the third Wife of Charles the last Duke of Burgundy of the French Line,
married unto him in the City of Dame, by the Bishop of Salisbury, upon the 9th
day of July, being Sunday, Stow Chr. p. 421. Col. 2.
in the 8th year of King Edward IV. her Brother, An. 1468. by whom she had not
any Issue.

This Charles was a great assistant to King Edward IV. his Brother-in Law,
being expelled his Kingdom by King Henry VI. and was lastly slain at Nancy,
upon the fifth day of January, 1477. His Body was honorably buried in St
George's Church there, where he had erected for him a magnificent Sepulcher,
with his Effigies placed thereon, done to the life, the Monument being
circumscribed with this Epitaph.

Le pacis pinguit, te teduit atque quietis
CAROLE, sicque jacis? jamque quiesce tibi.
Afterward, in the year 1553. the Emperor Charles V. caused the Body of this
Charles to be removed from Nancy to the Church of our Lady at Bruges, and to be
deposited in the Sepulcher of Mary of Burgundy his only daughter, before the
high Altar. Francis Vis. St Alhan. in vit^ H. 7.
The Duchess Margaret outlived her Husband many years, in which she was an
unwearied assertor of her own Family (the House of York) against King Henry
VII. and the forger of those counterfeit Plantagenets, Perkin and Lambert, that
so disquieted the Government of England: insomuch that the Kings friends called
her Juno, being to King Henry as Juno was to Aeneas, stirring both Heaven and
Earth against him.

In the year 1500 she was Godmother to the Emperor Charles V. which name he had
at the Font in memory of this Charles Duke of Burgundy his great Grandfather;
and An. 1503. she departed this life at Malines, where she was interred in the
Church of the Cordeliers.

13. VRSVLA of YORK, fourth daughter of Richard Duke of York; of whom no other
mention is made, than of her name.

portrait of Edward IV K EDWARD IV
portrait of Edward V K EDWARD V
portrait of Richard III K RICHARD III
13. EDWARD IV. Anno 1460. March 4.
KING of ENGLAND and FRANCE, and LORD of IRELAND.
CHAP. V.
The Figure of this Kings Seal (being of Green Wax) is exhibited in the 353
page of this fifth Book: on the one side of which is represented the Figure of
the King on his Throne in Royal Robes; in his right hand holding a Scepter, and
in his left a Mound and Cross: and is the first King of England, that in his
Seal is Crowned with an Arched Diadem: On the right side, under his Royal
Seat, is placed a Rose, and opposite thereto a Sun, with which Devises, his
Throne is adorned, and the ground of his Counterseal, diapred, whereon he is
represented on Horseback, his Surcoat, Shield, and the Caparizons of his Steed,
charged with the Arms of France and England quarterly. His Chapeau is encircled
with a Crown Royal (the first that appears in a Seal.) Upon which is placed the
Lion, his Crest. The said Seal is on both sides, circumscribed, Edwardus. dei.
gracia. rex. anglie. et. francie et. dominus. hibernie. (every word being
separated by a Rose) and annexed to King Edward's Charter, bearing date at
Westminster, the 14th day of June, an. 22 Ed. 4, Ex Registro Westmonast. The
Seal of his Earldom of March (represented in page 354.) is charged with an
Escocheon of Mortimer and Burgh, quarterly, Ensigned with a Coronet, and
supported by two Lions rampant guardant (Argent) their Tails passed between
their Legs, and turned over their Backs: which were the Supporters of Mortimer
Earl of March, and so continued by King Edward IV. for that Earldom. This white
Lion is depicted in the Window of the Dining Room of Dr. Durel, one of the
Prebends of his Majesty's Chapel Royal in Windsor Castle; over which is a
Scrole thus inscribed, Ex comitatu de March. There is also painted a Faulcon
Argent, within a Fetter-Lock closed, Or; superscribed Ex duratu de York; and
in the same Window, a Dragon sedant Sable corned Or, with this superscription,
Ex comitatu de Vulster, which King Edward used to show his descent from the
Burghs Earls of Vlster, whose Cognizance was this Dragon. In a Window of the
Staircase in the said Lodgings, I find two other Badges of this King, the one
being a Bull Sable, corned and hoofed Or, and over it a Scrole inscribed, Ex
honor de Clare, which either did signify his descent from Elizabeth, the
youngest sister and coheir of Gilbert de Clare, the last Earl of Gloucester,
who, by John de Burgo or Burgh, was Mother of William Earl of Vlster, Father of
Elizabeth his only Child, Wife of Lionel Duke of Clarence: or to show his
Pedigree from the said Lyonel, from whom he derived his Title to the Crown; for
Clare and Clarence are Synonymaes, and signify the same thing or matter.

The other Badge or Cognizance is a white Heart attired, accolled with a
Coronet, and chained Or, on a Mount, Vert; and over it, on the Scrole is
written, Ex Rege Ricardo; which he also made use of, in honor of King Richard
II. whose Devise it was, and who an. 1387. had nominated Roger Mortimer Earl of
March his Successor in the Kingdom of England (as being son of Philipe only
Child of Lyonel Duke of Clarence, third son of King Edward III. (King Henry IV.
being son of John Duke of Lancaster, a fourth son of that King) which Roger was
great Grandfather to this King Edward IV.

I find his Escocheon supported in three several places; First, in an
East-Window of Trinity Church in Chester, his Arms are painted standing upon a
Faulcon within a Fetterlock Ensigned with a Crown, and supported with the Bull
of Clare, and the Lion of March. Secondly, over the Library Gate in the
University of Cambridge, where his whole Achievement is carved, the Arms are
supported with the two Lions of March; and, Thirdly, upon the Tomb of Oliver
King on the South Side the Choire of Windsor Chapel, where his Escocheon is
painted, supported with the Lion of March, and the white Heart of King Richard
II. and superscribed, Rex Edwardus quartus; from which my Reader may note, that
he never omitted the Lion of March in his Supporters.

The Badges of this King Edward IV. were the White Rose and the Fetterlock
beforementioned, and the Sun after the Battle of Mortimers Cross, where three
Suns were seen, immediately conjoining in one.


HEnry the eldest son of Richard Duke of York deceasing in his insancy, Catal.
of Nob. by R. B.
this Edward his second son (by Cecily his Wife, the youngest daughter of
Ralphe Nevil the first Earl of Westmorland) whose birth at Roan, Speed Chron.
p. 851. Col. 2.
the Metropolis of Normandy, bears date on the 29th day of April, 1441.) was in
the life time of his said Father, as his eldest son surviving, called Earl of
March; Holingsh. p. 660. n. 10.
through which Earldom, and the Mortimers, he derived his Royal Title: who
having won the Battle at Mortimers Cross near Hereford (although the Lords his
Confederates had lost that of St Albans) from Ludlowe hastes toward London,
being on his way seconded by the stout Earl of Warwick Richard Nevil, to the
great increase of his numbers and power; Ibid. p. 661 n. 30. and 50.
which so terrified Queen Margaret, now ready to take possession of the City of
London, that with King Henry and her son Prince Edward, she retires, and the
City unresolved whether Prince to obey, consult on their safest estate; when,
on the sudden, March with Warwick enter their Gates; whose warlike
countenances so daunt the adverse party, that they begin with the first to make
his way to the Throne, and the Nobility and Clergy offer him their services to
establish his claim; whereupon the Earl of March (now Duke of York) makes known
his Title to the Crown, Ibid. n. 60. b.
and declares how the Body of the whole Parliament formerly had thereunto
consented, and Henry himself subscribed with his own Hand; whose possession,
though now carried through three descents, yet what right Lancaster had, they
all knew, and how insufficient this last Man was for Rule, France to their
dishonor did witness, where all was lost through his simplicity and neglect.

Things thus urged, their voices went current that Edward was the undoubted
King, whereunto the Londoners the sooner yielded for that his dreadful Army was
then encamped in St John's Field, in the amidst of which, upon Sunday the
third of March, he was proclaimed King; Anno 1461.
and upon the next day, with all Pomp attended to Westminster, and set upon the
Kings Seat in the Hall, where holding the Scepter of St Edward in his hand, the
voice of the people was again demanded, and again granted.

But before he could be Crowned, he is forced to march toward the North, the
13th of the same Month, having the day before in Cheapside beheaded one Walter
Walker a London Grocer, for some words spoken against him. By easy journeys he
comes to Pomfrect, whence sending the Lord Fitz-Walter to stop the passage at
Ferry-brig; King Henry's Army from York advances, commanded by Henry Beaufort
Duke of Somerset, Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland, and John Lord Clifford,
the last whereof setting upon those that guarded the Ferrybrig, defeated them,
with the death of the Lord Fitz-Walter, and the bastard of Salisbury: whereof
the Earl of Warwick being informed, came posting to King Edward, and killing
his Horse in his presence, protested to stand by him to the death; whereupon
King Edward appointing William Lord Fauconberg, and Sir Walter Blount to lead
the Vantguard, they upon their march near Dardingdale encounter with the Lord
Clifford, whom, with Sir John Nevil, Grandson to the Earl of Westmorland, they
slew, and put their Forces to flight. The next day, being Palm Sunday, King
Edward's Van led as before by Fauconbridge and Blount, The bloody Battle of
Towton.
came into a plain field near unto Towton; from whence, taking a full view of
King Henry's Army, which they found to be 60000, and their own not above 40600,
proclamation was made that no quarter should be given; and Fauconberg advancing
(the Enemy now in sight) gave direction to his Archers, that upon a Signal by
him given, every man to shoot a flight Arrow provided for that purpose, and
then to fall back three paces and stand; which the Enemy answering with their
Bows, all their Arrows fell short, and sticking in the ground, when they came
to a close Encounter, so gauled their legs, that it proved a main cause of
their overthrow, though the Battle continued ten hours doubtful, till the Earl
of Northumberland, the Lords Beaumont, Gray, Dacres and Wells, with many
Knights and Gentlemen were slain. The Dukes of Somerset and Exceter fled,
leaving the bloodiest Victory behind them to King Edward that since the
Conquest has been seen in England; there falling on both sides 35781 persons,
and not one prisoner taken besides the Earl of Devonshire.

King Henry with his Queen being then at York, John Lesly.
fly to Barwick, where leaving the Duke of Somerset, they pass into Scotland,
where, upon surrender of the Castle of Barwick, they have fair promises of
assistance from that King, whilst Queen Margaret and Prince Edward her son set
sail for France, and arriving there, obtain of King Lewis XI. that all friends
of King Edward are prohibited stay or traffic in his Dominions, which to King
Henry's is freely allowed.

This great Victory thus obtained, King Edward advances to York, where taking
down the heads of his Father and his Partakers, there set upon Poles, the Earl
of Devonshire, with three others are set up in their places; whence returning
to London, he is triumphantly received, and upon his entrance into the Tower,
having created several Knights, he rode from thence (on the 28th of June,
1461.) to the City of Westminster, His Coronation, 1461.
with great solemnity, Edward Halle in an. 1 Ed. 4.
and was Anointed and Crowned in the Abbey of St Peter the day following.

Upon which, Ibidem.
in a Parliament held there, he repealed all the Acts of King Henry prejudicial
to his Title, wherein John Earl of Oxford, Aubrey de Vere his son, Sir John
Tiddingham Knight, William Tirrel and Ralphe Montgomery Esquires, were without
answer condemned and beheaded; and to encourage his friends, he created his
brothers George, Duke of Clarence, and Richard, Duke of Gloucester: John Lord
Nevil, brother to Richard Earl of Warwick, he made first a Viscount, then
Marquis Mountacute; Henry Bourchier, brother to the Archbishop of Canterbury,
Earl of Essex; and William Nevil Lord Fauconberg, Earl of Kent: which two last,
with the Lords Audley and Clinton, he sent to scower the Seas, who landing in
Britain, Anno 1462.
took the Town of Conquest and Isle of Be, and then returned; at which time
Henry Beaufort Duke of Somerset, Ralph Percy, and diverse others, submitted to
King Edward's mercy, Anno 1463.
who freely pardoning them, declared the same to all that would do the like.

Queen Margaret having obtained of the French King the aid of 500 men, lands at
Tinmouth, but being forced to Sea again, is by tempest driven to Barwick, where
she saves her life, but looses her ships and goods; whereupon, shortly after,
having got together a great number of Scots and other Assistants, she, with the
King her Husband, The Battle of Exham, May 15.
enter Northumberland, where, near Exham, her Army being encompassed by the
Marquis Montacute, was with much slaughter overcome; Henry Beauford Duke of
Somerset (who had lately revolted) the Lords Roos, Hungerford, Molins,
Wentworth and Hussy, Sir John Findern and Sir Ralph Gray Knights, with others,
taken Prisoners, the first whereof was presently beheaded at Exham, and the
rest not long after at Newcastle; Edw. Hall in an. 3 E. 4.
and Sir Ralph Gray being first solemnly degraded, his gilt Spurs cut from his
Heels by the Master Cook, John Stows Annals.
his Sword broken over his Head, his Coat Armor rent, another reversed put on
by the King of Arms, was so led to his execution. Richard Grafton.
But King Henry himself escaped into Lancashire ( Grafton says into Scotland)
the Queen with her son into France; where also Jasper Earl of Pembroke the
Kings half Brother, with some other persons of Note flying, lived in great
misery.

But King Edward at this time no less willing to perform the Office of King as
well in Peace as War, Anno 1464.
for three days together (in Michaelmas Term) sat publicly with his Judges on
the Kings Bench, not only to inform himself of the orders of that Court, but to
reform what was needful both at Bench and Bar: ordering likewise the Officers
of his Exchequer to moderate their Fees, and to be more intentive to the
benefit of the Subject, than their own unjust gain.

And now, being about 23 years of age, King Edward is advised by his Counsel to
take a Wife, for the preservation of his Posterity; for which, after several
proffers, no place was thought so convenient to match in, as France, nor no
Lady for all personal qualities, and many reasons of State so fit as the Lady
Bona, Ibid. fol. 123.
daughter to Lewis Duke of Savoye, sister to the present Queen of France, and
now residing in the French Court. To treat of which Marriage the Earl of
Warwick is immediately dispatched into France; to whose Proposals the French
very readily condescend: But King Edward not so fortunate, hunting in the mean
time in Witchwood Forest, and coming to the Manor of Grafton, happened there
to be so bewitched with the Lady Elizabeth Gray, John Hardings continuer.
the young Widow of Sir John Gray of Groby, that it had almost proved his
ruin; who applying herself to him a Suitor for some Lands as a Jointure left
her by her Husband slain against King Edward at the Battle of St Alban, so
prevailed over him, that he became a Suitor to her; for what, since by wanton
persuasion he could not obtain, he sought and did accomplish by too hasty a
Marriage, His Marriage, May 1. 1464.
at his Manor of Grafton in Northamptonshire, upon the first day of May, 1464.
and on the 26th of May, in the year following she was crowned at Westminster
with all due solemnity.

The Figure of this Queen Elizabeth's Seal (of red Wax) is represented in the
352 page of this fifth Book, which contains an Escocheon of King Edwards, and
her Arms, and Quarteterings, impaled, under a Coronet composed of Crosses
patee, and as many Flowers de Lize, and between them 8 Flowers of a lesser
size: and supported by the white Lion of March on the right side, and on the
left with a Greyhound, accolled and chained, which last was the Supporter of
the Nevils Earls of Westmerland, as appears in their Seals. The Queen bears
therein, Quarterly of 6 pieces, 3 in Chief, and 3 in Base: The first quarter
is, Argent, a Lion, rampant, queve forche Gules, crowned Proper, and was the
Paternal Coat Armor of her Mothers Father Peter Earl of St Paul, Surnamed of
Luxemburg. Secondly, Quarterly, Gules a Starr Argent, and Azure semee of Flower
de Luces Or, the third as the second, the fourth as the first, by the name of
Baux, and were the Arms of this Queen Elizabeth's Grandmother, Margaret the
daughter of Francis de Baux Duke of Andree. Thirdly, Barry of 10 Argent and
Azure, over all a Lion rampant Gules: Luzignian Ciprus. Fourthly, Gules, three
Bendletts, Argent, a Chief parted per Fess, Argent charged with a red Rose, and
Or; being the Arms of her great Grandmother Susan daughter of the Earl of
Vrsins, and Wife of Francis de Baux aforesaid, Duke of Andree. The fifth is,
Gules, 3 Pallets varry, Argent and Azure on a Chief Or a Label of five points
Azure, borne by the name of St Paul, and was the Arms of (...) Countess of St
Paul, the Wife of Guy of Luxemburg,, the great Grandfathers Father of Queen
Elizabeth, who in the sixth and last quarter placed her Paternal Coat of
Woodvile, viz. Argent a Fesse and Canton, Gules. Thus were these several Coats
Marshalled for the honor of this Queen, to show the illustrious Nobility of
her Maternal D^scent (and impaled in the Royal Escocheon with those of King
Edward IV. who first of all our Kings married his Subject) in imitation of
which many afterward did the like; which so increased, that of late some have
packed near One hundred in one Shield. And this is to show their right; for it
was objected against Richard Duke of York, when he claimed the Crown as heir to
Lionel Duke of Clarence, that he did not bear the said Dukes Arms: But he
answered thereunto, That he might lawfully have done it, but did forbear it for
a time, as he did from making his claim to the Crown. The Titl son this Seal,
and those in her Instrument, to which it is annexed, are alike, in which she
writes herself Elizabetha Deigracia Regina Anglie et Francie Domina Hibernie.
It bears date, sub magno sigillo nostro apud Castrum de Wyndesore vicesimo
sexto die Maij anno Regni metuendissimi Domini mei Regis Edwardi quarti post
conquestum Anglie sexto. Ex Chartis Dom: Hen: Com: Huntington and F. 3 fol. 60.
usque 65. in Coll. Arm.

The same Impalement of King Edward IV. and this Queen Elizabeth, is painted on
a Banner in I. 2. Standards in Coll. Armorum? and her Quarterings aloue were
painted in the fourth West-Window of the Cloisters at Fotheringhay.


This Queen Elizabeth, Edward Halle fol. 124. b.
the daughter of Sir Richard Widevile Knight. afterward created Earl Rivers (by
his Wife Jaquetta Duchess of of Bedford, the Relict of John Duke of Bedford,
and daughter of Peter of Luxemburg Earl of St Paul) was King Edward's Wife 18
years, 11 months, and 9 days, not more fortunate in attaining to the height of
worldly honor than unhappy in the murder of her two sons, and loss of her own
liberty: for in the beginning of her Husbands Reign, she was forced to take
sanctuary at Westminster, where her first son Prince Edward was born; and at
his death did the like for fear of, the Protector Richard Duke of Gloucester.
And lastly, having all her Possessions seized on by King Henry VII. lived in
mean Estate in the Monastery of Bermondsey in Southwarke, where not long after
she left the troubles of her life, and enjoyed a quiet Burial Place by her
later Husband King Edward IV. at Windsor, of whom she had obtained license to
finish the Foundation of Queens-Colledge in Cambridge, begun by Queen Margaret
of Anjou her immediate Predecessor, which was accomplished in the sixth year of
his Reign.

Warwick being informed that the wanton King had got a new Wife, and that in
his courting the Lady Bona he had only beaten the bush abroad, but King Edward
at home had taken the Bird, upon his return dissembled his discontent, till
drawing to his party his two Brothers, the Archbishop of York and the Marquis
Mountacute, attempting likewise the Kings two Brothers, Clarence and Gloucester,
but not daring to trust the reservedness of the latter, he proceeds upon the
first; whom he found as ready to agree in complaints against his Brother,
Richard Grafton j. 200.
as the Earl of Warwick was to urge the wrongs he had done him by the King:
which bred such a compliance betwixt them, that Clarence taking to Wife the
Earls daughter, was then acquainted with his intention to restore King Henry;
to which the Duke of Clarence gave approbation, and promised his utmost
assistance.

Whilst thus much good is proposed for that sad Prince, Anno 1465.
he miserably wandering in disguise from one place to another, was at last
discovered and taken in Yorkshire; from whence, with his Legs tied under the
Horse-belly, he is carried toward London; but by the way is met by the Earl of
Warwick, by whom (though now privately his best Friend) he is committed to the
Tower, together with Dr. Manning Dean of Windsor, Dr. Beadle, and one Ellerton,
all taken in company of King Henry.

Richard Earl of Warwick having spent the last year in the forgeing of his
designs, Anno 1468.
and now beginning to stir, sends to his two Brothers the Archbishop and the
Marquis, who in Yorkshire presently raise a commotion; against whom, King
Edward sending William Herbert Earl of Pembroke, The Battle of Hedgecot or
Banbury.
with an Army of Welsh, Edward Hall f. 20^ b.
who having in a first Encounter at Hedgecote slain Sir Henry Nevil, and being
now upon the point of Victory, one John Clapham, a Servant of the Earl of
Warwicks, came in with 500 Country Fellows, and displaying his Lords Banner, on
which was painted his white Bear, cried a Warwick, a Warwick; which the Earls
party hearing, turned their backs, and were to the number of 5000 slain, the
Earl of Pembroke himself, and Sir Richard Herbert his Brother, having fought
bravely, were made Prisoners, John Stows Annals.
and at Banbury beheaded. Whereupon the Northamptonshire Men, under the conduct
of Robin of Riddsdale, rising with the Rebels, came to Grafton, where they
seiz^d upon Earl Rivers (Father to the Queen) with his son Sir John Widevile;
brought them to Northampton, and there took off their heads; upon which the
Earl of Warwick joined them; but hearing of King Edwards approach with a
numerous Army, he, with George Duke of Clarence his Son-in-Law, retreat
Northwards, keeping King Edward in suspense with Proposals of Accommodation,
till at last near Warwick, they surprise him in his Bed, and send him Prisoner
to the Archbishop of York at Midelham; from whence not long after he made his
escape and got to York, and thence to Lancaster, where, with the Lord Hastings,
raising some Forces he came to London.

Warwick and Clarence upon this, preparing to raise more Forces, by
intermediation of some Lords, an Interview (with Oaths of security on both
sides taken) is agreed on, to be in Westminster Hall, between King Edward and
his Brother Clarence, with the other discontented Lords, which came to nothing;
but parting worse friends than they met, the King removes to Canterbury, and
the Duke and Earl to Warwick, which they take in their way to Lincoln, where
Sir Robert Wells, with their Forces under his command was appointed to meet
them; whom leaving there, they depart Northward to raise more; during which
time, King Edward sends to the Lord Wells, Edward Halle in an. 9 E. 4.
together with his Son-in-Law Sir Thomas Dymock, to come before him, who
fearing the worst, took sanctuary; but upon the Royal Word for safety; they
appeared; whereupon the King commanding the Lord Wells to write to his son Sir
Robert to forsake the Earls party, he did accordingly, but not prevailing they
were both beheaded; whereof Sir Robert Wells having advice, The Battle of
Stamford or Loosecoate field, 1470.
and that King Edward in the head of a great Army was advanced to Stamford, he,
to revenge his Fathers death, though he knew himself too weak, adventured to
give the King Battle, where he being taken Prisoner, lost the day, with 10000
men, and his head into the bargain.

The sad news of this defeat quickly put Warwick and the Confederate Lords upon
consultations for their safety, who thereupon at Dartmouth take shipping for
Calais, where they are denied entrance by Vawclere the chief Captain, Phil.
Comines l. 3. cap. 4.
from whence therefore weighing anchor for Normandy, they take in their passage
several rich ships of Burgundy, and land in France; and being assisted by that
King, they not long after land at Dartmouth again, and march Northward; whom
King Edward pursuing, finding few that willingly adhered to him, and what
flocking there was from all parts to the Earl of Warwick, at Nottingham
forsakes his Army, and with his Brother the Duke of Gloucester and the Lord
Hastings comes to Lyn; where finding two Holland Vessels and one English, ready
to sail, they with about 700 men go on board them, and stand over for the Coast
of Flanders.

Upon this, the Duke of Clarence and Earl of Warwick march to London, and Queen
Elizabeth from the Tower removes to sanctuary at Westminster; and is there
delivered of her son Prince Edward; when Warwick entering the Tower with John
Earl of Oxford, and Jasper Earl of Pembroke, remove King Henry (now nine years
a Prisoner) to his own Lodgings; from whence, King Henry is restored.
October 6, they rode in triumph with him through London to the Bishops Place,
where he rested till the 13th, on which day he went in Procession Crowned to St
Paul's; presently after which, a Parliament is called at Westminster, wherein
King Edward is declared a Usurper, his Brother the Duke of Gloucester a Traitor,
and both their Inheritances confiscated to King Henry.

About this time Jasper Earl of Pembroke going into Wales, found there the Lord
Henry son to Margaret daughter and heir of John Beaufort the first Duke of
Somerset, not then above ten years old, and fostred with the Lady Herbert; him
the Earl brought away with him to King Henry; of whom the King spoke
prophetically to this purpose, Much striving there is between us, but this is
he to whom both We and our Adversaries must submit, when at that time many of
both Houses were alive to precede him.

Shortly after this, Anno 1471.
King Edward being furnished with 18 tall ships, 200 Dutch men, and 50000
Florens of Gold, by means of the Duke of Burgundy, lands at Ravenspur in
Yorkshire, from whence coming to York, and finding there cold entertainment, he
thinks it best to change his pretense, and in imitation of his Father (who in
like manner no less than thrice forswore himself) there took his Oath,
receiving the Sacrament upon it, that he only came to recover his Inheritance,
meaning perhaps the Crown (as some will say to save him from Perjury) in every
place where he came Proclaiming King Henry himself, and wearing an Estrich
Feather, which was Prince Edwards Livery; by this means, and the return of the
Duke of Clarence to his Loyalty, he came to London, and is there joyfully
received of the Citizens, who deliver King Henry into his hands.

Warwick being upon his march also toward London, Richard Grafton fol. 217.
had this bad news at St Albans, and thereupon advances to Barnet, upon the
13th of April, being Easter Eve, where King Edward (having King Henry there a
Prisoner) with his Forces gave him the meeting, so that upon Easter day in the
morning began that terrible Fight called Barnetfield, Battle of Barnet.
whereof the Earl of Warwick had certainly been Victor had not a strange
mischance happened, by reason of a Mist, which so confounded the Earl of
Oxford's men, who wearing a Star with Streams on their Liveries, and King
Edward's a Sun, were mistaken and shot at by the Earl of Warwicks Archers;
whereupon Oxford crying Treason, fled with 800 men, by which their Army became
wholly defeated; Richard Earl of Warwick with his Brother John Marquis
Mountacute, sold their lives at a dear rate, Edward Hall.
there being slain above 10000 on both sides, whereof on the Kings, the Lords
Cromwell, Say, and the son of Mountjoye; on the Earls party, the Duke of
Exceter left for dead, got to Westminster, and there took sanctuary; the Bodies
of the two Nevils put into one Coffin, were brought to London, where for three
days they lay barefaced, and were afterward buried with their Ancestors in the
Priory of Bisham.

And now (kept back by Tempest) when it was too late, came Queen Margaret (with
her son Prince Edward, who had newly married Warwicks younger daughter) from
Harfleur, and landed at Weymouth; but seeking to get into Wales to Jasper Earl
of Pembroke, The Battle of Tewkesbury, 1471. May 4.
she was crossed by King Edward at Tewkesbury, on the fourth day of May, 1471.
An. 11 Ed. 4. and there in Battle overthrown, her son slain by the Duke of
Gloucester, Richard Grafton f. 221. a. and ^.
and herself sent Prisoner to London, and afterward ransomed by the French
King. Edmond Beaufort Duke of Somerset, and his Brother John, John Longstrother
Prior of St John's, Sir Gervase Clifton, Sir Thomas Tresham, with twelve other
Knights and Gentlemen) before Richard Duke of Gloucester, as Constable of
England) were the 7th of May condemned and beheaded in the 11th year of King
Edward's Reign, An. 1471. Upon this defeat Thomas Bastard of Falconberg, then
at Sea with a great Navy, and 17000 men, came up the Thames to London,
demanding the restoration of King Henry VI where being denied entrance, he
fired Aldgate, but was by Robert Basset and Ralph Jocelin, with the Citizens,
stoutly repulsed, and pursued as far as Blackwall; for which good service, King
Edward upon his coming to London, rewarded the two Aldermen and Vrswick the
Recorder, with the Order of Knighthood.

Edward Halle f. 223.
And now to make sure work, and that King Henry might not any more be the cause
of disturbance, Anno 1473.
the Duke of Gloucester coming to the Tower, and finding him at his Devotion, as
not concerned at these distractions, with his Dagger in his Hand, stabbed him to
the heart, a Parliament now declaring him an Usurper, and King Edward lawful
King, when not half a year before another had declared the quite contrary.

Lastly, Ibid. fol. 223. b.
to be fully secured and rid of all suspected Persons, King Edward sent the
Archbishop of York prisoner to the Castle of Guisnes, and the Earl of Oxford,
(who had lately surrendered himself) to that of Hammes, Edward Halle fol. 224.
where for twelve years together he remained so close, that his Lady (not being
suffered to come near him) was, for want of maintenance, forced to sustain her
self by her Needle. Ibid.
Jasper Earl of Pembroke, and Henry Earl of Richmond flying into the Duke of
Bretagnes Country, lived there very obscurely; but the Duke of Exceter (though
Brother-in Law both to King Edward and the Duke of Burgoigne) was by Comines,
as himself relates, seen in that Country barefoot begging his bread; and
though afterward the Duke allowed him some small Pension, yet within a short
while he was found dead, and stripped upon Dover Sands.

King Edward being now quiet at home, Richard Grafton f. 226. b.
Anno 1474.
is persuaded by the Duke of Burgoigne to make War upon France; when sailing
thither with 1500 men of the Nobility and Gentry, 15000 Archers, and 8000
common Soldiers, he sends before him his Herald, to demand the Crown of the
King of France; who, having read his Letters, returns this Answer, It is far
better for the new King thy Master to trust us an old Adversary than two such
new Deceivers, as (if he comply with them) he will find the Duke of Burgoigne,
and the Earl of St Paul to be: And so commend me to thy Master. Which the
Herald promising to do, was, with an honorable reward of 300 Crowns, and a
rich piece of Crimson-Velvet for himself, and a Present of a stately Horse, a
wild Boar and a Wolf, for the King, graciously dismissed.

This Answer King Edward receiving at Calais, at first gave no credit to; but
afterward finding true, he was willing to hearken to Proposals of Peace, which
not long after was for nine years concluded at Amiens, upon these Conditions:

That the French King should pay to the King of England forthwith with the Sum
of 75000 Crowns, and thenceforth annually 50000 Crowns during King Edward's
life, and that, within one year, the Lady Elizabeth, King Edward 's Daughter
should be married to the Dauphin. In which Articles the Dukes of Burgoigne and
Bretagne, were included, if they would accept thereof; Richard Grafton f. 231.
b.
which the Duke of Burgoigne coming to the English Camp, after many reproaches
to King Edward, refused.

Hereupon great shows of friendship passed between the two Kings, and an
Enterview sumptuously performed at a Town called Picquiney, three miles from
Amiens, seated in a bottom upon the River of Soame, over which was erected a
strong Bridge, with a grate in the middle; at which both the Kings being met,
Ibid. fol. 233. b.
took their Oaths reciprocally to observe the new made Peace, King Edward
having with him his Brother the Duke of Clarence and the Earl of
Northumberland, and at his back his whole Army; and with the French King, came
his Brother the Cardinal, and John Duke of Bourbon, with 800 Men at Arms;
where, after many Complements, he invited King Edward to Paris; but the King
wisely refusing the courtesy, had the Composition Money paid him; Edward Halle
fol. 234. b.
and the Hostages being delivered on both sides, he returned to Calais, and so
for England.

Where his domestic troubles being thoroughly quieted, Anno 1475.
he casts a jealous eye upon Henry Earl of Richmond, Rich Grafton f. 237. a and
b.
the eldest Son of Margaret the daughter and heir of John Beaufort Duke of
Somerset; which Henry had fled into Brittany with Jasper Earl of Pembroke his
Uncle, and by continual solicitations, and no small Sums of Money, so works
upon Francis Duke of Britain, that the Earl of Richmond is delivered into the
hands of his Ambassadors, who pretended their Master King Edward (to end all
contentions betwixt him and the House of Lancaster, of which Earl Henry was a
Branch) would marry him to his eldest daughter the Lady Elizabeth (which
afterward came to pass) but it now happened, that the Ambassadors and the Earl
being stayed at St Malo^s by contrary winds; Duke Francis, by one John Chevlet,
an able Councellor, and in high esteem among the Nobility of Britain, is made
sensible of his error, in delivering up the Earl to King Edward, against the
Laws of Hospitality and Sanctuary, who instead of marrying him to his daughter,
did really design to espouse Richmond to a Grave, thereby to secure himself
from future troubles.

Upon this the Duke of Britain with all speed sends his Treasurer Peter
Landoys to St Malo^s, who so dexterously managed his affair with the
Ambassadors, that the Earl of Richmond found opportunity to escape into an
inviolable Sanctuary; upon which they depart without other satisfaction than
assurance from the Duke, that Richmond should be so confined, that King Edward
might receive no disturbance from him.

And now, Anno 1478.
by the pregnant ambition and practice of the Duke of Gloucester the King's
Brother, Rich Grafton f. 247. b.
George Duke of Clarence was first monument Alustrissimo et Potentissimo
Principi Georgio Duci Albemarliae, Comiti de Torington, Baroni Monck de
Potheridge, Beauchamp. et Teyes; Augustissimo Regi Carolo secundo ab intimis
Cubiculis, et Sanctioribus Consilijs, Omniumque Sacrae Regiae Majestatis
Exercituum Capitaneo Generali et Summo Duci, Magno Stabuli Magistro,
nobilijsimique Ordinis Garterij Equiti, Hanc Tumuli Serenissimi Regis Edwardi
4ti figuram in sacello Regio Windesoriensi siti, submisso cultu D,D,D:F:S

committed to the Tower, and shortly after drowned in a Butt of Malmesey, not
without the Kings knowledge, as was supposed, which however he afterward
repented.

About this time the Scots propounded a Marriage between the Kings eldest son
James Duke of Rothsay, Edward Hall fol. 242. b.
and the Lady- Cecily second daughter to King Edward, 1480.
whereto the King and Council readily agreeing, part of the Portion was paid,
on condition that if the Match should not succeed, the same to be returned
again; both which the Scots neglecting, King Edward sent an Army into Scotland,
Ibid. fol. 243.
under the command of the Duke of Gloucester; to whom the Scots readily
submitting, promised to pay the Money demanded, withal surrendering the Town and
Castle of Berwick, whereof the English had been then 21 years dispossessed;
notwithstanding which the Money was never paid.

After this King Edward understanding by his Lieger Ambassador in France,
Richard Grafton f. 248.
that that King not only denied payment of the forementioned annual Tribute of
50000 Crowns stipulated by the foresaid Articles of Peace, 1483.
but had also married the Dauphin to the Emperors Maximilians.
Sons daughter, Edward Halle fol. 238.
by advice of his Council he presently proclaimed War, but before preparations
could be sufficiently made, I. 3. f. 9. and I. 11. p. 84. in Coll. Arm.
he was himself prevented by death, His death, an. 1483.
deceasing of a Quartane Ague, at his Palace of Westminster, on the 9th of
April, An. 1483. in the 42 year of his age, and the 22 of his Reign, adding one
month and five days. He lies buried at Windsor in the new Chapel (whose
Foundation himself had laid, being all the Works of Piety by him left) under a
Monument of Steel polished and gilt, representing a pair of Gates, betwixt two
Towers, all of curious transparent Workmanship (after the Gothic manner) which
is placed in the North Arch (faced through with Touchstone) near to the High
Altar, as more exactly appears by the representation thereof here inserted.

The manner of this Kings Interment was thus, first, His burial.
The Corpse was covered from the Navel to the Knees, Ibid.
and so laid upon a board all naked, and so continued ten or twelve hours, that
all the Lords both Spiritual and Temporal then being in London or about might
look on him, and the Lord Mayor and his Brethren saw him so lying, and then he
was Seared. Then on the morrow after he was brought into the Now the House of
Commons.
Chapel of St Stephen, where there were three Masses Sung, the first of our
Lady, the second of the Trinity, the third of Requiem; and in the afternoon
there was Sung Dirige and Commendam: and at night, well watched with Nobles and
his Servants. He rested in this order eight days, and on Wednesday, being the
17th day of the month of April abovesaid, the Body was conveyed into the Abbey
of Westminster, borne by several Knights and Esquires that were for his Body,
having upon the Corpse a rich and large black Cloth of Gold, with a Cross of
Cloth of Silver, and above that a rich Canopy of Cloth Imperial, fringed with
Gold and black Silk, borne by four Knights, having at the Corners four Banners,
also borne by four Knights, the first of the Trinity, the second of our Lady,
the third of St George, and the fourth of St Edward. My Lord He was afterward
Duke of Norfolk.
Howard bare the Kings Banner before the Body, the Officers of Arms about him
on every side.

In the Hearse in Westminster Abbey, above the Body and Cloth of Gold
aforesaid, was a Personage like to the similitude of a King, in Habit Royal,
Crowned with a Crown Royal on his Head, holding in one hand a Scepter, and in
the other hand a Ball of Silver gilt, with a Cross patee.

When the Mass and all other solemnities were performed, the Body was placed in
a Chariot drawn by six Horses, and so with that Pomp that was required, went to
Charing Cross, where the Chariot was censed, and from thence to Syon, where it
was received that night with the usual Ceremonies; from thence, on the next
morning they departed in good order to Eaton, where they were received by the
Procession of Windsor; and at the Castle Gate the Archbishop of York and the
Bishop of Winchester censed the Corpse; and from thence they passed to the new
Church, where in the Quire was ordained a mavelous well wrought Hearse, being
that night watched with a good company of Nobles and Esquires of the Body, and
was there buried with all solemnity befitting so great and so victorious a
King; Ibid.
and had this Rhiming Epitaph composed for him registered in a Book in the
College Arms.

Carmina que letus cecini, cano tristia mestus, In Off. Arm. E. 6.

Heu pater, heu pastor, heu Rex, heu bellicus armis,
Heu doctus Solomon, Jonathas, Arthurus in host,
Heu vere legis custos, heu gloria plebis,
Edwardus quartus Anglis Rex, et decus orbis,
Tolitur a nobis Rosa mundi solque triumphi,
Absalom in vultu, Solomon tristi quasi custu,
Templi fundator castri novus et recreator,
Ast nobis natis qui sit jam queso beatus
Gallus obedit ejus vultu, luctusque subegit,
Protector Christi fidei victus nece tristi,
Celsa petens astri, jam lacuit colmina castri.
Sol latet obscuris gravibus dolet Anglia curis
Castra thoris plena psallentum sunt peramena,
Olim jam flentum, vix verba refer valentum,
Luce migrat celis, nona Rex noster Aprilis
Edwardi, Christi matris, precibusque Georgii,
M. semel. C. quarter octo decies tribus annis.
Tristi sed Regni vicenus trenus annus.
Natus quo mense necat hunc mors illius ense.
Anglia plange parens Regis sic neustria nutrix
Rex tuus ex jure moritur cur gallia conflet
Regem nunt Reges plangant, geniti genitores,
Princeps Duxque comes genitrix Regina proses
Spiritus exorent Reges petat alta Polorum
Omnes Angligene quia Rex et tutor eorum.
Comines gives King Edward this Character, viz. That he was the goodliest
Gentleman that ever his eyes beheld, Phil. Com. lib. 4. cap. 10.
Fair of Complexion, and of a Kingly Presence, of a Courageous Heart, Politic
in Counsel, and in adversity Undaunted, in prosperity rather Joyous than Proud,
in Peace Just and Merciful, in War Sharp and Fierce, and in Battle Bold and
Adventurous, yet not beyond discretion; and is no less commended when he
av^^^ded, than is his Manhood where he vanquished. Eight or nine Battles he
won, wherein to his great Renown he fought on Foot, and was ever Victor over
his Enemies. Much given he was to the Lusts of Youth, and had several
Concubines, of which the most memorable were, the Lady Elizabeth Lucy, and Jane
Shore; and in his later time, grown somewhat corpulent, which rather graced his
grave years, than disliked the eyes of his beholders.

Children of King EDWARD IV. by ELIZABETH WOODVILE his Wife.
14. EDWARD of YORK, Richard Grafton f. 240. a.
eldest Son of King Edward IV. known by the name of King Edward V. was
murdered by the procurement of his Uncle and Protector Richard Duke of
Gloucester, as more at large in his particular History Chap. 5.

14. On St George his day, 7 E. 4. the King being then at St John's, accompanied
with other Knights of the Garter, after Evensong in his Bedchamber, in the
presence of his Lords and his Council, as also of Norroy and Guyen Kings of
Arms, by express command determined, That his second son then Duke of York
should bear for his Arms the like Arms that the King himself did, with this
difference, viz. A Label of three points, Silver, on the first part, a Canton
Gules; and for his Badge, a Falcon volant Silver, membred with two Sewells,
Gold, within a Fetterlock unlocked, and somewhat open, Gold. This appears in
a Book (some time in the custody of John Stowe) which had belonged to an Herald.

The Coat of Arms beforementioned, viz. Quarterly France and England, a Label
of three points Argent, the first charged with a Canton Gules, are upon this
Dukes Stall subscribed, le dut de euerwyk Richard.


14. RICHAD Duke of York, Richard Grafton f. 240. a.
surnamed of Shrewsbury, the place of his birth, second Son of King Edward IV.
was upon the 28th day of May, 1474. An. 14. Ed. 4 created Duke of York; Cart.
ab an. 11. usque 15 E 4. m. 4.
and after the death of that rich and potent Prince Thomas Mowbray Duke of
Norfolk (which happened the year following) whose Honors for want of Issue Male
fell to the King, and his Inheritance to his daughter the Lady Anne, Trin. Rec.
16 E. 4 Rot 6. in dorso. Pat. 16 E. 4. p. 2. m. 12.
he was made first Earl of Nottingham (as the Mowbrayes had been before) 12
Jan. an. 16 Ed. 4. Then on the 7th of February next following was honored with
the Titles of Duke of Norfolk and Earl Warren.

And thus dignified (on the 15th of January, Rot. Parl. 71 E. 4. n. 10.
in the ensuing year) he espoused the aforesaid Anne Mowbray, His Marriage.
the richest and most noble Match of that time, This Anne did bear the Arms of
her Father John Mowbray Duke of Norfolk viz. Gules, 3 Lions passant guardant
Or, a Label of three points Argent: whose Family leiving of the Lion rampant
argent, in a Field, Gules, their Paternal Coat of Arms, assumed the Coat Armor
of Thomas of Brotherton Earl of Norfolk the fifth son of King Edward I. from
whom by heirs general they were descended.
being the only daughter and heir of the forementioned John Lord Mowbray Duke
of Norfolk, Earl Warren and Surrey, and Earl-Marshal of England, etc. The
ceremony of which marriage, performed the 15th day of January, In Coll. Arm. l.
m. 3. pa. 11.
1477, an. 17. Edw. 4. I have expressed as I find it recorded in an old Book in
the Office of Arms.

The 14th day of January the high and excellent Princess came to the Place of
Estate in the Kings great Chamber at Westminster, and there, according to her
high and excellent Estate, had a Void after the Form and Estate of this Realm
of England, accompanied with many Dukes, Earls and Barons, and abundance of
Ladies and Gentlewomen, the Princess being led by Earl Rivers.

On the morrow, being Thursday the 15th day of this said month, this Princess
came out of the Queens Chamber at Westminster, and so proceeding through the
Kings great Chamber, Now the House of Commons.
came into the great Whitehal, and so to St Stephens Chapel. Upon her attended
many Ladies and Gentlewomen. She was led by the Earl of Lincoln on the right
Hand, and on the left by the Earl Rivers; the Chapel was richly Hung, and a
State prepared, where sat the King, Queen and Prince, the Right, High, and
Excellent Princess (and Queen of Right) Mother to the King, the Lady Elizabeth,
the Lady Mary, and the Lady Cecilie, daughters to the King.

Thus was the said Lady received by Dr Goldwel Bishop of Norwich, and when he
had received her in at the Chapel door, intending to proceed to her Wedding,
then answered Dr Coke, and said, That the said High and Mighty Prince Richard
Duke of York ought not to be Wedded to that High and Excellent Princess, for
they were within Degree of Marriage, the one at the Fourth, the other at the
Third. For which causes he defended the Spousaile, without that there were a
special License from the Pope, and a Dispensation for the before said nighness
of blood; and then Doctor Gunthorp Dean of the Kings Chapel showed an ample
Bole of Authority that they might proceed to the Contractus and Matrimonium
before rehearsed, and then the said Bishop of Norwich proceeded to the
Marriage, and asked who would give the Princess to the Church and to him, and
the King gave her, and so proceeding to the High Altar to Mass, and then there
was great number of Gold and Silver cast among the common People, brought in
Basins of Gold, cast by the High and Mighty Prince the Duke of Gloucester; and
after accomplished the appurtenance of the Marriage, and after Spices and Wine,
as appertains to Matrimonial Feasts; and from St Stephen's Chapel the Duke
of Gloucester led the Bride on the right Hand, and the Duke of Buckingham on the
left: Then in St Edward's Chamber they had a stately Feast, at which were the
said Dukes with the Duchesses of Buckingham and Norfolk, Mother to the Princess
the Bride; at a side Table sat the Marquis Dorset, with many Ladies, and at
another Table the Lady Richmond, with many other Ladies.

Lastly, on the 5th of May, An. 19 Edw. 4. this Duke Richard had granted to him
the Office of Lieutenant of Ireland for two years; to which, two days after, by
reason of his minority, he deputed Robert Preston Lord of Gormanston under
these Titles, Ricardus secundus filius Illustrissimi Principis Edw. quarti,
etc. Dux Ebor. et Norff. Comes Warren, Surr. et Nottingham. Comes Marescallus
et Marescallus Angliae, ac Dominus de Segrave, de Mowbray et de Gower. Omnibus,
etc. Cum idem Excellentissimus Princeps Pater et Dominus meus, etc. per
Litteras suas Patentes, dat. apud Wyndsoram 5 Maij, an. Regni sui 19. Ordinavit
Nos praefatum Ricardum; Locumtenentem suum Terrae suae Hiberniae, Habend: pro
termino 2 an. etc. Sciatis nos deputasse Dilectum nostrum Robertum Preston
Dominum de Gormaneston Deputatum nostrum etc. dat. 7 Maii an. supradicto.

Not three years after, this Richard (being yet a child) with his Brother King
Edward V. were by the command of their unnatural Uncle and Protector Richard
Duke of Gloucester, secretly murdered in the Tower of London, upon the 9th of
the Kalends of June 1483. without Issue: the place of their burial being
unknown till of late discovered, as you shall find at large in the History of
the said King Edward V. and in the following Chapter.

14. GEORGE of YORK, surnamed of Shrewsbury, Duke of Bedford, third and
youngest son of King Edward IV. by Elizabeth Woodvile his Wife, was born at
Shrewsbury, and being yet a young child, was created Duke of Bedford, shortly
after which he departed this life, and was buried at Windsor.

14. ELIZABETH of YORK, Ric. Grafton fol. 240. a.
Queen of England, eldest daughter of King Edward IV. born at Westminster, 11
February 1466, and there christened in the Abbey with great solemnity, whom
first the said King intended to bestow upon George Nevil Duke of Bedford,
deposed from that Title by Act of Parliament, An. 17 E. 4. was afterward
promised in marriage to the Dauphin of France, and in the Court of France
called Madam the Dauphine. Next she was Wooed and Courted by King Richard III.
her unhappy Uncle, after he had murdered her two Brothers; but last of all,
most happily married to King Henry VII. to reconcile those bloody Wars betwixt
the two Royal Houses of York and Lancaster, and to join the White and Red Rose
in one; of whom see more in the History of Henry VII. Book 6. Chapter 1.

14. This Cecily Viscountess Wells did bear for her Arms, Quarterly, in the
first France and England quarterly. In 2d and 3d Burgh, and in the fourth
Mortimer. Impaled by Wells, which is. Or, a Lion rampant with two talls, Sable.
CECILIE of YORK, Rich. Grafton f. 240. a.
Viscountess Wells, second daughter of King Edward IV. was desired in marriage
by James King of Scots, for his son James Prince of Scotland and Duke of
Rothsay, which being well approved by King Edward and his Council, a good Sum
of Money was lent to the Scotch King, on condition that at a certain time it
should be at King Edward's choice whether his daughter should Match with that
Prince, or the Money be repayed. But Lewis the French King occasioning the
breach of this Alliance, the Scots were compelled by force to promise the
repayment of the Money, withal delivering Barwick into the hands of the
English. This not succeeding, she was at length married to John Lord Wells her
first Husband, created Viscount Wells by King Henry VI. (being son of Leonel
Lord Wells, and Margaret his Wife Duchess of Somerset, daughter of John Lord
Beauchamp.) This John Lord Wells deceased at Pasmers Place in St Sithes in
London, l. 3. fol. 32. in Coll. Arm.
on the Feast of St Appolyne, 9 Febr. 1498. an. 14 H. 7. and was by the Kings
order interred in our Lady-Chappel at Westminster, where his Majesty declared
himself intended to be buried, which was accordingly performed with great
solemnity, having at his Funeral a Standard, a Mourning Horse, with four
Escocheons of the defunct, on which rode one Villers armed, and in a long black
Cloak, carrying the Banner, his Coat of Arms worn by a Pursivant, four Banners
of Saints, and four Bannerols of his own and Lady Cecilies Arms, a Mourning
Chariot, in which the Body was drawn to Westminster, and a Hearse in the Abbey
where the Dirige was performed by the Bishop of London. This Cecilie had Issue
by the said Viscount Wells, two daughters, Elizabeth Wells who died without
Issue, and Anne Wells buried in the Augustine Friars. Stow p. 186.


The second Husband of this Cicelie was one Kyme of Lincolnshire, by whom she
had no children; her Body lies buried at Quarenna in the Isle of Wight.

14. ANNE of YORK, Duchess of Norfolk, Richard Grafton f. 240. a.
third daughter of King Edward IV. was espoused to Thomas Howord Duke Norfolk,
Earl-Marshal and Lord Treasurer of England, Catal. of Nob. by R. B.
by whom she had a son named Thomas Howard, who died young, 3 Aug. 1508. and
was buried at Lambeth, herself dying without Issue surviving, was buried at
Framlingham in Norfolk.

14. BRIDGET of YORK, fourth daughter, Richard Grafton f. 240. a.
was born at Eltham in Kent on St Martins Eve 10 Nov. 1480.20 Ed. 4. and the
next day was baptized in the Chapel there, by Edward Story Bishop of
Chichester; being yet young, B. 121.99.
she became a Nun at Dertford, and there spending her life in devotion and
contemplation to the time of her death, Weever p. 335.
was buried in that Priory, circa an. 1517. 8 H. 8.

14. MARY of YORK, fifth daughter, was promised in Marriage to the King of
Denmark, but deceasing before the Consummation thereof in the Tower of
Greenwich, Lib. l. 11. p. 21. in Coll. Arm.
on Thursday before Whitsonday, 1482. an. 22 E. 4. On the Monday in the
Whitsonweek, her Corpse was brought to the Church of Greenwich, and there had
her Dirige began by James Goldwell Lord Bishop of Norwich, who also sung Mass
the next morning, there being present several Lords and Ladies; and in the
afternoon the Body was conveyed into a Mourning Chariot drawn by Horses also
trapped with black, and adorned with Lozenges of her Arms. Thus from Greenwich
they set forward to Kingston, where the Corpse rested that night; and from
thence, the next morning, toward Windsor, where being met by the Parish in
Procession, at the foot of the Bridge next Eaton, they proceeded to the Chapel
of Windsor, where the Body was buried with the usual Offices thereunto
belonging.

14. MARGARET of YORK, sixth daughter of King Edward IV. was born 19 April
1472, died in her Infancy, 11 December following, and was buried in the Abbey
of Westminster, Vide her Epitaph in the Chapel of the Kings in the Abbey of
Westminster.
in the Chapel of the Kings, with this Epitaph upon her Monument.

Nobilitas et forma, decorque tenella juventus
In simul hic ista mortis sunt condita cista,
Ut genus et nomen, sexum, tempus quoque mortis
Noscas, cuncta tibi manifestat margo Sepulchri.
14. The Seal of this Catherine is delincated in the 354 page of this fifth
Book, upon which are the Arms of her Husband Will. Courtney Earl of Devonshire,
viz. Quarterly (Or) three Torteaux (Gules) and (Or) a Lion rampant (Azure) by
the name of de Ripariis or Redvers, the third as the second, the fourth as the
first. Impaling Quarterly of four pieces, the first quarterly France and
England, secondly (Or) a Cross (Gules) the third as the second, 4. Mortimer.
supported on the right side with a Dolphin, and on the left with the Lion of
March: upon the top of the Escocheon appears a Demi Rose within the Rays of
the Sun: the Seal being circumscribed, KATHERINA: COMITISSA: DEVON: FILIA:
SOROR: ET: AMITA: REGUM. The Indenture to which this Seal is annexed, is dated
upon the 24th day of October, in the sixth year of King Henry VIII. in which
she styles her self, We Katherine Countess of Devonshire, Daughter, Sister,
and Aunt of Kings, vide G. 6. p. 51. b. in Coll. Arm. The said Quarterings of
this Countess Katherine are impaled with those of William Earl of Devonshire
her Husband, in a Glass-Window of Tiverton Church in the County of Devon,
being, Or 3 Torteaux, a file of as many points, Azure.


KATHERINE of YORK; Richard Grafton f. 240. a.
Countess of Devon, seventh daughter of King Edward IV. was married to William
Courtney Earl of Devonshire, In Coll. Arm. lib. l. 3. f. 33.
that died at Greenwich, 9 Jun. 3 H* 8. who, though he had the Kings Letters
Patents of that Earldom past some weeks and odd days before his death, yet so
necessary was a Creation in that time accounted, that he could not be buried in
the quality of an Earl for want thereof, till the King, for such favor as he
bare him (which are the words of the Memorandum) willed him to be buried as an
Earl, any by the advice of his Council, commanded he should be called by that
Title. His Body being Cered, remained in the Court at Greenwich in his Chamber
till Thursday the 12th day of the same month, when in the afternoon, well
accompanied it was conveyed by Barge to Paul's Wharf, where attended several
Gentlemen and the four Orders of Friars, and so was solemnly brought to Black
Friars, with those trophies due to his Degree, the Lord Marquis Dorset being
principal Mourner. The Offertory and Mass finished, he was there buried by a
Bishop, on the South Side the High Altar, leaving his said Lady one of his
seven Executors; who out-living her Husband Earl William above sixteen years,
departed this life at her Manor of Tiverton in Devonshire. 15 Nov. 1527. An.
19 H. 8. at three in the afternoon; In Coll. Arm. l. 11. p^. 22.
her Body being Embalmed, Cered, Leaded, and Chested, was conveyed to the
Chapel of the said Manor, and placed within a Bars, and covered with a Pall
of black Velvet with a Cross of white Satin, and upon that another Pall of
Cloth of Gold with a white Cross of Silver Tissue garnished with six Escocheons
of her Arms. Thus it was attended day and night till Monday December. 2. when
with a formal proceeding it was brought to the Parish Church of Tiverton, under
a Canopy of black Velver, born by six Esquires, at each corner whereof a Banner
of a Saint was borne by so many Esquires, viz. of the Trinity, our Lady, St
Edward and St Katherine, the Bearers all in black Gowns, and Hoods, eight
Bannerolls carried by eight Gentlemen, four on the one side and four on the
other; the chief Mourner was the Lady Carew assisted by Sir Piers Edgcomb, her
Train borne up by a Gentlewoman, followed by six Gentlewomen. The next day the
Company being again come into the Church, the Mass of Requiem Sung, and the
Offertory performed, Doctor Sarsley made a goodly Sermon upon this Text, Manus
Domini tetigit Me; which done, and Divine Service ended, the whole Company went
to Tiverton to Dinner. The Lord Suffragan with all the other Abbots and
Prelates in Pontificalibus; having performed the office of Burial, the Body was
let down into a Vault under the Hearse, at what time her Officers brake their
Staves. In Memorial of which noble Lady the Marquis of Exceter caused a Chapel
and a Tomb, with her Effigies thereon, to be erected by the side of the High
Altar of the said Church.

This Katherine had Issue by her said Husband, her only son Henry Courtney.

This Marquis of Exceter did bear, Quarterly, in the first France and England
quarterly, within a Border quarterly of England and France, on the second and
third Or, three Torteaux, and on the fourth, Or a Lion rampant, Azure. These
Arms, within the Garter, are carved and painted in the Roof of the Chapel of
St George in Windsor.
Henry Courtney succeeded his Father in the Earldom of Devonshire, Catal. of
Nob. by R. B.
and Barony of Ockhampton, and was afterward created Marquis of Exceter at
Bridewell, 18 June, 1525. an. 17 H. 8. with which King he was in so great
favor, that at his going over into France, he nominated this Marquis his heir
apparent, but at his return, upon better policy, degraded him of that Dignity,
least acting his part on that infectious stage, he should create as much
trouble to the Commonwealth as the late Richard Duke of York had done after his
being honored with the like Title of heir apparent, since it proved the
Tragedy of his Raiser, King Henry VI. Now whether Courtney had been faulty in
abetting the Treasons wherewith Cardinal Pool was charged, or whether the King
packt him into that company for instigating several Foreign Princes on the
Popes behalf to invade the Realm, and raise the Cardinal to the Crown; certain
it is, that having the Marquis and his Partakers upon the advantage, the better
to secure his own Estate, he caused his head with those of the Lord Mountague,
and Sir Edward Nevil, to be cut off upon Tower Hill, An. 1538.

This Henry Marquis of Exceter married two Wives, the first was Elizabeth Gray,
daughter and heir of John Viscount Lisle, by whom he had no Issue, and the
second Gertrude, daughter of William Blount Lord Mountjoy (begotten of
Elizabeth daughter and coheir of Sir William Say Knight.) who, about nineteen years
after her Husband's death, was, with Margaret Countess of Salisbury, attainted
likewise for the aforementioned Treason against King Henry 8. But not being
executed, because she had no guilty Blood Royal in her Veins, she died a
natural death, and was buried under a fair Tomb in Wimborn-Minster in
Dorsetshire, An. 1557. leaving Issue her only Child,

He did bear the Arms of his Father.
Edward Courtney, long time Prisoner in the Tower of London; but at length, by
Queen Mary, on 3 Sept. 1553. in the first year of her Reign, Pat. an. 1. M. p.
2.
was created, and restored to the Earldom of Devonshire, to him and his Heirs
Males, at her Manor of Richmond; about three years after, dyed at Padua in
Italy, 4 October. 1556, sans Issue (not without suspicion of Poison) so that in
him was lopt off the last Branch of the Princely Family of the Courtneys.

Natural Children of King EDWARD IV.
14. Richard Grafton Chron.
ARTHVR PLANTAGENET, Viscount Lisle, Natural Son of King Edward IV. whose
Mother was supposed to be the Lady Elizabeth Lucy, was created Viscount Lisle,
Lieutenant of Calais, and Knight of the Garter: whose History follows in the
tenth and last Chapter of this fifth Book.

14. Lumley, Argent, a Fess Gules, inter 3 Popingays, vert, accolled Or, having
been the Arms of the the ancient Family of Thweng, sometime Barons of this
Kingdom.
ELIZABETH PLANTAGENET, Cat. of Nob. by R. B.
Lady Lumley, Base Daughter of King Edward IV. was the Wife of Sir Thomas
Lumley Knight (son of George Lord Lumley) who dying before his Father, An. 2 H. 7.
left Issue Richard Lord Lumley of Lumley Castle in the Bishopric of Durham,
who taking to Wife Anne the daughter of Sir John Conyers of Hornby Castle in
Com. York, had Issue two sons, John and Anthony; which John, Claus. an. 6 H. 8
in dorso.
An. 5 H. 8. being at Flodden-Field with the Earl of Surrey, was in 6 H. 8.
summoned to Parliament; shortly after which he had Livery of all the Lands of
his Inheritance. Pat. 7 H. 8. p. 2.
He married Joane daughter of Henry Lord Scroope of Bolton, and by her had
Issue George Lumley his son and heir, who deceased in his said Fathers
lifetime, leaving Issue by Jane second daughter and coheir of Sir Richard
Knightley of Fanisley in Northamptonshire Knight. E. 6. in Coll. Arm. fol. 5. b.
John his son and heir, and two daughters; Jane married to Geoffry Markham, and
Barbara the Wife of Humphrey Lloyd.

This John Lord Lumley succeeded his Grandfather, and taking to Wife Jane the
elder daughter and coheir of Henry Fitz-Alan Earl of Arundel, Catal. of Nob. by
R. B.
by her had Issue Charles, Thomas, and Mary, all which died issueless.

14. EDWARD V. KING of ENGLAND and FRANCE, and LORD of IRELAND.
CHAP. VI.
Upon the Tomb of Oliver King on the South Side the Choire of St George's
Chapel in Windsor Castle, is painted the Figure of this King Edward the Fifth,
in Royal Robes, his Surcoat semee of Flowers de Lize, and over his head an
arched Crown; the Nich in which the Kings Statue is painted is diapred with
Falcons within Fetterlocks, and beneath inscribed, Rex Edwardus quintus: and on
the Pedistal, his Shield of Arms ( viz. France and England quarterly) is
supported on the right side with the Lion of March, and on the left, with a
Hind Argent. The Seal exhibited for this King (in Mr John Speeds Chronicle)
belongs to King Edward IV. his Father as may be proved by his Indenture dated,
an. 22 Edward IV. to which the said Seal is annexed.


THis unfortunate Prince, the eldest son of King Edward IV. by Queen Elizabeth
his Wife, Pat. an. 12 E. 4. p. 2. on. 23.
daughter of Richard Woodvile Earl Rivers, was born in the Sanctuary at
Westminster, upon the 4th of November, An. 1470. and tenth year of his Fathers
Reign, at that time expulsed the Realm by the powerful Earl of Warwick; Chart.
an. 11 E. 4. n. 15.
upon the 26th of July in the year following, viz. 1471. an. 11 E. 4. (after
the death of Edward Prince of Wales, son of King Henry VI. slain at the Battle
of Tewkesbury in May next before) this Edward was created Prince of Wales;
afterward, on the 20th of June, An. 1475. in the 15th of Edward IV. the said
King upon his Expedition into France, constituted this Edward Prince of Wales,
Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, Pat. an. 15 E. 4. p. 2 m. 18.
(for so he is styled in the Patent) Custos of the Realm of England, and
Lieutenant of the said Kingdom during his abode beyond the Seas. In the 17th
year of his Reign, and the 15th day of February, Pat. 17 E. 4. p. 2. m. 16.
the King conferred on him the Title of Earl of Salisbury; and upon the 8th of
July in the 19th the Titles of Earl of March and Pembroke. Chart. ab an. 15.
usque 22 E. 4. (...). 10.


He had not attained to the eleventh year of his age when King Edward IV. his
Father, deceasing, he was proclaimed King, but never Crowned; so that that
space of time from his Fathers death, till his murder, may be more properly
called the Tyranny of (his Uncle) King Richard III. than the Reign of King
Edward V.

Which sad and fatal news came first to this Prince Edward at Ludlowe in the
County of Salop and Marches of Wales, Edward Halle fol. 5.
where he had abode some time, the better by his presence to awe the Welsh Men,
having about him several of his Mothers Kindred, among which, Anthony Earl
Rivers his Uncle was chief, being both his Councellor and Director.

Hence then, upon first notice of the Kings death, attended by a very strong
Guard, he proceeded for London (as did likewise his Uncle the Duke of
Gloucester, now Protector, from the North) when upon the Road, by the way,
receiving Letters from the Queen Mother to dismiss that strong Guard, without
intimating by what advice, he gave first way, by a too easy obedience, to his
Uncle Glocesters bloody Plot; who being arrived at Northampton, and having
gained the Duke of Buckingham and the Lord Hastings to the opinion that it was
not fit the Queen with her Kindred should be so much about the King, and others
of better quality rejected, caused the Earl Rivers then with the King at
Stony-Stratford to be imprisoned, together with the Lord Richard Gray the Kings
half Brother, and Sir Thomas Vaughan; who being thence conveyed into the North,
were the same day that the Lord Chamberlain was beheaded in the Tower of
London, all beheaded likewise at Pontfract in Yorkshire.

Thus the Protector having got the young King into his sole custody, Richard
Grafton f. 10. usque 13.
came to London, where the Queen Mother hearing of what had past, and fearing
the consequence, with her other son Duke Richard and five daughters took
sanctuary at Westminster, from whence the Protector (on pretense of the Kings
being melancholy, and not to be diverted but by his Brothers company) had no
sooner wrought upon the distressed Queen, not without abundance of tears, as
well as the Archbishop of York's persuasions to part with him, but with great
show of Pomp conveyed him, together with the young King, to the fatal Tower.

Both Brothers thus secured, it remains only to destroy them, which the Lord
Hastings (when tempted by one Catesby his Steward in Leicestershire) refusing,
it is soon contrived that himself shall lead the way; accordingly a Council is
held in the Tower to consult about the Kings Coronation, whereto the Protector
coming, charge the Lord Hastings, the Queen Mother, and and Mrs. Shore, late
King Edwards, now the Lord Hastings Concubine, by Sorcery to have practiced his
destruction; whereupon, by a Guard ready at the door for that purpose, Edward
Halle f. 14. b.
the Lord Hastings is there seized on, and immediately, upon a log of Wood,
before the Chapel within the Tower beheaded, and buried at Windsor, near to
his Master King Edward IV.

Now only remained to content the people, whom though he valued not much, since
he was now absolute in power, yet something that way must be done both for the
Laity and Clergy; accordingly he obtains the Lord Mayor, with his Brother John
Shaw Clerk, and one Penker, Provincial of the Augustine Friars, appointing the
first to call a Council of his Brethren at Guild Hall, and the other two to
Preach, Shaw at Paul's Cross, and Penker at the Spittle: where King Edwards
Children must be charged with Bastardy, and the Protector highly commended;
which on Doctor Shaws part was performed thus, Sapien 4.
taking for his Text, Bastard Plants shall take no deep Root, affirmed that
King Edward was never lawfully married to the Queen, but was (before God)
Husband to the Lady Elizabeth Lucye; his children therefore not legitimate, and
that King Edward himself with the Duke of Clarence were much to be doubted of,
their Faces resembling other known Men, whereas the Lord Protector was the very
print, visage, and express likeness of that noble Richard Duke of York; and
here (as before devised) the Protector should have come in, whereby to persuade
the Audience that those words were divinely spoken, and so to have cried King
Richard, King Richard, but the slackness of his coming ruined the design, and
proved rather His and the Preachers greater disgrace.

On Tuesday following the Duke of Buckingham came before the Lord Mayor and his
Council at Guildhall, Richard Grafton f. 21. a.
where after a long Harangue for their concurrence to elect the Protector King,
the same was only barely reiterated by Mr. Fitz-Williams the Recorder: however,
some of the Dukes Servants purposely set near at hand, cried aloud thereupon,
King Richard! King Richard! which he taking as their whole consent, gave them
many thanks, and departed to Baynard's Castle; where he declared to the
Protector with what a general consent the Commons had chosen him King; the
Protector at first seemingly refused it, but by the Duke of Buckingham and the
Lord Mayors persuasion, easily accepted it.

Thus the Issue of King Edward was put by, and this poor young Prince, though
proclaimed yet never crowned King; but his unnatural Uncle not thinking himself
safe, whilst he or his Brother remained alive, commands Sir Robert Brackenbury
Lieutenant of the Tower to dispatch them, upon whose refusal he is ordered to
resign his Office for that occasion to Sir James Tyrrel, Richard Grafton f. 27.
who immediately procures two Villains, King Edward the Fifth and Richard Duke
York his Brother murdered in their Bed, an. 1 R. 3. 1483.
Miles Forest and John Dighton to smother them in Bed; their lodging being then
in that building near the water Gate, which is thereupon to this day, called
the Bloody Tower; their Bodies were buried at the stair foot there, somewhat
deep in the ground, under a great heap of Stones; but King Richard being told
in what an obscure place they lay, gave command for their better Interrment;
Ibid.
whereupon a Priest belonging to Sir Robert Brackenbury, removing them, and
dying shortly after it could never be known whither they were carried.

Till, upon Friday the ^^ day of July, An. 1674. (take this Relation from a
Gentleman, John Knight Esquire principal Surgeon to His Majesty King Charles II.
an eyewitness, and principally concerned in the whole scrutiny) in order to
the rebuilding of the several Offices in the Tower, and to clear the white
Tower from all contiguous Buildings, digging down the Stairs which led from the
Kings Lodgings, to the Chapel in the said Tower, about ten foot in the ground,
were found the Bones of two Striplings in (as it seemed) a wooden Chest, which
upon the survey were found proportionable to the ages of those two Brothers,
monument H.SH. Re^^^j^^^ (...) ^ REGIS ANGLIAE ET RICHARDI DUCIS E^^ ACENSIS.
(...) FRATRES GERMAN^S TERRE LOND^^^ (...) IN^ECTI^O, CULCITRIS SUFFOCATOS,
A^D^^T, ET ^^HONESTE TUMULARI IUSSIT FRATRES RICHARD^^ PERTIDUS REGNI PRAETO
OSSA DESIDERAT^^^^, DIU ET NUL^UM (...) POST ANNOS CXX and I. SCA^ARUM IN
^^^^^IBUS (SCALE ESTE AD SACELLU^ TURRIS A^^AE NU^^^ DUCERANT) ALTE DEFOSSA
INDICIIS CERT^SSIMIS SUNT REPERTA XVE DIE IULII Ao. Di. MDCLXX^^^. CA^^^US ^
REX CLEMENTISSIMIS ALTERAM (...) INTER AVITA MONUMENTA PRINCIPIBUS
INFELICISSIMIS IUSTA PERSOLVIT. ANNO. DOMi. 1678 ANN^^ REGNI SUI 30.

Viro Honoratissimo Dno. THOMAE CHICHLEY Equiti Aurato, Tormentorum,
Bellicorum, et Armario rum Regis, summo Praefecto, nec non ad Sereniss Do^m:
Regem CAROLUM. II. e Secretioribus Consilijs. Tabulam hanc, HD.FS.

viz. about thirteen and eleven years. The Scul of the one being entire, the
other broken, as were indeed many of the other Bones, as also the Chest, by the
violence of the Laborers, who not being sensible of what they had in hand,
cast the rubbish and them away together, wherefore they were caused to sift the
rubbish, and by that means preserved all the Bones.

The Circumstances from Story being considered, and the same often discoursed
with the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Chichley Knight. Master of the Ordnance, by
whose industry the new Buildings were then in carrying on, and by whom this
matter was reported to the King: upon the presumptions that these were the
Bones of the said Princes, His Majesty King Charles the Second, was graciously
pleased to command that the said Bones should be put into a Marble Urne, and
deposited among the Relics of the Royal Family in the Chapel of King Henry
the Seventh, in Westminster Abbey, the representation of which, with the
Monumental Inscription thereon, is exhibited in the precedent page.

13. RICHARD III. KING of ENGLAND and FRANCE, Anno Dom. 1483. June 22.
and LORD of IRELAND.
CHAP. VII.
The Figure of King Richard the Third his Seal (exhibited in the 354 page of
this fifth Book) very much resembles that of King Edward IV. in every
particular, the circumscription only excepted, which is on both sides, Ricardus
dei gracia Rex Anglie et Francie et Dominus Hibernie. He wrote in his Charters.
Richardus Dei gracia Rex Francie et Anglie et Dominus Hibernie. Over the gate
of the Library at Cambridge, on the inside in a Compartment of Stone, is carved
a Rose. supported on the right side with a Bull, and on the left side by a
Boar. The latter of which, viz. the white Boar was his Cognizance, which gave
occasion to the Rhyme which cost the Collyngborne.
Maker his life: The Catesby.
Cat, the Ratcliff.
Rat, and Lovel the Dog
Rule all England under the King Richard.
Hog.
His Arms are also carved in Stone on the West side of the Steeple at
Wolverhampton in the County of Stafford, supported by two Boares; and among the
Devises of the Royal House of York, I find the Silver Boar with Tuskes and
Brissels, Gold, subscribed, Ex hon^re de Windsore.


AMong the sons of Richard Duke of York and Cecily Nevil his Wife, Catal. of
Nob. by R. B.
this Richard was the eighth and youngest, born at Fotheringhay Castle in the
County of Northampton, his Fathers Mansion house, upon whose death, and that of
Edmond Earl of Rutland his Brother, at the Battle of Wakefield, this Richard
and his Brother George were by their Mother sent unto the City of Vtrecht;
where having a fair reception by Philip Duke of Burgundy, they remained there
till Edward their Brother had attained the Crown of this Realm. Shortly after
whose Coronation, this Richard (in a Parliament held An. 1 E. 4.) was created
Duke of Gloucester, Mich. Rec. 1. E. 4. Rot. 46.
and thereupon constituted Lord Admiral of England On the twenty seventh of
October in the ninth of Edward the Fourth, Pat. an. 2 E. 4. p. 2. m. 6.
he was made Constable of England, and also Justice of North Wales and
South Wales, and in the 10th Warden of the West Marches toward Scotland; Pat.
9 E. 4. p. 2. m. 18.
and also in the same year, when King Edward (his Brother) was in such danger
through the power of Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick, Rot. Scoc. 10 E. 4. m. 2.
that he was forced to get into Flanders, he accompanied him thither; Pol.
Virg. 521. n. 10.
and upon his return commanded the Foreward of his Army at Barnet Field, where
he became victorious. He attended King Edward likewise at the Battle of
Tewkesbury, Holingsh. Chron ^84 a^ n. 60.
where, His Marriage. Queen Anne Nevil his Wife, did bear Gules, a Saltire
Argent, and Label of three points, Gobony, Argent and Azure.
after he had got the day, and taken Prince Edward (son of King Henry VI)
prisoner, he helped to murder him in cold blood; whose Widow Anne the second
daughter and coheir of Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick and Salisbury, he took to
Wife, who lived with him to the last year of his Reign, and then leaving her
Husband to choose another Queen, was laid at rest in the Abbey of Westminster.

Afterward ( viz. 18th of May, Pat. an. 11. E. 4. p. 1. m. 21.
An. 11 Ed. 4.) he succeeded Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick, first great
Chamberlain of England, in the said Office, Claus. 11. E. 4. indor^o m. 1.
which was granted unto him for term of life. In the same year likewise, in the
Parliament then held, he made Oath and Recognition to Prince Edward, eldest son
to the King; Pol. Virg. p. 531.
and An. 12 Ed. 4. acted that barbarous exploit upon the person of the deposed
King Henry VI. at that time kept prisoner in the Tower.

This Richard Duke of Gloucester (having been made High Constable of England,
Pat. 11 E. 4. p. 2. m. 12.
Febr. 29. 11 E. 4.) surrendered the Office of Great Chamberlain into the Kings
hands, who thereupon granted the same to George Duke of Clarence their Brother,
upon whose murder, perpetrated also by this Richard, he is again honored with
the said Office of Great Chamberlain, Pat. an. 17 E. 4. p. 2. m. 16.
in the 17th year of that Kings Reign. An. 21 E. 4. he was sent with a numerous
Army into Scotland, Pol. Virg. 538. n. 30.
where he wasted a great part of that Country, and forced the Scots to deliver
up unto the English the Castle of Barwick; and in the year following, Rot.
Scot. 22 E. 4. m. 3.
upon breach of the Truce, he was again constituted Lieutenant and
Captain General against the Scots.

But not long after this, happened the death of King Edward IV. whereupon it was
thought fit that King Edward V. his son, should during his tender years, be
under the Tuition of this Duke Richard his Uncle, and he to Govern by the name
of Protector, whose ambition was such to have the sole Sovereignty, that he
most barbarously caused the young King, with Richard Duke of York his Brother
(as I have said before) to be murdered in the Tower of London, and having so
done, as next of blood caused himself to be elected King the 18th of June,
1483. He is proclaimed the 22 following, His Coronation, an. 1483.
and Crowned the 7th of July after; Edward Halle fol. 25. b.
which Coronation was performed with the greatest splendour of any we read of,
proceeding with his new Queen the 4th of July from Baynards Castle to the Tower
by Water, where he created Prince Edward his son (scarce ten years old) Prince
of Wales, John Lord Howard, Duke of Norfolk; his son Sir Thomas Howard, Earl of
Surrey; William Lord Berkley, Earl of Nottingham; Francis Lord Lovel, Viscount
Lovel, and the Lord Stanley Lord Steward of his Household; whom with the
Archbishop of York he released, till then Prisoners in the Tower, but Morton
Bishop of Ely since he would not consent to the disinheriting King Edwards
children, he committed to the Duke of Buckingham, who sent him prisoner to
Brecknock Castle in Wales. The same night he made 17 Knights of the Bath, and
on the day appointed, accompanied with the Dukes of Norfolk, Buckingham and
Suffolk, with many other Lords, he rode, with his Queen, in great state through
London to Westminster; from thence, next morning to the great Hall at
Westminster, where he sat himself on the Kings Bench; hence he went barefoot
upon a Cloth of State, with the Queen, and every of his Lords in their degree
to St Edward's Shrine; Ibidem.
the Bishop of Rochester bore the Cross, succeeded by the Earls of Huntington
and Bedford, the one bearing the gilt Spurs, and the other St Edward's Staff;
after them came the Earl of Northumberland with a pointless Sword, to signify
Mercy, and the Earl of Kent and the Lord Lovel bearing each a pointed Sword,
signifying Justice to the Clergy and Laity, the Duke of Suffolk with the
Scepter, the Earl of Lincoln with the Ball and Cross, the Earl of Surrey with
the Sword of State, after whom went Garter King of Arms in a rich Coat,
followed by the Lord Mayor with the Mace, and the Gentlemen of his Privy
Chamber; next came the Duke of Norfolk with the Crown, and then King Richard
himself in Robes of Purple Velvet, and over his head a Canopy borne by four
Barons of the Cinque Ports, the Bishops of Bath and Durham on either hand, and
the Duke of Buckingham bearing up his Train, with a white Staff in his hand as
Lord High Steward of England; then followed the Queens Train, before whom was
borne the Scepter, Richard Grafton fol. 26. a.
Ivory Rod and Dove, with the Crown; herself apparelled like the King (the
Countess of Richmond bearing up her Train) with a Canopy over her head, having
a golden Bell at each corner, the Duchesses of Norfolk and Suffolk with their
Coronets on, and twenty other Ladies attending; in which State they came to St
Edward's Shrine, where they Offered, and thence to the High Altar, where they
were both Crowned, and in the same State returned to Westminster Hall, where a
great Feast was prepared; which ended, both King and Queen in a most sumptuous
manner, returned to their Lodgings.

True it is, no King got the Crown worse, yet perchance none governed it
better; his practicing the death of his Queen, which yet was but supposed,
remaining the only stain of cruelty upon him after his Settlement: as for the
Duke of Buckingham, and these four, Edward Halle fol. 30. a.
Robert Ross Sergeant, William Davy Priest, John Smith Groom of King Edward's
Stirrup, and Stephen Ireland one of the Wardrobe in the Tower, all in his first
year, with some others by him afterward beheaded, he may be very plausibly
defended from that imputation; to instance only the Duke, he was the main
Instrument whereby King Richard came to the Crown, and equally guilty (the
Blood of King Edward's Children excepted) of all the other formentioned
mischiefs by him committed; after which, to engage in an actual Rebellion
against him, to introduce the Dominion of the House of Lancaster, could not
reasonably deserve otherwise, though Divine Justice severely overtook his
Betrayer Banister and his whole Family, from whom, Ibid. 39. a.
since he had been raised by him, he justly merited a more grateful Protection.

The principal of the Dukes Accomplices, viz. the Marquis of Dorset, John Lord
Wells, the Bishop of Exceter, and Sir John Bourchier his Brother, Sir Richard
Woodville, Sir Robert Willoughby, Sir Giles d' Aubeny, Sir Thomas Arundel, Sir
John Cheyny with his two Brothers, Sir William Berkley, Sir William Brandon,
with Thomas his Brother, and Sir Richard Edgcomb, got over to Henry Earl of
Richmond into Britain; whence King Richard understanding that the Duke of
Britain not only afforded him his liberty, but was ready to grant him his
utmost assistance, set out his Fleet to prevent his passage: 12 October. 1484.
Notwithstanding which, the Earl of Richmomd with 40 ships and 5000 Britains
put to Sea; but his Fleet being by Tempest dispersed, and himself landed in
France, is honorably received by Charles the French King, and aided with good
Sums of Money, returns into Britain, where, on Christmas day, before the High
Altar in the great Church at Renes he received the Blessed Sacrament, Richard
Grafton f. 41. b.
with all the Lords there present, solemnly Vowing not to leave the prosecution
of the War till either King Richard's deposition or destruction, and then to
marry the Lady Elizabeth daughter to King Edward IV.

King Richard having advice hereof, sent Ambassadors with great offers to the
Duke of Britain, to keep the Earl of Richmond and those other Lords with him
close Prisoners; but the indisposition of the Duke not admitting access, they
practice with Peter Landois his Treasurer, who promises their desires shall be
performed; which the Earl hearing of, acquaints the Duke, whereupon Landois was
hanged.

The King not succeeding this way attempts another, 1485.
Ibid. fol. 48. a.
sending to Queen Elizabeth (still in Sanctuary) to deliver unto him her five
daughters, the eldest of which (his Queen being now dead) he intended to marry;
whereunto that easy Princess (influenced by fair Promises, all former injuries
forgotten) readily assented.

Now it was that the Earl of Richmond held it high time to stir, wherefore
about the middle of August next, with what store of shipping he could get, he
took presently to Sea; and being assured of some good Friends among his
Relations in Wales, he landed at Milford Haven, whence with his Uncle Jasper
Earl of Pembroke, and what force the Welsh had raised him, he came to Hereford,
where he was strengthened with the Earl of Shrewsbury and several other Lords,
Knights and Gentlemen; as likewise, during his march from thence to Leicester,
whence the Lord Stanley with the Kings Forces under his command withdrew, not
daring to declare for the Earl of Richmond as yet, least his son the Lord
Strange, then Hostage with King Richard should have been ill treated by him.

Hereupon the King marching with his Forces from Nottingham, Edward Halle fol.]
54. a.
advanced to Bosworth in Leicestershire, Battle of Bosworth, an. 1485
where he Marshalled his Army, the Vantguard whereof was led by the Duke of
Norfolk, consisting of 2500 Bowmen, flanked with 200 Cuirassiers, under the
conduct of the Earl of Surrey; the main Battle by Himself, composed of 3000
Pikes and Billmen, and the Rereward by Sir Robert Brackenbury, with about 1500
Men, expecting the Lord Stanley with about 2000 Horse; but he keeping himself
unsuspected till the Armies met, went over to the Earl of Richmond, who
advancing toward King Richard, had his Vantguard led by the Earl of Oxford;
the Battle by Himself, and the Rereward by the Earl of Pembroke: their Arrows
spent on both sides, they came to hand-stroakes, where the Earl of Oxford's
Men, though far less numerous, so valiantly behaved themselves, that King
Richard's Van became routed by the help of the Lord Stanley, which King Richard
seeing, with a most heroic courage flew upon the Earl of Richmond and his
party, and with his own hands slew Sir William Brandon the Earls Standard
Bearer, unhorsed Sir John Cheyney, and hand to hand encountered the Earl
himself, who kept him at Swords point till Sir William Stanley with 3000 fresh
men coming in, Richard Grafton f. 58. a.
so overpressed him that he was slain in the place, King Richard slain at
Bosworth, 22 Aug. 1485.
with the loss of not above 1000 men, the Earl of Northumberland, with many
more of King Richard's Followers, never lifting one hand in his defense, only
the Duke of Norfolk (though forewarned by a Rhyme affixt to his Gate the night
before) stuck close to him to the last, and was there slain with the Lord
Ferrers of Chartley, Sir Richard Ratcliff and Sir Robert Brackenbury, the Earl
not losing, as is said, above 10 men; whereupon the whole Army crying King
Henry! King Henry! he Knighted presently in the Field these following
Gentlemen, Sir Gilbert Talbot, Sir John Mortimer, Sir William Willoughby, Sir
Rice ap Thomas, Sir Robert Poynes, Sir Humphrey Stanley, Sir John Turbervill,
Sir Hugh Peshall, Sir R. Edgcomb, Sir John Bykenel, and Sir Edmond Carew. Upon
which the Lord Stanley took the Crown out of an Houthorn Bush wherein it was
hid, and set it upon the triumphant head of King Henry, who kneeling down, gave
God thanks for the Victory, whereupon they all cried again King Henry! King
Henry!

He Reigned two years and two months, and though his Name be odious in History,
yet he left behind him several examples of Piety; for he founded a College at
Midleham in Yorkshire, and a Collegiate Chantrey near the Tower in London,
called Our Lady's of Barking. He gave to Queens College in Cambridge 500 Marks
per annum, His Burial,
and disforested the great parcel of Land at Witchwood, which his Brother King
Edward had enclosed for Deer.

The Body of King Richard lying naked upon the ground, John Speed Chron. p.
936. col. 2.
and so (stripped as it was) thrown over cross a Horse, was carried to Leicester
(where two days after the Battle Sir William Catesby was beheaded) and having
remained for some time there a miserable spectacle to the people, was meanly
buried in the Gray Friars Church, l. 3. MS. in Coll. Arm. p. 4.
where afterward King Henry caused a Monument to be erected for him, with his
Picture in Alablaster, where it remained till the Dissolation under Henry VIII.
at what time it was pulled down and utterly defaced; since when, his Grave
overgrown with Weeds and Nettles, is very obscure and not to be found, only the
stone Coffin, wherein his Corpse lay was made a drinking Trough for Horses at a
common Inn, and retains the only memory of this Monarchs greatness. His
Epitaph registered in a Book in the College of Arms (differing not much from
that mentioned in Mr George Buck's History of this King, page 149) I have here
inserted.

Hic ego, quem vario Tellus sub Marmore claudit,
Tertius a multa voce Ricardus eram;
Nam Patrie Tutor, Patrius pro jure Nepotis,
Dirupta, tenui Regna Britanna, fide,
Sexaginta dies binis duntaxat ademptis
Estatesque, tuli non mea Sceptra duas.
Fortiter in Bello merito desertus ab Anglis
Rex Henrice, tibi, septime, succubui,
At sumptu, pius ipse, tuo, sic ossa decoras,
Regem olimque facis Regis honor coli.
Quatuor exceptis jam tantum qunque bis annis
Acta tricenta quidem, lustxa salutis erant,
Anteque Septembris Vndena luce Kalendas,
Redideram Rubre debita jura Rose.
At mea, quisquis eris, propter commissa precare
Sit minor ut precibus pena fienda tuis.
Issue of King RICHARD III. by Queen ANNE Daughter of RICHARD NEVIL Earl of
Warwick.
14. France and England, quarterly, a Label of three points Argent.
EDWARD Prince of Wales, Earl of Chester and Salisbury, only son of King
Richard III. born in the Castle of Middleham near Richmond in Yorkshire, An.
1473. was in the 17th year of King Edward IV. C. 332. pat. 15 Febr. 17 E. 4.
par. 2. m. 16.
his Uncle (being then under four years of age) created Earl of Salisbury; and
on the 24th of Aug. 1483. in the first year of his Fathers Reign (he being then
about ten years old) was created Prince of Wales, A. 226. chapter 1 R. 3.
and Earl of Chester, and in that Royal Procession 1 R. 3. about the City of
York, was led by Queen Anne his Mother on her left hand, Richard Grafton fol.
29. a.
having on his head a Demy-Crown appointed for the degree of a Prince. He died
in the lifetime of his Father.

Natural Issue of King RICHARD III.
14. KATHERINE PLANTAGENET, Ex ipso Autogr. pen. Tho. Herbert de Tintern in
Com. Monm. Bar.
Natural Daughter of King Richard III. was by Indenture made at London the last
of February in the first year of the said King, covenanted to be accepted in
marriage before the Feast of St Michael then next ensuing, by the Right Noble
Lord William Earl of Huntington, who thereby obliged himself to make her a fair
and sufficient Estate of certain his Manors, etc. in England to the yearly
value of 200 l. over all charges, etc.

13. GEORGE Of YORK, DUKE of CLARENCE, EARL of VVARVVICK and SALISBVRY, LORD of
RICHMOND, and GREAT CHAMBERLAIN of ENGLAND, etc.
CHAP. VIII.
In the three hundred fifty fourth page of this fifth Book is represented the
Figure of the Dukes Seal, as it was found among the Evidences of the Right
Honorable Henry Earl of Huntington, on which you have his Achievement, viz.
His Crest, Helmet, Lambrequin or Mantling, and his Shield of Arms hanging by
the sinister corner, containing France and England, quarterly, over all, a
Label of three points (Argent) each charged with a Canton (gules) which is
supported on the left side with a Bull, the right Supporter is broken off (as
are also most part of the Crest and Circumscription) there only remaining to be
seen the Legs and cloven Hoofs: by which I am very apt to credit, that the
right Supporter was also a Bull, it being the Devise of the Duke of Clarence,
as I have before noted among the several Badges of King Edward the Fourth, this
George's Brother page 382. The Grant to which the said Seal is annexed, is
dated at London the 20th of March 12 E. 4. and therein the Duke styles himself,
Georgius Dux Clarencie, Comes Warrewici et Sarum, Dominus de Richemond et
magnus Camerarius Anglie. upon his Stall at Windsor (for he was the first
Knight of the Garter, Temp. Ed. quarti) are his Shield of Arms, agreeing
exactly with those on his Seal abovementioned. The Duchess Issabel Nevil his
Wife did bear, France and England, quarterly, a Label of three points Argent,
each charged with a Canton Gules, Impaling Gules, a Saltire Argent, a Label of
three points, Gobony, Argent and Azure, the Arms of her Family of Nevil.


THis George, Catal. of Nob. by R. B.
born at Dublin in Ireland, was the sixth son of Richard Plantagenet Duke of
York, and upon his death at Wakefield in Yorkshire, by the Duchess Anne his
Mother, sent unto the City of Vtrecht, where he (with his Brother Richard)
continued till his Brother King Edward IV. had obtained the Crown of this
Kingdom. In the first year of whose Reign, An. 1461, Pol. Virg. p. 512.
and shortly after his Coronation, the said George was created into the dignity
of Duke of Clarence in a Parliament then held at Westminster in the 2 E 4. Pat.
an. 1 E. 4. p. 5. m. 16.
For the better support of his dignity he obtained a Grant in Tail-general of
several Manors, which by the attainder of the Earl of Northumberland ( an. 1
E. 4.) came to the Crown; Pat. 2. E. 4. p. 1. m. 3.
and in 5 E. 4. he was constituted Lieutenant of Ireland for the term of twenty
years. Pat. 5. E. 4. p. 1. m. 12.
But shortly after this, viz. An. 9 of King Edward IV. conceiving himself
slighted, for that the said King had preferred his Wifes Kindred to several
eminent Marriages and neglected him and his Brother the Duke of Gloucester,
Holingsh. Chron. 671 b. n. 50.
by the instigation of Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick, he designs to transfer
the Crown from King Edward's Head to that of the deposed King Henry VI. and
that Clarence might join more faithfully with him in this design, the Earl of
Warwick gives him his eldest daughter Issabel Nevil in marriage, with the one
half of the Inheritance of his Wife Anne, Ibid. n. 60.
sister and sole heir to the great Henry Beauchamp, King of the Isle of Wight,
and Duke of Warwick, and daughter of Richard Beauchamp the sixteenth Earl of
Warwick (by his second Wife Issabel daughter of Thomas Lord le Despenser Earl
of Gloucester, sister and heir of Richard Lord le Despenser. D. 1. Norff, in
calce Libri.
) She was born in the Castle of Warwick, Sept. 5. 1451. where also deceasing,
she was buried at Tewkesbury: being a Match no way inferior to any of those
King Edward had bestowed upon others.

The Duke of Clarence hereupon goes over to Calais, where he marries this Lady;
whence not long after he and his Father-in-Law, assisted by the French King
come for England; Holingsh. 675. n. 50.
where joining their Confederates they march to London, and without engaging in
a Battle deliver King Henry VI. out of the Tower, Ibid. 677. b. n. 40.
after having been prisoner almost nine years, setting the Crown on his head a
second time, and conveying him Robed in a blew Velvet Gown, through London to
the Bishops Palace, where he kept his Court; An. 1469.9 E. 4.
when in a Parliament begun at Westminster, Richard Grafton f. 210. b.
Nov. 26. An. 1469. King Edward is declared a Traitor and Usurper, his goods
Confiscated, Holingsh. 678. a. n. 16.
and the Crowns of England and France Entailed upon King Henry, and the Heirs
Males of his Body lawfully begotten, the remainder unto this George Duke of
Clarence and his Heirs Males lawfully produced, as next heir to his Father
Richard Duke of York; disenabling his elder Brother King Edward by virtue of
his atteinder.

Clarence, who to gratify his private resentments, Ibid.
had thus too successfully taken Arms against his Brother and King, did now at
leisure repent the injustice of his actions, and therefore resolves to turn the
scales even at the lowest ebb of King Edward's Fortune, who coming for England,
under pretense of gaining the Dukedom of York, is joined near Warwick by this
Duke with 4000 men, which he had raised upon pretense of assisting his
Father-in-Law, Warwick, whom he had earnestly invited to come about also.

Hereupon followed the Battle of Barnet, Edward Hall^ fol. 217.
April 14. 1470. An. 10 E. 4. being Easter day, Barnet-Field, an. 10 E. 4. 1470.
where King Edward with this Duke led the main Battle, in which great Warwick
and his Brother Marquis Mountague lost their lives, while they fought against a
Prince, whom with so much hazard and indefatigable labor they had lately
raised to the Royal Throne.

Having therefore in these greatest exigences stoutly adhered to King Edward
his Brother, in the very same year, Claus. 11 E. 4. in dorsom. 1.
viz. An. 11 E. 4. the Parliament then sitting, he did there (with many other
of the Peers) recognize his Right, and swear Fealty to Edward his eldest son;
Chart. ab. an. 12. usque 14 E. 4. n. 10 and 11.
and in the 12th of E. 4. (in consideration of that his marriage with Issabel
the eldest daughter and coheir to the beforementioned Richard Nevil Earl of
Warwick and Salisbury) was by special Letters Patent dated the 25th of March,
created Earl of Warwick and Salisbury: Pat. an. 12 E. 4. p. 1. m. 5.
and about two months after, viz. the 20th of May, 1472. (upon the surrender of
his Brother Richard Duke of Gloucester) he had the Office of Great Chamberlain
of England, granted unto him for term of life.

And in a Patent bearing date 14 E. 4. the King styles him, Pat. an. 14 E. 4.
Praecharissimus frater noster Georgius Dux Clarenciae, Comes Warrewici et
Sarum, Dominus de Richmond, magnus Camerarius Angliae, nec-non Locum-tenens
noster terrae nostrae Hiberniae. By which Titles he also wrote himself (upon
the 20th day of March; Chart. an. 12 E. 4. ex. cartis Hen. Com. Hunt.
An. 12 E. 4.) excepting that of Lieutenant of Ireland.

Thus dignified, he lived till the 17th year of that King, when (through the
envy of his Brother Richard Duke of Gloucester) being attainted of High Treason
before Henry Stafford Duke of Buckingham, then Steward of England, he was
committed to the Tower. The particulars of his charge being, That he labored
to make the World believe King Edward wrought by Necromancy, Pol. Virg. 537. n.
10.
poisoning those Subjects he hated; That he purposed to exalt himself and his
heirs to the Royal Dignity, most falsely publishing the King to be a Bastard,
and therefore incapable of Rule; That he induced several of the Kings natural
Subjects to be sworn upon the Blessed Sacrament, to him and his heirs, without
any reservation of their Allegiance; That pursuant hereunto, he had gotten an
Exemplification under the great Seal of Henry VI. declaring that if the said
King and his Son Prince Edward should die without Issue Male, that He the said
Duke and his Heirs should enjoy the Crown: to confirm which, the misapplication
of a certain Prophecy, Richard Grafton f. 240. b.
That a G. should Reign after an E. to be meant of this George (when Gloucester
more craftily lay in wind for the Game) contributed not a little.

This troubled the King much, but the Queen more, of both which the Duke was
highly mistrusted, who being now a Widdower, sent to his sister Margaret
Duchess of Burgundy, Pol. Virg. f. 537. n. 20.
to procure a marriage for him with her Husbands Daughter the Lady Mary,
against which the Queen most earnestly interposed, soliciting the Lady in
behalf of Anthony Earl Rivers her Brother, whereby the Duke received great
prejudice, and new jealousies were daily created in the King's Breast.

In short, whether Criminal or not, he was, by Parliament begun at Westminster,
15 Jan. 17 E. 4. an. 1477. attainted of High Treason, Esc. an. 18 E. 4. n. 46
and 47.
and the 18th of February next following, after he had offered his Mass-Penny
in the Tower of London, drowned in a Butt of Malmesey, his Brother the Duke of
Gloucester assisting thereat with his own proper Hands; Edward Halle fol. 246.
and though the King consented to his death, yet no sooner was it done but he
relented it extremely, and was so grieved at the remembrance thereof, as when
any solicited for the life of a condemned Person, he would openly say, Oh
unfortunate Brother! for whose life no man would make suit.

This Duke was buried at Tewkesbury in Glocestershire, ^a^al. of Nob. by R. ^.
near the Body of his Duchess, who being with Child, died of Poison not long
before.

Children of GEORGE Duke of Clarence, by ISSABEL NEVIL his Wife.
14. This Edward Earl of Warwick did bear, France and England, quarterly, with
a Label of three points gobony, Silver and Blew; for that he was Earl of
Warwick and Salisbury, by his Mother the daughter and coheir of Richard Nevil
Earl of Warwick and Salisbury, son and heir of Richard Nevil Earl of Sarum; who
being the eldest son of Ralph Nevil Earl of Westmorland by his 2d Wife Joane
Beaufort, distinguished his Saltire by the addition of a Label of three points
gobony Argent and Azure, to show his descent from the Beauforts, who bare the
Royal Arms within a Border Gobony Argent and Azure, thereby transmitting the
charge on the Border, to the Label. Which Arms (says Vincent, page 584.) are
thus set forth for this Prince, in the North-side the Choire or Chancel of All
Saints, commonly called Alhallowes in Northampton.
EDWARD PLANTAGENET, Earl of Warwick, Richard Grafton fol. 240.
the eldest Son of George Duke of Clarence and Issabel Nevil, and Nephew to
King Edward IV. was born in the Castle of Warwick. being after the death of his
Father, Earl of Warwick. He was a Child of most unhappy fortune, having from
his Cradle been nursed up in Prison, and his fatal day expedited by another
folly: For first, soon after King Edward his Uncles death, he was, Leland Itin.
vol. 6. fol. 92.
by Richard Duke of Gloucester his other Uncle, sent unto the Castle of
Sheriff-Hoton in the County of York, there to be secured (that Duke intending
to murder his two Nephews, sons of King Edward IV. and to make himself King)
where he remained, till King Henry VII. (immediately after the Battle of
Bosworth, even before his departure from Leicester) sent Sir Robert Willoughby
Knight. to the said Manor of Sheriff-Hoton, for this Edward Plantagenet Earl of
Warwick, then 15 years old, Pol. Virg. p. 546. n. 40.
and caused him to be imprisoned in the Tower of London, where he remained till
his death, which in the next place was thus occasioned; It happened that a
youth of mean birth, named Ralph Wilford, a Cord wainers son, set on by one
Patrick an Augustine Friar, to take upon him the name and person of this Earl
Edward, gave out, that he had lately escaped out of his Prison the Tower of
London, causing a great tumult amongst the Commons, who were glad to hear that
a Branch of the Plantagenets was to be restored to the Imperial Diadem; and
this was one of those winding Ivies of a Plantagenet that killed the true Tree
it self: It was most unfortunately true, Life of King Henry, by Fran. Lord
Verulam p. 6.
that at the same time, this Edward consulted with Perkin Warbeck the
counterfeit Richard Duke of York (at that time imprisoned likewise in the Tower
by King Henry VII.) about their escape, which being discovered before it could
be executed, this poor Prince was shortly after arraigned before the Earl of
Oxford (then High Steward of England, pro tempore) not simply for attempting to
escape, for that could not be Treason, but for conspiring with Perkin to raise
sedition, and to destroy the King. the Earl confessing the Indictment, Ex Rot.
vet. de Major and Vic. London.
had Judgment passed upon him the 21 of November, and was accordingly executed
upon Tower Hill, the 28th of Nov. 1499. An. 15 H. 7. After which, Rot. Parl. 19
H. 7. m. 21.
viz. 25th of Jan. 19 H. 7. the better to countenance this cruel action, His
death, 28 Nov. an. 1499.
he was attainted in the Parliament then held, so that all the favor he had,
was, Esc. virtute Officii capt. 5 Julii. 23 H. 8. n. 3.
That his Body should be sent to the Abbey of Bisham in the County of Berks,
and there Interred with those of his Ancestors.

But it was neither guilt of crime nor reason of State, could quench the
resentments of the King for this execution, since 'twas generally believed that
Perkin was but the bait to entrap this Earl, and King Henry himself laid it
upon Ferdinand King of Spain, producing Letters about the Treaty of Marriage
between Prince Arthur and that Kings Daughter, plainly declaring his jealousies
of an uninterrupted Succession as long as the Earl of Warwick lived, and his
unwillingness to expose his Daughter to troubles and dangers; whereby though
the King did in some part remove the odium from himself, yet did he withal
bring a kind of malediction upon the Marriage, which so succeeded as that
hopeful Prince enjoyed a very small time after the Nuptials, Life of King Henry
7. by Lord Verulam 196.
and the Lady Katherine her self remained a sad and religious Woman ever after,
insomuch that when King Henry VIII. his resolution of being Divorced was first
made known to her, she expressed her self to this effect, That she had not
offended, but that it was a Judgment of God, for that her former Marriage was
made in Blood, meaning that of the Earl of Warwick.

Such was the end of this noble and commiserated Prince Edward Earl of Warwick,
in whom the Male Line of the Plantagenets determined, after having flourished
in great Royalty (though often dipped in their own Blood) even from the time of
the famous King Henry II. the space of 331 years.

14. Cat. of Nob. by R. (...).
RICHARD, second Son of George Duke of Clarence, born at Tewkesbury, lived not
a quarter of a year, and deceasing the year after his Mother in the Castle of
Warwick, was interred in the Church there.

14. (...) eldest Daughter of George Duke of Clarence, G. I. in Cal^. Arm. i^
calce Libri.
was born at Sea, died an Infant, and was buried at Calais.

14. MARGARET, Ibid.
second daughter of George Duke of Clarence, was Countess of Salisbury, as in
the next and ninth Chapter.

14. MARGARET Of CLARENCE, COUNTESS of SALISBVRY.
CHAP. IX.
The Figure of Countess Margarets Seal (annexed to a Charter bearing date 1
Decembris, an. 28. H. 8.) is represented in the 354 page of this fifth Book,
unto which I refer my Reader, for the Arms impressed thereon, which are,
Clarence, Nevil, Beauchamp Warwick, Mountague, Monthermer, Clare, and le
Despensor. Penes E. A. W. Her Arms exhibited in L. 10. fol. 45. in Coll. Arm.
are Quarterly of six pieces, three in chief and 3 in base. The first is, France
and England, quarterly, a Label of three points Argent, each charged with a
Canton Gules, Clarence. 2. Gules, a Saltire Argent, a Label of three points
gobony Argent and Azure; Nevil Earl of Salisbury, 3. Gules, a Fess inter 6
Crosse-crosseletts, Or, Beauchampe. 4. Chequie, or and Azure, a Cheveron,
Ermine, Warwick. 5. Or, an Eagle displayed Vert, Mouthermer. 6. Quarterly, Or,
3 Cheverons, Gules, Clare, and quarterly, Argent, and Gules a Frett Or, over
all a Bendlet Sable, le Despenser.

Her Husband Sir Richard Pole did bear Party per Pale Or and Sable, a Saltire
ingrayled, countercharged; as appears upon his Stall in the Chapel of St
George at Windsor.


MArgaret Plantagenet, Daughter of George Duke Clarence, Edward Halle fol. 240.
a.
born at Farley Castle near Bath in Somersetshire, became the Wife of Sir
Richard Pole Knight. (Son of Sir Jeffrey Pole Knight, G. 1. in Coll. Arm. in calce
Lilri.
descended from a Family of ancient Gentry in Wales) who having valiantly
served King Henry VII. in his Wars of Scotland, Ex Coll. Rob. Glover Sowerset.
and being a person much accomplished, was made chief Gentleman of the
Bedchamber to Prince Arthur and Knight of the Garter; whereupon attending him
into. Wales, he received command to govern in those parts. The time of his
death I have not found, Parl. Pol. Virg. p. 610. n. 30.
but by the Lady Margaret his Wife, he left Issue four sons and a daughter:
After which, Ex Coll. R. Gl. S.
in the 5th year of King Henry VIII. she exhibited her Petition in Parliament
(as being only Sister and Heir of Edward Earl of Warwick and Salisbury, and
Daughter of Issabel, Ex Petit. in Parl. an. 5 H. 8.
Daughter and Heir of Richard Nevil Earl of Salisbury, Son and Heir of Alice,
Pat. 5 H. 8. p. 1.
Daughter and Heir of Thomas Mountague Earl of Salisbury) upon which she was
(upon the 14th of October, An. 5 H. 8.) in the same Parliament restored to the
Dignity of Countess of Salisbury by King Henry VIII. Herberts Hist. of H. 8. p.
447.
But proving afterward as great an eyesore to this King, as her Brother had
been to King Henry VII. his Father, she was An. 31 H. 8. condemned in
Parliament of High Treason, together with Gertrude Wife of Henry Courtney
Marquis of Exceter, Reginald Pole her son, Sir Adrian Fortescue and others,
certain Bulls from Rome being found at Cowdray (her Mansion House.) It was also
charged upon her, that the Parson of Warblington had conveyed Letters from her
to her Son ( Reginald) the Cardinal, and that she had forbidden all her Tenants
to have the New Testament in English, or any new Book privileged by the King.
What other cause there might be is uncertain. But we have sufficient testimony
that she behaved her self with great resolution (though seventy years of age)
and would not confess any thing: Nevertheless she had sentence of death passed
upon her without ever being heard: Godw. p. 166. Ibid. p. 179
And two years after, without Arraignment or Trial had her Head cut off in the
Tower of London, 27 May, 1541. 33 H. 8.

Children of MARGARET Countess of Salisbury, by Sir RICHARD POLE Knight. her
Husband.
15. HENRY POLE, H. 13. in Coll. Arm. f. 398. b.
Lord Mountague, Henry Lord Mountague did bear, quarterly of 8 pieces, 4 in
chief and 4 in base, 1 Clarence, 2 Pole, viz. Per pale Sable and Or, a Cross
ingrayled counter changed 3 Nevil Earl of Warwick. 4 Beauchamp. 5 Warwick. 6
Mountague, 7 Mounthermer, 8 Clare and le Despenser,
quarterly, as appears in D. 13. f. 102. b. M.S. in Coll. Arm.
eldest Son of Sir Richard Pole Knight. and Countess Margaret, was summoned to
Parliament, An. 21 H. 8. by the Title of Lord Mountague (as being descended
from Alice Daughter and Heir of Thomas Mountague Earl of Salisbury) and
convicted of High Treason, for endeavoring to deprive the said King Henry,
Stowes An.
in order to advance his Brother the Cardinal to the Crown, and had his Head
cut off on Tower Hill, Godw. p. 162.
the 9th of January, An. 30 H. 8. leaving Issue by his Wife Jane Daughter of
George Nevil, Baron of Abergavenny, D. 13. f. 102. b. in Coll. Arm.
two Daughters his Heirs, Katherine and Winifride.

Katherine Pole was espoused to Francis Hastings Earl of Huntington, Ex
Geneologia Com. Huntington
by whom she had Issue George Earl of Huntington, who by Dorothy daughter and
coheir of Sir John Pole of Derbishire Knight. was Father of Francis Lord Hastings,
In Pale Hastings, viz. Argent, a Mantle Sable, and Pole as aforesaid.
who died in the lifetime of his Father, leaving Issue by Sarah his Wife,
daughter of Sir James Harrington Knight. Henry Earl of Huntington, whose Wife being
Elizabeth the third daughter and coheir of Ferdinando Stanley Earl of Derby, he
had Issue by her Ferdinando Earl of Huntington, who married Lucie daughter and
sole heir of Sir John Davies of Englefield in the County of Berks Knight. (Prime
Sergeant at Law to King James and King Charles I. He was afterward Solicitor,
and then Attorney General in Ireland) by the Lady Eleanor his Wife, youngest
daughter to George Lord Audley, Earl of Castlehaven, and by her had Issue
Theophilus Earl of Huntington, now living, An. 1676; who has taken to Wife
Elizabeth daughter and coheir of Sir John Jews of Ledston, in Com. York, Knight.
19th of Febr. 1671.

Winifride Pole the second daughter and coheir, was first married to Sir Thomas
Hastings Knight, second Son of George Earl of Huntington, and Brother to the
foresaid Francis, by whom she had no Issue, Fun. Cert. l. 16. fol. 147.
In Pale Barrington, viz. Argent 3 Chereconells Gules a Label of 3 points
Azure, and Pole as before.
and afterward to Sir Thomas Barrington of Barrington Hall in Com. Essex Knight.
who had Issue by her Sir Francis Barrington of the same place Knight. and Bar. who
by Joane daughter of Sir Henry Cromwell of Hinchingbrook in the County of
Huntington Knight. was Father of Sir Thomas Barrington Knight. and Bar. who took to
Wife Frances daughter and heir of John Gobert Esquire and by her had Issue Sir John
Barrington of Barrington Hall Bar. who has married Dorothy daughter of Sir
William Litton of Knebworth in the County of Hertford Knight. and by her has Issue
Thomas, Visit. Essex 21. fol. 105.
John, William, Anne, Dorothy, Winifride, Johanna and Lucy.

15. Sir GEOFFREY POLE Knight, He did bear, Quarterly of 8 pieces, 4 in base. 1
Clarence, 2 Pole, viz. Perpale, Sable and Or, a Saltire ingrayled,
counterchanged, 3. Nevil Earl of Warwick, 4. Beauchamp. 5. Warwick, 6.
Mountague. 7. Monthermer, 8. Clare and le Despenser,
quarterly: Over all a Cressent Azure for the difference of a second Brother.
And for his Crest, out of a Ducal Coronet Gules, a Griffon with Wings expanded
Argent, membred gules. Which Achievement is thus Marshalled for this Sir
Geoffyey Pole in a Book marked D. 13. fol. 53. b. in the College of Arms.
second Son of Margaret Countess of Salisbury and Sir Richard Pole Knight. was
convicted with his Brother the Lord Mountague and others, Stowes Annals.
for endeavoring (as their Indictment imports) to deprive King Henry VIII. of
the Crown, and to raise up Reginald Pole his Brother to the Sovereignty; Visit.
D. 13. fol. 53. b. in Coll. Arm.
but suffered not death for the same.

He married Constance eldest daughter and coheir of Edmond Pakenham, had Issue
Katherine and Mary; In an old Pedigree in Manuscript.
but elsewhere I find him made great Grandfather to Geoffry and Arthur that
lately lived in Italy.

15. ARTHVR POLE, third Son, Ex Coll. R. Glover S.
in the year 1562. (5 Eliz.) being charged with purposing to go to the Duke of
Guise into France, and to return with a power into Wales, Annals Eliz. per
Camde^.
whereby the Queen of Scots might attain the Crown of this Realm, and himself
be declared Duke of Clarence, had judgment of death; but by reason of his near
alliance to Queen Elizabeth, no execution followed. He had Issue two daughters
his Heirs, Margaret and Mary.

Margaret was espoused to Sir Thomas Fitz-Herbert Knight. and Mary the second
daughter, was the Wife of Sir John Stanney Knight.

The Arms set forth for this Cardinal by Alphonsus Ciaconius, were, Quarterly
of 4 pieces, the first quarter charged with the Coat of Clarence; the second is
divided into three parts per pale, on the first Pole, on the second Nevil, and
on the 3 Beauchamp. The third quarter is party per pale Warwick and Mountague,
and the fourth quarter is divided into three parts per pale; on the first is
Monthermer, and the second and third are charged with the Arms of Clare and le
Despenser quarterly. Vide Alfonsus Ciaconius vitae and gesta summorum,
Pontificum. p. 1117. But the Arms and Quarterings of this Reginald the Cardinal
painted on the Wall over his Tomb at Canterbury are Marshalled in the same
manner with those of his Brother Sir Geoffrey Pole; but without a filial
distinction.
15. REGINALD POLE Cardinal, fourth Son of Sir Richard Pole by the said
Countess, Goodwin in Prosulibus Angli^.
was educated at Magdalen College in Oxford, where his great proficiency in
Learning was first recompensed by his Kinsman King Henry VIII. with the Deanery
of Excester; after which he traveled into Italy, and spent seven years study
at Padua. Hence the King having abolished the Pope, sent for him back into
England; but refusing to return, he was proclaimed Traitor, and his Deanery
given to another. Ibid.
This loss was soon repaired by the Pope's making him a Cardinal (22 May 1536.
An. 28 H. 8.) and employing him in many Embassies both to the Emperor and
French King, with whom he ever dealt against King Henry, and solicited others
from their obedience to him, insomuch that many homebred Subjects disliking the
cause of Papal Subversion, wrought secretly to deprive King Henry, and exalt
the Cardinal to the Royal Dignity. Next he was made Legate of Viterbium, and
with two others sent as the Pope's Vicegerent to the Council of Trent. Thus he
stood dignified when by the death of his Holiness, Ibidema (...). suprae.
a Faction arose in the Conclave of French and Imperialists, which last
prevailing, Cardinal Pole is elected Pope: Upon whose request, for a more
orderly proceeding he is again the same evening chosen to supply the vacant
Chair, notwithstanding the opposition of Cardinal Caraffa, charging him with
Incontinence and Heresy, for arguing a Justifying Faith in the Council of
Trent, and frequenting the company of Antonio Flaminus a known Protestant: But
he seemingly disliking the second Election, as a work of darkness, desired a
more regular proceeding on the morrow, when tempting his good fortune too far,
he lost the Papacy twice in one day; for the Cardinal de Monte was now chosen,
who to compliment Pole for his modesty, obliged Caraffa to ask him forgiveness
before they departed the Conclave.

Thus disappointed of the Papacy, he retired to Verona, into a Monastery of
Benedictins; where he was scarce settled before he heard of the death of King
Edward VI. by a Message from Queen Mary, remanding him for England, to be her
Director in Church Affairs, having lately introduced the Mass, and restored the
Popes Supremacy. This was no ungrateful news to the Cardinal, who besides the
esteem retained him by that Queen, had ever a longing desire homeward, not
doubting if things succeeded well in England, to dispense with his Cardinals
Hat in exchange for a Crown; which Charles the Emperor mistrusting, contrives
to detain him beyond Sea, till the Match was concluded between Queen Mary and
his Son; Pat. 1 and 2. Phil. and Mariae p. 5 Jour. of Parl.
but coming home at last as Legate from Pope Julius III. he was by the Queen
made Archbishop of Canterbury (22 Maij, An. 1555.1 and 2 Ph. and M.) the
several Acts of Parliament made by King Henry VIII. to the Cardinals prejudice
repealed, Godwin us supra.
and Lord Reginald Pole received as an Oracle, insomuch that the Parliament
humbly presented him with a Petition to be received again into the Bosom of the
Church of Rome: Ibid.
But neither that Church, the Queen, nor the Cardinal lived in England long
after, but expired together in one day, viz. 17 Nov. An. 1558.

This great Prelate thus dead, was interred in a little Chapel at the East end
of the Cathedral Church of Canterbury, near St Thomas Beckets Oratory, where he
has a Tomb of Brick, done over with Plaster, affixed to the North Wall, with
his Arms and Quarterings depicted on the said Wall over it.

15. VRSVLA POLE, Vrsula Lady Stafford, did bear, in Pale, Or, a Cheveron
Gules, Stafford, and party per pale, Sable and Or, a Saltire ingrayled
counterchanged Pole.
Lady Stafford, Ex Coll. R. Gl. S.
only Daughter o Margaret Countess of Salisbury, by Sir Richard Pole Knight. was
married to Henry Lord Stafford (son and heir of Edward Stafford, the last Duke
of Buckingham of that Family beheaded on Tower Hill, An. 13 H. 8. ( vide page
232.) whose large Revenues were his chiefest Crime, descended by a direct Line
of Barons, Earls and Dukes, from Robert Baron of Stafford, a Noble Man of very
great Possessions in the Reign of King Edward the Confessor, to whom he was
Steward of the Household.

This Henry, was after his Fathers death restored to the Barony of Stafford by
the said King Henry VIII. and had Issue Edward Lord Stafford, who by Mary his
Wife, daughter of Edward Stanley Earl of Derby, Ex Libro M.S. Staffordorum
Genealogiae.
was Father of Edward Lord Stafford, that married Issabel daughter of Thomas
Forester of Tongue in the County of Salop, Esquire and had Issue Edward Stafford that
died in the lifetime of his Father, who by Anne daughter of James Wilford of
Newman-Hall in Com. Essex, Esquire (Grandson to Sir James Wilford Knight, a valiant
and succesful Commander against the Scots, who having taken Haddington by
force, defended by a very great Garrison, not long after dying of his wounds,
there received, prevented the Honor of Viscount of that place, designed him as
a reward for that eminent service) left Issue, Henry Lord Stafford, Ibid.
after the death of his Grandfather, who died without Issue, and one only
daughter Mary Stafford (Heir to her Brother Henry Lord Stafford) born at
Newman-Hall aforesaid, Ibid. ut supra.
espoused to Sir William Howard Knight of the Bath (second son of Thomas Earl
of Arundel and Surrey, and Earl Marshal of England) who with the said Mary his
Wife, were created Baron and Baroness Stafford, September. 12. An. 16 King
Charles I. in the year 1640. and he advanced to the Dignity of Viscount
Stafford, the 11th of November next following: They have Issue, Henry Stafford,
eldest Son and Heir apparent, John and Francis ( Charles and Edward who died
young) Issabella Stafford, the Relict of John Pawlet Marquis of Winchester, and
Premier Marquis of England, Alethea Stafford, Vrsula, Mary, and Anastasia, now
living, An. 1676. and Helena, who deceased young.

14. ARTHUR PLANTAGENET, Viscount Lisle, Lieutenant of Calais, and Knight of
the Garter.
CHAP. X.
He did bear Quarterly of 4 pieces, the first France and England quarterly, the
second and third Burgh, and the fourth Mortimer, over all, a Baston sinister
Azure, and over that an Inescocheon quarterly of six pieces, three in chief and
three in base. The first Barry of six pieces Argent and Azure, 3 Torteaux in
chief. Gray Viscount Lisle. 2 Barry of 10 Argent and Azure an Orle of Martlets,
Gules, Valence. 3dly, Gules seven Mascles, three, three and one, Or, Quincy, 4
Gules, a Lion rampant, and Border ingrayled Or. Talbot. 5ly Gules a Fesse inter
six Crosse-Crossers Or, Beauchamp, and 6ly Gules, a Lion passant guardant
Argent, crowned, proper, Gerard Lord Lisle. Over the three quarterings in
Chief, is a Label of three points Argent; all these quarterings being within
the Garter. And for his Crest, upon a Chapeau Gules, embroidered Gold, and
turned up Ermine ( upon which is a capital A. in Gold for Arthur) stands his
Crest, being a Cat party per pale, Sable and Argent, betwixt two Broom stalks
blossomed proper. Which Coat Armor and Crest are thus Marshalled for this
Arthur Plantagenet in D. 13. fol. 102. a in Coll. Arm. The same Arms and Crest
are upon his Plate in his Stall in the Chapel of St George at Windsor.
ARthur Plantagenet, Catal. of Nob. by R. B.
Natural Son of King Edward IV. by the Lady Elizabeth Lucy (as was supposed)
after the surrender of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, Pat. 15 H. 8. p. 1.
20 April, 14 H. 8. was 26 April following ( viz. 15 H. 8) created Viscount
Lisle at Bridewell in London; to him and the Heirs Male of the Body of
Elizabeth his Wife Sister and Heir of John Gray late Viscount Lisle: Herbert in
eodem anno.
after which, in the Reign of the said King Henry VIII. he was elected and
enstalled Knight of the Most Noble Order of the Garter. Pat. an: 24 H. 8. p, 2.
Moreover in November, An. 1527. (19 H. 8) he was one of those whom King Henry
then sent (with Sir Thomas Wriothesley Garter King of Arms) to Paris; at what
time the Ensigns of the Order of St George were presented to King Francis I.
and upon the 24th of March, An. 24 H. 8. he was constituted Lieutenant of
Calais in France; which Town some of his Servants intending to have betrayed to
the French (two of which suffered death for the same) himself was sent to the
Tower of London; Godwin de Praesulibus Angliae p. 181.
but his innocence, after much search, appearing, the King sent him his Ring
from off his own Finger, with such comfortable expressions that he immoderately
receiving so great a pressure of joy, his Heart was overcharged therewith, Cat.
of Nob. by R. B.
and the night following (viz. 3 Martij An. 33 H. 8.) he yielded up the Ghost;
which makes it observable, that this Kings mercy was as fatal as his judgments.

His Body was honorably buried in the Tower of London.

Children of ARTHUR PLANTAGENET Viscount Lisle, by ELIZABETH GRAY his Wife.
15. BRIDGET PLANTAGENET, Catal. of Nob. by R. B.
eldest Daughter and Coheir of Arthur Viscount Lisle, was married to Ser
William Carden, who was knighted at Bullogne.

15. FRANCES PLANTAGENET, second Daughter, In Pale, Basset, viz. Argent three
Bars wavy Gules, (vide C. 1. Visit. Devon and Cornwall, in Coll. Arm. fol. 298.
a.) and Plantagenet, viz. Quarterly, 1. France and England quarterly, 2. and 3.
Burgh or Ulster, 4. Mortimer, over all a Baston Azure.
was first married to John Basset of Vmberley in the County of Devon, Catal. of
Nob. by R. B.
by whom he had Issue (16) Sir Arthur Basset of the same place Knight. who married
Eleanor daughter of Sir John Chichester of Rawley in Devonshire Knight. and had
Issue (17) Sir Robert Basset of Vmberley Knight. living An. 1620. who, Visit.
Devon. in Coll. Arm. C. 1. f. 297. b.
by Elizabeth daughter and coheir of Sir William Periam Knight. chief Baron of the
Exchequer, had Issue (18) Arthur Basset Esquire Which Arthur took to Wife (...)
daughter of (...) Leigh of Northam in the County of Devon, and had Issue, John
Basset Esquire who by (...) his Wife, one of the daughters and coheirs of (...)
Bluet of Holcombe in Somersetshire, had Issue, John Basset of Vmberley Esquire now
living, An. 1676.

The second Husband of this Frances Plantagenet, In Pale, Gules, a Cheveron,
inter three Lions heads errased Argent, Monk, and Plantagenet, viz. Quarterly,
the first France and England quarterly; the second and third Or a Cross Gules,
Ulster. 4. Mortimer, over all a Baston Azure.
was Thomas Monk (anciently named le Moyne) of Potheridge in the County of
Devon; Visit. Devon. in Coll. Arm. C. 1. f. 25. b.
by him she had Issue (16) Anthony Monk of the same place, one of the Deputy
Lieutenants of the said County, who died An. 1620. having first married Mary
daughter of Richard Arscot of Ashwater in the same County Esquire Ibid. fol. 79. a.
leaving Issue by her (17) Sir Thomas Monk of Potheridge Knight. who by Elizabeth
daughter of Sir George Smith of Madeworthy in the County of Devon Knight. had Issue
Thomas, George and Nicholas.

Thomas Monk of Potheridge Son and Heir, married Mary the daughter of William
Gold of Hayes near Exceter in the County of Devon, and had Issue Thomas Monk
who deceased at the age of 12 years; Elizabeth Monk the Wife of Thomas Pride,
who has Issue Thomas and Elizabeth; and Frances Monk, married to John le Neue
of St Giles's in the Fields, in the County of Middlesex.

George Monk, second son of Sir Thomas Monk Knight. was, after the death of his
Nephew Thomas, Lord of the Manor of Potheridge, who having through the whole
course of his life employed himself in military affairs, first both by Sea and
Land in foreign parts, and afterward at home, in His Majesty's Dominions
(where he ever merited the character of a valiant and experienced Commander) to
crown all his former actions became at last, by Gods great Providence, the
principal instrument in the restoration of His present Majesty King Charles
II. to his just Rights, and his Kingdoms to their long desired Peace.

In contemplation of which, and considering also, that by the Lady Frances
aforesaid, daughter and coheir of Arthur Plantagenet Viscount Lisle, he was
descended from Edward Gray Viscount Lisle, and Elizabeth his Wife daughter and
heir of John Talbot Viscount Lisle, Bill. sign. de a. 1 Car. 2.
son of the renowned John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, by Margaret his Wife
daughter and coheir of the valiant Richard Beauchamp Earl of Warwick; this
George was created Duke of Albemarle, Earl of Torrington, Baron Monk of
Potheridge, Beauchamp and Teys, by Letters Patents bearing date at Westminster,
7 Julij, in the 12th year of our most gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles II.
to Him and the Heirs Male of his Body for ever; with a Fee of 20 l. per annum,
out of the Exchequer; and 40 l. per annum, payable for the said Dukedom, out of
the Customs of London.

He was also in the same year, constituted Captain General of His Majesty's
Forces, Master of the Horse, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and
one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.

He deceased upon the 4th day of Jan. 1669. and was honorable Interred upon
the last day of April next following, on the North-side the Chapel of King
Henry VII. in a Vault prepared for him and his Family near to the Tomb of Queen
Elizabeth.

He married She died an. 1669. Jan. 23.
Anne daughter of John Clarges, and sister of Sir Thomas Clarges Knight. by whom he
had Issue their only Child Christopher Duke of Albemarle, Earl of Torrington,
The Paternal Arms of Anne Duchess of Albemarle, were, Barry of 12 Argent and
Azure, on a Quarter Sable; a Roms head couped, Argent, accorned with 4 Horns Or
(as being descended from the Family of Glarges in Heynalt, which appears by a
Certificate (entered in the Earl Marshals Book, marked I. 25. fol. 163 and 164.
in the College of Arms) under the Hand and Seal of Corneille de Montigny de
Glarges, chief of that House, and Knight of the Order of St. Michael. But the
Augmentation granted unto her by His Majesty, is, Azure, a Flower de Lize Or,
within a Border of the second, charged with 8 Roses Gules.
Baron Monk of Potheridge, Beauchamp and Teys, one of the Bedchamber to His
present Majesty, Knight of the Garter, and One of the Lords of His Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council; who took to Wife the Lady Elizabeth Cavendish,
eldest Daughter of Henry Duke of Newcastle, (Son and Heir of William Duke of
Newcastle, who deceased Dec 25. being Christmas day, 1676.) by whom he has
already had Issue a Son, who lived not long after he came into the World.

Funeral Certificates in the College of Arms.
Nicholas Monk, third son of Sir Thomas Monk of Potheridge, consecrated Bishop
of Hereford, 13 Jan. 1660. and was also Provost of Eaton College; a person
very instrumental to his Brother the Duke of Albemarle, in the Restoration of
our present Sovereign. He deceased at his Lodgings in the old Palace of
Westminster, on Tuesday, 11 December. 1661. and was conveyed thence to the
Jerusalem Chamber in the Dean of Westminsters house, whence with funeral
solemnity he was carried to the Abbey, and interred in St. Edmond's Chapel;
the Duke of Albemarle his Brother being chief Mourner, and the Bishop of
Gloucester preaching his Funeral Sermon.

Fairwel does bear. Sable a Cheveron inter 3 Escolleps Argent, a Cressent for a
difference.
He married Susanna daughter of Thomas Pain of Plimtree, in Devonshire, by
whom he left at the time of his decease, two daughters: Mary the elder daughter
and coheir, was married to Arthur Fairwell of Westminster Esquire (Son and Heir of
Arthur Fairwell of Barington in the County of Somerset Esquire son and heir of
Arthur Farewell of the same place, younger Brother of Sir George Farewell of
Hill-Bishops in the said County, Knight.) by whom he has had Issue Arthur Fairwell
his eldest Son, now living, An. 1677. Albemarle second, George third Son, and
Christopher fourth Son, all three deceased. And Elizabeth Monk, second daughter
and coheir, the Wife of Curwen Rawlinson of Carke in Cartmale in Lancashire;
and by him has Issue a Son.

15. ELIZABETH PLANTAGENET, Lady Jobson, third daughter and coheir of Arthur
Viscount Lisle, Catal. of Nob. by R. B.
was married to Sir Francis Jobson Knight. who had been Master of the Jewel-house,
Pally of six pieces, Argent and Azure, over all a Cheveron Ermine, inter 3
Eaglets, Or, by the name of Jobson. Impaling Quarterly of four The first France
and England quarterly. The second and third Or, a Cross Gules. The fourth
Mortimer. Over all a Baston sinister Azure. This Impalement is entered among the
Certificates of Robert Cook Clarenceux, in the College of Arms.
and afterward Lieutenant of the Tower of London.

By him she had Issue these Children following, Cert. Fun. by Clar. Cook in
Coll. Arm.
viz. John Johson eldest son, Edward second son, Henry third son, and Thomas
Jobson fourth son, and one only daughter named Mary. The said Sir Francis
deceased at his house called Moakwike in West-Donyland in the County of Essex,
on Thursday 11 June 1573. and was buried in the Parish Church of St. Giles's
near Colchester the 29th following.

He did bear the Arms of his Father, with the distinction of a Cressent.
Edward Jobson, Cert. Fun. I. 10. fol. 198. in Coll. Arm.
second son of Sir Francis Jobson Knight. (for I find not what became of the
eldest) deceased 28 May, An. 1590. at Trinity Hall without Aldersgate, and was
Interred the 30th of the same month in the Parish Church of St. Botolph
Aldersgate His first Wife was Mary daughter of Edmond Markham of Essex, by whom
he had no Issue. His second Wife was Mary daughter of John Bode, and by her had
Issue two daughters, Mary and Elizabeth.

BOOK VI. The Union of the Roses. OR, The ROYAL HOUSE of TUDOR.

CONTAINING A Genealogical History OF THE KINGS OF ENGLAND, etc. From HENRY
VII. to King JAMES.

From the Year 1486. to the Year 1603.

Henricus dei gra rex anglie and francie and dominus hibernie


Henricus dei gracie Rex anglie et francie et dominus Hibernie


Viro Ho^oratissimo D^^ IOANNI ERNLEY Equiti aurato ad screniss: D. Regem Carll
Scaccarij Cancellario et ejusdem Majestatis esecretioribus Consilijs, Sigillum
hoc HD. F. S.



blazon or coat of arms

CAPVT HENRICus OCTAV^S DEI GRATIA ANGLIE FRANCIE ET HIBERNIE REX FIDEI DE
FE^SOR ET I^ TERA ECCLESIE A^GLICANE ET HIBERNICE SVPREMV^


Viro Pr^stantissimo SAMUELI PEPYS Armijero, Ad. S. D. Regem CAROLUN II.
Admiralitati Anglioe. a Secretis: Sigillum hoe H.D. ^. S.



blazon or coat of arms

CAPVT HENRICus OCTAV^S DEI GRATIA ANGLIE FRANCIE ET HIBERNIE REX FIDEI DE
FE^SOR ET I^ TERA ECCLESIE A^GLICANE ET HIBERNICE SVPREMV^


CAPVT EDWARDus SEXTus GRA A^GLIE FRANCIE ET HIBERNIE REX FIDEI DEFE^SOR ET IN
TERRAE ECCLESIE A^GLICANE ET HIBERNICE SVPREMV^


CAPVT EDWARDus SEXTus D G ANGLIE FRANCIE ET HIBERNIE REX FIDEI DEFENSOR ET IN
TERRA ECCLESIE ANGLICA^E ET HIBERNICE SVPREMV^


Viro Spectatissimo D. GLORGIO IEFFERYS Equiti Aurato, (...) consilijs ^^i
Regis in Lege erudito, ac Civitatis London. (...) Lege^ Servienti Sigillum hoc
HD. F S.



blazon or coat of arms

* PHILIP ET MARIA D G REX ET REGINA ANGL HISPANIAR FRANC VTRIVSQ SICILIE
JERUSALEM ET HIB FIDEI DEFE^SOR


ARCHDVCES AVSTRIE DVCES BVRGVNDIE MEDIOLANI ET BRABANCIE COMITE HAPVRGI
FLANDRIE ET TIROLIS


Viro Pravalido RANDOL PHOL^^RTON, de BETLLEY in Agro Staffordiensi Armigero ad
Sereniss Do^ Reg^ CAROLUMIL Sanlli^ij ^^^^llini, Summo Subducenario ot Praet^^i
(...). H. D. F. S.



blazon or coat of arms

REGINA FIDEI DEFENSOR ELIZABETH DEI GRATIA ANGLIE FRANCIE ET HIBERNIE


REGINA FIDEI DEFENSOR ELIZABETH DEI GRATIA ANGLIE FRANCIE ET HIBERNIE


Fortissimo Consultissimo^^ Viro D^EGIDIO STRANGWAYS Armigero Seronissimi Dm^:
nostri Caroli II: Regis e Sanctioribus Consilijs Domini Iohannis Strang^^a^s
Equitis Aurati Primo ^enito Hoc Elizabeth^ Reginoe sigillum DDD. F. S.



blazon or coat of arms

A GENEALOGICAL TABLE of the Sixth BOOK.
14. HENRY VII. King of England, and France, and Lord of Ireland, p. 433.
ELIZABETH the eldest Daughter of King Edward IV and Sister to King Edward V. p.
436. 15. ARTHUR Prince of Wales, p. 445. KATHERINE of Spain, p. ibidem. JANE
Seamour, his 3d Wife, p. 450. 16. EDWARD VI. King of England, France, and
Ireland, etc. p. 467.
HENRY VIII. King of England, France, and Ireland, p. 449. KATHERINE of Spain
first Wife p. 457. MARY Queen of England, France, and Ireland, etc. p. 473.
ANNE Bullen, second Wife, p. 458. ELIZABETH Queen of England, France, and
Ireland, etc. p. 482.
ANNE of Cleve, fourth Wife, p. 459. KATHERINE Howard 5 Wife, p. 459. KATHERINE
Parr, 6 Wife, p. 460. MARGARET Queen of Scots, wife of King James IV. p. 447
and 495. JAMES V. King of Scots, p. 497. MARY of Lorrain, p. 497. 17. FRANCIS
II. the French King first Husband of Mary Queen of Scots, p. 502. MARY Queen of
Scots, only Daughter of King James V. p. 500 and 502.

ARCHIBALD Douglas Earl of Angus, second Husband, p. 496. MARGARET Douglas the
Wife of Matthew Stewart Earl of Lenox, p. 497. HENRY Stewart Lord Darley second
Husband, p. 500 and 503. 18. JAMES VI. King of Scots the first Monarch of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland, vide Book 7. Chap. 1. CHARLES Stewart Earl of
Lenox, second Son, p. 501. ELIZABETH Cavendish, ibid. ARABELLA Stewart, married
to William Seymour Earl of Hertford, etc. ob. s. prole, p. 501.



MARY Queen of France, Wife of Lewis XII. p. 509 and 448. CHARLES Brandon Duke
of Suffolk, second Husband, p. 509. FRANCES Wife of Henry Gray Duke of Suffolk,
p. 510. JANE Wife of Guilford Dudley, ob. s. prole. p. 510. KATHERINE married
to Edward Seymour Earl of Hertford, p. 510. EDWARD Seymour Lord Beauchamp, p.
510.
MARY the Wife of Martin Keys, ob. s. prole p. 512.
ELEANOR second Daughter married to HENRY Clifford Earl of Cumberland, p. 512.
MARGARET Clifford, Heir of her Mother, was married to Henry Stanley Earl of
Derby, p. 512.



portrait of Henry VII K HENRY VII
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT portrait of Henry VIII K HENRY VIII
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT portrait of Edward VI K EDWARD VI
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT 14. HENRY VII. KING of ENGLAND and
FRANCE, Anno Dom. 1485. Aug, 22.
and LORD of IRELAND, Surnamed TVDOR.
CHAP. 1.
The Figure of this Kings Seal is exhibited in the 426. page of this sixth
Book, little differing from that of King Richard III. only the ground of the
Counter-Seal, (resembling the Mashes of a Net) is diapred with a Rose upon
every Lozenge and a Flower de Lize upon cach Knot. The Roses being to show his
descent from the Lancastrians, and the Flowers de Lizes, his Royal Blood from
Queen Katherine of France his Grandmother: neither do his Titles in the
circumference thereof, differ from those of his Predecessors King Edward IV.
and King Richard III. being Henricus dei gracia cer Anglie et Francie et
dominus Hibernie. Every space betwixt these words in the Counter-Seal is
charged with a Rose. His most glorious Monument at Westminster (delineated in
the end of this Chapter) contains all the Trophies of this King Henry VII. for
upon the foot thereof, are placed his Royal Arms, viz. France and England
quarterly within the Garter, Ensigned with an arched Crown, composed of Crosses
and Flowers de Lizes; and betwixt each of them a Flow^y of a less size. At the
head you have a large Rose crowned, Supported on the right side with a Red
Dragon. the Ensign of Cadwalader, the last King of the Britains, from whom by a
male Line he is said to derive his Pedigree. This Red Dragon, painted upon
white and green Silk in his Standard at Bosworth, was afterward offered up
(among other Trophies of his Victory) at St Paul's, and commemorated by the
institution of a Pursivant of Arms, by the name of Rouge Dragon. Which Standard
is also represented at the foot of his Tomb on the South-East-Corner, held by
an Angel. The left Supporter of this King is a Greyhound argent accolled Gules,
which he did bear in the right of his Wife Queen Elizabeth of York, who was
descended from the Family of the Nevils, by Anne her Grandmother, the daughter
of Ralph Nevil Earl of Westmorland, Wife of Richard Duke of York.

His Monument is also adorned with the Portcullis in respect of his descent (by
his Mother) from the Beauforts, to which he added the Motto ALTERA SECURITAS,
it is probable meaning thereby, that as the Portcullis was an additional
security to the Gate; so his descent from his Mother strengthed his other
Titles. From this Devise he also instituted another Pursivant, named Portcullis.

In respect also of the union of the two Houses of Lancaster and York by his
Marriage, he used the White Rose united with the Red, as appears on his
Monument. And to commemorate his being Crowned with King Richard's Diadem at
Bosworth Field, found in an Hawthorne Bush, he bare the Hawthorne Bush with the
Crown in it, and these Letters K. H. with which the Windows of this his Royal
Chapel are replenished.


THis wise and noble Prince Henry, Catal. of Nob. by R. B.
son of Edmond of Hadham Earl of Richmond (eldest son of Owen Tudor and Queen
Katherine, Relict of Henry V.) by Margaret sole Daughter of John Duke of
Somerset, son of John Earl of Somerset, son of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster,
by Katherine Swinford, his third Wife, was born in Pembroke Castle, about the
year 1455. who being yet a Child, Edward Halle fol. 224.
and a Scholar of Eaton College, was there by King Henry VI. prophetically
entitled the decider of the then difference between that Prince and King Edward
IV. In the 11th year of whose Reign he fled with his Uncle Jasper Earl of
Pembroke into Britain, where he remained till the third year of the Reign of
King Richard III. whose Tyranny and Usurpation being now become odious, a
remedy is consulted of by the Duke of Buckingham, and John Morton Bishop of
Ely; the result of which was, that the Earl of Richmond being next heir of the
House of Lancaster, should take to Wife the Lady Elizabeth eldest daughter to
King Edward the Fourth, the very heir of the House of York, that so the two
Roses being united in one, an unquestionable Title might be set up to depose so
cruel a Murderer.

Accordingly the design is first communicated to his Mother the Countess of
Richmond, next to Queen Elizabeth and the Earl himself, and by him to Duke of
Britain, while instruments are employed on all hands to draw in parties to the
Confederacy; on the other side King Richard, acquainted with the Plot, first
sollicites the Duke of Britain to detain the Earl Prisoner, and then sends for
the Duke of Buckingham; who refusing to come, the King marches toward him with
his Forces, Richard Grafton f. 41. 41. b.
when the Duke prevented by the interposition of the overflowing Severn, from
joining the Forces he had collected in Wales, with those the Courtneys had got
in Devonshire and Cornwall, was forced to shift for himself, while his
Accomplices, either by conveying themselves into Britain to the Earl of Richmond,
or by Sanctuary, or Obscurity, are forced to consult their own safety.

In the mean while the Earl of Richmond (assisted by the Duke of Britain) on
the 12th of October 1484. Anno 1484.
with 40 Ships and 5000 Britains put to Sea, but dispersed and forced back by
stress of weather, he lands in Normandy, and being aided by the French King,
solemnly vows to prosecute the War, in order to his marrying the Lady
Elizabeth, and depose King Richard.

Whereupon with about 2000 Mercenaries he again puts to Sea, Anno 1485.
the middle of August, landed at Milford Haven in Wales, Edward Halle 30. a.
Ibidem f.
and proceeding thence by Hereford and Lichfield, meets the Kings Army near
Bosworth in Leicestershire, Bosworth Field Aug. 22. 1485.
where (having by the way been strengthened by the Earl of Pembroke and other
Forces out of Wales and Shropshire; and here lastly, by the Lord Stanley,
Richard Grafton f. 54. a.
(and others who withdrew themselves from the Kings part) he gives them Battle,
wherein King Richard being slain, the Earl is saluted King, 22 Aug. An. 1485.

Thus victorious, he sends Sir Robert Willoughby from Leicester to the Castle
of Sheriff-Hutton in Yorkshire, for the only remaining Root of Danger, Edward
Plantagenet, son and heir to George Duke of Clarence, then 15 years old, whom,
with the Lady Elizabeth, eldest daughter of King Edward IV. King Richard had
there kept Prisoner all his Reign; him he sent to the Tower of London, and her
in a very honorable manner to the Queen her Mother, intending shortly to marry
her according to his Promise.

Next he proceeds for London, where, Stow. Annal. Fabian.
at Shoreditch he was met by the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs, and sumptuously
attended to St Paul's, Edward Halle fol. 1. b. in vita H. 7.
where he offered his three Standards, the first of St George, the second a Red
fiery Dragon, upon green and white Sarcenet, and the third a dun Cow upon a
yellow Tartern: His Coronaon 30 October. an. 1485.
after which, at a Council held in the Bishop of Londons Palace, a day was
appointed for his Coronation, His Marriage.
and another for the solemnization of his Marriage; accordingly 30 October. 1485.
he was with great Pomp crowned at Westminster by Thomas Bourchier Archbishop of
Canterbury, At the foot of King Henry VII. his Monument, are the Arms of this
Queen Elizabeth of York his Wife (carved in Copper, Ensigned with a Royal
Crown, and Supported by two Angels, all of the same metal) viz. France and
England quarterly; Impaling quarterterly of four pieces, the 1. France and
England quarterly, 2. Ulster 3. also Ulster, and 4. Mortimer. Which are thus
painted in very many Glass Windows. But different from these is the Impalement
of this Queen Elizabeth carved in Stone, and painted on the South Wall of our
Lady Chapel in the Cathedral Church at Winchester. Being, Per pale, France and
England quarterly; the Femmes side also party per pale, France and England
quarterly on the dexter-side, and quarterly Mortimer and Vlster on the
sinister. Over these Arms upon a Scrole are these words, In gloriain de^,

She also joined her White Rose per pale, with her Husband King Henry's Red
Rose as is evident in the West Window of this Kings magnificent Chapel at
Westminster.


and 18 Jan. 1486. solemnly married to the said Lady Elizabeth, John Speed p.
942. col. 2. out of Bern. Andreas M.S.
which was celebrated by them with all religious and glorious Magnificence, and
by the people with all expressions of joy and satisfaction.

But first a Parliament is called at Westminster, Holingsh.
17 Nov. wherein diverse Lords and Commons attainted by King Richard are
restored to their Estates and Dignities, and the said King Richard with his
Assistants at the Battle of Bosworth, viz. John late Duke of Norfolk, Thomas
Earl of Surrey, Francis Viscount Lovel, Walter Devereux late Lord Ferrers, John
Lord Zouch, etc. attained, though diverse of them were afterward pardoned and
restored, as others were who came in upon the Proclamation of Grace. Ibid.
Thus dealt he with his Enemies; and as for his Friends, first Jasper Earl of
Pembroke his Uncle he created Duke of Bedford, then Thomas Lord Stanley Earl of
Derby, the Lord Chandos a Britain, Earl of Bath, etc. Morton he made
Archhishop of Canterbury, and Fox Bishop of Winchester and Lord Keeper of his
Privy Seal; and for the security of his person he first constituted the Guard
of Yeomen continued to this day. Edward Halle fol. 3. in vita H. 7.


Thus peace and quiet seemed firmly settled, when two several Impostors
successively springing up, Pol. Virg. in H. 7.
occasioned much trouble to the King, Speed out of Bern. Andr. M.S.
and disquiet to the State; the first Lambert Symnel a Shoomakers Son,
pretending himself to be the young Earl of Warwick, and to have lately escaped
out of the Tower, instigated thereto by the Duchess of Burgundy, sister to the
late King Edward IV. out of mere spleen to the House of Lancaster. Him the
Nobility of Ireland salute as King, and aid with a great number of Almains,
Irish and others, with which he landed in Lancashire, Richard Grafton f. 10. a.
and gave King Henry Battle at Stoke near Newark upon Trent in Nottinghamshire,
16 June, An. 1487. But being after a bloody dispute overthrown, and the
principal Actors, viz. the Earl of Lincoln, Battle of Stoke, 16 of June, 1487.
Martin Swarde, the Lord Lovel, Pol. Virg.
the Lord Maurice Fitz-Thomas, etc. with 4000 common Soldiers, slain upon the
place; himself, with one Richard Symond a Priest his first Fosterer, were
taken; however Symonds was pardoned, because a Priest, and Lambert, for that he
was a child, first made a Turnspit in the Kings Kitchen, and afterward one of
his Falconers.

After which, Anno 1487.
till the appearing of the next Counterfeit, Edward Halle fol. 11. a. b.
the state of Affairs at home yielded little memorable, besides the Kings
progress into the North about the middle of August to settle the minds of those
people, when from Newcastle upon Tine, sending Ambassadors into Scotland, a
Truce was concluded with that King for seven years. Coronation of Queen
Elizabeth.
Only the Coronation of the Queen followed on St Katherines day in November
after, and was sumptuously performed at Westminster.

But as to his Concerns abroad, we find him (by Christopher Vrswick his
Commissioner) mediating a Peace between the French King Charles VIII. and
Francis II. Duke of Britain; Scevole and Lovis de S^ March p. 1330.
whereupon ensued certain Articles of Agreement; but the preparations for War
not ceasing, the Lord Woodvile (Uncle to the Queen) moved King Henry to aid the
Duke; which the King denying, himself with 400 men go over to his assistance;
and at length on the 27th of July, 1488. giving the French battle, were
overthrown, Anno 1488.
and the Lord Woodvile with most of the English slain on the place: which King
Henry very ill resenting, Edward Halle f. 14 and 15.
8000 men are presently sent to aid the Britains; but the Duke dying in the
interim, the English return home, leaving the French King Charles VIII. to
marry Anne his daughter the sole heir of Britain, who thereby annexed that
Duchy to the Crown of France. Scevole and Lovis de St March p. 292.
This Anne was after his death espoused to his Successor King Lewis XII. by
whom she had Issue Claude Queen of France, the Wife of King Francis I. Richard
Grafton f. 17.
For this Expedition a Subsidy of every tenth penny being granted King Henry in
Parliament, but refused to be paid in the North, the Earl of Northumberland,
Lord President, having received a strict order to see the same levied, was
slain by the tumultuous Commons. Anno 1490.
But the Earl of Surrey having suppressed them, their Leader John Chambers with
some others were hanged at York, and the Subsidy collected notwithstanding.

Next we find him assisting the Emperor Frederick against the French, whom the
Inhabitants of Gaunt and Bruges in Flanders, then in Rebellion, had lately
called in: for the reducing of which King Henry sends the Lord Morley with 1000
men to Calais, Richard Grafton f. 24 and 25.
who joining the Lord d' Aubeny (then Deputy there) they march by night from
Calais to Newport, and so to Dixmuyd, being in all about 2000; hence the Lord
d' Aubeny caused all the Horses to be sent back, which the Lord Morley refusing
to do, was killed by a Gun Shot, whilst the English, after the first discharge,
falling flat on their faces, escaped the fury of the Enemies Cannon, gaining a
signal Victory and very great Booty: Which the Lord Cords (the French Governor
of Picardy) thinking to revenge, presently besieged Newport with 20000 men, and
entering the Town, set up his Standard on the Tower thereof, when suddenly a
Bark arriving with only 80 fresh English Archers, so terrified them, that
leaving their Banner in the place, they immediately quit the Siege, and
returned to Helding.

Thus stood the state of Affairs, John Speed Chron.
when the French King, Anno 1492.
in order to his Marriage with the foresaid Anne, sole daughter of Francis Duke
of Britain, at that time affianced to Maximilian King of the Romans, sends back
to her Father his late contracted Lady, Margaret daughter of the said
Maximilian: Whereupon the Emperor, to revenge so manifest an Injustice, so far
prevails by his Ambassadors with King Henry, that he (8 October. 1492.) with a
puissant Army, set sail for Calais, where it was agreed, the Emperors Forces
should join him; which failing, King Henry was in no small suspense whether to
return without action, or singly engage the French Army; at length resolving
upon the Siege of Bologne, and having actually invested the same, a Peace is
immediately sought by the French, Speed out of Bern. Andr. M. S
and upon these Conditions concluded, That King Henry, without quitting his
claim to France, should, in consideration of a Peace during the lives of both
Kings, receive for the present 745000 Ducats, amounting to 186250 Pounds
English, besides 25000 Crowns yearly, with many great Presents to his Nobility
and Servants, with which he returned to Calais, and in December after to
Westminster, where he kept his Christmas.

King Henry had not long enjoyed himself in this tranquillity, Anno 1495.
when that other Counterfeit, Pol. Virg. Ber. Andr. M. S.
Perkin Warbeck (pretended Son, supposed Base-Son, but certain God-Son of King
Edward IV.) began to appear in the World, with more probable pretense both of
person and descent; long sought for, and at last found out by the means of the
aformentioned Duchess of Burgundy, in age and similitude both of Body and Face
to the young Richard Duke of York, some few years before murdered with his
Brether King Edward V. Him she first sends into Portugal, Richard Graston in
vita H. 7.
thence to Ireland, where; (as afterward in Paris) he was for a while most
Prince like received; the French King appointing a Guard to attend his Person:
Next he repairs to his Foundress the Lady Margaret, who at first seemingly
suspects him, but afterward owns for her true Nephew, ordering him a Guard of
30 persons, and calling him the White Rose of England: Stow. Annal.
Upon which, many of the English incline to him, visit him, and complement him.
King Henry on the other side keeps a watchful eye over him, and by his Spies
sent over into Flanders, informs himself of the whole Intrigue, and causes Sir
Simon Montford, John Ratcliff Lord Fitz-Walter, William d' Aubeny, and Sir
William Stanley Lord Chamberlain to be beheaded, as favorers of the Impostor;
this last upon Tower Hill, 16 Febr. 1495. for that he had been heard to say,
Pol. Virg.
That if he really knew that Perkin Warbeck was the true Son of King Edward IV.
he never would be engaged to fight against him: A severe requital however of
his high merits at Bosworrh Field.

Anno 1496.
Shortly after, Richard Grafton.
Perkin having collected some Ships and Money together, lands at Sandwich, where
finding suitable reception, he sails into Ireland, and there having got some
small force, he went into Scotland, and prevailed so far with that King, that
he not only entertained him with great State, and gave him the Lady Katherine
Gourdon daughter of Alexander Earl of Huntley to Wife, Richard Grafton in vita
H. 7. fol. 39. b.
a young Maid of excellent beauty and virtue, but speedily raised him a strong
Army, with which having entered and spoiled Northumberland, he returned to
Edinburgh. King Henry to revenge this indignity sends the Lord d' Aubeny with a
Puissant Army toward Scotland; but a commotion arising in Cornwall, Ibidem f.
41. a.
about the payment of the Subsidy to that end lately granted, he is remanded to
oppose the Rebels, with whom James Touchet Lord Audley unhappily joining,
became their Leader, from Wells to Salisbury, thence to Winchester, and so to
Blackheath near London; where being overcome by the Kings Forces, and the chief
Authors, Pol. Virg.
Thomas Flamock a Lawyer, and Michael Joseph a Smith, taken, the Lord Audley is
led from Newgate to Tower Hill, in a Coat of his own Armories, painted on
Paper, Anno 1497.
reversed and torn, is there beheaded on the 20 day of June, 1497. and the
other two drawn, hanged, and quartered. In the mean time the Scots again
invading Northumberland, are repulsed by the Earl of Surrey; but by the
mediation of the King of Spain, a Peace is concluded between the two Kings, and
Perkin banished the Scottish Dominions.

Hence then, with his Wife and Family, he sets sail for Ireland, and thence for
Cornwall, where being saluted King, by the name of Richard IV. and having
collected about 6000 Men, he besieges Exceter; Richard Grafton f. 46. a.
but upon the approach of Giles Lord d'Aubeny with a Potent Army, he retires to
Taunton, and thence by night to Beaulieu near Southampton; where, having a
while remained in Sanctuary, he rendered himself, and so was sent to the Tower
of London.

Here Perkin had not been long, before he made his escape to the Prior of Sheen
near Richmond; who procuring his life, he publicly confessed the whole
Imposture, and so was sent again to the Tower; when, shortly after, Stowes
Annals.
for practicing the death of Sir John Digby then Lieutenant, whereby to escape
with Edward Earl of Warwick, and raise another Insurrection, on the 16th of
November, 1499. he was arraigned and condemned at Westminster, and the 23 of
the same month hanged at Tyburn, Anno 1499.
Richard Grafton f. 50. a.
after having troubled King Henry and the State the space of seven or eight
years. And the beforenamed Earl of Warwick, Edward Plantagenet, consenting (as
the fame went) to break prison, Raphael Holingsh. p. 778. c. 2.
and to depart out of the Realm with Perkin, was the 21 day of November
arraigned before the Earl of Oxford Lord High Steward, for the said Treason;
and upon his confession, had Judgment passed upon him, and was beheaded at
Tower Hill the 28th day of the same month.

The King having thus rid himself of these two Impostors, the next considerable
occurrence is the solemnization of two great Marriages; Ibid. p. 788 col. 2.
the first of his eldest Son Arthur, with Katherine daughter to Ferdinand King
of Spain, on the 14th of November: on whom, in consideration of her Portion of
200000 Ducats, a Jointure was settled of the third part of the Principality of
Wales, Cornwall and Chester. Anno 1901,
The other of his eldest Daughter Margaret, with James IV. King of Scotland, by
Proxy, published on St Paul's day, at St Paul's Cross, with Te Deum and great
Acclamations of Joy, and solemnly Consummated at Edinburgh in Angust following;
her Portion 10000 l. and her Jointure 2000 l. per annum. Concerning which, when
some of the Council objected, That by this means the Crown of England might
come to the Scottish Nation, King Henry made Answer, That it would not be an
accession of England to Scotland, but of Scotland to England.

Prince Arthur, Ralph Holingshed p. 790. col. 2.
presently after his Marriage, was sent to Ludlow, and within five months
after, viz. 2 April, An. 1502. departing this life at the Castle there, was on
St Marks day following, conveyed to Bewdly, and the next day to Worcester,
where the morrow following he was sumptuously interred in the Cathedral there.
Hereby the Lady Katherine being left a young Widow, and King Henry loath to
return her Portion, by Dispensation from Pope Julius the Second, had her
re-married to his second Son Henry Duke of York; which, on the 25th of June,
1503. was at the Bishop of Salisbury's Palace in Fleet Street, sumptuously
solemnized.

The Excellent Prince Arthur had not been long dead, when, on Saturday the 11th
of February following, l. 3. f. 20. in Coll. Arm.
An. 18 H. 7.1502. Her death. Anno 1502.
his Mother Queen Elizabeth died in Childbed in the Tower of London, Raphael
Holinshed p. 709. c. 2.
on the very day of her birth, in the 37th year of her age, the 18th of her
Marriage, and the 16th from her being crowned Queen. Upon whose decease, it was
ordained through all the Realm, that in Colleges, Parish Churches, Her burial.
and other Religious Houses, especially within the City of London, solemn
Diriges and Masses should be performed, with ringing of Bells and such like
Ceremonies. For the embalming whose Body, there was allowed 60 Else of Holland,
Ell-broad, with Gums, Balms, Spices, Sweet Wines and Wax; with which being
cered, the Kings Plumber closed it in Lead, with an Epitaph likewise in Lead,
showing who and what she was; which, chested in Boards, sufficiently cered, and
covered with black Velvet, with a Cross of white Damask, and the Quire of the
Chapel of the Tower adorned with a Hearse of five Principals, with burning
Lights about the Church, and all the Windows railed about a good height,
furnished with burning Tapers, and hung with black Cloth, garnished with
Escocheons of the Kings Arms, and of the Defunct; the Corpse was the Sunday
after placed under the said Hearse, and covered with a rich Cloth of black
Velvet, with a Cross of Cloth of Gold; and then an Officer of Arms, with an
audible voice said a Pater Noster for the Soul of Queen Elizabeth, and of all
Christian Souls; and at every Kyrie-Eleyson, and at Oremus before the Collect,
Animabus in like manner.

The Corpse being conveyed into a Chair, whose bayles, sides, and coffers were
covered with black Velvet, with a Cross of white Cloth of Gold well fringed;
and an Image or Personage adorned like the Queen in her very rich Robes of
Estate, and her very rich Crown on her Head, her Hair about her Shoulders, her
Scepter in her right Hand, and her Fingers well garnished with Rings of Gold
and Precious Stones, and on every end of the Chair a Gentlewoman-Usher,
kneeling on the Coffers, was in this manner drawn by six Horses, trapped with
black Velver, and all the draught of the same, from the Tower to Westminster.
On the Fore-horse and the Thiller rode two Chariot-men, and on the four other,
four Hench-men in black Gowns and mourning Hoods, every Horse having four
Lozenges of the Queens Arms on Sarcenet, viz. one on each Shoulder, and one on
each Buttock, with an Escocheon of Paste on their Heads: By every Horse a
Person of Honor on foot in a mourning Hood, and at every corner of the Chair a
In token that she deceased in Childbed.
white Banner of our Lady, borne by a Knight; and on each side of the Chair
certain Knights and Esquires, the Horsemen bearing the Banners. Next there were
ordained eight Palfreys, sadled, trapped and empareilled with black Velvet, for
the The Lady Katherine. The Lady Elizabeth Stafford. The Countess of Essex. The
Lady Herbert. The Lady Lucy of Montague. The Lady Anne Percy. The Lady Lisle.
The Lady Scroop of Vpsal.
eight Ladies of Honor to follow the Chair, who rode single in their Slops and
Mantles, every Horse led by a Man on foot, without an Hood, in a Demi black
Gown; followed by a second Chair, drawn by six Horses in Mourning, accompanied
with many Lords, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, the Kings Officers, the
several Orders of Friars, and a great number of Citizens all in Mourning. Thus
the Streets being all set with Torches and Tapers, they arrive at
Charing Cross; where the Quire of St Paul's departing, they were met by the
Abbot of Westminster and Bermondsey in Pontificalibus, with the Covent of that
place in black Copes who Censed the Corpse, and so in order proceeded to the
Churchyard of St Margaret, where it was removed out of the Chair, and conveyed
into the Abbey to the Hearse, curiously wrought with Imagery, adorned with
Banners and Bannerols, Pencils, and a Cloth of Majesty, with the Vallance
fringed accordingly, Inscribed with her Word, Humble and Reverence, and
garnished with her Arms, and other her Badges: here the ceremony being
performed, a Sermon was preached by the Lord Richard Fitz-James Bishop of
Rochester, upon these words, Miseremini mei, Miseremini mei, saltem vos amici
mei, quia manus Domini tetegit me. Which words he spoke in the name of England,
and the Lovers and Friends of the same, seeing the great loss of that Queen,
and that noble Prince and the Archbishop of Canterbury.

In memory of whom, King Henry her Husband directed that her Figure of gilt
Copper, should be placed by his own, on his Tomb in that magnificent Chapel by
him founded, which is represented in the end of this Chapter, with the Queens
Effigies on his left Hand, under which, on a square Tablature of Brass you may
read this Epitaph.

HIC IACET REGINA ELIZABETHA, EDWARDI QUARTI QUONDAM REGIS FILIA, EDWARDI
QUINTI REGIS QUONDAM NOMINATI SOROR, HENRICI SEPTIMI OLIM REGIS CONJUX, ATQUE
HENRICI OCTAVI REGIS MATTER INCLYTA. OBIIT AUTEM SUUM DIEM IN TURRIM LONDONIARUM
DIE 11. FEBR. ANNO DOM. 1502. 38 ANNORUM AETATE FUNCTA. About this time Edmond
de la Pole Earl of Suffolk, Raphael Holingsh. p. 789.
having chanced to kill a mean person, and notwithstanding the King's Pardon,
suffered to be arraigned at the King's Bench Bar, conceived so great
indignation thereat, that he flies into Flanders to his Aunt the Lady Margaret
Duchess of Burgundy; where contriving to supplant King Henry, the Conspiracy is
made known to the King, and the Chief Accomplices Sir John Windham and Sir James
Tyrrel, (which last murtherd the two Princes in the Tower) both beheaded. The
Earl of Suffolk now despairing of assistance, wanders through Germany, Ibid. p.
792. c. 2.
and at last threw himself upon the protection of Philip Archduke of Austria,
then King of Castile, Anno 1506.
in right of his Wife Joane the eldest daughter of Ferdinand and Elizabeth; who
with her sailing into Spain, to take possession of his said Kingdom, was by
stress of weather driven on the Coast of Devonshire, where being kindly
received by the Earl of Arundel, Ibid.
and afterward by King Henry, were splendidly conducted to Windsor, and there
joyfully met by the Lady Katherine, Wife to Prince Henry, and Sister to the
said Queen of Castile. Ibid. p. 793 c. 1.
Here, by agreement between the two Kings, the Earl of Suffolk is sent for into
England, and committed to the Tower, whose life the King having promised not to
take away, he remained till the Reign of his son King Henry VIII. who, not
lying under that obligation, soon cut off his Head.

Richard Grafton fol. 58. b.
We now draw toward the latter end of the Reign of this Prince, Anno 1507^
which we find remarked with a note of Covetousness, especially propagated by
two Barons of his Exchequer, Empson and Dudley; who for surmised Crimes, and
breach of Penal Statutes, etc. extorted vast Sums of Money by Fines and
Mitigations as they called them, whereof Sir William Capel, Sir Laurence
Aylmer, and Thomas Kneesworth, severally Lord Mayors of London, were amongst
others too sensible; for refusing to pay certain Fines imposed on them, they
were committed to the Tower, where they remained till the beginning of the
Reign of Henry the Eighth; when that King to ingratiate himself with the
people, ordering their release, caused the said Empson and Dudley to be
beheaded on Tower Hill.

By these and other means King Henry became so rich, that at his death there
was found at Richmond and other secret places under his own Keys, the Sum of
1800000 l. besides what his public Exchequer contained; out of which by his
Will he ordered all exorbitant exactions to be repayed.

King Henry having been a Widower ever since the 18th year of his Reign, and
now toward his last inclined to re-marry: The young Queen of Naples, Widow to
Ferdinand the younger, is first proposed; who being declined as not rich
enough, though otherwise an accomplished Lady, a Match is concluded with the
Lady Margaret Duchess Dowager of Savoy, daughter to the Emperor, and Sister to
the King of Castile, but protracted in regard of the Kings infirmity, was (with
that other Match, concluded between his youngest daughter Mary, His death.
and Charles King of Castile, both about ten years of age) prevented by King
Henry's death, Ralph. Holinshed p. 797. c. 1.
which happened at his Place of Richmond, Anno 1509.
in the 53 year of his age, when he had Reigned 23 years and 8 Months, wanting
one day; who, how covetuous soever, left behind him among others these eminent
pieces of State and Piety.

In the nineteenth year of his Reign he founded that stately Chapel, His Works
of State and Piety.
bearing his name, Raphael Holinsh. p. 790. ca.
at the East End of Westminster Abbey wherein he now lies, next the High
Altar, establishing maintenance for three Monks, Doctors or Batchellors of
Divinity to sing and preach there every Sunday and principal Feast day for
ever, also sounding Almshouses in that Monastery for 13 men and 3 poor women,
with liberal maintenance. He likewise builded three Houses for Franciscan
Friars called Observants, at Richmond, Greenwich and Newark, and three others
of Franciscan Friars called Conventuals, at Canterbury, Newark and Southampton.
And in his last year he completed that goodly Hospital of the Savoy,
purchasing Lands for the relief of 100 poor people therein. And as for Secular
Memorials, he enlarged Greenwich, calling it Placentia; in his sixteenth year
he new built his Manor of Sheen, Ralph. Holinshed. p. 788. c. 1.
calling it Richmond; and lastly, in like manner new builded Baynard's Castle
within the City of London.

This great Prince thus expired as aforesaid, In Coll. Arm. I. 1^. f. 86.
and all necessary preparations made, His Burial.
his Body was brought into the great Chamber, where resting three days, it had
solemn Mass and Dirige sung by a Miter'd Bishop; whence removed into the Hall,
had the same service there the like space, as also in the Chapel for three
days longer; and in every place a Hearse garnished with Banners, Escocheons and
Pencils, with Mourners giving their attendance: from thence, on Wednesday the
ninth of May, it was conveyed into a Chair, covered with black Cloth of Gold,
drawn by five great Coursers covered with black Velvet, garnished with
Escocheons of fine Gold, with his Effigies over it, apparelled in rich Robes,
monument Reurendissimo in Christo Patri, GILBERTO Diuina Pmpvodentia
ARCHIEPISCOPO CANTVARIENSI, totius Angliae PRIMATI, et Metropolitano, nec non
Serenissimi Dn^i: Regis CAROLI II:^ e Sanctioribus Consilijs.

Hane Sacelli figuram, in qvo Rex HENRICUS ejus nominis VII^^^ jacet Tumulatus
cum Prospectu partis Regis ejusdem capellae, H.D.D.D.F.S.

W: Hollar fecit. (...) 1665 (...) ^^ compl:
monument Haec Insignia ad Caput hujus Tumuli collocatasunt

Ejusdem Tumuli latus Boreate.

Illustrissimo et Excellentissimo Domino. Dno. EDOARDO Comitide CLARENDON.
Vicecomitide CORNBURIE Baroni HIDE de HINDON. Summo totius Angliae nec non
almae OXONIENSIS Academiae CANCELARIO. ac Sacrae Mati: Regiae a Secretioribus
Consilijs: Hanc tumuli Regis HENRICI 7mi. et ELIZABETHAE Reginae figuram
H.D.D.D.F.S.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE HIC IACET HENRICUS

SEPTIMVS HIC SITVS EST HENRICUS.

DEVS NOBIS HAEC OTIA FECIT with the Crown on the Head, and Scepter and Ball in
the Hands, laid on Cushions of Gold, and environed with Banners of Arms of all
his Dominions, Titles, and Genealogies; a great number of Prelates praying,
with his Servants and others in black, before the Body, and 9 Mourners, with
about 600 Torches following it. In this order, attended to St George's Fields
near Southwark, and there met by the Religious of all sorts in or about the
City, with the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons in black, it was brought
through London to St Paul's, and placed in the Quire under a stately Hearse of
Wax; Richard Grafton in vita H. 8. fol. 1. b.
whence after a solemn Mass and Sermon preached by the Bishop of Rochester, it
was next day with the same state conveyed to Westminster, Sir Edward Hayward
riding in the Kings Coat of Arms, bearing his Banner on a Courser trapped with
the Arms of the Defunct, and there by six Lords taken out of the Chariot, and
set under a most curious Hearse sull of Lights, the representation lying upon
the Coffin on a Pall of Gold, about which the Mourners being set within the
first Rail, Knights bearing Banners within the second, and Officers of Arms
without the same, Garter King of Arms cried aloud, For the Soul of the noble
Prince Henry VII. King of this Realm: when the Quire beginning Placebo, and
ending at Dirige, closed the Solemnities of that day. The next day were three
Masses solemnly sung by Bishops, at the last of which were offered the Banner
and Courser, Coat of Arms, Sword, Target, and Helmet, the Nobility likewise
offering their rich Palls of Cloth of Gold and Bodkin. Thus when the Quire had
sung Libera Me -- the Corpse were interred, the Lords Treasurer, Steward,
Chamberlain, with the Treasurer of the Household; and Comptroller, breaking
their Staves into the Grave, when Garter with a loud voice having cried, Vive
le Roy Henry le Huitesme Roy d' Angleterre and de France, Sire d' Ireland, the
Mourners, with them of the Household departed to the Palace, where they had a
sumptuous Feast, and thus the Funeral ended.

His Body thus interred, in his own magnificent Royal Chapel, a stately
Monument of Copper was erected for him, Stow. p. 486.
and finished An. 1519. by one Peter T. a Painter of the City of Florence:
Holingsh. p. 797. c. 2.
for which he received 1000 l. Sterling. for the whole Stuff and Workmanship, at
the hands of the Kings Executors. The Figures of which Tomb and Chantry,
inscribed with the following Epitaphs (together with a prospect of the said
Royal Chapel including the same) I here present you with, which is thus
described by the Viscount St Albans, in the History of this King, viz. That he
lies buried at Westminster, in one of the stateliest and daintiest Monuments
of Europe, both for the Chapel and for the Sepulcre; so that he dwells more
richly dead in the Monument of his Tomb, than he did alive in Richmond, or any
of his Palaces.

On the South Side the Tomb, toward the Top, and near to the Kings Effigies.

HIC IACET HENRICUS EIUS NOMINIS, SEPTIMUS, ANGLIAE QUONDAM REX, EDMUNDI
RICHMONDIAE COMITIS FILIUS, QUI DIE XXII AUGUSTI REX CREATUS, STATIM POST APUD
WESTMONASTERIUM DIE XXX OCTOBRIS CORONATUR, ANNO DOMINI 1485. MORITUR DEINDE
XXI. DIE APRILIS ANNO AETATIS LIII. REGNAVIT ANNOS XXIII. MENSES VIII. MINUS
UNO DIE. On the Friese of this Monument, beginning on the South side, at the
head.

SEPTIMUS HIC SITUS EST HENRICUS, GLORIA REGUM CUNCTORUM IPSIUS QUI TEMPESTATE
FUERUNT. INGENIO ATQUE OPIBUS GESTARUM ET NOMINE RERUM, ACCESSERE QUIBUS
NATURAE DONA BENIGNAE: FRONTIS HONOS, FACIES AUGUSTA, HEROICA FORMA: JUNCTAQUE
EI SUAVIS CONJUX, PERPULCHRA, PUDICA, ET FAECUNDA FUIT: FAELICES PROLE
PARENTS, HENRICUM QUIBUS OCTAVUM TERRA ANGLIA DEBES. And about the said
Chantry or Sacelle, both within and without, these Verses are Embossed in old
English Characters.

Septimus Henricus tumulo requiescit in isto,
Qui Regum splendour; lumen et orbis erat,
Rex vigil, et sapiens, com^s virtutis amator,
Egregius forma, strenuus atque potens,
Qui peperit pacem regno, qui bella peregit
Plurima, qui victor semper ab host redit.
Qui natas binis conjunxit regibus ambas,
Regibus et cunctis federe junctus erat:
Qui sacrum hoc struxit templum, statuit que sepulcrum
Prose, proque sua conjuge, prole, domo
Lustra december atque annos tres plus conpleverat annis,
Qam tribus octenis regia sceptra tulit.
Quindecies Domini centenus fluxerat annus
Qam tribus octenis regia sceptra tulit.
Quindecies Domini centenus fluxerat annus
Currebat nonus, cum venit atta dies,
Septima ter mensis lux tum fulgebat aprilis
Cum clausit summum tanta corona diem
Hulla dedere prius tantum tibi secula regem
Anglia, vix similem posteriora dabunt.
Children of King HENRY VII. by Queen ELIZABETH of York his Wife.
On the Crown Stone of the Arch over his Tomb at Worcester, resembling a
Lozenge, are neatly carved the Achievements of this Arthur Prince of Wales; his
Shield is ingrayled at both ends (on which he does bear, France and England
quarterly, over all a Label of three points) Supported by two Antelopps, and
Ensigned with a Coronet, composed of Crosses and Flowers de Lize: over which is
placed a Feather and a Scrole, and undereath the Shield are three Ostrich
Feathers, and a Scrole, The like Escocheon and Supporters are carved on the
South Side the said Chantry' among several Devises of the Royal Family, as
plainly appears in the Figure thereof inserted in the next page.
15. ARTHVR TVDOR, Prince of Wales, eldest Son of King Henry VII. was born at
Winchester, In Coll. Arm. M. 3. f. 28.
20 Sept. ^1486. An. 2 H. 7. on a Wednesday about an hour after midnight, upon
the Feast of St Eustace, and the Vigil of St Matthew the Apostle, the Dominical
Letter being A. and was baptized the Sunday following in the Cathedral Church
of Winchester aforesaid, Queen Elizabeth his Grandmother being Godmother, and
the Earl of Derby and the Lord Matravers Godfathers at the Font, Richard
Graf^on f. 5. in vita H. 7.
and the Earl of Oxford at the Confirmation, where he received the name of
Arthur, in memory of the Renowned King Arthur, who is said to have kept his
Court in that place.

He was born Duke of Cornwall, and 1 October. 1489. in the fifth year of his
Fathers reign, Pat. an. 5 H. 7. m. 8. G. 219.
created Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester; in which fifth year I find him
thus stilled, Arthurus Princeps Walliae, Dux Cornubiae, et Comes Cestriae et de
Flint. After which he was elected a Companion of the most noble Order of the
Garter. Billae sign. de ann. 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 H. 7. Bil. 4.
Upon his Fathers Expedition into France, against Charles VIII. the French
King, he was appointed Lieutenant, Regent and Governor of England, during the
Kings absence.

At the age of fifteen years, Stows Chr. p. 483.
one month, His Marriage, Anno 1501.
and twenty five days, 14 Nov. An. 1501. being Sunday, In a ^ook marked l. 2.
Standards, etc. in the College of Arms. The Arms of Prince Arthur and this
Lady Katherine, are painted on a Banner supported by an Eagle Sable, membred
Or, being, France and England quarterly, a Label of three points, Argent.
Impaling quarterly of four pieces. The 1. Castile and Leon, quarterly, 2.
Perpale Arragon and Sicily. The third as the second, the fourth as the first.
And in the base point of the Banner, being Argent an Apple of Granada or
Pomegranet Proper; in memory of the expulsion of the Moors out of the Kingdom
of Granada, by King Ferdinand and Queen Issabel, Father and Mother of this
Princess Katherine.
his Marriage with the Lady Katherine, daughter of Ferdinand King of Spain
(then 18 years old) was, in the presence of the King and Queen, celebrated in a
most glorious manner, Ralph. Holinshed p. 788. col. 2.
in the Cathedral of St Paul, by the Archbishop of Canterbury, assisted by 19
Bishops, and Abbots Miter'd; shortly after which he was sent to the Marches of
Wales, the better to Govern that Principality by his presence; where having
enjoyed his Marriage Bed only four Months and nineteen days, I. 3. p. 14. in
Coll. Arm.
he departed this mortal life in the Castle of Ludlow in Shropshire, 2 April
1502. The sad news whereof was certified by his Chamberlain Sir Richard Pole,
to the Kings Confessor, then (with their Majesty's) at Greenwich, who after
this Preface, Si Bona de manu Dei suscipimus, Mala autem quare non sustineamus?
Showed his Grace that his dearest Son was departed to God.

In the mean time, his Body being embalmed, His Burial.
cered and put into a Coffin, covered with black Cloth, close cered, was thus
laid in his Chamber under a Table covered with rich Cloths of Gold, having a
rich Cross over it, furnished with Latten Candlesticks, and great Tapers. Thus
it lay till St George's day, when, in the afternoon, it was removed into the
Parish Church there, in solemn Procession, the Earl of Surrey being principal
Mourner, where, besides the Canopy, there were four Banners, the first of the
Trinity, the second of the Patible, the third of our Lady, the fourth of St
George; and next after the Corpse, a Banner of the Prince's own Arms. Upon St
Marks day the Corpse was conveyed from Ludlow to Bewdley, and set in the Quire
there, every Church where the Body remained being well furnished with
Escocheons of the Princes Arms. The next morning they came in a solemn manner
to Worcester, where with great state they proceeded through the Quire in the
Cathedral, to a splended Hearse, adorned with no less than 500 Lights, two
Standards, a Banner of the Kings Arms, one of the Queens, a Banner of Spain, a
Banner of the Princes, a Banner of the Princesses Arms, a Banner of Normandy,
two Bannerolls of Wales, one of Cadwallader, one of Guyen, of Cornwall, Chester,
and Poutieu, and 100 Pencils of diverse Badges, also a rich Vallence, and the
Cloth of Majesty well fringed. The next day, at seven in the morning after
several Masses and Offerings of the Trophies and Coursers, and several Anthems,
with the Office of Burial, the Gentlemen took up the Corpse, and bare it to the
Grave, at the South end of the High Altar of that Cathedral, where with
infinite sorrow it was interred, while his great Officers breaking their Staves
upon their heads, cast them into the Grave.

monument blazon or coat of arms Honoratissimo et Nobilissimo Domino Dno
RICARDO Baroni ARUNDELL ac Trerice, Tumuli hanc ARTHURI Principis WALLIAE Regis
HENRICI VII primogeniti, Tiguram H.D.F.S.

L^^ (...) the right re^^wmed King Henry the seventhe which noble Prince
departed out of this ^ran^^t^r^



monument Illustrissimo et Excellentissimo Principi GULIELMO Seamour Duci
SOMERSETIAE Marchioni et Comiti HERTFORDIAE et Baroni BEAUCHAMP. Sacelli hanc
Wigorniensi Ecclesia Cathedrali in quo ARTHVRVS Princeps WALLIAE tumulatus
jacet Imaginem H.D.F.S.



In memory of whom a stately Chapel was built, on the South Side of the said
Choire, enclosing, besides his own Tomb, on the upper Floor, two other fair
Monuments below, the South Side of which Chapel or Chantry, curiously wrought,
and adorned with five Orders viz. of Virgins, Bishops, Kings, Confessors, and
Angels, together with his Arms and seve^al Badges, I have here delineated in
the precedent page, with a draught of the Monument it self, which encloses the
Body of Prince Arthur, from whose Verge I transcribed this Epitaph, beginning
at the head.

Here lies buried Prince Arthure the first
begotten son of the right renowned King
Henry the Seventhe, which Noble Prince
departed out of this transitori life in the
Castle of Ludlowe in the sevententh year of
his fathers raygne, and in the year of our
Lord God on thousand five hundred and two.
15. HENRY TVDOR, second Son of King Henry VII. succeeded his Father, by the
name of King Henry VIII. as in the next Chapter.

15. EDMOND TVDOR, Cerem pen. Edw. Walker Garterum, lib. 2. p. 163. Speed, etc.
1495.
third and youngest Son of Henry VII. was born at Greenwich on Thursday, 21
Febr. 1498. about six in the evening, An. 14 H. 7. and was christened at the
Church of the Gray Friars there, on St Mathias's day, the 24th of the same
month, his Godfathers being the Duke of Buckingham and the Bishop of Durham,
and his Godmother Margaret Countess of Richmond his Grandmother, who held him
at the Font, where he was called Edmond, in memory of Edmond Earl of Richmond
his Grandfather. He was created Duke of Somerset in his infancy; and shortly
after departing this life at Bishops Hatfield in Hertfordshire, An. 1499.15 H.
7. was buried in the Abbey of Westminster.

15. MARGARET TVDOR, Queen of Scotland, eldest Daughter of King Henry VII. born
29 Nov. 1489.15 H. 7. was at the age of fourteen years married to James IV.
King of Scots, An. 1503. who being slain at Flodden Field, in fight against the
English, she was re-married to Archambald Douglas Earl Anguisse, An. 1514.
whose Issue by both Husbands, with her History more at large, is set down in
the sixth and seventh Chapters of this sixth Book.

15. ELIZABETH TVDOR, second Daughter of King Henry VII. was born 2 Julii, In
Coll. Arm. l. 14. par. 15.
1492. and at the age of three years, two months, and twelve days, died at
Eltham, 14 Sept. 1495. whose Body being cered and chested by the Wax-Chandler,
was brought into the Quire of the Kings Chapel there; where it rested about
eleven days, having Dirige and Mass of Requiem sung every day. Over her Body
was a Cloth of Gold, with four Lozenges of her Arms, beaten in Gold; also six
Lozenges of her Arms about the Chapel, of the same; also a Chair covered with
black Cloth, drawn by six Horses; also a Canopy, under which the Body was
conveyed from the Chapel to the Chair; also four Banners, viz. of the Trinity,
of our Lady, of St George, and of the Kings Arms. Thus on Thursday, the
eleventh day after her decease, her Corpse was conveyed with a solemn proceeding
to the Stangate over against Westminster; and at the Gate at the Bridge end of
Westminster, was received by the Prior and Convent of the Abbey, and conveyed
into the Quire to the Hearse, the Majesty Cloth, and the Vallence of black
Sarcenet, fringed with red and white Roses, and the Word in Letters of Gold,
Jesus est Amor men's. The next morning, being Friday, after several Masses the
Offerings and the Office for the dead performed, the Corpse was borne with the
like Ceremony as it was brought to the Church (excepting the Ladies) to the
Grave on the right hand of the Altar, just before St Edward's Shrine, the
foundation of which the foot of the Grave almost touched: near which, viz. at
the Feet of King Henry III. was erected for her a small Altar-Tomb of black
Marble, inlay'd with Brass, where her Effigies lay of Copper guilt (since
stolen away) with this Epitaph circumscribed about the Verge thereof, viz.

Elizabetha Illustrissimi Regis Anglie, Francie et
Hibernie Henrici Septimi, et Domine Elizabethe
Regine Serenissime consortis sue filia et secunda
proles, que nata fuit secundo die mensis Julii anno
Domini 1492. et obiit decimo quarto die menfis
Septembris an Dom. 1495. Cujus anime propitietur
Deus. Amen.
And at the feet of her Portraiture, on a Copper Plate, these Verses are
engraven.

Hic post fata jacet proles regalis in isto
Sarcophago, juvenis, nobilis, Elizabeth,
Principis illustris Henri: sep: filia Regis
Oui bini regni florida septra tenet:
Attrepos hanc rapuit serenissima nuncia mortis,
Sit super in celis vita perennis ei.
15. MARY TVDOR, Queen of France, and afterward Duchess of Suffolk, third
daughter of King Henry VII. and Queen Elizabeth of York, of whom and her
descendents see more in the eighth and last Chapter of this sixth Book.

15. KATHERINE TVDOR, fourth and youngest daughter of King Henry VII. was born
upon Candlemas day, 2 Febr. 1503. An. 19 H. 7. and shortly after was called
unto a far better Kingdom. It may be presumed, that her Sister-in-Law Katherine
of Spain (the Widow of Arthur Prince of Wales her Brother) was her Godmother.

15. HENRY VIII. Anno Dom. 1509. April 21.
KING of ENGLAND, FRANCE, and IRELAND, Defender of the FAITH, etc.
CHAP. II.
Two several Seals of King Henry VIII. have come to my hands, the first
differing from the second in these two particulars, viz. the form of the
Throne, and the Titles in the circumscription; for the Fabric of the Kings
Throne in the first Seal is Gothic work, and that in the other Roman. The
Style in the circumference of the first Seal, was made use of when he had the
Title of Defender of the Faith, conferred on him by Pope Leo X. An. 1521. viz.
HENRICUS VIII. ANGLIE ET FRANCIE REX FIDEI DEFENSOR ET DOMINUS HIBERNIE. But
being in the year 1534. declared in Parliament, Head of the Church of England,
and afterward, An. 1541. proclaimed King of Ireland; he caused this second
great Seal to be made (delineated in the 427 page of this sixth Book) the
Circle whereof is charged with these words, HENRICUS OCTAVUS, DEI GRATIA,
ANGLIE FRANCIE ET HIBERNIE REX, FIDEI DEFENSOR, ET IN TERRA, ECCLESIE ANGLICANE
ET HIBERNICE, SUPREMUM CAPUT, by which it appears, that this King caused his
Seals to be circumscribed with Roman Capitals, whereas all the Inscriptions of
the Kings of England his predecessors, from Richard II. inclusive (as you may
observe in the circle of their Seals) were in old English Letters. The Kings
Arms, (being France and England quarterly) on each side his Throne, upon both
Seals, are placed within the Garter, and Ensigned with arched Crowns: He being
the first King of England that in his Seal added to his Shield, the Garter and
the Crown. In imitation of which Royal Example, the Knights of the Order, in
the latter end of his Reign, caused their Escocheons on their Stalls at
Windsor, to be encompassed with the Garter; and those that were Dukes,
Marquisses, or Earls, had their Coronets placed upon their Shields, which has
been so practiced ever since, And whereas all the precedent Kings of England,
from King Edward I. had the Ensigns of their Kingdoms represented on the
Caparisons of their Horses in their counter-Seals: this King discontinued the
same, and in place thereof, caused his Caparisons to be embroidered, on the
upper part, with small Flowers de Lize placed in Network; and on the nether
part, with large Roses and Branches embossed, the edge thereof being garnished
with a deep Fringe. Both before and behind the Kings Horse, within the Circle,
are placed several Ovals, alternately charged with Roses and Flowers de Lize:
and underneath the Horse is a Greyhound current, with a Collar about his Neck;
which this King did use, to show his descent, by his Mother Queen Elizabeth
from the Royal House of York

The like Greyhounds are thus placed in the Seals of our succeeding Monarchs,
Edward VI. King James, King Charles I. and his present Majesty King Charles II.

King Henry VIII. in the beginning of his Reign, bare his Arms supported with a
Dragon, on the right side, and a Greyhound on the left (as did his Father King
Henry VII.) which Achievement is so painted over his Picture in the Privy
Gallary at Whitehall, and also carved in Stone over the great Gate House of
that Palace in the passage to Westminster, subscribed, DIEV ET MON DROIT: But
afterward he discontinued the Greyhound, and supported his Shield on the right
side with one of the Lions of England, viz. a Lion guardant Or, and transposed
the Red Dragon to the left side of his Escocheon Royal, as appears on the
Sterns of several of this Kings Ships, in that famous Picture in the said
Gallary at Whitehall, expressing his most glorious Naval Expedition into
France, all the Sails of the Admiral being Cloth of Gold. The said Supporters
of the Lion (Crowned) and the Dragon, are stamped on his Gold Coin, which were
continued by his three Children, King Edward VI. Queen Mary (until her
Marriage) and Queen Elizabeth.

With these Supporters, and others of his Predecessors, the King adorned his
Pavilions and Tents; for in Edward Halle fol. 28. we read (at the Siege of
Terwin) that at the top of the Pavilions stood the Kings Beasts, holding Fanes,
as the Lion, the Dragon, the Greyhound, the Antelope, the Dun Cow, etc. I
needed not have passed beyond Sea for an example of this kind, for the Fanes on
the Kings Palaces of Hampton Court and Whitehall, are supported by the Beasts
beforenamed.

This Kings Hereditary Devises or Badges; were a Red Rose, a Flower de Lize,
Or, and a Golden Portcullis. But in his time the English Wits beginning to
imitate the French and Italians in these Devices, by adding the Mots; King
Henry himself at the Interview between him and King Francis I. whereat also
Charles V. was present; used for his Impress, an English Archer in a green
Coat, drawing his Arrow to the head, with this Inscription, CUI ADHAEREO,
PRAEEST: whereas at that time those two mighty Princes banding one against the
other, wrought him for their own particular. Camdens Remains p: 216.217.


THis Heroic Prince Henry, M. 3. f. 28 in Coll. Arm.
second Son of King Henry VII. born at Greenwich, on Tuesday, being St Peter's
Eve, 28 Jun. 1491, An. 6 H. 7. between the hours of 8 and 9 in the morning, was
baptized in the Parish Church there, by the Bishop of Excester, Lord Keeper of
the Privy Seal, and called Henry, having for Godfathers the Earl of Oxford, T.
326. Rot. Parl. temp. H. 7. m. 9. an. 10.
and the Bishop of Winchester. In the tenth year of his Fathers Reign, I find
him styled Constable of Dover Castle, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, Earl
Marshal of England, and Lieutenant of Ireland. And thus dignified, he was 31
October. An. 10 H. 7. created Duke of York in Parliament, by cincture of a Sword,
imposition of a Cap, A. 222. pat. 9. H. 7. and C. 245. and R. 81. Chart. de an.
16 H. 7. m. 9.
and Circle of Gold on his Head, and delivery of a golden Rod, with a Fee of 40
l. per annum, out of the County of York. At 12 years of age; and the year after
the death of his elder Brother Prince Arthur, he was created Prince of Wales,
and Earl of Chester in Parliament, by the girding on a Sword, G. 198. Billae
sign.
the putting a Cap on his Head, a gold Ring on his Finger, and a golden Rod in
his Hand, 18 Febr. 1503. An. 19 H. 7. Lastly, having been so trained up in his
youth as to be accounted the most learned Prince in Christendom, he was, at the
age of 18 years, upon his Fathers decease, Raphael Holingsh. p. 799. col. 1.
22 Apr. 1509. proclaimed King, Anno 1509.
as being his only Son then living, and consequently sole Heir to the Crown by
both Houses of Lancaster and York.

And now having made choice of an able Council, Ibid.
and seen his Father Funerals performed, in pursuance of his said Fathers Will,
his marriage with Katherine of Spain, His first Marriage.
Relict of his Brother Arthur, is by Dispensation from Rome sumptuously
solemnized at the Bishop of Salisbury's House in Fleet Street, The Arms of this
Queen Katherine, are emblazoned in the Margent of the 445 page of this sixth
Book.
the third of June following (viz. An. 1509.) where the Bride, to express her
Virginity, though a Widow, was attired in white, with her Hair dishevelled; on
the twenty fourth of which Month, M. 3. fol. 28. in Coll. Arm.
being the Feast of St John Baptist, they are solemnly crowned at Westminster
by William Warham Archbishop of Canterbury, Their Coronation.
with great acclamations. Next he proclaims a general Pardon for less than
capital Offenses; but as for Sir Richard Empson Knight. and Edmond Dudley Esquire those
two grand Extortioners, Barons of the Exchequer to the late King, he committed
to the Tower, and a Parliament being called, Anno 1510.
they were attainted of High Treason, Raphael Holinshed p. 80 9. coli. 1.
and the seventeenth of August, the year following, beheaded on Tower Hill.

The first year of King Henry being spent in almost perpetual Justs, Masks and
Tournaments, performed with great magnificence and eminent acts of heroic
Valor, even by the King himself; he is first in February following, solicited
by his Father-in-Law the King of Arragon for aid against the Moors; Ibid. col.
2.
whereupon the Lord Thomas Darcy, with the Lord Anthony Gray, Henry Guylford
Esquire and others, are sent to his assistance, who embarking at Plymonth, Richard
Grafton f. 11. b.
arrived at Cadis the first of June; but a Truce being concluded in the
interim, they are honorably dismissed.

Next we find him assisting Margaret Duchess of Savoy, daughter to Maximilian
the Emperor (and Governess of Flanders, etc. for Charles the young Prince of
Castile) with 1500 Archers; who having done her very eminent service, returned
nobly rewarded.

After this, Anno 1511.
in his third year, Ralph Holingshed p. 811. col^.
Pope Julius II. desires his assistance against Lewis XII. of France, who had
in a hostile manner, entered some part of Italy; upon which, King Henry having
made an alliance with the Emperor and King of Spain, etc. the latter of which
courted him likewise against the French, he sends over a great Army under the
conduct of Thomas Gray, Marquis Dorset, Anno 151^.
the Lord Thomas Howard, son to the Earl of Surrey, the Lords Brook, Willoughby
and Ferrers, with the Lords John, Anthony and Leonard Gray, Brothers to the
Marquis, etc. in order to the invading France, Edward Halle fol. 15. b.
and to demand the surrender of that Crown, with the present possession of
Normandy, Guyen, Anjon, Maine, and Aquitaine, as the ancient inheritance of the
Kings of England, who at the instance of the King of Spain, and the promise of
assistance from that King, and the King of Navarre, landing in Biscay, resolved
to force the Country on that side; when Ferdinand de Toledo Duke d' Alva,
Holingsh. p. 813. col. 2.
whom they had long expected, instead of relieving the English, fell upon the
Realm of Navarre, at that time possessed by John d' Albret and Queen Katherine
de Foix his Wife, Richard Grafton. f. 18. b.
and seized that Kingdom to the Spanish use; whereupon the incensed Marquis
attacking the Frontiers of Guyen, took several Towns, when a violent Sickness
raging among the Soldiers, swept many away, and obliged the Lord Howard to
convey the mutinous residue of his Forces home again.

In this interim, Sir Edward Howard Lord Admiral being at Sea with his Fleet,
Holingsh. p. 814. c. 2.
invaded Britain, wasted several Towns, and at last with 2500 men, encountered
10000 of the Britains, defeating them in their own policy; and so returning to
Sea, cruised along those Coasts, Edward Halle f. 20 b.
till at length coming to the Isle of Wight, the Kings Fleet joined him, when
being 25 sail strong, they engaged the French Fleet of 39 sail in the Bay of
Britain; where maintaining a sharp conflict, the Admirals on either side
grapled together, were at once burnt and sunk, with the loss of about 800 men
in each of them. Which loss the King having soon repaired, by causing a fairer
ship to be built, Holingsh. p. 815. col. 2.
called Henry Grace de Dieu, Anno 25^3.
in March next he sends to Sea the said Sir Edward Howard Lord Admiral, with 40
great Ships, who unadvisedly attacking the French in the very Haven of Breast,
Richard Grafton f. 23 b.
lost himself and many of his followers in the attempt.

Hereupon, it having been resolved in Parliament that the King should in person
invade France; and to that end an extraordinary Subsidy willingly granted, King
Henry himself with a most Royal Navy, the Admirals Sails being Cloth of Gold,
lands at Calais, having the May before sent over thither diverse of the
Nobility, Gentry, and others, to the number of 10000; with these he sat down
before the well fortified Terwin, on the fourth day of August; and on the
twelfth of the same month, the Emperor Maximilian came from Air to the Kings
Camp, Richard Graston f. 12. a.
where being most splendidly received, he entered himself a Soldier at 100
Crowns a day wages, and wore the Cross of St George, with a Rose; shortly after
which, the French Cavalry, to the number of 8000, being ordered to relieve the
Town, were so roundly received by the English, that having lost six Standards,
and many men, whereof 240 were made prisoners among which the Duke of
Longueville was chief, they spurred away so fast, Holinsh. p. 822. col. 1.
that the Fight was thereupon called the Battle of Spurrs, Battle of Spurrs,
Aug. 16.
the effect of which Victory was the surrender of the place the eighteenth
following, 1513.

Hence, the twenty first of September, he marched toward Tournay, Anno 1513.
and arriving within a League of the Town, sends Garter King of Arms to summon
its surrender; which being denied, he so fiercely assaulted it, that their
Maiden Town, never taken before, was obliged to yield up her self to the
victorious King, Edward Halle fol. 44. ab.
the second day of October, the Inhabitants whereof having redeemed their
Liberties at 10000 l. sterling. were all sworn to the King of England, to the
number of 80000 Souls; whence, after many solemn Justings and Masks, according
to King Henry's wonted manner, the Winter approaching, he departed for England.

In the mean time James IV. King of Scots, invading the North of England with a
mighty Army, was by the Queens diligence, and the Earl of Surry's valor, slain
in Battle at Brankston in Northumberland, Battle of Flodden, an. 1513. Sept. 9.
otherwise called Flodden Field, Edward Halle fol. 42. b. and 43. a.
upon the ninth day of September, 1513. with 3 Bishops, 3 Abots, 12 Earls, 18
Lords, and 12000 Soldiers; for which noble service, the King, on Candlemas day
after, among other Promotions, created the said Earl, Duke of Norfolk, with an
augmentation of a part of the Arms of Scotland. Ibid. f. 46. a.


Hereupon, by the mediation of Pope Julius, Ibid. f. 48. a.
who the nineteenth of May before, Anno 1514.
had sent King Henry a Cap of Maintenance, and a Sword, which was received with
great solemnity in the Cathedral Church of St Paul, on the Sunday next ensuing,
and transserred the forfeited Title of Christianissimus, from the French King
to King Henry, a Peace is concluded between the two Kingdoms, Richard Grafton
f. 48.
with the Marriage of the Lady Mary the Kings Sister, to Lewis XII. King of
France, in the great Church of Abbeville, her Jointure to be 320000 Crowns, per
annum, and 100000 Crowns to King Henry for 5 years, in lieu of a Peace during
the lives of both Kings, Ibid. f. 49.
and a year after; which Marriage was solemnized at St Denis on St. Denis's
day, and the fifth of November after she was Crowned in Paris; where becoming a
Widow within twelve weeks after her marriage, the Duke of Suffolk is sent to
convey her into England, which he did, having first privately married her in
Paris, and after wards publicly at Calais.

About this time, Thomas Wolsey, a man of obscure Parentage, but great
abilities, Anno 1515.
by birth a Butchers son of Ipswich in Suffolk, having been first made Fellow
of Magdalen College in Oxford, next Schoolmaster of the School there,
afterward Chaplain to King Henry VII. Dean of Lincoln, Lord Almoner to that
King, one of the Council to King Henry VIII. Bishop of Tournay in France, next
of Lincoln, and afterward Archbishop of York, Richard Grafton f. 56. a.
was about this time made Cardinal, Lord Chancellor of England, and Legate a
Latere; Ibid. f. 58.
who to ingross the management of all affairs to himself, advised the King to
his pleasures, and less frequency at the Council Table, whereby this puissant
Prince, whose service the Emperor had personally embraced, whose friendship the
King of France sought to purchase at any rate, and whose obligements the Pope
endeavored to gratify by the glorious Titles of Liberator Vrbis and Orbis,
Defensor Fidei, etc. resigning as it were the Reins of Government, grew so
irregular in his motions, that the Peace and Prosperity of the Realm was soon
interrupted.

A new League being proclaimed with France, Anno 1519.
Margaret Queen of Scots, eldest sister to King Henry, with Archibald Douglas
Earl of Angus her Husband, expulsed the Kingdom by the Religious Rebellion of
their Lords, Edward Halle fol. 58.
had the Castle of Harbottel in Northumberland assigned them, where she was
delivered of her daughter, named also Margaret.

It was now the tenth year of King Henry's Reign, Anno 1518.
when the King of France, Ibid. f. 65. a. b.
by great gifts and large promises to the Cardinal, obtained a Treaty for the
surrender of Tournay, and a marriage to be had between the Lady Mary and the
Daulphin, and in stead of a Portion, that City to be delivered to the French
King, he paying for the Castle which King Henry had there built, 600000 Crowns;
whereupon Hostages being left on both sides, on condition that if the Marriage
succeeded not, the English should be repossest thereof; the City was
accordingly delivered to the French the eighteenth of February following.

The Emperor Maximilian dying, Anno 1519.
Charles King of Castile is elected in his stead, by the name of Charles V. who
in his journey from Spain, Richard Grafton f. 72. a. b.
landed at Dover, and was entertained by the King at Canterbury, who was then
on his way toward the Interview between him and Francis I. the French King;
which was performed in the Vale of Andren, on Thursday the 7th of June, so
magnificently, that from thence it retains the name of the Camp of Cloth of
Gold. Where having been entertained with solemn Justs and Masks till the
twenty fourth of June they mutually departed; and King Henry with his Queen
having first been entertained by the Emperor at Graveling, Edward Halle f. 84.
a. b.
as the Emperor was by them afterward at Calais, (where the Tripartite League
was concluded between the Emperor and both Kings) on Saturday the fourteenth of
July, they returned for England.

A small resentment happening about this time between the Duke of Buckingham,
Ibid. fol. 85 and 86.
the last High Constable, and the Cardinal, Anno 1520.
grew in fine to that height, that he soon procured the Duke to be arraigned,
upon an intention of making away the King, and transferring the Crown to his
own Head; for which being condemned by his Peers, he was the seventeenth of May
beheaded on Tower Hill.

A War being now begun between the Emperor and the King of France, Edward Halle
fol. 86. a.b.
for composing thereof, Anno 1521.
King Henry sent the Cardinal of York, with diverse other Lords, Knights and
Gentlemen to Calais, where meeting the Commissioners of both parties, after a
tedious dispute, the only conclusion was, that both Princes should enjoy free
Fishing till the end of February following. Ibid. fol. 18. a.


But King Henry being now at Greenwich (viz. Febr. 2.) is there presented by
the Cardinal, and a Legate from Pope Leo X. with a Bull, dated at St Peter's the
fifth of the Ides of October, Richard Grafton. f. 18 and 89.
An. 1521. in the ninth year of his Popedom, wherein his Majesty for his great
zeal to the Catholic Faith, in writing that Book in which the notorious errors
of Martin Luther were confuted, was with his Successors forever, declared
Defendors of the Christian Faith; which being by the King solemnly received, he
caused it to be read and published; and thereupon proceeding to his Chapel,
accompanied by many of his Nobility, and several Ambassadors then resident in
his Court, Mass was there sung by the Cardinal; after which having given
remission, and blessed the King and the Queen, and all the people present; and
the said Bull being declared with Sound of Trumpet, and other Wind Instruments,
in Honor of the Kings new Style, his Highness went to a stately Dinner: in the
midst whereof, the King of Arms, with the other Heralds, began the Largess,
crying, HENRICUS DEI GRATIA REX ANGLIAE ET FRANCIAE, DEFENSOR FIDEI, ET DOMINVS
HIBERNIAE. Little different from which Titles are those carved in Roman
Capitals on the Mantletree of white Marble in the Privy Galary of His Majesty's
Palace of Whitehall, where they are at present to be read; being, HENR. VIII.
ANG. ET FRANC. REX FID. DEFEN. AC DOM. HIBER.

About the same time the Duke of Albanie coming into Scotland, and taking upon
him the sole government of that Realm, Ibid. f. 88.
is commanded out by King Henry, which so distasted the French King, that he
seized the ships and persons of the English, denied the composition Money for
Tournay, Richard Grafton f. 91, 92, 93.
and kept back the Queen Dowagers Jointure; Anno 1522.
whereupon the King confined the French Ambassadors here, committed all French
men within his Dominions, secured the four Hostages, and set out a Fleet of 28
sail, which burnt several Scotch ships in their very Harbors, took many
Prisoners, and great Booty.

King Henry being informed that the Emperor on his way to Spain intended to
visit England, Edward Halle f. 94, 95, 96.
sent the Marquis of Dorser to receive him at Calais, and the Cardinal of York,
at Dover, where on Ascension Eve the King embraced him with extraordinary
splendour, and conducting him to Canterbury, and thence to the Queen his Aunt at
Greenwich, and shortly after to London (where they were entertained with as
splendid Shows as at a Coronation, the Emperor being lodged at the Black
Friars, and his Lords at the new Palace of Bridewell.) On Whitsunday with great
Triumph they rode to St Paul's, where the Cardinal sang Mass, before which, two
Barons served him with Water, and after the Gospel, 2 Earls with Wine and
Water, and at the last Lavatory, two Dukes performed the same service. Next the
two Courts removed to Windsor, Ibid. f. 99.
where, on Corpus Christi day, both Princes took the Sacrament, renewing their
League with reciprocal Oaths. Hence they proceeded to Winchester, and so to
Southampton, where the English Fleet commanded by the Earl of Surrey, then lay,
which having conveyed the Emperor into Biscay, Edward Halle f. 100. a b.
in their return fell upon Britain, took the Town of Morlaix, and being shortly
after sent to the Coast of France, landed in Picardy, burnt and took many Towns
and Castles, Ibid. f. 101 b.
even as the Lord Ros and Lord Dacres of the North, had likewise done all this
while in Scotland.

It was about this time (when Christierne King of Denmark, with his Queen
landing at Dover the 15th of June, were sumptuously received at the Bishop of
Bath's Palace in London) that King Henry thus engaged in a War with France and
Scotland, resolved to prosecute it in good earnest; Ibid. f. 116 a. 117. a.b.
usq 121. b.
when sending Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, with an Army of 12600 men for
France, Anno 1523.
they first took Bell Castle, and then marching into Picardy, and being joined
by 3000 Foot, and 500 Imperial Horse, took the rich Town of Anchor, also Bray,
Cappe, Roy, Libome, Davenker, and Montdidier; thus ravaging the Country, they
came before the Castle of Boghan, which at last, by the advantage of the Frost,
they took, and so returned to Calais-

During which, Richard Grafton f. 104.115. b.
the Duke of Albanie from Scotland, invading Northumberland with a great Army
the second time, was confronted by the Earls of Surrey, Northumberland and
Westmorland, etc. upon whose approach he retired into Scotland. Whereupon
Margaret, Queen Mother of Scotland, praying King Henry her Brothers forbearance
of the War till a furthur communication could be had, the Army was dismissed.

In this year came three Ambassadors from the Emperor, Edward Halle f. 136. a.
b.
requesting first, That his only Daughter the Lady Mary, Anno 1524.
might be sent into Flanders, and by the name of Empress to govern the Low
Countries. Secondly, That her Portion Money might be forthwith paid: and,
Thirdly, That the King in Person should prosecute the War in France the next
Summer. The two first the King waved, and took time to consider of the last,
when suddenly news was brought that the French King, before the Town of Pavia,
was by the Imperialists taken prisoner, and carried to Madrid. This altered the
face of affairs, for that King despairing of life, by reason of a violent
Sickness, contentedly resigned the whole Dukedom of Burgundy to the Emperor,
whereby gaining his liberty, and shortly after his health, he married Isabel
daughter to Emanuel King of Portugal, when three years before at Windsor he had
engaged to take King Henry's daughter to Wife.

This year ( viz. 1524.) the Cardinal by some specious pretenses, Richard
Grafton f. 137. a.
obtained from the Pope the suppression of about forty small Monasteries in
England, for the raising of two Colleges, one at Oxford, and another at
Ipswich. By which president it is much to be feared King Henry afterward took
example to destroy all the rest.

On the eighteenth of June this year, Ibid. f. 140 a. b.
King Henry at his Palace of Bridewell, created his Natural Son Henry, called
Pitz-Roy, These Creations were 18 June 1525. 17 H. 8.
first Earl, of Nottingham, and then Duke of Somerset and Richmond, Henry
Courtney Earl of Devonshire, Marquis of Exceter; the Lord Henry Brandon, son to
the Duke of Suffolk, by Mary the French Queen, Earl of Lincoln; Sir Thomas
Manners Lord Roos, Earl of Rutland; Sir Henry Clifford, Earl of Cumberland; Sir
Robert Ratcliff Lord Fitz-Walter, Viscount Fitz-Walter; and Sir Thomas Bullen,
Viscount Rochford.

The same year, King Henry, Edward Halle f. 144. a.b. usque 152.
by mediation of the French Kings Mother, then Regent of France, having
concluded a Peace with that Kingdom, in consideration of 400000 l. sterling.
whereof 50000 to be paid in hand, and the rest at a time appointed; and
thereupon made Arbitrator between the French King and the Emperor; a motion was
made by the French Ambassadors for a marriage between the Lady Mary King
Henry's only daughter, Anno 1526.
and the Duke of Orleans, second son to the French King, Ibid. f. 155 b.
wherein (as Wolsey had designed it, to revenge himself on the Emperor, for
denying him the Archbishopric of Toledo, as likewise the Papacy) the question
was started by the President of Paris, Ibid. f. 155
concerning the lawfulness of the Kings marriage with Queen Katherine (Aunt to
the Emperor) having been the Wife of his elder Brother Prince Arthur. And this,
as it afterward became the Cardinals ruin, so it put the King upon all those
future extravagancies: for being secretly fallen in love with Anne Bullen
daughter to the late created Viscount Rochford, the Cardinal was obliged even
against his own inclination, to prosecute the Divorce from Queen Katherine, by
soliciting the Court of Rome for a Session here in England to determine the
business, Richard Grafton f. 181 and 182
who joining Cardinal Campeius in Commission with his Eminence of York, Anno
1528.
the matter was debated at the Blackfryers: where the Queen appealing to the
Pope, and the Kings own Conscience; his Majesty declared her virtue and
innocence, and his unwillingness to leave her, were it not for the scruple of
his Conscience. Whereupon after much debate and many means used, but
ineffectually, to persuade the Queen to recall her Appeal; the Kings Council
moved earnestly for Sentence; which Campeius the chief Commissioner, though
gratified by the King with translating him from Bath to Salisbury, being
recalled to Rome, refused to pronounce till farther conference with the Pope.

The King, Anno 1529.
impatient of these delays, and being informed of his own power and authority
in the Case, by one Cranmer a Master of Arts of Cambridge, Edward Halle f. 183
and 184
sends the Duke of Norfolk and Suffolk to fetch the Seal from the Cardinal of
York, whom he had now discovered to be averse to his inclinations for the
foresaid Anne Bullen; withal confining him to his house at Esher near Hampton
Court; whereupon many Articles of High Treason exhibited in Parliament against
him, being clearly answered by his Servant Thomas Cromwell then a Member of the
House of Commons; he was at last voted guilty of a Praemunire, for exercising
the Legantine Power without the Kings public consent; and thereupon having
first delivered up all his Movables to the Kings use, he was adjudged to
forfeit all his Lands and Goods; when upon new Articles exhibited against him,
he was commanded to retire to his Diocese of York, Ibid. f. 184. b. and 194. b.
which Bishopric with that of Winchester were yet left him; where, at Cawood
Castle, seven miles from thence, Anno 1530.
he was arrested by the Earl of Northumberland, and in his journey to London,
died at Leicester, the 29th of November, 1530, after having expressed himself to
this purpose, That if he had served his God as diligently as he had done his
King, he would not so have deserted him in his gray Hairs. This was the end of
that mighty Prelate, in whose Retinue were diverse Knights, and some Lords, in
all to the number of 1000; and in whose Hands were at once the Bishopric of
York, Winchester, and Durham; the Dignities of Lord Cardinal, Legate, and
Chancellor of England; the Abbey of St Albans, diverse Priories, and sundry
great Benefices in Commendam, and in effect the Bishoprics of Bath, Worcester,
and Hereford.

The Queen insisting peremptorily on her Appeal to Rome, Ibid. fol. 21^. a. b.
from whence she expected a favorable answer, obliged the King, Anno 1533.
according to Cranmer's advice (for which he had bestowed on him the
Archbishopric of Canterbury) to interpose his own authority, whereby having
procured the Divorce to pass in Parliament, Edward Halle f. 206. a.
he now publicly produces the Lady Anne Bullen, great with child, His second
Marriage.
whom he had before privately married the 25th of January, Her Coronation.
1532. (after having created her Marchioness of Pembroke, the first of
September preceding) and on Whitsunday, at Westminster, The Achievement of
Queen Anne Bullen, stands nearly carved on the large Wood Screen as you go up
to the Choire in Kings College Chapel in Cambridge, being, Quarterly France
and England Impaling quarterly, of six pieces, 1. Gules three Lions passant
guardant, Or, on a Label of three points Azure, 9 Flowers de Lize of the second
Lancaster. 2. Azure, seem of Flowers de Lize, Or, a Label of three points
Gules, Engolesme. 3. Gules a Lion passant guardant, Or, Guyon. These three were
augmentations given her by King Henry VIII. when he created her Marchioness of
Pembroke. 4. Quarterly, Or, a chief indented Azure, Butler Earl of Ormond, and
Argent a Lion rampant Sable, crowned Gules, by the name of Rochford; the third
as the second, the fourth as the first: 5. Gules, 3 Lions passant guardant Or,
over all a Label of three points Argent, Brotherton. 6 Chequie, Or, and Azure,
Warren. This Impalement is crowned with an arched Diadem, and supported on the
right side by a Greyhound, with a Collar about his Neck; and on the left by a
Lion with a Griffins head, gorged with a Coronet, and chained. The like
Impalement and Quarterings are depicted in a Book in the College of Arms,
marked, D. 4. Yorkshire, fol. 1. b. in which the colors of the Arms before
mentioned, and the names by which they are borne, do manifestly appear.

Queen Anne did bear for her Devise, a white crowned Faulcon, holding a Scepter
in her right Talon, standing upon a golden Trunck, out of which sprouted both
white and red Roses, with these words, MIHI ET ME^AE. Vide Camdens Remains p.
217.


she was Anointed and Crowned with great magnificence.

On the 16th of Febr. following, the whole Clergy was voted in a Praemunire,
and all the small Monasteries of the Kingdom of 200 l. per annum, and under,
wholly given to the Kings use, and he thereupon in Parliament authorized to be
Head of the Church of England. Richard Grafton f. 225. b.


After which, he wrote in his Style, HENRICUS VIII. DEI GRATIA ANGLIAE ET
FRANCIAE REX FIDEI DEFENSOR DOMINUS HIBERNIAE, ET IN TERRA SUPREMUM CAPUT
ANGLICANAE ECCLESIAE. Which Title, after the birth of his daughter Elizabeth
the 7th of November following, was universally exacted, by an Oath prepared in
Parliament, obliging all persons to swear obedience to King Henry, as Supreme
Head of the Church, and to his Issue begotten or to be begotten by Queen Anne,
the refusal whereof cost many persons their lives afterward, among the first
of which, were the learned Sir Thomas More, sometime Lord Chancellor, and the
Bishop of Rochester, Anno 1535.
which last was with several others, Ibid f. 226
adjudged guilty of Misprision of Treason, in not exploding the treasonous
Impostures of Elizabeth Barton, called, the Holy Maid of Kent.

And now began the Lutherans and other Sectaries to swarm in England, for
prevention whereof six Articles, made by Statute, were tendered upon Oath to
all people throughout the Kings Dominions, whereby many suffered death in the
latter end of his Reign, while they denied the Articles on one side, or his
Supremacy on the other.

Anno 1536.
King Henry having thus satisfied his scrupling Conscience in the case of his
first Queen, Edward Halle f. 227 and 228
makes short work with the second; for on the 15th of May, An. 1536. she, with
her Brother the Lord Rochford, are arraigned in the Tower, their own Father
(now Earl of Wiltshire and Ormond) sitting among the rest of the Judges, by
whom they were both condemned; and on the 19th of the same month, with four
others put to death. Thus, when she had been King Henry's Wife, three years,
three months, and twenty five days, she was buried in the Chapel of St Peter
in the Tower; while the King mourning in a Wedding Garment, espoused, His third
Marriage.
the very next day, being the twentieth of May, Ibid. f. 22^.
the Lady Jane Seymour, The Arms of this Queen, are not only painted in very
many places, both in Windows and Galaries at Hampton Court, but also in Windsor
Castle, among which I have taken that Impalement of the Kings Arms and hers in
a Window of that Room lately called the Counsel Chamber. In which Escocheon she
bears Quarterly of six pieces, 1. Or, on a Pile, Gules inter six Flowers de
Lize Azure, three Lions passant guardant of the first. The augmentation granted
her by the King her Husband. 2. Gules, two Wings conjoined in Pale, Or. He
Paternal Arms, by the name of Seymour. 3. Varry Argent and Azure, Beauchamp of
Hatche. 4. Argent three Demi Lions rampant Gules, Stermy. 5. Party per bend
Argent and Gules, three Roses in Bend, counterchanged, Mackwilliam. and 6.
Argent on a bend Gules, three Leopards heads. Or, Coker.
This Queen, Jane Seymour, who is said to die willingly, to save the life of
her Son the Prince afterward King Edward VI. didbear a Phoenix in his Funeral
Fire, with this Motto, NASCATUR UT ALTER. Remains p. 217.


daughter of Sir John Seymour, creating, on Whitson Tuesday following, Sir
Edward Seymour her Brother, Ibid. f. 232
Lord Beauchamp, and Sir Edward Hungerford Lord Hungerford. She was his Wife
one year, five months, and twenty four days, and died in Childbed the 14th of
October, An. 1537. to the great grief of the King, who not only removed from
the place, but kept himself private, and wore the Garment of Mourning even in
the Festival time of Christmas. Her Body was solemnly conveyed to Windsor, the
8th of November following, where she was interred in the midst of the Choire
of the Church within the Castle.

This year began the Parliament, Richard Grafton f. 228. a.
wherein the Lord Thomas Howard, for affiancing the Lady Margaret Douglas,
daughter of Margaret Queen of Scots, and niece to the King, without his
consent, was convicted of Treason, being committed to the Tower, there died,
whence the Lady, after having long remained there, being released, married
Matthew Earl Lenox, by whom she had Henry, Father to James VI. of Scotland,
afterward King of both Realms.

King Henry exercising now full power of his Supremacy, Ibid. fol. 232 and 233
advanced his Secretary Thomas Cromwell to many degrees of Honor, till coming to
be Keeper of the Great Seal, Vicegerent of the Kingdom, and Head of the Clergy,
had at last his own Head struck off on Tower Hill.

Many innovations being by these means introduced, no less than five
insurrections broke out this year on the account of Religion; Anno 1536.
as first, Edward Halle f. 228. b.
to the number of 20000 in Lincolnshire, suppressed by the King in person: The
second about 40000 in Yorkshire, quelled by the Earl of Shrewsbury: The third
in Cumberland, Westmerland, and the North of Lancashire, quieted by the Earl of
Derby: The fourth in the North, where, to the number of 12000 besieging
Carlisle, Ibid. f. 231
were encountered, by the Duke of Norfolk, and 74 of them hanged on the Walls of
that City: The fifth in Yorkshire again, where Francis Bigot, etc. with a great
power intending to surprise Hull, was repulsed by the industry of Sir Ralph
Ellerker, and the Mayor of the Town, and their principals executed.

Anno 1538.
This year, by order of the Lord Cromwell, all the greater Monasteries both of
Friars and Nuns, Richard Grafton f. 233. b.
were suppressed also, to the number of 645, besides 90 Colleges, 110 Hospitals,
Chantries and Free Chapels 2374; in stead whereof the King instituted these
six Bishoprics, Westminster, Oxford, Peterborough, Bristol, Gloucester, and
Chester: and upon the 3d of November following, the Marquis of Excester, the
Earl of Devonshire, the Lord Montacute, etc. were put to death for complotting
to advance Cardinal Pole to the Crown, Ibid f. 233
as being son to the Lady Margaret, Daughter and Heir of George Duke of
Clarence. Anno 1539.


King Henry having lived now almost two years a Widower, His fourth Marriage.
Queen Anne of Cleve did bear, Quarterly of seven pieces, four in chief and
three in Base. The 1. Gules, an Inescocheon Argent, over all, an Escarbuncle of
eight rays pomette and flowery Gules, Cleve. 2. Or a Lion rampant Sable,
Juliers or Gulick. 3. Azure a Lion rampant crowned, Or. Schwarzenberg. 4.
Argent a Lion rampant queve forch^ Gules, crowned or, Bergh or Mons. 5. Or, a
Fesse Chequie Argent and Gules, la Marck or March. 6. Argent, a Lion rampant
Gules crowned of the first. 7. Argent, three Cheverons Gules, Ravensbergh.
These Arms thus marshalled, are painted in a Glass Window of a house in Poplar
in the County of Middlesex, sometime belonging to Sir Gilbert Dethick Knight.
Garter King of Arms, and now in the possession of his great Grandson Mr Henry
Dethick. Rouge Croix, a Member of our Society.
was by advice of his Favorite Cromwell, Richard Grafton f. 237, 238, 239 and 240
(6 Jan. 1539.) married to the Lady Anne, sister to William Duke of Cleve, a
Lutheran Prince of Germany; whereupon Cromwell was made Earl of Essex; but being
shortly after arrested of Heresy and High Treason, he was without answer
condemned and beheaded the 28th of July following: Ibid. fol. 242 a.
about which time the King, upon some dislike, had (by his own and the
Archbishop of Canterbury's authority) got himself divorced in Parliament, from
his new Queen, with full power to each of them for re-marrying; after which,
the Queen, by the Title of Lady Anne of Cleve, Ib. f. 242. b
remaining single in England the space of sixteen years, died An. 4 Mariae
Reginae, and was buried at Westminster, on the South Side the High Altar, where
her large Monument of Freestone, is to be seen nearly carved and adorned with
the Arms of Cleves, and the Letters A. C. knit together, for Anne of Cleves.

But the King, within a month after, viz. 8 Aug. An. 1540. was again wedded,
His fifth Marriage, an. 1540. The Lady Katherine Howard fifth Wife of King
Henry VIII. did bear for Arms, quarterly; The 1. Azure three Flowers de Lize in
Pale, Or, between two Flaunches Ermine, each charged with a Rose Gules: an
augmentation granted her by the King her Husband, 2. Gules, three Lions passant
guardant Or, a Label of three points Argent, Brotherton. 3. Gules, on a Bend
betwixt six crosse-croslets fiche, Argent, the augmentation of part of the
Scottish Arms, being her Paternal Coat of Howard. 4. Azure, two Lions passant
guardant, Or, the Verge of the Escocheon charged with four half Flowers de Lize
of the second, which was also an addition granted to this Queen Katherine. This
Escocheon, within a Chaplet of Leaves and red and white Roses, Ensigned with a
Royal Crown, is painted in the East-Window of Gresham College Hall in the City
of London; from whence it was delineated the 22d of July 1669.

to the Lady Katherine Howard Niece to the Duke of Norfolk, and Daughter to his
Brother Sir Edmond Howard, who, within three months after, being accused of
Adultery and a Praecontract, Anno 1541.
was on the 13th of February, Edward Halle f. 245.
together with the Lady Rochford, beheaded on the Green within the Tower;
twenty days before which, viz. on the 23d of January, King Henry was proclaimed
King of Ireland, by the Parliaments of both Kingdoms.

Anno 1542.
Several complaints coming about this time of the daily insolence of the Scots,
Ibid. f. 247 248, 249, etc.
and their harboring diverse English Rebels, King Henry, before he would invade
that Kingdom, sets forth a Declaration, containing the just causes and
considerations of the intended War with the Scots; wherein also appeared the
true and right Title of his Majesty to his Sovereignty of Scotland: which
taking no effect, the Lord Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk, and many Earls and
Barons, with an Army invade and harass the Borders of that Kingdom, and so
return to Barwick; when presently the Scots made an inroad upon the Western
Borders of the two Nations; but being repulsed by Sir Thomas Wharton and Sir
William Musgrave, with a considerable loss, the sad news thereof struck King
James V. with a sudden death; who leaving one only Daughter, named Mary, King
Henry desires her in marriage for his son Prince Edward; which not being
granted, a new War ensues; In which Edward Seymour Earl of Hertford, Richard
Grafton f. 257 and 258
and Sir John Dudley Viscount Lisle, having taken the rich Town of Leith, burnt
Edenbrough, and destroyed the Villages within seven miles round about it, and
on the 18th of May returned to Barwick.

Anno 1543:
The King had already disposed of five Wives, Ralph Holingshed p. 960. col. 1.
when resolving on a sixth, His sixth Marriage.
he married at Hampton Court, the Lady Katherine Parr, daughter of Sir Thomas
Parr of Kendal, sister of William Marquis of Northampton, In an East-Window of
the Hall of Baynard's Castle, stood the Escocheon of this Queen Katherine Parr,
which I delineated from the Original on the 8th of November, 1664. In which she
did bear, Quarterly of six pieces. The 1. Argent, on a Pile Gules, betwixt six
Roses of the first, three Roses of the second; which was an augmentation given
to her being Queen. 2. Argent two Bars Azure, a Border ingrayled Sable, Parr.
3. Or, three Waterbougets, Sable, Roos of Kendal. 4. Varry Argent and Azure, a
Fess Gules, Marmion. 5. Azure, three cheverons interlaced in base, and a chief
Or, Fitzhugh. 6. Vert, three Bucks standing at gaze Or, Green. These
Quarterings are Ensigned with a Royal Crown, and are between a K. and a P. for
Katherine Parr.

and Window of John Nevil Lord Latimer, Her Coronation is large in Edward Halle
fol. 212, 213, 214, etc.
the 12th of July, An. 35. of his Reign, and of our Lord, 1543. of whom growing
a weary within a year or two, a Warrant was signed for her commitment to the
Tower, (to be burnt for Heresy) which miscarrying, and happily coming to her
hands, gave her the opportunity of retriving the Kings favor, by submitting her
Will to his Majesty's judgment, and the good luck to last him the remainder of
his Reign; T. f. 92. Populwel 19.
which being about two years and a half, she was afterward married to Sir
Thomas Seymour, Knight of the Garter, Lord Seymour of Sudely, and High Admiral
of England (Brother to Queen Jane, third Wife of King Henry VIII.) to whom, by
Will dated the 5th of Sept. 1541. An. 2. E. 6. she bequeathed all her Goods and
Chattels, Test. probat. 6 Dec. 1548.
etc. and shortly after dying in Childbed, he being immediately afterward
beheaded.

King Henry having on Trinity Sunday before entered into a League with the
Emperor, in July this year, sends Garter, accompanied with the Emperors Toyson
d'or King of Arms, to the French King, demanding performance of several
Articles; which being denied, an Army of 6000 men is sent over; which joining
the Emperor, they besiege the new fortified frontier Town Landersey, which the
French King by stratagem relieving, the Emperor broke up his Army, and the
English returned home.

Anno 1544.
The vast Sums which the King had made of the Monasteries and Religious Lands,
besides the immense Treasure left him by his Father, now totally exhausted,
Proclamation is made the beginning of this year, for advancement of Gold from
40 to 45 s. per Oance, and Silver from 3 s. 9 d. to 4 s. and the acceptance of
several base Coyns as Current; which done, he raises another great Army for
France, and having first left his Queen Governess of his Realms at home in his
absence, and sent over the Duke of Norfolk, D. 145. Pat. 9 Julij an. 36 H. 8.
etc. besiege Mutterel, and the Duke of Suffolk on the like account, before him
to Bulloigne, himself shortly after arrives there, to whom the Town, after a
months siege, and hard service, being surrendered the 8th of September, upon
Articles, to depart with Bag and Baggage, he leaves the Lord Lisle his Deputy,
and returns for England, landing at Dover the first of October following.

King Henry still straightened for Money, demands so high a Benevolence toward his
Wars in France and Scotland, that being denied by an Alderman of London, he is
commanded personally to accompany the Earl of Hertford with his Army to
Scotland, where at Pavior Hough, being surrounded by the Scots, and most of
them slain or taken, the poor Alderman was made a Prisoner.

Anno 1545.
About this time the English Fleet before Newhaven, were by the French beaten
home, when their Admiral making a descent into Sussex, and landing some French
Soldiers, soon allarum'd the Country, who forced them to their ships, as they
of the Isle of Wight did afterward upon a like attempt. To retaliate which,
the English, Richard Grafton f. 240. a.
under the command of Sir John Dudley, soon after landed in Normandy, burnt the
Suburbs of Treport with the Abbey, and 30 ships in the Haven.

Anno 1546.
Bulloigne continued all this while in the hands of the English,
notwithstanding the frequent attempts of the French, once with no less than
60000 men; the Earl of Hertfort is sent into France for the relief of the Town;
where several skirmishes passing between the two Armies, Edward Halle f. 262. b.
a Peace is concluded; for confirmation of which, the Admiral of France coming
into England, landed at Greenwich the 19th of August; and being next day
sumptuously met by Prince Edward, with 500 Gentlemen in Coats of Velvet, with
one Sleeve of Cloth of Gold, and half the Coat embroidered with the same, was
conducted to Hampton Court, where the League was sworn and signed by King Henry.

Thus we are come to the last year of his Reign, Ralph Holingshed p. 976. col.
2.
when about Michaelmas, An. 1546. Thomas Duke of Norfolk with his son Henry
Earl of Surrey, were committed to the Tower, upon certain Articles of Treason:
and the 13th of January the said Earl was arraigned in the Guildhall of London,
before the Lord Mayor, the Lord Chancellor, and diverse other Lords and Judges,
being there in Commission; one especial Article, among others, wherewith he was
charged, was, for quartering certain Arms which belonged to the King and the
Prince; which the Earl justifying, that they appertained to his Ancestors, as
by proof of the Heralds he could make appear, was nevertheless by a common Jury
(as not being a Peer of the Realm) found guilty, and on the 19th of the same
month beheaded on Tower Hill; when the King himself being sensible of the
approaches of death, caused the great and fair Church of the Gray Friars
London, lately suppressed, to be opened, and made a Parish Church, giving the
Revenues thereof to the City of London, toward the relief of their poor,
endowing the same with 500 Marks yearly of Lands for ever, to maintain Gods
Divine Service, and the said Churches reparation. Immediately after which, King
Henry made his Will, wherein, however Titles had been disabled in Parliament,
he ordained his three Children to succeed each other, for want of other Issue;
1000 Marks he commanded to be given to the poor, and to 12 poor Knights at
Windsor each of them 12 pence a day for ever, every year a Gown of white Cloth,
the Garter embroidered upon the Breast, wherein was placed the Cross of St
George, and a Mantle of red Cloth to be worn thereupon, ordaining for his
Executors, in the minority of Prince Edward, 16 persons. He also gave competent
maintenance, for life, to such as were expulsed the Monasteries, commanding his
son Edward should be carefully brought up in the Catholic Faith. But he that
made so many Wills void, had his own broken in every particular. He had also
instituted several Professors in each University; put down the Stews in
Southwark; built the Tower of Greenwich, as also his Mansion house of St
James's, where he made a fair Park.

Thus languishing under a Fever and an ulcerated Leg, His death, an. 1546. Jan.
28.
Richard. Grafton. f. 263.
King Henry VIII. (in great penitency for his sins) deceased at his Palace of
Westminster, upon the 28th day of January, An. 1546. when he had ruled the
Scepter thirty seven years, nine months, and five days; and lived fifty five
years, five months, and as many days.

His Body remaining privately in his Chamber, was there cered and put into a
Coffin of Lead, In Coll. Arm. I. 14. to 63.
while a sumptuous Hearse of Virgins Wax was prepared within the Chapel at
Whitehall, with six goodly Pillars, weighing by estimation 2000 pound; under
which Hearse, was a Canopy of rich Cloth of Gold, whose Vallence were half Gold
and half black Silk, into which the Corpse was conveyed, covered with a Pall of
Cloth of Tissue, an Altar being erected at the East End, richly adorned with
black Velvet, and Escocheons of the Kings Arms. The Hearse was railed about with
Timber covered with black Cloth, with which the Chapel, Cloister, Hall, and
Chamber were likewise Hung. Within the Rail were Seats for the twelve Lords
Mourners to kneel or sit; and here the Corpse remained from the 2d of February
to the 14th, served with day and night watches, a Herald standing at the
West End of the Hearse, and desiring the people to pray, saying, You shall of
your Charity pray for the Soul of the most famous Prince King Henry VIII. our
late most gracious King and Master.

On the 14th of February about ten in the morning, the Kings Body set forward
toward Windsor, in a stately Chariot, his Effigies lying upon the Coffin, with
the true Imperial Crown on the Head, and under it a night Cap of black Satin,
set full of precious Stones, and apparalled with Robes of crimson Velvet,
furred with Minever, poudred with Ermine, the Collar of the Garter, with the
Order of St George about the Neck, a crimson Satin Doubler embroidered with
Gold, two Bracelets of Gold about the Wrists, set with Stones and Pearl, a fair
Armouring Sword by the side, the Scepter in the right Hand, and the Ball in the
lest, a pair of scarlet Hose, crimson Velvet Shoes, Gloves on the Hands, and
several Diamond Rings on the Fingers, drawn by eight great Horses, trapped with
black, adorned with Escocheons, and a Shafferen on their Heads, on each of
which rode a Child of Honor, carrying a Banneroll of the Kings Arms.

Thus with an exceeding great Train of four Miles in length, the Body was
conducted to Syon, where it was received at the Church door, by the Bishops of
London, Bristol, and Gloucester, who performed Dirige that night and next
morning; the Corpse being brought into the Church, was placed in a Hearse like
that at Whitehall, but the Effigies was conveyed into the Vestry.

The next morning, about six of the Clock, after the third sound of the
Trumpets (the whole company, the Marquis Dorset being chief Mourner) proceeded
for Windsor, and brought the Corpse to the Castle Colledge-gate about one of the
Clock, from which place to the West door of the Church, a large way was railed
in on both sides, and hanged with black Cloth and Escocheons, the Church and
Quire being likewise hanged round with black. The Bishops of Winchester,
London, and Ely in their Pontificalibus, with the Sub-dean of the Kings
Chapel, and all the Singing Men of the same, and the Dean of Windsor, with all
the Canons, and their whole Quire, received the Corpse at the foresaid place;
whence, after censing and such like ceremonies, it was carried into the Church,
the Singing Men of the Kings Chapel on the right Hand, and they of Windsor on
the left preceding it: Thus the Effigies was first conveyed into the Quire by
diverse Knights and Gentlemen, and then the Coffin, by sixteen Yeomen, with
black Staves in their Hands, was brought into a Hearse, made in the midst of
the Quire, under which was provided a goodly Vault to bury the Corpse in, over
which was laid a Grate, whereon stood the said Hearse with the Coffin and
Picture; this Hearse was like that at Whitehall, only it consisted of thirteen
great Pillars, and weighed by estimation 4000 pound, having about it the twelve
Banners of Descents; thus the usual ceremonies being performed, the Body
remained there that night.

Wednesday being the 16th of February, about four of the Clock began the
Communion of the Trinity, performed by the Sub-dean of Windsor, and the
Sub-dean of the Kings Chapel: where, after an Offering of Gold by the chief
Mourner, of the Knights of the Garter to St George, and of the Kings
Hatchments, Pannerolls and Banners, and other Trophies, as also of the Kings
Horse richly trapped, came four Gentlemen Ushers, and took away the Pall of
Cloth of Tissue (the Picture being conveyed away before by six Knights into the
Vestry) after which sixteen strong Yeomen of the Guard took the Coffin, and
with five strong Linen Towels, which they had for their Fees, let it into the
Vault (near unto the Body of Queen Jane Seymour his third Wife) the Grate being
first taken away; then the Lord Chamberlain, the Lord Great Master, Mr.
Treasurer, Mr. Comptroller, and the Sergeant Porter, breaking their white
Staves upon their Heads in three parts, as did likewise all the Gentlemen
Ushers, threw them into the Grave, when Garter, assisted by the Bishops of
Canterbury and Durham, declared the State and the Name of the most Godly Prince
their Master, King Edward VI. Thus the Funerals ending, the Trumpets sounded in
the rood Loft, and the Company departed.

In a Chapel Eastward to that of his Interment, John Speed p. 1036.
was begun for this King (by Cardinal Wolsey) a most costly and stately Tomb of
Copper gilt, but never finished; in the Enclosures of whose Grates were
curiously cast his several Titles: with what charge and magnificence this
Monument was intended, is manifested by a Manuscript taken from the true model
thereof, received from the hands of that industrious Herald Nicholas Charles
Lancaster, and recited at large by Mr. John Speed, in his History of Great
Britain, p. 1037 and 1038. to which I refer my Reader. It was to contain in
breadth twenty foot upon the Pavement, and to be twenty eight foot high, which
with the several Pillars, were to be of Oriental Stones, the Capitals and Bases
Copper gilt; the Figure of the King on Horseback, two other of the King and
Queen (to lie on two Tombs of black Touch) with four Statues of Angels, all as
big as the life; the Images of the fourteen Prophets, the twelve Apostles, the
four Evangelists, and the Doctors, with the Statues of the Father, St John
Baptist, and St George, were five foot in height, the Figures of several Angels
and Children, contained in length two foot and an half. The whole number of
Images being one hundred thirty four, and of Histories forty four, and all of
gilt Brass, as appears in the designment.

These Images were prepared, and part of this glorious Pile erected, when the
reformation of Religion, by this Kings Son Edward VI. would not admit of the
finishing thereof; but many of these Statues being preserved in the said
Chapel till the year 1642, were, since, by the prevailing party of the late
Long Parliament, and their Sword Alchimie, turned into Silver, toward the
support of a Rebellion against so pious and so gracious a King, as was our late
Sovereign Lord Charles I. These were indeed but Images; but what did those men
imagine, who under the pretense of Religion, fought with the Revenues of the
Church, against the Head of the Church, and made use of the Title of his Kingly
Office, to the destruction of his Royal Person.

Children of King HENRY VIII. by Queen KATHERINE of Spain his first Wife.
16. HENRY TVDOR, Raphael Holinshed p. 807. c. 1.
eldest son, born at Richmond in Surrey, 1 Jan. 1509. An. 1 H. 8. had for
Godfathers at the Font, William Warham Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Earl
of Surrey, and for Godmother, the Lady Katherine Countess of Devonshire, Ibid.
fol. 808. col. 2.
daughter to King Edward IV. He lived not fully two months, Edward Halle f. 9.
b.
but dying in the same place, the 22d of February, his Body with all due
Obsequies, was buried at Westminster.

16. Another son, not named, born in November, 1514. An. 6 H. 8. lived but a
short while, wherefore no further mention can be made of him: Only King Henry
in the case of the Divorce, urged the death of these two Princes as a
punishment from God, being begot on his own Brothers Wife.

16. MARY TVDOR, only Daughter of King Henry VIII. by Queen Katherine,
succeeded her Brother King Edward VI. in the Royal Dignity, by the Title of
Queen Mary, whose History follows in the fourth Chapter of this Book.

Children of King HENRY VIII. by Queen ANNE BULLEN his second Wife.
16. ELIZABETH TVDOR, second Daughter of King Henry VIII. swayed the Scepter of
these Realms after the death of her Sister Mary, by the name of Queen
Elizabeth; whose Story you may read in the fifth Chapter of this Book.

16. A Male-child, still-born, 29 Febr. 1535. An. 27 H. 8. to the regret of the
King, Richard Grafton f. 227. a.
and no little grief of the Mother, as the sequel of her accusation and death
did shortly after confirm.

A Son of King HENRY VIII. by Queen JANE SEYMOUR his third Wife.
16. EDWARD, only Child of King Henry VIII. by the Lady Jane Seymour,
succeeded his Father in his Kingdoms, and was styled King Edward VI. as more at
large in the ensuing Chapter.

Natural Issue of King HENRY VIII.
16. HENRY, A Banner of the Arms of this Henry Duke of Richmond, impaled under
a Ducal Coronet, with those of the Lady Mary Howard his Wife, are depicted in a
Book of the College of Arms marked l 2. Standards, etc. in which he does bear,
France and England quarterly, within a Border also quarterly, the 1. Ermine,
the 2. and 3. compony. Or and Azure, the 4. gobony Argent and Azure. Over all a
Easton sinister Argent. (...) an Escocheon of Pretense quarterly Gules, and
verry or and vert, charged with a Lion rampant Argent, on a chief Azure a
Castle betwixt two Bucksheads caboshed Arg. His Wives Arms are also 1. Howard,
with the augmentation, 2 Brotherton, 3 Mowbray, and 4 Warren. This Banner is
supported by an Ante^ope Argent Bezanty, accorned, hoofed, gorged, with a Ducal
Coronet, and chained all Or. The same Arms here emblazoned for this Duke, are
also upon his Stall in St George's Chapel in Windsor Castle.
surnamed Fitz. Roy, or the Kings Son, Natural Son of Henry VIII. (begotten of
the Lady Elizabeth Tailbois, daughter of Sir John Blount Knight. and Widow of Sir
Gilbert Tailbois) born at Blackamore in Essex, Ex Coll. Gl. (...).
was at the age of six years, upon the 18th of June, An. 17 H. 8. 1525. Pat. 17
H. 8. p. 1. m. 14.
first made Knight of the Garter, then advanced to the Dignity of Earl of
Nottingham, and also (the same day) created Duke of Richmond and Somerset, to
him and his Heirs Males, with the Fee of 40 l. per annum, the ceremony thereof
being performed at the Royal Palace of Bridewell, in the City of London; and
the 26th day of July following he was constituted Admiral of England, Ireland,
Normandy, Pat. 19. H. 8, p. 2. m^.
etc. and in the 19th of Henry VIII. had a Patent for his Wardenship of the
East, West, and middle M^rches toward Scotland.

The Lieutenancy of Ireland was also granted him, Pat. 22 H. 8. p. 1.
An. 22 H 8. but by reason of his tender years, Sir William Sheffington Knight. was
constituted his Deputy there; and having his education with Henry Earl of
Surrey, first at Windsor, and afterward in Paris, there grew so great and
intimate a friendship between these two young Noblemen, Herbert Hist. 8. p. 178.
that the Duke of Richmond married the Lady Mary his sister (daughter of Thomas
Howard third Duke of Norfolk) but deceasing without Issue, at St James's near
Westminster, upon the 24th of July, An. 1536. (28 H. 8.) being then about
seventeen years of age, Inq. capta 25 October. 30 H. 8. Summers.
he was buried at Thetford in the County of Norfolk, the King mourning for him
a long time after.

He was a Prince early in Martial Activities, of good Literature and Knowledge
in the Tongues; as may be collected from an Hexasticon of the Learned Antiquary
Leland, to be found among his written Epigrams.

16. EDWARD VI. Anno 1546. January 28.
KING of ENGLAND, FRANCE, and IRELAND, Defender of the FAITH, and in Earth, of
the CHURCH of England and Ireland SUPREME HEAD.
CHAP. III.
The Figure of this Kings Great Seal is exhibited in the 428 page of this sixth
Book, on both sides of which he is styled EDWARDUS SEXTUS DE^ GRATIA ANGLIE
FRANCIE ET HIBERNIE REX FIDEI DEFENS OR ET IN TERRA ECCLESIE ANGLICANE ET
HIBERNICE SUPREMUM CAPUT. This Seal differs from the last Seal of his Father
King Henry, only in the form of the collateral Shields within the Garter, which
are indented, and the barbing of his Horse, which is charged with large Roses.
The Arms of King Edward VI. (represented on his gold Coin) are Ensigned with an
arch-Crown, and supported on the right side with a Lion rampant guardant
crowned Or; and on the left, with a Red Dragon, both standing upon a Scroul,
upon which are stamped the Letters E. R.

The like Achievement was observed by Mr. Weever (vide p. 587.) to be painted
on a Tablet in Barkhamsted in the Diocese of London, under which were these
Verses.

Quid sextum dicis? nulli virtute secundus,
Ingenio nulli, nullus in art prior:
Edwardi insignis sunt haec Insignia? Indis,
In Signis illum delineare nequis.
This Edward VI. Camdens Remains p. 217.
bare (as did the black Prince) three Feathers in a Crown, while his Father
lived, as Prince of Wales, with ICH DIEN. Albeit he was never so created.


EDward Duke of Cornwall, youngest Son of King Henry VIII. MS. penes W. D. N. p.
15^.
and only Child by his third Wife the Lady Jane Seymour, Richard Grafton f. 232.
was born at Hampton Court the 12th of October, on Friday the Feast of St
Wilfrid, and Vigil of St Edward, about two in the morning, An. 1537. in the
29th year of his Fathers Reign, the Dominical Letter G. being cut out of his
Mothers Womb, as is constantly affirmed, like as Julius Caesar, that august
Roman Emperor is said to have been. He was christened the Monday following, with
great magnificence at his Majesty's Chapel there, having for Godfathers at the
Font, Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Duke of Norfolk, and at
his Confirmation the Duke of Suffolk, his Sister the Lady Mary being Godmother,
and Garter King of Arms proclaiming the name of the Prince; whence possibly
Grafton supposed him created Prince of Wales (as he has it) six days after his
birth; which he never was, for in the ninth year of his age, when all things
were prepared, and in readiness for his Creation, his Father died, viz. 28 Jan.
1546, having by his Will appointed him the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord
Chancellor, the Bishop of Durham, with others, to the number of sixteen, for
his Privy Council; who, the first of February after, elected his Uncle Edward
Seymour Earl of Hertford, Protector both of his Person and Kingdom; from whom
the young King having received the Order of Knighthood, the 6th of February,
immediately conferred the same upon Sir Henry Hoblethorne Lord Mayor.

Next, his Fathers Obsequies being solemnly performed, the 17th of February he
created the Lord Protector, Duke of Somerset; Raphael Helingsh. p. 971. col. 1.
William Parre Earl of Essex, Marquis of Northampton; John Dudley Viscount
Lisle, Earl of Warwick; Thomas Wriothesley Lord Chancellor, Earl of
Southampton; Sir Thomas Seymour, his other Uncle, and Brother to the Protector,
he made Lord Sudeley, and Admiral of England; Sir Richard Rich, Sir William
Willoughby, and Sir Edmond Sheffeild, Lords of the same Names. With which Train
and many more, he rode through London in great State, and was with equal
solemnity crowned at Westminster, His Coronation.
the 25th of February, by Thomas Cranmer aforesaid, Archbishop of Canterbury;
at which time a general Pardon was proclaimed for all Offenders, these six
excepted, Cardinal Pole, the Duke of Norfolk, Edward Courtney, eldest Son to
the Marquis of Excester, Mr. Fortescue, Mr. Throckmorton, and Doctor Pates,
Bishop of Worcester, who were all fled to avoid the Oath of Supremacy.

King Henry having left strict charge with the Council to prosecute the Match
between the young King Edward and the Queen of Scots, Anno 1547.
the Protector himself, with an Army of 18000, enters Scotland, assisted by the
Lord Clinton, with a Navy of 60 sail, in order to the compelling the Scots to
perform the Articles of Marriage formerly agreed on, which they upon friendly
offers still refusing to do, the Protector proceeds to Hostilities, and having
marshalled his Army, advances two days march into Scotland, and took three
Castles; whereupon the Governor of Scotland sending the Fire-Cross about the
Kingdom, commanded all above sixteen, and under 60 years of age to appear in
Arms; by which means, with a considerable force, he faced the English at a
place called Musselbrough, Musselbrough Field, Sept. 10.
where a most bloody Battle was fought with much loss on either side; but the
Victory fell to the English, Ibid. fol. 985., etc.
who slew 14000 Scots upon the place, and took 1500 Prisoners. However, the
Governor of Scotland recruiting again, continued the War, maintained against
him by the Lord Gray of Wilton, with various success, till at last the young
Queen being but six years of age, was conveyed into France, where shortly after
she was married to the Dauphin.

Several Insurrections were about this time fomented in England, partly about
Enclosures, Anno 1548.
but mostly for Religion: For the first the Lord Protector in the Kings Name,
gave out such strict Commands, that the people therein had present
satisfaction; but as to the latter, severe injunctions were by him set forth
for pulling down Images in Churches, and several new Preachers sent to admonish
the people from praying to Saints, or for the Dead, Masses, Diriges, etc. and
punishments ordained for offenders in that kind; whereupon Edmond Bonner Bishop
of London, was committed to the Fleet, Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester,
to the Tower, Cuthbert Tonstal Bishop of Durham, Dr. Heath Bishop of Rochester,
and Dr. Day Bishop of Chichester to several Prisons, and their Bishoprics
taken from them: All which was afterward confirmed by Parliament, wherein it
was ordered that Bishops should be elected by collation of the Kings Letters
Patents only; That none speak against receiving the Eucharist in both Kinds;
That King Henry's Statute of six Articles be repealed, and that of his
Supremacy confirmed: Raphael Holinshed p. 1002.
For execution whereof many Commissioners were sent into the several Countries,
among which one Mr. Body performing his charge in a Church in Cornwall, was
stabbed by a Priest, who, for an example, was hanged in Smithfield.
Nevertheless, the whole Country rising in Arms besieged Exceter, where for
twelve days the Inhabitants were so straightened, that they fed upon Dogs and
Horses, till at last the Siege was raised by the Lords Gray and Russel, and
most of the Rebels taken and executed, some by Martial Law, and the rest at
London: But to exterminate them wholly, Sir William Kingston was sent down with
a Commission as Provost Marshal, to enquire after the remainder, who inviting
himself to dinner with the Mayor of Bodmin in Corrwal, was by him nobly
received and entertained, when after dinner, having first ordered a Gallows to
be erected in the Marketplace, he repaid the Mayors civilities, by causing him
immediately to be hanged thereon.

Soon after this, two other Insurrections broke out, Anno 1549.
the first in Norfolk, headed by one Robert Ket, a Tanner of Wimondham, who
pretending Justice and Religion (but after a monstrous manner) grew to be 20000
strong, took the City of Norwich, and made that Mayor wait on him as his
servant; whence advancing to a place called Monshold, he was encountered by the
Marquis of Northamthampton, whom, with the death of the Lord Sheffield he put
to flight; but shortly after, being met by the Earl of Warwick (and his
Company, upon promise of pardon, forsaking him) he was taken and hanged in
Chains, upon Norwich Castle, and nine of his Accomplices upon his own Oak of
Reformation, under which himself with these Officers of his Army used to sit
and give Judgment. The other in Yorkshire, was soon quieted; the Seditious,
after the usual manner, accepting pardon, cast away their Arms, relinquishing
their Leaders to the Kings mercy, whereof William Ambler Gentleman, and four
others were hanged at York.

About this time the French King taking advantage of these troubles in England,
with a great Fleet of Galleys set upon the Isles of Gernsey and Jersey, but was
gallantly repulsed from both by the Lord Admiral, with the loss of above 1000
men, and many Ships. For which good service the Admiral upon his return is most
ungratefully accused to have practiced the death of his Brother the Protector;
which proceeded merely from the spleen of the Protectors Wife, daughter to the
Lord Stanhop, and from the malice his Brother and some others had against him
for his Religion, which as yet was not of the Reformation; now the ground of
his sisters displeasure was his having married the Relict of the late King, who
being the younger Brothers Wife, and yet taking place of the Protectors Lady,
so distasted her, that (notwithstanding the Queen-Dowager was now dead in
Childbed) she never rested till the Admiral was sent to the Tower, and by a
Warrant from the Hand of his Brother beheaded. The Protector having thus cut
off that Courage, which chiefly supported his own Authority, the John Dudley Vi
count Lisle.
Earl of Warwicks subtilty so far prevailed against him, that within a short
time after, himself is committed to the Tower, together with Sir Michael
Stanhop, Sir Thomas Smith, Sir John Thynne, and others; and his Protectorship
taken from him: when submitting to the Kings mercy he is released, but not
quitted from the Earls malice, who (notwithstanding for confirmation of amity,
the Dukes Daughter was married to the Earls eldest Son) about a year after
framed more Articles against him, for which, 22 Febr. 1551 he procured him to
be beheaded.

This year, Anno 1550.
ultimo Martij, was a general Peace proclaimed between the Emperor and the two
Kings of England and France, Bulloign restored to the French, that King
presented with the Order of the Garter, and a marriage concluded between
Elizabeth his eldest Daughter and King Edward VI. The Earl of Warwick now Lord
Admiral, grows great, and is created Duke of Northumberland, while among
several others advanced to new Titles of Honor, his Son Sir Robert Dudley is
sworn one of the six Gentlemen in Ordinary of his Majesty's Privy Chamber;
after which it was observed the King enjoyed his health but a while.

On the Duke of Somerset's account, and but four days after him, Anno 1551.
viz. the 26th of February, Sir Michael Stanhop, with Sir Thomas Arundel were
beheaded; Sir Ralph Vane, and Sir Miles Partridge hanged, all upon Tower Hill.

King Edward now sensibly declining in point of health, Anno 1552.
began in July this year to prepare the House of the Gray Friars in London,
Ralph Holingshed p. 1802. col. 1.
now called Christ's Hospital, for poor and fatherless Children; St Thomas in
Southwark, and Little St Bartholomews, for the Lame and Impotent; and his House
at Bridewel for the Riotous and Idle, unto all which he gave 1000 l. per annum,
the better half of which he took from the Savoy.

And now were the three daughters of Henry Gray Duke of Suffolk (which he had
by Frances daughter to Charles Brandon and Mary Queen of France) married at
Durham House; Jane the eldest, to the Lord Guilford Dudley fourth son to the
Duke of Northumberland; Katherine, the second, to Henry eldest Son and Heir of
William Herbert Earl of Pembroke, and Mary, the youngest, (being somewhat
deformed) to Henry Keys the Kings Gentleman Porter. And thus far proceeded
Northumberlands Plot, according to his desire; which to perfect, he falls to
work upon the Kings Weakness, now languishing for death, and lays before him
the great care which he ought to take for preservation of the Gospel, by
excluding his two sisters, and placing the Succession of the Crown on the Dukes
Daughter-in-Law, the Lady Jane Gray; whereunto King Edward's easiness, by his
last Will and Testament monument Illustrissimo Domino Dno: ANTONIO Comiti de
SHAFTSBURY, Baroni Ashley de Wimborne St. Giles, et Barom Couper de Paulet,
summo totius Angliae Cancellario, e Secretioribusque Consilijs, Altar hoc sub
quo Rex Edw: VI Tumulatus Iacet. HD.FS.

LOVE SERVE soon subscribing, the Dukes design was fully accomplished let the
King but die. Which whether by his means, or to his satisfaction, His death
July 6 an. 1553.
soon after happened at Greenwich, Raphael Holingsh. p. 1083. col. 2.
6 July 1553. in the sixteenth year of his age, when he had reigned six years,
five months, and nine days.

Immediately before his death, he was heard to pray by himself in these words:
O Lord God deliver me out of this miserable and wretched Life: O Lord thou
know how happy it were for me to by with Thee; yet for thy Chosens sake, if
it be thy Will, send me life and health, that I may truly serve Thee: O Lord
God save thy Chosen People of England, and defend this Realm from Papistry, and
maintain thy true Religion, that I and my people may praise thy Holy Name, for
thy Son Jesus Christ his sake.

His Body was buried with great solemnity in the Chapel of St Peter's Church in
Westminster, the 8th of August following, under the High Altar of Brass, at the
head of his Grandfather King Henry VII. the representation of which Altar, as
it stood entire before the late Fanatic Zeal destroyed it, I have inserted in
the precedent page. The Service and Communion, by especial favor of his Sister
Queen Mary, were performed in English, I. 11. fol. 118. in Call. Arm.
and these Trophies among others used at his Funeral.

Inprimis, four great Banners, which were not of Saints, as former Kings and
Queens were, but the first, of the Order of the Garter; second, of the Red
Cross; third, of his Mothers Arms. Queen Jane; and, fourth, of the Queen
Dowagers Arms; the Marquis of Winchester being chief Mourner. Item, A Majesty
and Vallence set up in the Chapel at Whitehall, and the like in the Church at
Westminster; a Majesty for the Chariot; three Standards, one of the Lion, a
second of the Dragon, a third of the Greyhound; six large Banners of Damask;
six large Banners of Sarcenet; thirteen Banners in Fine Or. Item, A large
Helmet gilt. Item, A Crown carved and gilt. Item, A Lion carved and gilt with
burnished gold. Item, an Arming Sword. Item, A Target of the Kings Arms within
a Garter, and the Crown over it gilt. Item, Mantels of Cloth of Gold lined with
white Satin; besides several Bannerolls, Pencils, and Escocheons, and a Crown
Imperial embossed and gilt with fine gold, to be set on the Hearse at
Westminster.

I shall conclude the short Reign of this Prince, with the Verses of Iherome
Cardan, written as an Epitaph for him, and recited by Henry Holland in his
Herologia Anglica, p. 27. which are these, Flete nefas magnum, sed toto
flebitis orb
Mortales; vester corruit omnis honor.
Nam Regum decus, Juvenum flos, spesque; bonorum,
Delitiae secli, and gloria gentis erat.
Dignus Apollineis lachrymis doctaeque' Minervae:
Flosculus hen misere concidit ante diem.
Te tumulo dabimus musae, supremaque; flentes
Munera, Melpomene tristia fata canet.


portrait of Queen Mary Q Mary

portrait of Elizabeth I Q ELIZABETH

16. MARY QUEEN of ENGLAND, FRANCE, and IRELAND, Defender of the Faith. Anno
1553. July 6.

CHAP. IV.
Olivarius Viedius in his Genealogia Comitum Flandri^e, p. 143. exhibits the
Seal of Queen Mary, used before her Marriage, in which, under the Queens
Throne, and also under her Figure on Horseback in the Counterseal, are these
words, in Roman Capitals, TEMPORIS FILIA VERITAS, and in the Circumference of
each, MARIA D.G. ANGLIE FRANCIE ET HIBERNIE REGINA, EIUS NOMINIS PRIMA, FIDEI
DEFENSOR. After her Marriage with King Philip, both their Figures and Titles
were joined in the same Seal, in which the King and Queen are Seated upon one
Throne, under a Canopy, King Philip on the right hand, and Queen Mary on the
left, both Crowned, he having a Sword in his right Hand, and she a Scepter in
her left Hand; betwixt them is an Altar, on tho Tablature of which is carved
the Letters P. M. upon this Altar is a Mound or Ball, sustained by the other
Hands of the King and Queen; and over that, their Arms within the Garter
(Ensigned with an arched Diadem, as those on their Heads) viz. Party per Fesse,
the Chief part Quarterly of four pieces 1 Castile and Leon, quarterly. 2.
Arragon, impaling Sicily. The third as the second, the fourth at the first. The
Basse part of the Escocheon is also quarterly of four pieces, 1. Austria
modern, 2, Burgundy modern; 3. Ancient Burgundy; and 4, Brabant Over all, on
an Inescocheon, Flanders and Tirol, impaled. This Achievement impal^ng. France
and England quarterly, being the Arms of Queen Mary. These Arms within the
Garter, are carved on a Table of Stone upon that Tower in Windsor Castle,
belonging to the Governor of the poor Knights, the ground being diapred with
Rose Branches, and the Escocheon supported by an Eagle, on the right side, and
on the left, by a Lion rampant guardant Crowned. This Seal is Circumscribed,
PHILIPPUS. ET. MARIA. D. G. REX. ET. REGINA. ANGLIE. HISPANIARUM. FRANCIE.
UTRIUSQUE SICILIE. JERUSALEM. ET. HIBERNIE. FIDEI. DEFENSORES.

The ground of the Reverse or Counter-Seal, is composed of Roses, Castles, and
Flower-de-Luces, within ovals of Fret-work interlaced, on which the King and
Queen are represented on Horseback. He with a Cap on his Head, and a Sword in
his right Hand, and she, in her Hood, and a Scepter in her left Hand; behind
them is their Achievement Crowned, and within the Garter; the Kings Caparizons
being embroidered with the same Devises, as is the ground of the said
Counter-Seal; about which are these words, ARCHIDVCES, AUSTRIE. DUCES.
BURGUNDY. MEDIOLANI, ET. BRABANCIE. COMITES. HASPURGI. FLANDRIE. ET. TIROLIS.
for the Figure of which Seal, vide Book 6. page 429.

Queen Mary, when she was Princess, used both a Red and white Rose and a
Pomegranet knit together, to show her descent from Lancaster, York, and Spain.
When she came to the Kingdom, by persuasion of her Clergy, she bare winged
Thime drawing Truth out of a Pit, with, VERITAS TEMPORIS FILIA. Which Motto
adorns her first great Seal, as I have before observed.


THis Mary, eldest Daughter of King Henry VIII. Collect. Cerem. vol. 2. f. 139.
per E. Walker mil. Gart.
(by Queen Katherine, Daughter of Ferdinand King of Spain, Relict of his elder
Brother Prince Arthur) was born at Greenwich in Kent, on Monday 8 Febr. 1515.
An. 7 H. 8. Richard Grafton f. 58.
about four of the Clock in the morning, Edward Halle f. 85.
and was baptized at the Friars at Greenwich, the Wednesday following with
great solemnity; the Lord Thomas Wolsey, Cardinal of St Cicely in Rome, and
Archbishop of York, being Godfather, the Lady Katherine and the Duchess of
Norfolk Godmothers at the Font, and the Countess of Salisbury at the
Confirmation, to whose care, by direction of the Queen her Mother she was
afterward committed. Her Style was proclaimed at the Church door by the Office
of Arms (who gave their attendance) in manner following, God give good Life and
long, unto the Right High, Right Noble, and Excellent Princess, Mary, Princess
of England, and Daughter of our Sovereign Lord the King.

At nine years of age, she was desired in marriage by the Emperor, next by the
King of Scots, and afterward by the Duke of Orleans, all which failing, and
her Brother King Edward VI. dying, she assumes the Title of Queen, in
opposition to the Lady Jane, eldest daughter of Henry Gray Duke of Suffolk, and
Wife to the Lord Guilford Dudley fourth son of John Duke of Northumberland, to
whom King Edward VI. devising the Crown by Will, the ten days ensuing his death
are not improperly termed the an Interregnum, or the Reign of Queen Jane.

For the next day after the death of King Edward VI. Anno 1553.
viz. 7 Julij, 1553, she, by the procurement of her Father-in-Law the Duke, is
sumptuously attended to the Tower, and proclaimed Queen, while the Princess
Mary, on her way toward London, from her House at Hovesdon, in compliance to
the Duke of Northumberlands Letters, sent to her in the Kings Name, is first
happily informed of the Kings death, and the Dukes design of securing her
Person; whereupon returning to Hovesdon, and afterward converying her self to
the Castle of Framingham in Norfolk, she is there saluted Queen, and resorted
unto by the Gentry of the Country, and the Earls of Oxford, Bath, and Sussex,
etc. whence writing to the Lords of the Council at London, that she might there
be forthwith proclaimed Queen, she received Answer, That her Mothers Divorce,
besides the Kings Will, was Warrant sufficient for their Proceeding, and
therefore required her to submit to Queen Jane, as her Sovereign. And therewith
resolving to fetch her in by force, the Duke of Northumberland is elected
General, who with the Earl of Arundel, the Marquis of Northampton, the Lord
Gray, 8000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, march toward Cambridge the 14th of July; of
which, Edward Hastings eldest son to the Earl of Huntington, with 4000 Foot,
committed by the Duke to his command, revolt to the Lady Mary; whereof the
Citizens of London hearing, and that her Army in all parts of the Kingdom did
increase, consulting with the Lords at Baynard's Castle, it is so resolved,
that Queen Mary was presently proclaimed. Which was no sooner understood by the
Duke of Northumberland, but he did the same at Cambridge; notwithstanding
which, he was next morning in his Chamber, arrested by the Earl of Arundel,
unto whom falling on his knees, lamentably begged his intercession to the Queen
for him, who (though late as guilty as he) telling him, that he should have
thought of that sooner, sent him and his three sons, John, Ambrose, Henry, with
the Earl of Huntington, and others, to the Tower, whither the next day followed
the Marquis of Northampton, the Lord Robert Dudley, and Sir Robert Corbet.

Whereupon Queen Mary removing from her said Castle of Framingham, came to
Wansted in Essex, Anno 1553.
where her Sister the Lady Elizabeth, with a Train of 1000 Horse, met her, on
her journey toward London, through which the 3d of August, she rode in great
State to the Tower, where she released Thomas Duke of Norfolk, Edward Lord
Courtney, Stephen Gardener, late Bishop of Winchester, and the Duchess of
Somerset, Prisoners there on her account, restoring Courtney to his Marquisate
of Exeter, and Gardener to his Bishopric, whom she likewise made Lord
Chancellor. The next day Edmond Bonner was remitted from the Marshalsey, and
Cuthbert Tunstal, from the Kings Bench; the first restored to his See of
London, the other to that of Durham; and shortly after the rest of the Popish
Bishops and Clergy were invested also.

Shortly after which, viz. the 18th of August, the Duke of Northumberland, with
his Son the Earl of Warwick, and William Parre Marquis of Northampton, were
arreigned at Westminster Hall, before Thomas Duke of Norfolk, as High Steward
of England; where confessing the Indictment, Sentence of Death was past upon
them, as likewise on several others the day after; and the 22d of August, the
Duke declaring himself a Catholic, was beheaded on Tower Hill accordingly.

On the 3d of September following, the Lord Ferrers of Chartley, the two Chief
Justices, and others, were, by the Queens favor, released from the Tower,
whither Mr. Latimer, and Archbishop Cranmer were sent the 15th of the same
Month, the latter of which, together with the Lady Jane (late Queen) her
Husband the Lord Guilford Dudley, and his two Brothers the Lords Ambrose and
Henry, were the 3d of November following, arreigned and condemned at the
Guildhall; the 30th of which Month, Her Coronation. Anno 1553.
was performed the Queens Coronation at Westminster, by Stephen Gardener Bishop
of Winchester, after this manner:

The Queen riding in her Chariot, through the City of London, was preceded by a
great number of Gentlemen, Knights, Doctors, Judges, Bishops, and Lords on
Horseback; next, those of the Council, and Knights of the Bath in their Robes;
then the Bishop of Winchester Lord Chancellor, the Marquis of Winchester Lord
Treasurer, and the Duke of Norfolk; and after them, the Earl of Oxford, bearing
the Sword, and the Lord Mayor of London, with the Golden Scepter; after the
Chariot, followed another, wherein sat the Lady Elizabeth, and the Lady Anne of
Cleve; after whom came a great Train of Ladies on Horseback, richly attired
with their Horse-trappings of Red Velvet, while a Dutchman on the top of St
Paul's Steeple, with a Streamer in his hand, bowed his knee at the Queens coming
by; thus with many Pageants, great Presents, and rare Shows, she was attended
go Whitehall, and thence next day with equal state to Westminster, where her
Coronation was, with the usual Solemnities, most gloriously consummated.

After which, a general Pardon was proclaimed, some only for Treason excepted;
yet several of them admitted to compound afterward; and this was seconded by
another for those that were already condemned; whereupon the Marquis of
Northampton, and diverse others in the Tower were released, the Lady Jane
admitted the Liberty thereof, and assurance given her of absolute Pardon.

The Queen, now at the age of 37 years, was persuaded by her Council to marry,
while waving two of the Candidates, viz. the Lord Courtney Marquis of Exceter,
as being suspected a Lutheran, and Cardinal Pole for his age, then fifty four;
the third is resolved on, which was Philip Prince of Spain, son of Charles V.
Emperor; when in the beginning of January, Ambassadors happily arrive in
England on the same Message; whereupon the Match is concluded on these
advantageous Conditions:

First, That after the Marriage, King Philip should have the Title of all the
Queens Dominions only Conjunct with Herself. Secondly, That to the Queen alone
should remain all Privileges, Customs, Offices, and Honors, to be disposed of
at all times, according to her pleasure, within her Dominions, whereof the King
was to be assumed into the Fellowship of Government only. Thirdly, That the
Queen should in like manner be assumed into the same Fellowship of Government
with the King throughout all his Dominions, and surviving him, have a Jointure
of 200000 l. per annum, out of the same. Fourthly, That their Issue should
inherit all the Low Countries and Burgundy; his Son Charles by his former Wife
to enjoy all his Dominions in Italy and Spain; but he dying without Issue, all
to remain to Queen Mary, and the Heirs of her Body by King Philip to be
begotten.
To this effect were the Articles concluded, which, how beneficial soever to
the Kingdom, were not sufficient to stay the precipitate rashness of some
Malcontents in Religion, from drawing to Rebellion, under pretense of
preventing the subjugating of England to Spain, by obstructing the Match. The
first that appeared, was Sir Thomas Wyat, with a great Army in Kent, wherein
Sir Henry Isley, Sir George Harper, and other Gentlemen of the County, were
engaged; against whom was sent the Duke of Norfolk, Sir Henry Jernegan, Sir
Edward Bray, and others, with a competent force, with 500 more, under the
command of Captain Bret, who, on his march after the Duke, overpersuaded by the
secret insinuations of Sir George Harpur, revolted to Wyat, obliging the Duke
to retreat toward London; which so animated the Rebels, that with great
resolution they advance to Southwark, expecting many of the City to appear in
favor of them; but finding the Bridge drawn up against them, after two days
stay they remove to Kingston, where passing the River, they come to Brentford,
and the 3d of February to London; whereupon the Queen addressing her self to
the City, is presently assisted with a considerable force; when Wyat advancing
to Charing Cross, encounters the Lord Chamberlain, and worsts him, but coming
to Ludgate, and finding his entrance denied, returns toward Temple Bar; where
being informed of Sir George Harpurs forsaking him, that all his men were
defeated by Sir Thomas Bray near Knightsbridge, and that the Earl of Pembroke
with the City Forces, was at Charing Cross coming upon him, by the persuasions
of Clarenceux, contrary to the advice of his Soldiers, he surrendered himself to
Sir Maurice Berkeley, who carried him to the Court, whence he was sent to the
Tower, as most of his company were to several Prisons.

In the mean while the Duke of Suffolk endeavoring to raise some Forces in
Warwickshire, to join with Wyat, is apprehended by the Earl of Huntington, sent
to London, and the 10th of February committed to the Tower, where the Lady Jane
his daughter, and the Lord Guilford Dudley his Son-in Law, in stead of their
enlargement, which before they daily expected, are now clapped up close
Prisoners. Thus their Fathers Treason becomes once more a cause of theirs as
well as of his own destruction; for within two days after, viz. the 12th of
February, that innocent Lady with her Husband, were beheaded on Tower Hill,
where their Father more deservedly met with the same Fate the 15th of the same
month.

About which time fifty of the more eminent Rebels were hanged on twenty
Gibbets, Anno 1554^
in several parts of the City, Brett, at Rochester, Sir Henry Isley, etc. at
Maidstone, others at Sevenoke, and lastly Wyat himself was the 11th of April,
beheaded on Towerhill; all others concerned in or suspected to be of the
Conspiracy were pardoned by the Queens mercy, only the Lord Thomas Gray,
brother to the Duke, being found active in that Treason, was beheaded the 27th
of that month; and the 18th of the next, one Mr. William Thomas, for conspiring
the murder of the Queen, was drawn to Tyburn, and there hanged and quartered.

Shortly after which, Cranmer late Archbishop of Canterbury, Ridley Bishop of
Rochester, and Latimer Bishop of Worcester and Gloucester, were sent from the
Tower to Oxford, there to dispute several controverted points in Religion,
among which that of the Eucharist being chiefly insisted on, the Assembly
rejected the opinions of the late Bishops, requiring them to recant; which
Cranmer alone subscribing to, the other two were condemned of Heresy.

Hitherto these disturbances had protracted the business of the Queens
marriage, Anno 1554.
which now in Parliament was fully concluded, with these Reservations: First,
That no Stranger should be admitted into any Public Office. Secondly, That no
Innovation should be made on any of the Laws or Customs of the Kingdom.
Thirdly, That the Queen, without her consent, should not at any time be carried
out of England, nor any of her Children, without consent of her Council.
Fourthly, That if Prince Philip survived her, he should claim no interest in
the Kingdom, but that Right and Rule thereof should redound solely to her
Heirs. Lastly, That neither Money, Plate, Jewels, nor Arms, should at any time
by Him or his Order be conveyed out of the Nation, which in no wise was to be
engaged in his War against France. To all which the Queen consenting, the
Prince is sent for over, and the 20th of July landing at Southampton, was met
by the Queen at Winchester on Wednesday the 25th of the same month, Collect.
Cerem. vol. 2. f. 157. penes E. Walker mil. Gart.
and there solemnly married in that Cathedral, Hermarriage, July 25. an. 2554.
by the Bishop of that place, then Lord Chancellor of England; when immediately
before the Marriage, Prince Philip had sent him from his Father the Emperor, a
surrender of the Kingdom of Naples, which he freely gave to Him and his Heirs.
The Queen was given by the Marquis of Winchester, the Earls of Arundel, Derby,
Bedford and Pembroke, in the name of the whole Realm. The Ring being hallowed
by laying it upon the Book, and their Hands joined, immediately the Sword was
presented before the King, born by the Earl of Pembroke, and so they returned
to their Traverse in the Quire, the Queen on the right Hand, and their Swords
born before them, where, after Mass, Wine and Sopps were hallowed, and
delivered to them both. Upon which, Garter King of Arms, and the Heralds, and
Pursuivants, published their Styles in Latin, French, and English thus: Philip
and Mary, by the Grace of God, King and Queen of England, France, Ireland,
Naples, and Jerusalem, Defenders of the Faith, Princes of Spain and Sicily, and
Elect of the Empire of Germany and Kingdom of the Romans, Archduke and Duchess
of Austria, Duke and Duchess of Millair, Burgundy and Brabant, Count and
Countess of Haspurg, Flanders and Tyrol. Then they returned to the Bishops
Palace, under a Canopy born by six Knights (the Queen always on the right Hand)
and their Swords borne before them, and thence to the Hall, where they both
dined under one Cloth of Estate. Hence by easy journies, they came to Windsor,
where the King, with Henry Ratcliff, Earl of Sussex, were Installed Knights of
the Garter: whence the 11th of August, they removed to Richmond; and there
staying till the 17th, they departed and with all imaginable splendour came to
Suffolk Palace in Southwark, and the next day rode through London to Whitehall.
Shortly after which, they removed again to Richmond; where dismissing their
Train of Nobility, they went and rested at Hampton Court.

About this time Cardinal Pole, sent for over by the Queen, came with
Commission of Legate (...) Latere, into England, unto whom the Parliament, by
humble supplication submitting, prayed to be restored again to the Union of the
Church of Rome; which the Cardinal granting, the Kingdoms Excommunication was
taken off.

In October this year, Anno 1554.
all the Prisoners in the Tower were released, upon presumption of the Queens
impregnating; about which time William Fether stone.
a counterfeit Edward VI. was first whipped, and afterward hanged and quartered
at Tyburn: the latter end of the year being taken up with the magnificent
Receptions of Emanuel Prince of Piemont, and the Prince of Orange, was
concluded by the Proto-martyrdom of John Rogers, Vicar of St Sepulchers, burnt
in Smithfield the 4th of February.

On the first of July, Anno 1555.
John Bradford was also burnt in Smithfield, and the 16th of October, Nicholas
Ridley, and Hugh Latimer, the beforementioned Bishops, were burnt at Oxford;
where five months after, the late Archbishop Cranmer, notwithstanding his
former Subscription, was also burnt, having first declared himself of the
Reformed Religion, and punishing the Hand that subscribed his Recantation, by
thrusting it first into that fire which immediately after consumed his whole
Body. The adhering to which, cost many more their lives in several places of
the Kingdom; so that within the compass of four years, there died no less, for
the Testimonial of their Conscience in this Case, than 277 persons, without
regard of Degree, Sex, or Age, as Fox his Voluminous Collections of Acts and
Monuments abundantly testify.

These sanguinary proceedings occasioned several Conspiracies the beginning of
this year, as of Robbing the Queens Exchequer, Anno 1556.
thereby to raise a Rebellion, the Attempters whereof were hanged at Tyburn:
and another of murdering the Queen; for which the Conspirators were executed
at Bury.

After which, Anno 1557.
Thomas Stafford, second son to the Lord Stafford, with others, to the number
of thirty two, instigated by the French, set sail from that Kingdom, and
violently possessed themselves of the Castle of Scarborough in Yorkshire for
two days, when being taken by Thomas Percy (immediately after created Earl of
Northumberland) and brought to London; Stafford was beheaded on Tower Hill the
28th of May, and the next day three of his Accomplices quartered at Tyburn:
Upon which a War was proclaimed with France, and the Earls of Pembroke,
Lincoln, Rutland, and other Noblemen, with about 1000 Horse, and 4000 Foot,
sent to the aid of King Philip, who besieging St Quintins, took it by Storm the
17th of August, St Quintins taken, 27 Aug. 1557.
with the loss of the Lord Henry Dudley, youngest son to the late Duke of
Northumberland. The Pillage of the Town King Philip gave to the English, by
whose Valor it was chiefly won; but the advantage nothing countervailed the
loss which they received at that time; for Calais being left naked by this
Supply, was attacked by the French, and taken, to the great grief of Queen
Mary, who declared they should find Calais written in her Heart, when dead.

This, with the Kings long absence, who had spent but three months of twenty
six in England, since he first went to visit his Father in Flanders, so
afflicted her, that she took no comfort in her life, though, by Mediation of
the Duchess of Lorrain, a general Peace was concluded, save only the
restoration of Calais, which whilst they treated about, the Emperor dies, and
Queen Mary herself expires the 17th day of November, Her death, an. 1558. Nov.
17.
1558. in the forty third year of her age, when she had reigned five years,
four months, and eleven days.

She restored many of the Abbey Lands that were in her possession, and
doubtless would have proceeded, had she lived longer, as may be conjectured by
her answer to the suggestion of the loss the Crown would sustain by the want of
them, viz. That she had rather loose her Crown on Earth than her Crown in
Heaven.

Thus deceasing, as aforesaid, I. 14. pa. 19. in Coll, Arm.
at her Manor of St James's beyond charing Cross, she was opened by her
Physicians and Surgeons, who took out her Bowels, which were coffined and
buried solemnly in the Chapel, her Heart being separately enclosed in a Coffer
covered with Velvet, bound with Silver. Her Body being Embalmed, was put into a
Coffin, enclosed in Lead, covered with Purple Velvet. The Privy Chamber, into
which the Corpse was removed was hanged with black, and garnished with
Escocheons of her Arms, and the Kings in Pale within the Garter, and some of
her own Arms singly within the Garter. Her Pall was Cloth of Tissue, with a
Cross of white Cloth of Silver, adorned with Escocheons of her Arms within the
Garter, painted on Sarcenet.

A stately Hearse being prepared in the Chapel, the Corpse was brought down, and
placed therein on Saturday the 10th of December, the Countess of Lenox being
chief Mourner.

On the Tuesday following the Corpse was removed and put in a Chariot, having
thereupon the representation of the Queen, and so solemnly proceeded to the
Abbey of Westminster. The Queen had an embroidered Banner, Helm, and Crest,
Target, Sword, and Coat of Arms; four Banners, the first of the Trinity, second
of our Lady, third of St George, fourth of Mary Magdalene. The Hearse was drawn
by five Horses: a fair Hearse was prepared in the Abbey, adorned with Angels of
Wax, the Valence fringed and adorned with Escocheons, and within the Garter,
Dien and mon Droit.

Garter King of Arms said with a loud voice, Pray for the Soul of the most
Puissant and Excellent Princess, Mary, by the Grace of God, late Queen of
England, Spain, France, both the Sicilies, Jerusalem, and Ireland, Defender of
the Faith, Arch-Duchess of Austria, Duchess of Burgundy, Milan, and Brabant,
Countess of Flanders, Haspurg, and Tiroll. Afterward Garter, assisted by two
Bishops, did declare the State of the Queen present, in this manner, The Most
High, Puissant, and Most Excellent Princess, Elizabeth, by the Grace of God,
Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith. God save Queen
Elizabeth.

The Corpse was thus carried to the Chapel of King Henry VII. her Grandfather,
appointed for her Burial, and interred on the North-side thereof, without any
Monument or other Remembrance, where the Archbishop with the other Bishops
performed all the Ceremonies. Over which place King James caused a fair Tomb to
be erected for Queen Elizabeth her younger Sister, on the Basement at the head
of which yon may readthese words, REGNO CONSORTES ET URNA, HIC OBDORMIMUS,
ELIZABETHA ET MARIA, SORORES, IN SPE RESURRECTIONIS.

16. ELIZABETH QUEEN of ENGLAND, Anno 1558. Nov. 17.
FRANCE, and IRELAND, Defender of the Faith, etc.
CHAP. V.
In the 430 page of this sixth Book is exhibited the Seal of this Queen,
circumscribed on both sides, ELIZABETHA DEI GRATIA ANGLIE FRANCIE ET HIBERNIE
REGINA FIDEI DEFENSOR. a Rose on the one side, being interposed betwixt every
word, and on the Reverse a Roundel, or Besant, it is probable to show her
descent from the Britain, Caudor Earl of Cornwall, who is said to bear, Sable 10
Besants, 4, 3, 2, and 1. for so many there are in the Circumference of this her
great Seal:on which the Queen is seated on her Throne in Royal Apparel, the
Crown on her Head, the Scepter in her right Hand, and the Globe in her left. Oh
each side the Queen is her Arms, being France and England quarterly, within the
Garter, and Ensigned with a Crown Royal; over which her Robe doubled with
Ermine is held up by two Hands, issuing out of the Clouds, in memory of that
Divine Providence which set her upon, and upheld her in, the Throne of her
Royal Ancestors and Predecessors; above them are two Roses, the one of
Lancaster and the other of York, from both which Houses she derived her
descent. The Counter-Seal has her on Horseback in her Royal Habit, as before,
with the Scepter and Mound, and Crown on her Head over-shadowed by a Cloud, an
Emblem of the Heavenly Protection. Her Horse is richly trapped and her
Foot-cloath, gorgeously embroidered: the ground of the Seal charged with her
Devises, viz. a Rose Crowned, for England; a Flower de Lize Crowned, for
France, and a Crowned Harp, for her Kingdom of Ireland, the first Ensign of
that Realm which I have observed to be placed in any Royal Seal; but ever since
her Reign, not only exhibited in the great Seals, but also quartered in the
Kingly Achievement, for the Arms of that Realm, by her Successors the Monarchs
of Great Britain, King James, King Charles I. and His present Majesty King
Charles 11.

Queen Elizabeth made use of many Heroical Devises, but most commonly of a Sive
without a Motto, for the words VIDEO, TACEO, and SEMPER EADEM. Camdens Remains,
p. 217.

Her Escocheon within the Garter Crowned upon her Tomb in Westminster Abbey, is
supported on the right side by a Lion of England crowned Proper, and on the
left by a Red Dragon, on the Friese of which Monument are carved the Arms both
of this Queens Paternal and Maternal descent.


THE High and Mighty Princess Elizabeth, second Daughter of King Henry VIII. by
his second Wife Anne Bullen (his first Wife, In Coll. Arm. D. 4. pa. 57.
though divorced, yet still living) was born at Greenwich on Sunday 7 Sept.
1533. An. 25 H. 8. betwixt 3 and 4 of the clock in the afternoon, Edward Halle
fol.) 27. b.
and Christened the Wednesday following in the Friars Church there, with great
State, the Duchess of Norfolk bearing her to the Font; her Godfather was Thomas
Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, and her Godmothers the old Duchess of
Norfolk, and the old Marchioness of Dorset; when Garter, chief King of Arms,
cried aloud, God of his infinite Goodness send prosperous Life and long to the
High and Mighty Princess of England, Elizabeth. Over the Font (which was of
Silver, and stood in the midst of the Church three Steps high) hung a square
Canopy of Crimson Satin, Fringed with Gold, another being likewise born over
the Child's Head.

Upon her Sisters coming to the Crown, being then about twenty years of age,
she accompanied her in State through the City of London; but being falsely
accused of Confederacy in Wiats Rebellion, was, by the malice of Stephen
Gardener, Lord Chancellor and Bishop of Winchester, sent from her Manor of
Ashbridge, and committed to the Tower in March the year following; where
remaining till the 19th of May next ensuing, she was then, (notwithstanding a
Warrant had been once procured to put her to death) released, but yet confined
to Woodstock: during which imprisonment the common Question concerning the Real
Presence in the Sacrament was urged to her, to which she thus wisely replied,

Christ was the Word that spoke it;
He took the Bread, and brake it:
And what the Word did make it,
That I believe, and take it.
From Woodstock, by the solicitation of King Philip for her delivery, she was
conveyed to Hampton Court, where the King and Queen Mary then resided, and
shortly after discharged of her Jailor and kindly respected; when her Sister
Queen Mary dying, 17 of November. 1558. this Renowned Princess, then at Hatfield
in Hartfordshire, was there first saluted Queen, Anno 1558;
and the same day with great acclamations publicly proclaimed. The 23d
following, she removed to the Lord North's House in the Charter House, London,
and the 28th rode through London to the Tower. The 5th of December after, she
removed thence to Somerset House in the Strand, and shortly after to her Palace
at Westminster. The 12th of January she went back again to the Tower, and the
14th she rode thence in great State to Westminster, in order to her Coronation,
which was there performed the next day, being Sunday, January the 15th, with
great solemnity, by Doctor Oglethorp Bishop of Carlisle; Her Coronation. Anno
1558.
at which time William Parre was created Marquis of Northampton; Edward
Seymour, Earl of Hertford; and Thomas Howard, second Son of Thomas Duke of
Norfolk, Viscount Bindon; Sir Henry Carry her Cousin German, she made Baron of
Hunsdon, and Sir Oliver St John, Baron of Bletsho.

The 20th of January began the Parliament at Westminster, wherein were restored
to the Crown not only the Supremacy of the Church, but all Tenths,
First Fruits, Abbey-Lands, etc. whereupon several of the Reformation were
recalled from beyond the Seas, others of the Church of Rome banished, and most
of the late Bishops secluded, and Protestant ones placed in their rooms. Thus
the Queen began to perfect the Reformation, which yet she did gradatim; for
having composed her Council of both parties; she first permitted only the
Epistles and Gospels, the Decalogue, Lords Prayer, and Creed in the English
Tongue: The 22d of March the Eucharist was allowed in both Kinds; Anno 1559.
the 24th of June the Mass was abolished, and the Liturgy in English
established; in July the Oath of Supremacy was exhibited, and in August Images
were removed.

During this time, a Treaty of Peace was held at Cambray, between the Emperor
and the French King, in which Philip stood firmly for the restitution of
Calais; but understanding that Queen Elizabeth rejecting his Suit of Marriage,
had established the Protestant Religion, he desisted; whereupon the Queen
concluded a Peace for herself Conditionally, that after the expiration of eight
years Calais should be delivered unto the English, on the forfeiture of 500000
Crowns.

King Henry II. of France, Anno 1560.
unhappily slain in Tilting about this time by the Earl of Montgomery, is
succeeded by his Son Francis II. who having married Mary Queen of Scots, now
lays Claim to the Arms and Crown of England, but work sufficient was found them
in Scotland to employ their Power, a great part of the Nobility, and most of
the Commons, by the Preaching of John Knox, being now up in Arms on the score
of Religion. Whom Queen Elizabeth finding herself obliged to assist, so
strengthened the Faction, that the French King soon sued to England for a
Peace, which by Commissioners at Edenborourgh, was on these Conditions speedily
granted, viz. That both King and Queen of France and Scotland should absolutely
acquit the Arms of, and Title to the Crown of England; That both French and
English should depart out of Scotland, and a Free Pardon granted to all that
had been Actors in this Commotion.

The French King not having Signed the Treaty before his death, Anno 1564.
Queen Elizabeth by her Leiger in France, required the performance thereof at
the hands of the Queen Dowager, and Charles IX. the young King, Brother of the
foresaid Francis; which not readily accepted, Queen Elizabeth Treats with the
Lords of Scotland, persuading them to a mutual League of Amity with herself and
other Protestant Princes, and to declare that their Queen (now a Widow) should
not Marry with any Foreign Prince whatsoever; whereupon Queen Mary resolves for
Scotland, and willing to keep her Correspondence with Queen Elizabeth, entreats
a free passage by Sea into that Country; which being denied, and several Ships
ordered to intercept her, she retires herself at Calais till favored by a
Mist, she set sail and arrived safe in Scotland, where by her presence she so
appeased her Subjects of all sorts, that being now quiet, she sent to Queen
Elizabeth, protesting her affection and readiness to enter into a perpetual
League with her, if by Act of Parliament she might be declared her Successor;
to which the Queen answered, That for her Amity she wished her well, but as to
her Proposal, she was not yet weary of her life.

It was now the fifth year of her Reign, when the Protestants of France, under
the Prince of Conde, having raised a Rebellion in that Kingdom, were assisted
by Queen Elizabeth with an Army of 6000 men commanded by Ambrose Dudley Earl of
Warwick, unto whom the Town of Newhaven was delivered, toward which the Prince
of Conde marching, was intercepted by the Duke of Guise, and taken Prisoner;
whereupon a Peace was concluded between them, and the Earl of Warwick required
by the French (nay even by the Rebels themselves) to redeliver the place, which
at length he did by the Queens Order.

Hereupon Queen Elizabeth sending into France, that Calais might be surrendered
unto her according to the former Treaty, received this answer, That her
Interest therein was forfeited by her late Act in defense of the Rebels. To
which the Protestants of France likewise agreeing, the Queen sent over Sir
Thomas Smith, with whom it was concluded, that for the Sum of 600000 Crowns,
the French Hostages should be restored, and a perfect Peace upon reciprocal
Oaths ratified.

The Queen having created Robert Dudley (Master of the Horse) first, Baron of
Denbigh, and then Earl of Leicester, proposes him in Marriage to Mary Queen of
Scots, promising upon her acceptance of him, she should be declared her
Successor to the Crown; but she having refused several great Matches, by reason
of Queen Elizabeth's disapprobation, rejected this for the meaness of his
Quality, fancying rather the young Lord Darnley, eldest Son to the Earl of
Lenox (at that time a long Exile with his Father in England) as being of
English birth, and reputed, next her, Heir to the Crown of England: Them Queen
Mary recalls into Scotland; to which Queen Elizabeth after two years
consenting, they arrive at Edenborough in February, and five months after
(contrary to the inclination of Queen Elizabeth, who to prevent it, had a
little before remanded both the Father and Son into England upon their
Allegiance) this Princely Gentleman, then about 19 years of age was married to
that Queen.

In the interim, the Parliament of England request her Majesty to think of
Marriage, accusing her indifferency for preservation of Posterity, and
declaiming against her Councellor Cecil, and Physician Dr. Huit, as suspected
to advise her to the contrary; when the Queen ordering 30 of both Houses to
come before her, gave them so great satisfaction in that particular, as never
after to trouble her therewith.

The Queen of Scots after the murder of her late Husband, Anno 1568.
and imposed Nuptials with the Earl Bothwell, having suffered 11 months
imprisonment by her own factious Nobility, about this time makes her escape to
Hamilton Castle, whither in a few days about 6000 men resorted unto her; but
these being soon defeated by the Earl Murray, she flies to Workinton in
Cumberland, whence addressing her self to Queen Elizabeth for admission to
Court, she is, instead thereof, first carried to Carlisle, and afterward
committed to Bolton Castle, under custody of the Earl of Shrewsbury, while a
Commission was held at York to debate the matter between that Queen and her
Lords; to which she defiring the French and Spanish Ambassadors might be
joined, the business was abruptly broken off.

Upon a second Insurrection of the Protestants of France, Anno 1569.
Queen Elizabeth notwithstanding their late ingratitude, relieves them once
more with 200000 Crowns in Money, and great store of Ammunition; about which
time the Netherlanders revolting upon the like occasion from the Allegiance of
his Catholic Majesty, were eminently assisted and protected by the Queen, and
the Fugitives of both Countries were here kindly received and entertained.
Whereupon the Duke d'Alva, the Spanish Governor there, seizing all the English
Ships in the Low Countries, Queen Elizabeth did the like for them here, which
occasioned afterward that memorable Spanish Invasion by their Invincible
Armada, An. 1588.

The Duke of Norfolk endeavoring about this time a Marriage with the Queen of
Scots, chiefly persuaded thereunto by the Earls Murray and Leicester, is soon
committed to the Tower, from whence though he got once released, yet in fine it
cost him his life. In which interim the Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland
having raised a Rebellion in the North, came to Durham, where they burnt all
the English Bibles and Books of Common Prayer, and afterward besieged and took
Barnard Castle; but hearing that the Earls of Sussex and Warwick were coming
against them, they fled into Scotland, where Northumberland sheltering himself
a while, was at last delivered up to Murray, and after beheaded at York, 22
Aug. 1572. while Westmorland conveying himself into Flanders, lived there to a
great age, on a small Pension allowed him by the King of Spain. Anno 1570.
Not long after Earl of Murray, Regent of Scotland, meeting an untimely fate,
Queen Mary's friends not succeeding in their violent attempts upon England,
endeavor by fairer means with Queen Elizabeth to procure her release, which not
prevailing, they have recourse (though in vain) to underhand practices, withal
getting the Pope to issue out his Bull against her; upon which a Conference is
held with the Queen of Scots about the Conditions of her release; which though
it lessened the rumor of her hard usage, yet nothing was effected thereby in
favor of her; but on the other hand, John Hamilton Archbishop of St Andrews,
and Brother to the Duke of Castle Herald, being bloodily assassinated in his
Bedchamber, the Queen of Scots is thereupon discharged of most of her Retinue,
which while she designs to complain of to the Pope and French King, her Letters
in the hands of the Bishop of Rosse, and by him communicated to the Duke of
Norfolk, are treacherously revealed; whereupon the Duke is apprehended,
condemned and beheaded, and the Bishop sent prisoner to the Tower.

About ten days after the Dukes death, the Lord la Ware, Anno 1572.
Sir Ralph Sadler, and others, were sent to the Queen of Scots to expostulate
with her, First, For having usurped the Title of England. Secondly, For having
without the Queens Consent endeavored Marriage with the Duke of Norfolk.
Thirdly, Implored aid from Foreign Princes. And, Fourthly, Practiced her own
Enlargement, etc. All which Queen Mary either denied, or fairly extenuated; and
though she declared herself an absolute Monarch and subordinate to none, yet
proposed she at the next Session of Parliament willingly to answer for herself.

A Peace being this year concluded between France and England, Anno 1573.
a Marriage is propounded between the Queen and Duke of Alanson, which, though
it was earnestly prosecuted by the French, yet it succeeded not.

It was now the eighteenth year of Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1575.
when the Prince of Orange, with the Confederate States, reduced to great
extremities, offered by their Ambassadors to Queen Elizabeth, the Countries of
Zealand and Holland, to be either possessed or protected by her, as descended
from Philippa Princess of Holland, and Wife to King Edward III. which the Queen
took into consideration; and in the twentieth year of her Reign receiving their
Complaints of very hard usage from John Duke of Austria, Governor of the Low
Countries, she entered into a League with them, requiring his removal by her
Ambassador in Spain, when shortly after, being made Arbitress between them, she
so determined the matter in favor of the distressed States, that many
Volunteers were thereupon permitted to transport themselves into their service,
and several Horse and Foot received there at her charge out of Germany, under
command of Cassimire, Son to the Elector Palatine.

On the 3d of November, Anno 1580.
Sir Francis Drake returning from his famous Voyage about the World with
incredible quantities of Gold, Silver, and Precious Stones, the Spanish
Ambassador required a restoration of the Goods, as taken from their Subjects
in the Indian Seas: upon which the Queen (having before sequestered them) repaid
a great part of the same to Pedro Sebura, the King of Spains Agent; which
afterward was ungratefully employed in the Low Country Wars.

And now more earnestly than ever is the Match between the Duke of Alanson (now
Anjou) and Queen Elizabeth, solicited by the Queen Mother of France, in
compliance to which, Delegates on both sides are appointed, and Articles at
last agreed on, much to the same purpose with those of Queen Mary and King
Philip, upon which the Duke comes over, stays here three months, and was so
kindly received by the Queen, that publicly she took off her Ring from her
Finger, and put it upon his, admitting many private Conferences with him; but
being thwarted by the Earl of Leicester and the Court Ladies, for fear of
re-introducing Popery, it came to nothing. Many Tumults at this time arising in
Scotland, even to the surprising the Kings Person, Anno 1582.
Queen Elizabeth sends thither Sir Francis Walsingham, to advise the King (who
a little before had rescued himself from his Surprisers) to beware of evil
Counselors, to preserve the purity of Religion, and the Amity of both
Kingdoms; to which the young King returned a full satisfactory answer, beyond
what could be expected from his years.

Many practices were about this time discovered for the Queen of Scots
Enlargement, the chief whereof was by Francis Throckmorton, eldest Son to the
Chief Justice of Chester; upon whose apprehension, some persons of Note fled
beyond the Sea; others were committed, and in fine Sir William Wade is sent to
Treat with the Queen of Scots, from whom, though he received all he could
require, yet did it not suffice, but that an association was entered into by
the Earl of Leicester, and others, for the prosecution of all those that should
attempt any thing against the Queen, which the Queen of Scots easily perceiving
to be meant against her, sent so absolute a Submission to the Queen in all
things but that of her Religion, that Queen Elizabeth was in a manner disposed
to have acquitted her. But so potent were her Adversaries in England and
Scotland, that they wanted not opportunities to obstruct it, by suggesting to
the Queen the dangerous consequences thereof, which was seconded with such
scandalous and contumelious bellowings, from the Scottish Pulpits against her,
and other stratagems and devices, as might if possible drive her to some
desperate attempt; but failing, Assassinates were by Leicester sent to make her
away; which they had certainly done, if Sir Drue Drury, and Sir Amias Paulet,
to whom she was now committed, had not detested so horrid a Villainy.

In this Session of Parliament, Anno 1584.
the aforesaid Association was universally approved of; and 'twas Enacted, that
twenty four of the Queens Council and Peers of the Realm should be elected and
authorized to enquire of all such persons as should attempt any evil against
the Queen, lay claim to the Crown, attempt, or invade the Kingdom; and that
person, by, or for whom the same shall either be attempted or invaded, to be
made incapable of the Crown, and liable to the Law.

The poor distressed States of the Low Countries being now again drawn into a
sad straight, and neglected by the French, more humbly than ever solicit
Queen Elizabeth's assistance, who considering the growing potency of the
Spaniards, and the lamentable condition of those afflicted people, resolved
actually to take them into her Protection, and to supply them with a 1000
Horse, and 5000 Foot, with Pay during the War, on condition that the Forts of
Flushing, Ramekin, and the Brill, should be delivered up to her use; which
being agreed to, the Earl of Leicester as General, with the Earl of Essex, the
Lords Audley, and North, etc, with a great number of Volunteers, besides the
before promised Forces, landed at Flushing in December, 1584. where they were
honorably received by Sir Philip Sidney Governor of that place; whence being
with great magnificence conducted to the Hague by the States of Holland,
Leicester is invested with the Titles of absolute Governor, and General of all
the United Provinces; whereat Queen Elizabeth seemed somewhat displeased, as
being too great a presumption in them to bestow, and in him to accept them,
without the Queens knowledge and consent.

The Peace thus broken with Spain, the Queen, to divert that Kings anger
further from home, immediately fits our a Navy of twenty one ships, for the
West Indies, where they surprised many Spanish Towns, when a Calenture seizing
on their Men, they returned with a very great Booty homewards by Virginia,
where Sir Walter Raleigh had planted a Colony, from whence they now first
brought Tabaco into England.

The Earl of Arundel having remained near a year in the Tower, Anno 1585.
was summoned into the Star Chamber, where he is charged with the Fostering of
Priests, having Correspondence with Allen, and Parsons the Jesuit, and his
endeavoring to depart the Kingdom; for which being convicted, he was Fined
10000 l. and committed again to the Tower during the Queens pleasure.

About which time another Conspiracy was discovered against the Queen, for
which one Ballard a Priest, Anno 1586.
and thirteen more were hanged, drawn, and quartered in St Giles's Fields.
Whereupon the Queen of Scots, being supposed conscious of the Treason, it was
consulted what should be done with her, when concluding to put in execution,
the Statute of 27 Eliz. made about a year since, by the procurement of
Leicester and his Association, for that very purpose, Commissioners are
appointed to proceed against her; who after many meetings at Fotheringhay
Castle in Northamptonshire, in order to her Trial, finding her to insist on her
innocence and exemption as a Sovereign Princess, threatened her at last into a
compliance; whereupon the Court being sat in her presence Chamber, and the
charge read, she replied, That the Letters produced might be Counterfeits, the
Treasons confessed might be extorted for fear of death, motions for the Queens
destruction she was never privy to; but for practicing her own Enlargement, as
a thing justifiable in her, she denied not, desiring to be heard in Parliament
before the Queen herself; which not being granted, the Commissioners proceed to
Sentence, which in the end was performed, 1 Aug. 1586. when, upon a Scaffold,
purposely erected in the great Hall of the Castle of Foderinghay, she was after
nineteen years imprisonment, unhappily beheaded.

To excuse which, Sir Robert Carry, son to the Lord Hunsdon, is sent to King
James, charging Davyson the Queens Secretary, and her too credulous Council
with the Fault, protesting the Queens intention otherwise. But the King denied
him access at the first till means were found to persuade him to continue Amity
with England. However a War from Spain must certainly be expected, and
therefore it is resolved to attack them first; whereupon Sir Francis Drake,
with others, are ordered to Sea, who sunk, took, and fired in the Harbor of
Cales 100 ships, took 4 Forts at Cape St Vincent, and performing other eminent
Exploits about the Western Isles, returned with great spoil. While in the same
interim Thomas Cavendish passing the Streights of Magellan, burnt a great
number of Spanish Towns, sunk and took nineteen ships in the Coast of Chili,
Peru, New-Spain, and North America, returning home by the Philippine Isles.

At this time a Treaty was held between Spain and England at Ostend, but
nothing concluded, and the English Delegates dismissed, Anno 1588.
a great Navy immediately appeared before the Coast of England, consisting in
about 130 ships, aboard which 19290 Soldiers, The Spanish Invasion.
8350 Mariners, 2080 Gally slaves, and 2630 great Ordnance; to oppose which,
the Queen provides and sets forth her Navy, under the command of the Lord
Charles Howard Admiral, Sir Francis Drake Vice Admiral, Hawkins, Forbisher, and
others; who setting sail from Plymouth, the 21 of July bore up to them, and
after the Signal given, the head Ships on each side mutually engaged, but night
approaching, no considerable action past between them; two days after they
renewed the Fight without any great damage to the English, and resting the next
day, prosecuted it again the twenty fifth with great resolution, wherein the
English having the better, became so encouraged, that many of the Nobility, as
the Earls of Cumberland, Oxford, and Northumberland, with others, hired ships
at their own charges, to attend the Admiral, increasing his Fleet to about 140
sail. On the 27th of July, the Spanish Armada came to an Anchor near Calais,
when the English Admiral having the day after converted eight of his worst
Ships into Fireships, sent them in the night before the Wind, toward the
Spanish Fleet, who seeing them all on fire, made the best way they could,
cutting their Cables, and flying toward Flanders, where, before Graveling,
they were again encountered by the English, who assisted by the Dutch, forced
them home, after a tedious Voyage by the North of Scotland; whilst her Majesty
in person came with a considerable Army to the Camp at Tilbury in Essex, to
oppose the designed Invasion of the Kingdom, by this Invincible (as they called
it) Armada.

The next year after, Anno 1589.
to revenge this Invasion, the Queen gave leave to Sir Francis Drake, Sir John
Norris, and others, to undertake a Voyage into Spain, to endeavor the
establishment of Don Antonio into the Kingdom of Portugal, who setting forth
from Plymouth the 5th of April, landed at Groyne in Galitia, which they took,
and sailing thence into Portugal were met by the Earl of Essex, who joining
them, they proceeded to Penycha, which they also took, and thence to Lisbon,
where all expectations sailing, they were repulsed; Anno 1591.
yet seizing on 60 Hulks in their retreat laden with Corn and Ammunition, they
came and pillaged Virgo and the adjacent Country, and so returned into England.

This year the Queen sent the Earl of Essex, with 4000 men, to assist the King
of Navarre, Henry of Bourbon, a Protestant, in the gaining the Crown of France,
which was left him by the French King Henry III. against the Duke of Guise,
Head of the League, whose Declaration was for a Catholic King; who landing in
Normandy, directed his way to that King then at Noyon, where they concluded
upon the besieging of Roan, which was afterward effected: about which time one
Hacket pretending himself to be Christ, Anno 1592.
was executed in Cheapside, persisting to the last in his horrid Blasphemies.

About this time the Lord Thomas Howard, with six of the Queens ships, having
waited at the Azores six months for the Spanish West India Fleet, was at last
set upon by fifty Spanish Men of War Convoys to that Navy, who overpowering the
English, took the great Ship the Revenge, commanded by the valiant Sir Richard
Greenville, Vice Admiral; which Sir Walter Raleigh shortly after struck scores
with them for, intercepting a mighty Carraque of theirs, called the Mother of
God, valued at 15000 l. Sterling.

The War with Spain continuing, Anno 1593.
a sharp Conflict happens at Sea between the two Nations, wherein Sir Martin
Forbisher received his deaths wound, while Sir Richard Hawkins, coming home by
the Straights of Magellan, took five rich Spanish ships, but was himself
shortly after intercepted; which hard fortune was soon recompensed by James
Lancaster, who taking no less than thirty nine rich Vessels from the Spaniards
on the Coast of America, brought them all safe to England.

This year Sir Walter Raleigh undertook his Voyage to Guiana; Anno 1595.
Preston and Summers, to the West of America; Hawkins and Drake, those two
famous Seamen, to Porto Rico; but none of them meeting with any considerable
success, the two last died for grief.

The Earl of Tyrone (alias Tir-Oen) having the year before submitted himself to
William Russel (youngest son of the Earl of Bedford) then Deputy of Ireland, is
now again found in Rebellion, when Sir John Norris being sent against him out
of Ireland, he dissembling another submission, is pardoned: During which, to
divert the King of Spain from invading England, a Navy of 150 ships, besides 22
sail of Dutch, was fitted out from Plymouth in the beginning of June, and being
arrived near Cape St Vincent, were advertised that a great Fleet of Spaniards
lay at anchor before Cales, whereupon the Generals Robert Earl of Essex and
Charles Howard Lord Admiral sailing thither, set upon them, and after a sharp
Fight took and destroyed the greater part of them, when forcing his entrance
with great valor into the Town, he enriched himself with an infinite Booty,
demolishing the Fort, while Raleigh was sent to fire the Merchantmen lying at
Portreal; which done, they (unwillingly) returned home by the Queens command,
having damaged the Spaniards to the value of Twenty Millions of Ducats.

About the time that Thomas Arundel of Wardour returned from the Wars in
Hungary against the Turks (where for his great services he was made Count of
the Sacred Empire) Queen Elizabeth understanding that the Spaniards designed to
Invade Ireland, Anno 1596.
set forth another great Navy of above 160 Men of War, under the command of the
Earl of Essex, the Lord Thomas Howard, and Sir Walter Raleigh, for intercepting
the Spanish Fleet from the West Indies, which at Gratiosa they narrowly missed,
gaining only three of forty, while the rest got into Harbor.

All Tyrone's former dissimulations breaking out now into an open and declared
Rebellion, Anno 1598.
the Earl of Essex is at last sent thither as Lord Lieutenant, with 18700 Foot,
and 1300 Horse, fully authorized to conclude Peace or make War, when after some
slight skirmishes, a conference is held with Tyrone, and a Truce concluded,
with which the Queen being dissatisfied, remands him home, when being come, he
falls on his knees begging the Queens mercy; who receiving him less kindly than
formerly, commits him to the custody of the Lord Privy Seal; shortly after
which he was brought to a private Trial, wherein he was accused for,

First, Making the Earl of Northampton General of the Horse. Secondly, Drawing
his Forces into Munster, and neglecting the Arch-rebel Tyrone. and Thirdly,
Having a Private Parley with him.
To which protesting his innocence, and craving the Queens mercy, he was at
last enlarged; when falling into new Dilemma's, he was with the Earl of
Southampton and others committed to the Tower.

With the beginning of the year they were brought to their Trials, Anno 1600.
the Earl of Essex and other his Confederates beheaded, some hanged, and the
rest suspended.

All this while the Rebellion remained hot in Ireland, Tyrone having received
aid from Spain, now carries himself as Monarch of the Country; but by one
single Battle near Kinsale, on Christmas Eve, they were by the Lord Mountjoye
defeated, and the Spanish * General who had possessed himself of Kingsale, Don
John d' Aqu^ta.
forced to a Capitulation; whereupon Kinsale, with other Forts being by Treaty
yielded up, the Spaniards quit the Kingdom, and are conveyed home: Tyrone thus
deserted submits wholly to the Queens mercy, rendering himself to the Lord
Mountjoy then Deputy of Ireland, who designing to bring him into England, was
prevented by the death of the Queen, Her death
which happened at her Palace of Richmond, 24 March 1602. when she had lived 69
years 6 months and seven days, and reigned 44 years 4 months and 7 days. Eight
days Camden.


Her Body being embalmed and wrapped in Lead, was conveyed to Whitehall,
whence, the 28th of April, it was brought to St Peter's at Westminster, with
great solemnity (attended by Funeral Mourners to the number to 1600) by her
converted into a Collegiate Church, with a Dean, 12 Prebends, Vicars, and
Singingmen, a Master, Usher, and 40 Scholars, and 12 Alms-men) and there
buried, in the magnificent Chapel of her Grandfather King Henry VII. where her
Royal Successor King James built for her a stately Monument, near the East end
of the North Isle, which being of white Marble, and supported by ten Corinthian
Pillars of black Marble, has the Frize thereof adorned with the Arms of all
the Royal Matches in a direct Succession from Edward the Confessor, and also
with Impalements of several Branches of the Kingly Family. The Figure of which
Tomb, with the Epitaphs at each end of it, containing a Summary of her most
memorable Actions, I have here exhibited.

On a Tablature over the Cornish at the head of the Tomb.
MEMORIAE AETERNAE.
ELIZABETHAE ANGLIAE, FRANCIAE, ET HIBERNIAE
REGINAE, R. HENRICI VIII. FILIAE, R. HEN. VII. NEPTI, R.
ED. IIII. PRONEPTI, PATRIAE PARENTI RELIGIONIS
ET BONARVM ARTIVM ALTRICI, PLVRIMARVM
LINGVARVM PERITIA, PRAECLARIS TVM ANIMI
TVM CORPORIS DOTIBVS REGIISQ. VIRTVTIBVS
SVPRA SEXVM, PRINCIPI INCOMPARABILI.
IACOBVS MAGNAE BRITANNIAE FRANCIAE ET
HIBERNIAE REX, VIRTVTVM ET REGNORVM
HAERES, BEEN MERENTI PIE POSVIT.
On the Basement at the ^ead.
REGNO CONSORTES ET VRNA, HIC OBDORMIMUS, ELIZABETHA ET MARIA SORORES, IN SPE
RESVRRECTIONIS.

monument Illustrissimo Domino Dno. IOHANNI Comiti de BRIDGE WATER Vicecomiti
BRACKLEY et Baroni de ELLESMERE Serenissmoque Regi CAROLO 2do in Comitatu
Buckinghamiae locum tenenti hanc Monumenti; Elizabethae Reginae Figuram
hunnili.m^ DDDFS

SIC DONEC HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT R Gaywood fecit


MEMORIAE SACRUM.
On a like Tablature over the Cornish at the foot.
RELIGIONE AD PRIMAEVAM SINCERITATEM RESTAVRATA,
PACE FUNDATA, MONETA AD IUSTUM VALOREM REDUCTA,
REBELLIONE DOMESTICA VINDICATA, GALLIA MALIS
INTESTINIS PRAECIPITI SUBLEVATA, BELGIO SUSTENTATO,
HISPANICA CLASS PROFLIGATA, HIBERNIA PULSIS
HISPANIS, ET REBELLIBUS AD DEDITIONEM COACTIS
PACATA, REDDITIBVS VTRIVSQ ACADEMIAE LEGE
ANNONARIA PLURIMVM ADVCTIS, TOTA DENIQ ANGLIA
DITATA, PRVDENTISSIMEQ ANNOS XLV. ADMINISTRATA
ELIZABETHA REGINA VICTRIX, TRIVMPHATRIX, PIETATIS
STVDIOSISSIMA, FAELICISSIMA, PLACIDA MORTE SEPTUAGENARIA
SOLVTA, MORTALES RELIQVIAS DVM CHRISTO IVBENTE
RESVRGANT IMMORTALES, IN HAC ECCLESIA CELEBERRIMA
AB IPSA CONSERVATA, ET DENVO FVNDATA DEPOSVIT.
On the Basement at the foot.
OBIIT XXIIII. MARTII ANNO SALVTIS M. DC. II. REGNI XLV. AETATIS LXX.

For an Eternal Memorial.

Thus Englished by Mr. Speed in his Chronicle of the Kings of England.
Unto Elizabeth, Queen of England, France and Ireland; Daughter of King Henry
the Eighth, Grandchild to King Henry the Seventh, Great-Grandchild to King
Edward the fourth. The Mother of this Her Country; The Nurse of Religion and
Learning; for perfect skill of very many Languages; for glorious endowments as
well of Mind as Body, and for her regal Virtues beyond her Ser. A Prince
Incomparable.

James of Great Britain, France, and Ireland King, Inheritour both of Her
virtues and Kingdoms, to Her so well deserving, piously has this erected.

Consorts both in Throne and in Grave, here rest we two Sisters; Elizabeth and
Mary, in hope of our Resurrection.

Sacred unto Memory.

Religion to its Primitive Sincerity Restored, Peace Thoroughly Settled; Coin
to the true value refined; Rebellion at home extinguished; France, near ruin
by intestine mischiefs, received; Netherland supported; Spaines Atmano
vanquished; Ireland, with Spaniards expulsion, and Traitors coercion, quieted;
both Universities Revenewes, by a Law of Provision, exceedingly augmented:
Finally all England enriched, and xlv. years most prudently governed;
Elizabeth a Queen, a Conqueresse, a Triumpher, the most devoted to Piety, the
most happy, after ixx. years of her life, quietly by death departed, has left
here (in this most famous Collegiat Church, which by her was established and
refounded) these remains of her Mortality, until at Christ's call they shall
again rise immortal. She died xxiiij. March, the year of Salvation, MDCII. of
her Reign XLV. of her Age, LXXII.

15. MARGARET QUEEN of SCOTS, eldest Daughter of Henry VII. King of England,
etc.
CHAP. VI.
THis Princess Margaret, In pale, Or, d Lion rampant within a double Tressure
flowery counterflowry Gules, Scotland, and France and England, quarterly. Which
Arms are carved and painted on the Tomb of Queen Elizabeth in King Henry VII.
his Chapel.
Th. Milles p. 221.
eldest Daughter of King Henry VII. and Queen Elizabeth, Daughter of King
Edward IV. and Sister to King Henry VIII. was born on the 29th day of November,
in the year of our Lord, 1489. and of her Fathers Reign the fifth. At the age
of 14 years, she was assied unto James IV. King of Scots, Richard Grafton f. 56.
who had earnesty desired her in Marriage; whereupon King Henry her Father
accompanying her as far as Cole-Weston beside Northampton (where his Mother the
Countess of Richmond then lay) having given her his Blessing, with fatherly
counsel and exhortation, committed the guard and conduct of her person
principally to the Earls of Surrey and Northumberland, and to such Ladies and
Gentlewomen as were appointed to that service; a great company of Lords,
Knights, and Esquires, and Men of Note, attending them as far as Barwick. At
St. Lamberts Church in Lamer Moore within Scotland, King James, attended by the
principal of his Nobility, espoused her, and receiving her from the hands of
the Earl of Northumberland; the next year after, viz. An. 1503. married her at
Edinburgh, his Nobility being present.

Objections being made at the Council Board against this Marriage, viz. That
thereby the Crown of England might come to the Scottish Line by the Issue of
Lady Margaret; Episc. Ross. ex Pol. Virg.
King Henry made answer, What if it should? For if any such thing should
happen, (which Omen God forbid) I see it will come to pass that our Kingdom
should lose nothing thereby, because there will not be an accession of England
to Scotland, but contrarily of Scotland to England, as to that which is far the
most noble head of the whole Island, seeing that which is less uses to accrue
to the ornament of that which is much the greater, as Normandy heretofore came
to be under the Dominion and Power of the English our Forefathers.

This conjugal alliance did not only produce perfect peace and sincere amity
between the two Realms of England and Scotland for a long time after; But
(according to the prophetic saying of King Henry VII.) from this Match
proceeded the union of both Kingdoms, under the Government of King James VI.
their great Grandson, sole Monarch of the Island of Great Britain; for this
James VI. was the son of Mary Queen of Scots, only Child of King James V. son
of the aforesaid King James IV. and this Queen Margaret.

Which Queen, after the death of King James IV. Edward Halle fol. 58.
her first Husband, incited to a War with England by the French King, and slain
at Flodden Field, An. 1513, was re-married to Archibald Donglas Earl of Angus,
in the year of our Lord, 1514. much to the dissatisfaction of King Henry VIII.
her Brother, and the Council of Scotland; after which there fell such
dissension among the Scotch Nobility, that Queen Margaret and the Earl of
Augus, like banished persons, came into England, where beseeching the Kings
mercy and protection, he kindly granted their request, and sending them Apparel
and all things necessary for their support, willed them to continue in
Nothumberland till his farther pleasure should be signified, in which time (
viz. An. 1516.) Queen Margaret was delivered of a fair Lady, baptized after her
own name, Margaret; who afterward became the Wife of Matthew Steward Earl of
Lenox, Father of Henry Stewart Lord Darley, who, taking to Wife Mary Queen of
Scots, was, by her, Father of James VI. the first Monarch of Great Britain, etc.

The next year, Anno 1516.
Queen Margaret with Earl Archibald her Husband, were by King Henry VIII.
heartily invited to the Court of England, but the Earl of Angus failing of his
promise, and departing privately into Scotland, left the Queen to make his
excuse, who being nobly attended, and making her solemn entry into London, was
from thence conveyed to the Court at Greenwich, and there joyfully received by
King Henry, the Queen, and the French Queen her Sister. Here she continued
above a year, Richard Grafton f. 63.
entertained with Jousts, Anno 1517.
Feastings, and all the delights of a most splendid Court; and on the 18th of
May, 1517. taking her journey toward Scotland (richly furnished with all things
answerable to her Estate, both of Jewels, Plate, Tapistry Arras, Coin, Horses,
and all other things necessary, by the large bounty and magnificence of the
King her Brother) she was upon the 13th day of June next following, received at
Barwick by the Earl of Angus her Husband, accommodated with all the
circumstances of a Queen (although she came into England stripped of all the
Attendents of Majesty) where let us leave her, and make her Royal Descendents,
by both Husbands, the matter of our following discourse.

Children of MARGARET Queen of Scots, by King James IV. her first Husband.
16. ARTHVR STEWART eldest Son, Tho. Milles, p. 31.
eldest Son, deceased upon the 14th day of July, An. 1510. in the lifetime of
his Father.

16. JAMES V. the second Son of James IV. King of Scots, and Queen Margaret,
was (after his Fathers death, slain in England) King of Scotland, being Crowned
at Scone, An. 1515. the usual inauguration place of their Kings. In the Reign
of this James V. several acts of hostility, both by Sea and Land passed between
the two Nations, during whose minority John Duke of Albany Cousin Germane to the
deceased King, was by the grave Council of the Realm, sent for home out of
France, to prorect this young King, and to govern his Kingdom; who, not long
after he had taken upon him the Government, joining with the French, made War
upon England, severely ba^^dling those Lords of Scotland whom he conceived
forsook the King in his Wars, some by imprisonment, and others by death; for
which cause mistrusting much his own safety, he returned into France. Mary of
Lorrain did b^ar quarterly of 6 pieces, 1. Hungary. 2. Naples. 3. Jerusalem. 4.
Anjou. 5. Bar. 6. Lorrain.
And King James V. being now arrived at Man's Estate, Thomas Milles p. 33.
took to his first Wife Magdalen eldest Daughter to Francis I. King of France,
who deceasing not much above a year after, without Issue, made way for his
second Marriage with Mary of Lorrain, Daughter of Claudius Duke of Guise,
Sister to Duke Francis, and Widow of Longuevil, who departing this life, An.
1560 had Issue by him James and Arthur, who died in their infaucy; and Mary
their only Daughter, after her Fathers death Queen of Scots, whose History
follows in the seventh Chapter of this sixth Book.

King James V. died with grief of mind in the Castle of Falkland on the 13th
day of December, 1542. Ibid.
after whose decease James Earl of Arran Lord of Hamilton his Kinsman was
constituted Governor to the young Queen Mary, and also her Tutor.

16. ALEXANDER STEWART, Thomas Milles p. 31.
third Son of King James IV. born An. 1514. was after his Fathers death Duke of
Rothsay.

A Daughter of MARGARET Queen of Scots, by ARCHIBALD DOUGLAS Earl of Angus her
second Husband.
16. MARGARET DOUGLAS, The Arms and Supporters of this Countess Margaret are at
the head of her Tomb, vide p. 499.
Richard Grafton f. 58.
Countess of Lenox, only Daughter and Heir of Archibald Douglas Earl of Angus,
by Margaret Queen of Scots, eldest Daughter of Henry VII. King of England, was
born at Harbottel Castle in Northumberland, Thomas Milles p. 31.
in the year of our Lord, 1515. She was married to Matthew Stewart second of
the name Earl of Lenox, and Regent of Scotland (elder Son of John Earl of
Lenox, only son of Matthew first of the name Earl of Lenox and Lord Darley or
Darnley, slain with King James IV. at the Battle of Flodden, An. 1513. whose
Father was John Stewart Earl of Lenox, the Son of Alain Stewart the first Earl
of Lenox, eldest Son of John Stewart Count of Evereux, Lord Darnley, Aubigny
and Concorsaut, and Constable of the Scottish Army in France, slain in Battle,
An. 1429. which John was her only Son of Alexander Stewart sole Brother of
Robert II. King of Scots.) and by the said Matthew Earl of Lenox (who deceased,
An. 1586) this Margaret Douglas had Issue (as appears by the following
Epitaph on her Monument in the South I Will of King Henry VII. his Chapel in
Westminster Abbey, the Figure of which is exhibited in the following page,
their Portraitures being carved thereon in Alablaster) four Sons and as many
Daughters.

MEMORIAE SACRUM.
At the head of the Monument.
MARGARETAE DOVGLASIAE MATTHAEI STVARTI
L^VENOSIAE COMITIS VXORI, HENRICI 7. ANGLIAE
REGIS EX FILIA N^PTI, POTENTISS: REGIBVS
COGNATIONE CONIVNCTISSIMAE, IACOBI 6. SCOTORVM
REGIS AVIAE, MATRONAE SANCTISSIMIS MORIB ET.
INVICTA ANIMI PATIENTIA INCOMPARABILI. P.
OBIIT MARTII DECIMO ANNO DOM. 1577.
On the South Side the the Tomb.
MARGARETA POTENS VIRTVTE, POTENTIOR ORTV,
REGIBVS AC PROAVIS NOBILITATA SVIS:
INDE CAL^DONIIS, AVSTRALIBVS INDE BRITANNIS
AEDITA PRINCIPIBVS PRINCIPIBVSQ. PARENS
QVAE MORTIS FVERANT, SOLVIT LAETISSIMA MORTI
ATQVE DEVM PETIIT: NAM FVIT ANTE DEI.
HENRY SECOND SON TO THIS LADY, WAS K. OF SCOTTS,
AND FATHER TO JAMES 6. NOW KING. THIS HENRY
WAS MVRTHERED AT THE AGE OF 21 YEARS. CHARLES
HER YOUNGEST SON WAS EARL OF LEVENOX,
FATHER TO THE LADY ARBEL: HE DYED AT THE
AGE OF 21 YEARS, AND IS HERE INTOMBED.
On the North side.
THIS LADY HAD TO HER GREAT-GRANDFATHER K.
EDWARD THE 4; TO HER GRANDFATHER K. HENRY
THE 7; TO HER UNCLE, K. HENRY THE 8; TO HER
COVSIN GERMANE K. EDWARD THE 6; TO HER BROTHER
K. JAMES OF SCOTLAND THE 5; TO HER SON KING
HENRY THE FIRST; TO HER GRANDCHILD K. JAMES 6;
HAVING TO HER GREAT GRANDMOTHER, AND GRANDMOTHER
TWO QVEENS, BOTH NAMED ELIZABETH; TO HER
MOTHER, MARGARET Q. OF SCOTTS; TO HER AVNT MARIE
THE FRENCH Q; TO HER COVSYNS GERMANS,
MARIE AND ELIZABETH QVEENS OF ENGLAND; TO HER
NIECE AND DAVGHTER IN LAW, MARY Q. OF SCOTTS.
At the foot of the Tomb.
ABSOLVTV CVRA THOMAE FOWLERI HVIVS DOM. EXECVTORIS OCTOBER. 24. 1578.

HERE LIES THE NOBLE LADY MARGARET COUNTESS
OF LEVENOX, DAVGHTER AND SOLE HEIR OF ARCHIBALD
EARL OF ANGVISE BY MARGARET Q. OF SCOTTS HIS
WIFE, THAT WAS ELDEST DAVGHTER TO KING HENRY
THE 7. WHO BARE UNTO MATTHEW EARL OF LEVENOX
HER HUSBAND 4. SONS, AND 4. DAVGHTERS.
monument Ad Caput Tumuli sunt haec Insignia

IAMAIS DARREIRE Ad pedem Tumuli hujus sunt haec

IN MY DEFENSE (...)

(...)

Honoratissimo et Nobiliss. Domino Dn.o FRANCISCO Vicecomiti NEWPORT de
Bradford Baroni NEWPORT de High-Ercoell Hospity Dn.i Regis CAROLD II.di
Thesaurario, Comitatus Salopiae Locum tenenti, et ejusdem majestatis e
secretioribus Consilijs; Tumuli hanc, margaretoe Leviniae Comitissae, Figuram.
H.DD.FS.

NE SVPRA MODVN^ SAPERE

The four Daughters, with one of the Sons of this Countess Margaret deceasing
in their infancy, Speed p. 996 and 997
mention is made only of the the names of three, viz. Henry, who died at the
age of nine months, and lies interred at the upper end of the Chancel in the
Parish Church of Stepney near London; upon whose Grave is engraven in Brass, as
follows,

Here lies Henry Steward Lord Darle, of the age of three quarters of a year,
late Son and Heir of Matthew Steward Earl of Lenox, and Lady Margaret his
Wife. Which Henry deceased the xxviii. day of November in the year of our Lord
God, 1545. whose Soul Jesus pardon. The Impalement of this Henry and Mary Queen
of Scots his Wife Ensigned with a Royal Crown and Supported, are carved at the
foot of his Mother: Tomb, exhibited in the precedent page, viz. 499.
Henry Lord Darnly (another Henry) was their second Son, a noble young Prince,
and reputed for person one of the goodliest Gentlemen of Europe; he was a
Native of England, (Earl Matthew his Father having been kept here an Exile near
twenty years) and having now scarcely accomplished the seventeenth year of his
age, he with his said Father were invited into Scotland by Queen Mary, under
pretense of restoring to the Earl of Lenox his ancient Patrimony; but indeed to
confer with him about a marriage with this Henry Lord Darnley his Son, to
strengthen her own Title, and to prevent any other: for they were Cousin
Germans, and he next Heir after her and her Descendents, to the Crown of
England. After some time, by the importunity of the Countess of Lenox, and
other means used, Queen Elizabeth was contented to give them liberty of a three
months stay in Scotland; whereupon being come to Edenborough, the Queen of
Scots at first sight became so enamoured of the lovely young Lord Darnley, that
neither the menaces of Queen Elizabeth, nor all other considerations, could
deter her from marrying him; whom to render the sitter companion for her, she
caused first to be honored with Knighthood, and then created into the Dignity
of Earl of Rosse, and Duke of Rothsay; which Dukedom by birth pertains to the
eldest Sons of the Kings of Scotland. After this, when he had not been above
five months in Scotland, and not exceeded his nineteenth year, she married him,
and with the consent of most of the Peers, declared him King. The fruit of this
marriage soon appeared in the Queens being with Child; but her love to King
Henry was not so warm at first but it began now as much to cool, and Queen Mary
had not heaped Honors on him so fast before, but he is now as suddenly
divested of them; for where before in all public Acts, she used to place her
Husbands name first, now she caused it to be placed after hers, and in the
Coining of Money, began to leave it quite out. This unkindness between them, was
chiefly fomented by one David Rizie an Italian, her Secretary for the French
Tongue, by means whereof he had often times Conference with her, when the King
himself might not be admitted; which indignity the King instigaed by some of
his Nobility, and more especially by the Earl of Murray, revenges, by the death
of Rizie, whom finding at a side Cupbord, tasting some Meat that had been taken
from the Queens Table, dragged him forth into an outer Chamber, and there
murdered him. Of the foulness of which fact, when King Henry after a while
grew sensible, he meant to be revenged on Murray, who had councelled him to it:
which the Earl of Murray understanding, prevented it, with causing the like to
be done to him. For the Queen having been delivered of her Son ( James VI. of
the name, King of Scots, afterward Monarch of Great Britain, etc.) and the day
of the Christning being come, Queen Elizabeth being requested to be Godmother,
sent thither the Earl of Bedford as her Deputy, and a Font of massy Gold for a
Present, in value 1043 l. but gave him express command, that he should not
honor Darley with the Title of King. But before a month or two after the
Christning were passed, this Matrimonial King, in a stormy, and tempestuous
night, was strangled in his Bed, and then cast forth into a Garden, and the
House immediately blown up with Gunpowder.

Charles Stewart Earl of Lenox (the third son of Matthew Earl of Lenox and
Margaret Douglas his Wife) was born also in England.

He took to Wife Elizabeth the second Daughter of Sir William Cavendish of
Chatesworth in the County of Derby Knight. by Elizabeth his Wife one of the Sisters
and Coheirs of John Hardwick of Hardwick in the same County Esquire and deceasing
in the one and twentieth year of his age, left Issue by her, his only Child
Arabella Stewart, who being Cousin Germain to King James, and without his
privity or consent secretly marrying Mr. William Seymour (second Son of the
Earl of Hertford) afterward Earl of Hertford, and lately restored to the
Dukedom of Somerset, they were both committed prisoners to the Tower of London,
where the said Lady Arabella ended her life, without Issue, upon the 27th day
of September, An. (...) and was interred in the Vault with Mary Queen of Scots,
in the Chapel of King Henry VII. where I have seen her Lead Coffin, without
any Monumental Inscription.

17. MARY QUEEN of SCOTS and DOWAGER of FRANCE.
CHAP. VII.
The Achievement of Mary Queen of Scots, is carved and painted on her
Magnificent Tomb in the Chapel of King Henry VII. in Westminster Abbey. Vide p.
506.
THis Mary, sole Daughter and Heir of James V. of the name King of Scots, (and
of Mary of Lorrain, Daughter of Claude Duke of Guise) Son of James IV. King of
Scots, by Margaret eldest Daughter of Henry VII. King of England, was born on
the Vigil of the and Conception of our blessed Lady, Tho. Milles p. 33.
An. 1542. being an Infant at the time of her Fathers death, was proclaimed
Heir to the Kingdom of Scotland in the same year. James Earl of Arran her
Kinsman being her Governor in her tender years, denied to give her in marriage
to Edward VI. King of England, notwithstanding it was so agreed between the
chief Peers of both Realms; whereupon ensued the famous Battle of
Musselborough, where the English became victorious, An. 1547.

But lest this young Lady should fall into the hands of the English, Scevole
and Louis de St Marthe Tome 1. p. 656 and 657.
the Queen Dowager Mary of Lorrain her Mother, and the Estates of Scotland
convey her into France, when Henry II. the French King, taking that Realm into
his protection, sends them Forces, Her first Marriage.
and espouses Queen Mary to his Son Francis the Dauphin; which Marriage, when
they came of years, was solemnized in the Church of our Lady at Paris, An
Impalement of the Arms of King Francis and Queen Mary are embroidered under an
Imperial Crown on the Valence of the Canopy in the Queens Presence Chamber at
Whitehall, much of which is said to be her own handiwork.
by Charles Cardinal of Bourbon Archbishop of Roan; upon which it was agreed,
among other things, That Francis the Dauphin should have the Title of King of
Scotland, and bear his Arms quarterly with those of Scotland, under the same
Crown; the Queens Dower being assigned her upon the Duchy of Touraine, and
County of Poicton.

Shortly afterward, this King Daulphin, not being above sixteen years old,
succeeded to the Crown of France (after the death of Henry II. his Father.) by
the name of King Francis II. and was anointed and crowned at Rheims by Charles
Cardinal of Lorrain Archbishop of that place, Uncle by the Mother to the Queen
his Wife, the 8th day of September, An, 1559. whereupon being King and Queen of
France and Scotland, they lay claim to the Crown of England, quartering the
Arms thereof, and also bearing them on an Escocheon of Pretense; but a Peace
being shortly after concluded at Edenborough, these Arms and Titles were to be
disused. This Royal Couple continued but a short time together; for King
Francis being violently seized with a Catarrh in his Ear, it caused his death
the 5th of December, An. 1560. having reigned only 17 months and 25 days.
After whose decease, Mary the Queen-Dowager (having no Issue by him) retired
into Scotland; where she afterward took to her second Husband her Cousin Henry
Stewart Lord Darley Son and Heir of Matthew Earl of Lenox, Her second Marriage.
from which Marriage came James I. Monarch of Great Britain, The Arms of Henry
Lord Darley and Queen Mary, are Impaled on her Tomb in Henry VII. his Chapel.
vide p. 506.
the happy Uniter of both Kingdoms.

Few years had Queen Mary enjoyed her second Husband Henry Lord Darnly, when by
the practices of the Earl of Murray her base Brother (who had animated the said
King Henry to assassinate David Rizie her Secretary) he was most cruelly
murdered; so that the Queen being thereby left alone, is councelled to marry
with some person that might be able to assist her against all opposers. The man
pitched upon, is James Hepburn Earl of Bothwell, being then great in her favor,
and of singular eminency for his Valor. And though he were the person that had
acted the Kings murder, yet is he, by Murray, Morton, and their Confederates,
recommended to the Queen; to which motion, as being destitute of Friends, and
not knowing whom to trust, she at last consents: But upon these Conditions,
That above all things respect might be had to her young Son James, and that
Bothwell might be legally quitted both from the Bond of his former Marriage,
and also of the Kings murder. Hereupon a course is plotted, by which Earl
Bothwell is called to the Bar, and ( Morton being his Advocate) by the Sentence
of the Judges, clearly acquitted. Her third Marriage.
Upon this he is created Duke of Orkney, and many of the Nobility consenting,
married to Queen Mary; which bred a suspicion in several, that the Queen was
conscious of the murder, the thing indeed that by the marriage they intended:
which suspicion once raised, they seek by all means to increase, thereby to
have the better color against her; and so the very same man who had absolved
Bothwell, and consented to the marriage, now, with others, takes Arms against
her, as a delinquent in both; force him to fly, and then seize upon the Queen,
whom clad in very homely Garments, they thrust into Prison at Loch-Levyn under
the custody of Murray's Mother, who had been the Harlot of King James V. but
boasted herself to have been his Lawful Wife, and this Earl of Murray her Son,
the King's lawfully begotten Son.

Queen Elizabeth being informed of these proceedings against the Queen of
Scots, sends Sir Nicholas Throckmorton into Scotland, to expostulate with the
Confederates, touching their cruel usage of her, and to consult by what means
she might be restored to her liberty. Being come into Scotland, he found the
Confederates in more insolent terms than report had made them, being divided in
opinion what to do with the Queen; some would have her banished perpetually;
others committed to Prison, and her Son proclaimed King; others, more inhumane,
were for having her to be deprived of Princely Authority, life and all; and
this Knox and some other Ministers thundered out of the Pulpits. Throckmorton on
the other side maintained that the Queen was subject to no Tribunal but that in
Heaven, and that there was no Jurisdiction in Scotland which was not derived
from her Authority, and revocable at her pleasure. To which they opposed the
peculiar right of the Kingdom of Scotland; and that in extraordinary Cases they
were to proceed besides order: taking up Buchannans Arguments: who in those
days by instigation of Murray, wrote that damned Dialogue, De jure Regni apud
Scotos. After all this Debate, what Throckmorton could get of them, was a
Writing without any Subscription, in which they protested they had shut up the
Queen only to keep her from Bothwell, whom she loved so desperately, that to
enjoy him she regarded not all their ruins; willing him to rest satisfied with
this answer, till such time as all the Peers met together. The Queen was yet
confined to a more close imprisonment, and through fear of death, compelled
unheard, to set her hand to three Instruments; The first whereof contained, the
resignation of her Kingdom to her young Son, at that time scarce thirteen
months old; In the second, she constituted Murray Viceroy during the minority
of her said Son; And in the third, in case he refused the charge, the Governors
nominated, were, James Duke of Chastean-Herald, Giles Spike Earl of Argyle,
Matthew Earl of Lenox (the Queens Father-in-Law) John Earl of Atholl, James Earl
of Morton, Alexander Earl of Glencarn, and John Earl of Mar. And presently she
signified to Queen Elizabeth by Throckmorton, that she had made these Grants by
compulsion, through the counsel of Throckmorton, telling her, that a Grant
extorted from one in Prison (which is a just fear) is actually void and of none
effect. Five days after this Resignation, James VI. the Queens Son, was
Anointed and Crowned King, James Knox Preaching at the same time; but Queen
Elizabeth had forbidden Throckmorton to be thereat, that she might not seem by
the presence of her Ambassador to approve their proceeding in the displacing of
the Queen of Scots: Who some time after (having been a Prisoner eleven months)
makes her escape from Loch-levyn to Hamilton Castle; where, upon the
Testimonies of Robert Melvyn, and others, in a meeting of a great part of the
Nobility, there was drawn a Sentence Declaratory, that the Grant extorred from
the Queen in Prison (which is Justus Metus) was actually void from the
beginning; upon which great multitudes flocked unto her; so as within a day or
two, she had gotten an Army of at least 6000. But when they joined Battle with
Murray, being but raw and unexperienced Soldiers, they were soon defeated; so
that the Queen sought to save herself by flight, journying in one day
threescore Miles, and coming at night to the house of Maxwell Lord Heris. From
thence she sent John Beton to Queen Elizabeth with a Diamond Ring, which she
had formerly received from her, as a Pledge of Mutual Amity; intimating, that
she would come into England, and implore her aid, if her Subjects offered to
prosecute her any farther. Queen Elizabeth returned answer, that she should
receive from her, in abundant manner, all loving and friendly Offices. But
before the Messenger was returned, she, contrary to the advice of her Friends,
entered into a small Bark, and with the Lords Heris, and Fleming, and a few
others, landed at Wickington in Cumberland, near the mouth of the River Derwent.

England, instead of being a Sactuary to the distressed Queen of Scots, became
only a change of air, but not from confinement to liberty; for being denied
access to Queen Elizabeth, and tossed from one Prison to another for the space
of above eighteen years, in which she had often strugled for liberty (as our
Annals do testify) that cruel Tragedy of her life, begun in Scotland, was here
more cruelly ended by the stroke of an Axe in Fotheringhay Castle in
Northamptonshire (much to the dishonor of this Kingdom) upon the 6th of the
Ides of February ( viz. the 8th day of February) 1587. But beginning the year
on the first of January, An. 1586.

Being thus deprived of life, Queen Elizabeth to show her detestation of so
horrid an act, which she declared to be done without her knowledge, caused the
Corpse of the Queen of Scots to be buried with very great solemnity in the
Cathedral Church of Peterborow, E. 11. fol. 95. and I. 14. fol. 160. usque 168.
on the first day of August, An. 1587. with all the Trophies of a Sovereign
Queen, and a stately Hearse in the said Church; the Proceeding consisting of
many of the Nobility, Lords and Ladies (the Countess of Bedford being the chief
Mourner) and abundance of the Gentry, all in Blacks. Here her Body rested till
her Son King James, not long after his coming to the Crown of England, prepared
a Vault in the South I Will of King Henry VII. his Chapel at Westminster, to
which her Corpse was privately conveyed, and over the same erected a Magnificent
Tomb (the Figure of which is inserted in the following page) upon eight
Corinthian Pillars, under the Arch of which lies the Portraiture of the Queen;
the Frize is beautified with several Matches of the Kings of Scotland, and the
top thereof crowned with her Achievement; several Tables of Marble contain her
Epitaph, which gives the Reader a brief account of her Royal Descent and Kingly
Relations; the exquisite Endowments both of her Body and Mind, the Troubles of
her life, her constancy in Religion, and resolution in death.

D. O. M. Bonae Memoriae et Spei Aeternae. This Monumental Inscription is
engraven in Roman Capitals.


This first part of her Epitaph is on the South Side of her Tomb.
Mariae Stuartae Scotorum Reginae, Franciae Dotariae, Jacobi V.
Scotorum Regis filiae et haeredis unicae, Henrici vii. Angl. Regis,
ex Margareta majori natu filia (Jacobo iiii Regi Scotorum
matrimonio copulata,) Proneptis, Edwardi iiii. Angl. Regis
ex Elizabetha, filiarum suarum natu maxima Abneptis,
Francisci II. Gallorum R. Conjugis, Coronae Angl. dum vixit.
monument Honoratiss: et Nobiliss. Domino Dno. IOANNI Baroni ROBERTS de Truro,
Dno. Custodi privati Sigilli, Serenissimo CAROLO IIo. Magnae, Britanniae,
Franciae, et Hiberniae. Monarchae, ab intimis et sanctioribus Consilijs, Tumuli
hanc Mariae Scotorum Reginae, Jacobi Mag: Britanniae andct. Matris, Imaginem.
HD.F.S.

certae, and indubitatae haeredis, and Jacobi magnae Britanniae
Monarchae potentissimi, matris.
Stirpe vere Regia, and antiquissima prognata erat, maximis
totius Europae principib. agnatione, and cognatione conjuncta,
and exquisitissimis animi, and corporis dotibus, and ornamentis
cumulatissima, (verum ut sunt variae rerum humanarum vices)
postquam annos plus minus viginti, in custodia detenta,
fortiter, and strenue, (sed frustra) cum malevolorum
obtrectationibus, timidorum suspitionibus, and inimicorum
capitalium insidiis conflictata esset, tandem inaudito, and
infesto regibus exemplo, securi percutitur;
and contempto mundo, devicta morte, lassato carnifice,
Christo servatori animae salutem, Jacobo filio spem Regni, and
Posteritatis, and universis caedis infaustae spectatoribus
exemplum patientiae commendans, pie patienter, intrepide,
cervicem regiam, securi maledictae subjecit, and vitae caducae
sortem, cum ceolestis regni perennitate commutavit,
VI. Idus Februarij. Anno Christi. M. D. Lxxxvii. Aetatis XXXXVI.

This latter part of the Epitaph of Queen Mary is on the North-side of her
Monument.
Generis splendour rarae si gratia formae
Probri nescia men's, inviolata fides,
Pectoris invicti robur, sapientia, candor,
Nixaque solantis spes pietate dei:
Si morum probitas, duri patientia freoni,
Majestas, bonitas, pura, benigna manus,
Pallida fortunae possint vitare tonantis
Fulmina, quae montes, templaque sancta petunt.
Non praematura fatorum sort perisset,
Nec fieret moestis tristis imago genis
Jure Scotos, Thalamo Francos, spe possidet Anglos,
Triplice sic triplex, jure corona beat,
Foelix, heu nimium foelix, si turbine pulsa
Vicinam sero conciliasset opem.
Sed cadit ut terram teneat, nunc morte triumphat
Fructubus ut sua stirps, pullulet inde novis.
Victa nequit Vinci, nec carcere clausa teneri;
Non occisa mori, sed neque capta capi.
Sic vitis succisa gemmit foecundior uvis
Sculptaque purpureo, gemma decore micat.
Obruta frugifero sensim sic cespite surgunt
Semina, per multos, quae latuere dies.
Sanguine sanciuit foedus cum plebe jehoua
Sanguine placabant numina sanctae patres.
Sanguine conspersi quos praeterit ira penates;
Sanguine signata est quae modo cedit humus.
Parge Deus, satis est, infandos siste dolores:
Inter funestos pervolet illa dies.
Sic Reges mactare nefas, ut sanguine posthac,
Purpureo nunquam terra Britanna fluat.
Exemplum pereat caesae cum vulnere Christae:
Inque malum praeceps, author and actor eat.
Si meliore sui post mortem part triumphet,
Carnifices sileant, tormina, claustra, cruces.
Quem dederant cursum superi, regina peregit.
Tempora laeta Deus, tempota dura dedit.
Edidit eximium fato properante Jacobum
Quem Pallas, Musae, Delia, Fata colunt.
Magna viro, major natu, sed maxima partu
Conditur hic Regum filia, sponsa, parens.
Det Deus ut nati and qui nascentur ab illa,
Aeternos videant hinc sine nube dies.
H. N. gemens. Over the Cornish at the head of the Monument.
1 Pet. 2.21. Christus pro nobis passus est relinquens
Exemplum, ut sequamini vestigia ejus.
Over the Cornish at the f^^t of the Tomb.
1 Pet. 2.22. Qui cum malediceretur non maledicebat, cum pateretur non
comminabatur, tradebat autem judicanti just.

A Son of MARY Queen of Scots, by HENRY Lord Darley, her second Husband.
18. JAMES VI. King of Scots, and first Monarch of Great Britain, whose History
follows in the first Chapter of the seventh Book.

15. MARY QUEEN-DOWAGER of FRANCE, and DUCHESS of SVFFOLK, third Daughter of
Henry VII. King of England.
CHAP. VIII.
THis Lady Mary, Queen Mary of France did bear, France Impaling, quarterly
France and England, Vide I. 15. fol. 107. b. in Coll. Arm.
third Daughter of King Henry VII. born An. 1498. was first promised to Charles
King of Castile, and afterward at the age of eighteen years, Scevole and Louis
de St. March 286 and 287.
married to Lewis XII. the French King, in the City of Abbeville in Picardy,
upon the 9th day of October, being the Feast of St. Dyonis, in the year 1514.
0170 0175 V 3 and solemnly Crowned in the Monastery of St. Denis, Edward Halle
f. 48. a. 6. and 49. a.
on the 5th day of November next following, to whom she was third Wife, but
lived with him only three months; when having enjoyed his Marriage Bed too
freely, he died without Issue by her, at his Palace of Tournelles in Paris the
first of January, 1515. in the 53 year of his age, Ibid. f. 56.
and the 17 of his Reign (having prepared an Army for his second Expedition
into Italy) and was buried at St. Denis. After whose decease, she returned into
England, and in the year 1517, was re-married to that Pompous Gentleman, Her
second Marriage.
and Favorite of her Brother King Henry VIII. Charles Brandon 0170 0175 V 3
Duke of Suffolk, to whom she was also third Wife, Brandon, viz. Barry of 10
pieces Argent and Gules a Lion rampant Or crowned party per-pale Argent and
Gules. Impaling France and England quarterly.
and in whose lifetime she died, I. 15. a. fol. 107. b. in Coll. Arm.
at the Manor of Westhorp in Suffolk the 25th of June, between the hours of 7
and 8 in the morning, 1533. An. 25 H. 8. the Dominical Letter E. Whose Body
being embalmed and chested, was brought out of her Chamber into the Chapel,
where it lay in State till the 21 of July, when it was conveyed under a Canopy,
suitable to the degree of a Queen, unto a Chair covered with a rich Pall of
Cloth of Gold frized, the ground black, with a Cross of Cloth of Gold, the
ground white, thereupon lay the Image of a Queen, apparelled in Robes of
Estate, with a rich Crown of Gold on her Head, her Hair dishevelled, a Scepter
of Gold in her right Hand, and rich Stoned Rings on her Fingers; the Chair
covered with a Pall of black Velvet, with a Cross of Cloth of Silver. Thus,
with a noble Proceeding, and a second Chair also in Mourning, they set forward
toward St. Edmondsbury the said 21 of July, attended by the Heralds, the Lady
Frances her Daughter being chief Mourner; where arriving about two in the
afternoon, it was conveyed to a glorious Hearse in the Abbey there, and on
Wednesday the 22 of July, all Ceremonies performed, was interred in that
Monastery: whose Issue by the aforesaid Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, were
as follow, viz.

16. HENRY BRANDON, created Earl of Lincoln, who deceased without Issue.

16. FRANCES BRANDON, Vide Queen Elizabeth's Warrant, I. 9. p. 14. in Coll. Arm.
for an augmentation of Arms to this Lady Frances Brandon Duchess of Suffolk in
these Words, By the Queen.
Duchess of Suffolk, eldest Daughter, was married first to Henry Gray Duke of
Suffolk, who lost his Head on Tower hill the 23 of February, the first year of
Queen Mary, An. 1554. And afterward she became the Wife of Adrian Stock Esquire
which Adrian erected for her a fair Monument, with her Effigies thereon in
Princely Habit, in the Chapel of St. Edmond in Westminster Abbey. Upon which
this following Epitaph is inscribed.

IN CLARISS. DOM. FRANCISCAE SUFFOLCIAE QUANDAM DUCISSAE EPICEDION. Trusly and
welbeloved We great you well, letting you to understand, that for the good zeal
and affection which We of long time have borne to our derely beloved Cousyn the
Lady Frances late Duchess of Southfolk, and especially for that she is lynyally
decended from our Grandfather King Henry the Seventhe, as also for other causes
and considerations Us thereunto moving, in perpetual memory of the same, We
have thought it requisite and expedyent, to grant and give unto her, and to
her Posterity, an Augmentation of Our Arms to be borne with the difference to
the same by us assigned, and the same to bear in the place of the first
quarter, and so to be placed with the Arms of her Ancestors, as by the
Orders of Our Office it is manifest, according to the Skochin by Us directed to
you in that behalf, that is to say, Our Arms with a bordure goubony gold and
Azure, which shall be an apparent declaration of here consanguynyte unto Us.
Whereupon We will and requier you to see the same entryd into your Registres
and Records; and at this her Funeral to plasse the same Augmentation with her
Ancestors Arms, in Banners, Bannerols, Lozenges, and Scocheons as otherwise,
when it shall be thought mete and convenyent. And this Our Letters shall be
your sufficyent warant and discharge in this behaulf. Geouen under Our Signet
at Our Palace of Westminster the therde day of December in the second year
of Our Reign. To Our trusty and welbe loved Servant Sir Gilbert Dethike Knight
alias Garter Our principal King of Arms, and William Harvy Esquier alias
Clarencieux King of Arms of the South part of this Our Real me of England,
and to either of them.




NIL DECVS AUT SPLENDOUR, NIL REGIA NOMINA PROSVNT.
SPLENDIDA DIVITIIS, NIL IUVAT AMPLA DOMVS.
OMNIA FLVXERVNT, VIRTVTIS SOLA REMANSIT.
GLORIA, TARTAREIS, NON ABOLENDA ROGIS.
NVPTA DVCI PRIVS EST, VXOR POST ARMIGERI STOK.
FVNERE NVNC VALEAS, CONSOCIATA DEO.
HERE LIES THE LADY FRANCES DVCHESS OF SOVTHFOLKE DOVGHTER TO CHARLES BRANDON
DVKE OF SOVTHFOLKE, AND MARY THE FRENCH QVEENE, FIRST WIFE TO HENRY DVKE OF
SOVTHFOLKE, AND AFTER TO ADRIAN STOCK ESQVIER

The Duchess Frances had Issue by Henry Duke of Suffolk her first Husband,
three Daughters.

17. Jane Gray married to Guilford Dudley, Dudley, viz. Or, a Lion rampant with
the Tails, vert, impaling Barry of six pieces Argent and Azure, three Torteaux
in Chief, and over all, a Label of three points, Ermine, Gray.
fourth Son of John Duke of Northumberland, whose aim being no less than to
have the whole Government of the Kingdom, allured the Duke of Suffolk her
Father to countenance the proclaiming of this his Daughter the Lady Jane to be
Queen of England, Stows Annals.
upon pretense of King Edward's designation of her so to be, by his Will; which
attempt not taking effect, cost the two Dukes, the Son Guilford Dudley, and the
Lady Jane Gray, their lives, being all four beheaded, and she deceasing without
Issue.

17. Katherine Gray their second Daughter, was espoused to Henry Lord Herbert,
eldest Son to William Earl of Pembroke, and being divorced from him, Annal.
Eliz. per Camden de an. 1562.
married to Edward Seymour Earl of Hertford, Seamour impaling Gray.
who deceased, An. 1621. having had Issue by her, Edward Seymour Lord
Beauchamp, who dying in his said Fathers life, time, An. 1618. left Issue by
Honora his Wife, daughter of Sir Richard Rogers of Brianston in the County of
Dorset, Knight. Edward Seymour Lord Beauchampe, of whom there is no Issue. Sir
William Seymour Knight. his second Son, and Sir Francis Seymour third Son.

Sir William Seymour Knight. the second Son, succeeded his Grandfather Edward Earl
of Hertford in his Honors, and married two Wives, first the Lady Arabella,
Seamour, viz. quarterly Or, on a Pile Gules; between six Flowers de Lize Azure,
three Lions passant guardant of the first, and Gules two Wings conjoined Or,
impaling Dev reux. Which is Argent a Fesse Gules and three Tortaux in Chief.
Daughter of Charles second Son of Matthew Earl of Lenox, by whom he had no
Issue; and afterward Frances Daughter of Robert Devereux Earl of Essex, Sister
and Coheir to Earl Robert. Pat. an. 16 Car. 1. p. 1.
An. 16. Car. 1. this William was for his eminent merit advanced to the Dignity
of Marquis of Hertford, and living to see the Restoration of his present
Majesty King Charles II was by a Special Act in that Parliament begun at
Westminster, Journal of Parl.
the 25th of April, in the twelfth year of His Reign, restored to the Title of
Duke of Somerset, I. 8. fol. 80. a. in Coll. Arm.
by a Repeal of that Act of the 5 and 6 Edward VI. for the attainder of Edward
Duke of Somerset his Greatgrandfather. After which, departing this life the
24th of October the same year 1660. he left Issue by the said Lady Frances his
second Wife, five Sons, viz. William and Robert, who died unmarried at the age
of twenty years; Henry Lord Beauchamp third Son, who took to Wife Mary Daughter
of Arthur Lord Capel, Seamour impaling Capel. viz. Gul^s, a Lion a Lion rampant
in three Crossecroslets, fichee, Or.
and Sister of Arthur Earl of Essex, and died at the age of 28 years, in the
lifetime of his Father, Fun. of the Nob. unmarked in Coll. Arm. fol. 31. a.
leaving Issued by her, one Son named William, who was after the decease of his
Grandfather, Duke of Somerset; but he departed this life the 12th of December,
1671. unmarried, in his 20th year, and was interred at Great Bedwind in the
County of Wilts. Edward Seymour was the fourth Son of William Duke of Somerset,
and died in his infancy; and John Seymour was his fifth Son, who out-living his
Nephew Duke William, enjoyed his Honors but a short time, and having taken to
Wife Sarah Daughter of Sir Richard Alston Knight. deceased in April, An. 1675.
without Issue, his Body being interred in the Cathedral Church at Salisbury.

The Issue Male of the first Line being thus extinguished, I now come to Sir
Francis Seymour Knight. the third Son of Edward Lord Beauchamp, Son and Heir of
Edward Earl of Hertford; which Sir Francis, upon the 19th of February 16 Car.
1. was advanced to the Dignity of a Baron of this Realm, by the Title of Lord
Seamour of Trowbridge, in Com. Wilts. He took to his first Wife Frances the
Daughter and Heir of Sir Gilbert Prinne of Allington in the County of Wilts.
Pat. an. 16. Car. 1. p. 7.
Knight. by whom he had Issue Charles Lord Seamour, who succeeding him, married to
his second Wife (the first dying without Issue Male) Elizabeth Daughter of
William Lord Allington of Horshet in the County of Cambridge, by whom he had
Issue five Sons, Francis, William, and William, who died in their infancy, and
Francis and Charles, now living 1677. and deceased in August, An. 1665.

Francis his eldest surviving Son, succeeded this Charles in the Honor of Lord
Seymour of Trowbridge, and by the death of the before-specified John Duke of
Somerset without Issue, he enjoys also that illustrious Title.

17, Mary Gray the third and youngest Daughter of Henry Gray Duke of Suffolk
(and Lady Frances his Wife, Daughter of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk by Mary
the French Queen, third Daughter of King Henry VII.) being somewhat deformed,
was married unto Henry Keys the Kings Gentleman Porter.

16. ELEANOR BRANDON, the second Daughter and Coheir of Charles Duke of
Suffolk, Braudon impaled by Clifford, being Cheque Or and Azure, a Fesse Gules.
by Mary the French Queen, third Daughter of King Henry VII. was the first Wife
of Henry Clifford Earl of Cumberland, and by him had Issue Margaret Clifford
her Daughter and Heir, married to Henry Stanley Earl of Derby, who, by his
Testament bearing date 21 Sept. An. 1594. bequeathed his Body to be buried in
his Chapel of Ormeskirk, and departing this life upon the 25th of September
ensuing, was there interred, leaving Issue by his said Wife Margaret,
Ferdinando, F. F. in Coll. Arm. 382. a.
and William, Earls of Derby successively.

Ferdinando the elder Son, Earl of Derby, outlived his Father but a short
time, for having by his Testament bearing date the 12th of April, 36 Eliz.
ordained his Body to be buried in his said Chapel at Ormeskirk, deceased in the
flower of his youth soon after, not without suspicion of Poison, and was there
interred on the 6th day of May next ensuing, Stanley impaling Spencer, viz.
Quarterly Argent, and Gules a Frett Or, over all, on a Bend Sable, three
Escolleps Argent.
leaving Issue by Alice his Wife, Daughter of Sir John Spencer of Althorpe in
the County of Northampton, Knight. three Daughters his Heirs, Anne Stanley eldest
Daughter, was married to Gray Bruges Lord Chandos, and they were Father and
Mother of George and William both Lords Chandos successively, who having had
Issue several Daughters, died both without Male Issue. Frances Stanley second
Daughter, Bruges, viz. Argent, on a Cross Sable, a Leopards head, Or. Impaling
Stanley.
was the Wife of Sir John Egerton Knight. (afterward Earl of Bridgewater) Father
by her of John Egerton Earl of Bridgwater, now living, An. 1677. who by
Elizabeth his Wife, second Daughter of William Cavendish late Duke of
Newcastle, Egerton, viz. Argent a Lion rampant Gules, inter three Pheons Sable.
Impaling Stanley.
has a numerous Offspring.

Elizabeth Stanley the third Daughter and Coheir, was married to Henry Lord
Hastings, afterward Earl of Huntington, Father of Ferdinando Earl of
Huntington, Hastings, viz. argent a Manch Sable. Impaling Stanley.
and Henry Lord Loughborough. Ferdinando Earl of Huntington had Issue
Theophilus the present Earl of Huntington, of whom, and his Ancestors, see more
in the 417 page of the fifth Book.

William Stanley the second Son of Henry Earl of Derby, succeeded his Brother
Ferdinand in the Earldom of Derby deceasing without Issue Male. He married
Elizabeth Vere, eldest Daughter of Edward Earl of Oxford, and by her, was
Father of that Prudent, Loyal, and valiant Nobleman, James Earl of Derby, put
to death by the Rebels at Boulton in Lancashire, the 15th of October, 1651. who
having matched with Charlote Daughter of Claude Duke Tremouille, a Lady of an
heroic Courage (witness her resolute defense of her House of Latham, against
the Kings Enemies) had Issue Charles Earl of Derby; which Charles, by Dorothy
Helen Rupa a German Lady, was Father of William the present Earl of Derby, An.
1677. (who has married Elizabeth the Daughter of Thomas Earl of Ossory, Son
and Heir of James Duke of Ormond) and several other Children.

BOOK VII. THE Union of the Kingdoms. OR, The ROYAL HOUSE of STUART.

CONTAINING A Genealogical History OF THE MONARCHS OF GREAT BRITAIN, etc. From
King JAMES to King CHARLES II. Inclusive.

From the Year 1603. to the Year 1677.

REX FIDEI DEFENSOR IACOBVS GRATIA ANGLIAE SCOTIAE FRANCIAE ET HIBERNIAE


REX FIDEI DEFENSOR IACOBVS GRATIA ANGLIAE SCOTIAE FRANCIAE ET HIBERNIAE


Honoratissimo Domino Dno. THOMAE DAVIES Aequiti aurato, Civitalis LONDON
Celeberrimae, MAIORI; Sigillum hoc JACOBI Regis, HD.F.S.



blazon or coat of arms

1627 REX FIDEI DEFENSOR CAROLVS DEI GRATIE ANGLIAE SCOTIAE FRANCIAE ET
HIBERNIAE


REX FIDEI DEFENSOR CAROLVS DEI GRATIE ANGLIAE SCOTIAE FRANCIAE ET HIBERNIAE


Generosissimo Viro Domino PHILIPPO Warwick de Chissilherst in Com Kanty Equiti
Aurato Hoc CAROLI primi Regis Sigillum, H.D. F.S.



blazon or coat of arms

1640 REX FIDEI DEFENSOR CAROLVS DEI GRATIA MAGNAE BRITTANIAE FRANCIAE ET
HIBERNIAE


1640 REX FIDEI DEFENSOR CAROLVS DEI GRATIA MAGNAE BRITTANIAE FRANCIAE ET
HIBERNIAE


Viro Spectatissimo Dno. EDWARDO WALKER Equiti aurato GARTERO Regi Armorum
principali. Sigillum hoc CAROLI. 1 Regis. HD. FS.



blazon or coat of arms

1653 REX FIDEI DEFENSOR CAROLVS II DEI GRATIA MAGNAE BRITANNIAE FRANCIAE ET
HIBER


1653 REX FIDEI DEFENSOR CAROLVS II DEI GRATIA MAGNAE BRITANNIAE FRANCIAE ET
HIBER


Clarissimo Viro Domino GEORGIO LANE Equiti Aurato ^t Baro: netto, Sere nissime
Regis CAROLI II in Hibernia Secretario suo principali, ibidemo^ e Secrenoribus
Consili^^ Sigillum hoc H.D. F.S.



blazon or coat of arms

A GENEALOGICAL TABLE of the Seventh BOOK.
18. JAMES King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, etc. p. 519.=ANNE the
Daughter of Frederick II. King of Deumark and Norway, p. 522. 19.
HENRYFREDERICK Prince of Wales, p. 528. ROBERT Stuart, second Son, p. 530.
CHARLES I. King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, p. 538.=MARY Daughter of
Henry 4. King of France, p. 540. 20. CHARLES II. King of Great Britain, France,
and Ireland, etc. Book 7. Chap. 3. KATHERINE of Portugal, ibident. JAMES Duke
of York and Albany, and Earl of Vlster, etc. p. 562. ANNE Daughter of Edward
Earl of Clarendon, first Wife, p. 564.
21. CHARLES Duke of Cambridge, p. 564. JAMES Duke of Cambridge, p. 565.
CHARLES Duke of Kendal, p. 566. EDGAR Duke of Cambridge, p. 566. MARY Wife of
William Henry Prince of Orange, p. 566. ANNE, p. 567. HENRIETTA, p. 567.
KATHERINE, p. 568.
MARY d' Este Daughter of Alphonso Duke of Modena, second Wife, p. 568.
CHARLES Duke of Cambridge, p. 569. KATHERINALAURA, p. 569. ISSABELLA, p. 569.
HENRY Duke of Gloucester, p. 569. MARY Wife of William Prince of Orange, p.
571. ELIZABETH, p. 573. ANNE p. 574. HENRIETTA-MARIA Duchess of Orleance, p.
574.
ELIZABETH married to FREDERICK Prince Elector Palatine, and King of Bohemia,
p. 530. MARGARET. p. 535. MARY p. 335. SOPHIA, p. 537.

portrait of James I K JAMES
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT portrait of Charles I K CHARLES
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT portrait of Charles II K CHARLES II
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT 18. JAMES KING of ENGLAND,
SCOTLAND, An. Dom. 1603.
FRANCE, and IRELAND, Defender of the FAITH, etc. Surnamed STVART.
CHAP. I.
The Figure of King James his Great Seal is exhibited in the 514 page of this
seventh Book, on which the King is represented sitting on His Throne, in Royal
Robes, having the great Collar of the Order of St. George about his Neck, a
Royal Crown on His Head, the Scepter of the Flower-de-Lize in His Right Hand,
and in His Left, the Ball or Mound with a Cross on the top thereof. On the
right side of His Throne, is a Lion crowned sedant, supporting with his right
Paw a Standard, Ensigned with the Arms of Cadwallader the last King of the
Britains, which is, Azure, a Cross Patouce fitchee, Or. On the left side, is an
Unicorne gorged with a Coronet, and Chained, in the like posture as the Lion,
holding with his left Foot, a Standard of the Arms of King Edgar, Sovereign of
the Island of Great Britain, who did bear, Azure, a Cross flowery betwixt four
Martletts, Or. These Ensigns were here placed to show His Majestics descent
from the Blood Royal of the Welsh and English Over these Standards, are placed
the Kings Arms within the Garter, Ensigned with a Royal Crown: Who, as he was
the happy Uniter of three Kingdoms under one Head, so was He the first of our
Monarchs that quartered the Arms of those three Kingdoms in one Shield, by the
addition thereto of the Ensignia of Scotland and Ireland, to which His Motto of
Tria in Vno juncta, seems to have respect: and His Inscription upon the
Twenty Shilling Piece of Gold, called the Unite, stamped on the one side with
His Picture, formerly used with his Style, Iacobus Dei Gra: Mag: Britannie
Fran: et Hiber: Rex. And on the other side His Arms Crowned with this word,
Faciam eos in gentem unam. His Five-Shilling Piece of Gold, called the Britain
Crown, had on one side His Picture and His Style as aforesaid, and on the other
side His Arms, with this Word, Henricus Rosas, Regna Iacobus, meaning thereby
that King Henry VII. was the Uniter of the Roses or Families of Lancaster and
York but He the Uniter of the two Kingdoms. The said Seal and Reverse are
circumscribed, IACOBUS. DEI. GRATIA. ANGLIAE. SCOTIAE. FRANCIAE. ET. HIBERNIAE.
REX. FIDEI. DEFENSOR. In which we find no mention of Magnae Britanniae, that
being a fit Title for His Coin which was current throughout His Dominions; but
this Style only applicable to the Seal under which he passed all Grants in His
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, but not of Scotland, He having a Great Seal
for that Kingdom also, in which Scotland is placed before England, and also the
Arms of Scotland in the first Quarter of the Royal Shield.

On the Reverse of this Great Seal, the King is represented on Horseback in
Armor, in His right Hand holding his Sword brandished over his Head; on his
Casque is placed his Crest, and in his left Hand he sustains His Shield, upon
which he bears, Quarterly of four pieces. The first France and England
quarterly. The second Or, a Lion rampant within a double Tressure flowery
counterflowry Gules, Scotland. The third Azure, an Harp Or, stringed Argent,
Ireland, The fourth as the first. His Horse is Caparisoned, having on his
Buttocks the Quarterings aforesaid richly embroidered. The ground of the Seal
is charged with a Rose, a Flower-de-Lis, and an Harp, all Crowned; and under
the Horse with a Greyhound Current.

The Supporters of this Kings Arms were, the English Lion Crowned on the right
side of the Escocheon, and the Scottish Unicorn on the lest, His Motto. BEATI
PACIFICI.


THis Wise and Peaceable Prince, Son of Henry Stuart Lord Darley, by Mary Queen
of Scots, only Daughter and Heir of James V. (Son of James IV. King of Scots,
and Margaret eldest Daughter of King Henry VII.) was born in the Castle of
Edenborough the 19th of June, 1566. An. 8 Eliz. whose Father being cruelly made
away by the procurement of the Earls of Murray and Morton, and his Mother by
them thrust into Prison, even after they had constrained her to marry Earl
Bothwell (the late King her Husbands Murderer) this young Prince, scarce 13
Months old, is Proclaimed, Anointed, and Crowned King by the factious Lords,
and Murray himself, her base Brother, made Regent; who, after the Queens escape
out of Prison, having forced her to relinguish the Kingdom, meets with a
violent death at Lithquo in Scotland, thereby leaving Matthew Earl of Lenox
Grandfather to the young King, first Governor, then Regent of the Kingdom.

The factious Nobility of Scotland growing potent, Anno 1573.
the Regent is forced to request aid from Queen Elizabeth in defense of the
young King, which granted, the Castle of Edenborough (then in the hands of the
Rebels) is recovered, but the adverse party setting upon him unawares, he is
obliged to render himself unto David Spense of Wormester, whose care to defend
him, was the cause that he, together with the Regent, was slain by Bell and
Caulder, after having with great industry governed the Kingdom for his
Grandchild about fourteen Months. In whose room John Ereskin Earl of Mar by
common consent of the Kings Faction being chosen Regent, he, when he had
governed thirteen Months, died of grief for the troubles he sustained in the
place; after whose death the Regency lay vacant, till by Queen Elizabeth's
procurement, James Douglas Earl of Morton was made Regent, who shortly after
confirmed the protection and keeping of the Kings Person to Alexander Ereskin
Earl of Mar, to whom that custody, during the Minority of their Kings of right
belonged, though himself a Minor also.

The Earl of Morton thus exercising the Regency, contrary to the liking of the
Scottish Lords, against whom he was obliged to make use of the assistance of
Queen Elizabeth, with much difficulty preserves himself from the designs of the
French, for depriving him of the Regency, and getting the young King into
France, pursuant to the inclinations of the Queen his Mother; but at length
growing covetous, and thereby incurring a general hate, with joint consent of
the Nobility, the administration of affairs is translated to the King himself,
then but twelve years old, or thereabout, An. 1579. Whereupon the King desires
of Queen Elizabeth the confirmation of the Treaty of Edenborough, made An.
1559. with the restitution of his Patrimony in England, viz. the Lands granted
to his Grandfather and Grandmother Matthew Earl Lenox, and his Countess.

Shortly after the Earl of Morton (late Regent) engrosses the affairs of State,
and the custody of the King; whereupon the Lords rise up in Arms, but are
appeased by the English Ambassador; yet not so but that afterward Morton was
accused by the Earl of Arran, as accessory to the murder of the Kings Father,
and thereupon beheaded, while those of his Faction seek refuge in England.

About this time Esme Stuart Lord Aubigny (Son of John Stuart, Brother of
Matthew Earl of Lenox the Kings Grandfather) having after his arrival from
France, been made Lord Chamberlain of Scotland, Earl, and then Duke of Lenox,
was in so great favor at Court that (to prevent the Duke of Guise from
employing his interest with the King in favor of that Faction) William Reuthen
Earl of Gowry, and others, endeavor to remove him and the Earl of Arran from
the King: Accordingly they invite His Majesty to the Castle of Reuthen, where
they detain him close, change his Servants, imprison Arran, and dismiss Lenox
into France, where shortly after he died. The King applies himself to Queen
Elizabeth for redress, and advice about his Marriage, when being scarce
eighteen years old, he rescues himself (in the height of his Surprizers
security) and escapes to the Castle of St Andrew; where resort to him the
Nobility with several Forces to protect him; after which he advises his
Surprizers to leave the Court, frees the Earl of Arran, and employs him to
compose the differences; but they plotting a second surprise, are abjured the
Kingdom: Notwithstanding which, the next Spring, Gowry, and others, plotting
again another Surprise, are discovered, Gowry imprisoned, condemned and
beheaded, and his Accomplices forced to fly.

Queen Elizabeth endeavoring a strict League of Amity with the King, commends
to him a Match with the King of Denmark's daughter; but Francis Russel (Son to
the Earl of Bedford) the Queens Commissioner being slain (as was supposed) by
the Earl of Arran, and Lord Fernihurst, the Queen gives way to the Earl of
Angus, Mar, and other Scottish Lords (fled into England at the conviction of
the Earl of Morton) to return into Scotland and subdue the Earl of Arran; these
being assisted by her with money, and encouraged by Maxwell lately made Earl of
Bothwell, and others in Scotland, even in the Court it self, command assistance
in the Kings Name; when being joined by about 8000 men, they approach
Edenborough, scale the Walls, and enter the place: whereupon Arran secretly
getting away, the Rebels request admittance to the King in the Castle, which
granted on Conditions, the Earls of of Mount-Rosse, Craford, and Rothsay, with
others, are delivered them, Arran remanded home, the Assaulters pardoned,
declared good Subjects, and advanced to Places of Trust, and the Treaty with
England unanimously advanced; whereupon ensued not long after a League
Offensive and Defensive between the two Crowns concluded at Barwick in July, by
Commissioners on both sides, by the Title of The League of strict Amity.

After the sentence of death was past upon the Queen his Mother, King James
sollicites Queen Elizabeth most earnestly by his Ambassador for sparing her
life; Anno 1587.
but Reasons of State exacting the contrary, he denies admittance to the
Messengers from Queen Elizabeth, for extenuating the severity of the Fact; when
being overpersuaded of the necessity of continuing Amity with that Queen, and
being assured that it was no prejudice to his Right of Succession, the like
Reasons of State prevailed to assuage his just Indignation; Anno. 1588.
which he afterward with great affection intimated to Queen Elizabeth by Sir
Robert Sidney, much to the accession of that joy which the English were then
celebrating for the great defeat of the Spanish Armada, while he wittily told
the Spanish Ambassador, That he expected no other courtesy from that King, but
( as Polyphemus to Ulysses) that he should be the last whom he would devour.
His Marriage.


Anno 1590.
And now King James (by the recommendation of the Queen of England) espouseth
Anne the Daughter of Frederick II. King of Denmark and Norway, Queen Anne did
bear for Arms, A Cross Gules, surmounted of another Argent, between four
quarters. On the first, Or, three Lions passant guardant Azure crowned proper,
and semee of Hearts Gules. Denmark. The second Gules, a Lion rampant crowned
Or, holding in his Paws, a Battel-Axe, Argent, Norway. Thirdly, Azure, three
Crowns proper, Sueden. And fourthly, Or, ten Hearts, four, three, two, and one,
Gules, and a Lion passant guardant in chief, azure, Goths. The Basse of the
whole Escocheon under the Cross is Gules, charged with a Dragon or Wiverne Or,
being the Ensign of the Vandalls. Upon the Cross is an Escocheon, likewise
quarterly of four pieces. The first Or, two Lions passant guardant Azure,
Sleswick. Secondly, Gules an In-escochoon, having a Nail fixed in every point
thereof in Triangle between as many Branches Argent, Holstein. Thirdly, Gules a
Swan Argent, Beaked Sable, and gorged with a Coronet Proper, Stormer. And,
fourthly, Azure a Cavalier armed cap-a-pee, brandishing his Sword, his Helmet
plumed, upon a Courser Argent, trapped Or, Ditzmers. Over all, upon another
Shield party per pale, Or two Bars Gules, Oldenburgh; And Azure a Cross pate
fitche on the foot, Dalmenhurst.
in the sixteenth year of her age; she being born at Scanderburgh on the 12th
of December, 1574. and married by Proxy at Cronenburgh, the 20th day of August,
An. 1590. upon which she sailing for Scotland, was by storms and stress of
weather carried to Norway; where being forced to stay by reason of contrary
Winds, the King (to accomplish his Vow of celebrating the Marriage within the
year) sailed over thither in Winter, thereby frustrating the suspected designs
of Witchcraft, for obstructing that happy Marriage. The King was now arrived to
the 36 year of his Reign, when continuing a good correspondence with Queen
Elizabeth, as the only way to secure his Succession, she a little before her
death (which happened the 24th of March, 1602.) declared him her Successor;
whereupon he was the same day at Whitehall proclaimed King of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland with great acclamations, Sir Robert Carry first
voluntarily carrying the News to the King, for which he was rewarded with the
Barony of Leppington; and the Lords of the Council seconding him by Messengers
on purpose, a few days after.

The King having confirmed the Privy Council of England, adding thereto the
Earls of Northumberland and Cumberland, the Lord Thomas and Henry Howard, Son
and Brother to the late Duke of Norfolk, who died for the cause of his Mother
Mary Queen of Scots, and having withal settled his Kingdom of Scotland, he set
forward for England the 5th of April, 1603 attended by the Duke of Lenox, the
Earl of Mar, the Lord Hume, and many other great Lords, riding that day to
Dunglass, the next to Barwick, where he rested two days, thence to Sir Robert
Caryes at Widdrington, whence by easy Journeys and Royal Entertainment (making
several Knights on his way) he came to Theobalds in Essex upon the 3d of May,
where staying some days, he chose many Scotch Lords of his Council, and made
many Gentlemen, Knights: Thus coming to London the 7th of May, he lodged at the
Charterhouse, where he created many more Knights, and before the end of the
year, conferred that Dignity on many hundreds, thereby recompencing the
sparingness of Queen Elizabeth in disposing of that Honor.

King James being now settled at London, sends the Earls of Sussex and Lincoln
with diverse other Lords and Ladies, into Scotland, to conduct his Queen and
Children thence into England, who returning the 27th of June, brought with them
Prince Henry (then nine years of age) and the Lady Elizabeth, leaving Charles
the young Duke of Albany, not yet three years old, behind them, who the year
after falling sick of a Fever, Doctor Atkins being sent unto him, not only in
six weeks cured him of his Distemper, but brought him safe in October to
Windsor; for which the King most liberally rewarded him.

Diverse new Lords being created this year 1603. and several Ambassadors from
Foreign Princes sent to congratulate His Majesty's happy arrival to the Crown,
received, a strange kind of Treason was discovered for the surprising His
Majesty and Council, and setting up the Lady Arbella, etc. for which the Lords
Cobham and Gray, Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir Griffith Markham, and others, were
apprehended in July, and committed to the Tower, and in November after (the
Plague raging in London) arraigned at Winchester, and condemned, Watson and
Clerk two Priests, executed, and George Brook Brother to the Lord Cobham
beheaded.

After which was solemnized the Coronation of the King and Queen (preceeded by
diverse Promotions to Titles of Honor, and performed with all the Magnificence
and Ancient Rights of the English Kings) at Westminster, the 25th of July, Anno
1603. Their Coronotion.
being the Feast of St. James, An. 1603. by the hands of John Whitgift,
Archbishop of Canterbury; where the Antique Regal Chair of Inthronization did
happily receive, with the Person of His Majesty, the full accomplishment of
that Prophetical Prediction of this His coming to the Crown of England: And the
5th of August following, being Friday, the Kings deliverance from Gowries
Conspiracy, that day three years before, was publicly solemnized.

The King keeping the Feast of St. George at Greenwich, Anno 1604.
made the Duke Vlrick Brother to the Queen, and the Earl of Northampton,
Knights of the Garter; Robert Cecil Lord Cranburn, Earl of Salisbury; Philip
Herbert, Earl of Montgomery; with diverse other Barons; at which time one
Richard Hadock pretending to Preach in his sleep, declaimed much against the
Pope, the Cross in Baptism, and the last Canons of the Church of England; but
being discovered, and confessing the Imposture to the King, he was graciously
pardoned.

A Parliament now sitting at Westminster, the Never to be forgotten Powder Plot
was happily discovered, Anno 1605.
and the design of blowing up the King and the House of Lords with Gunpowder,
prevented; a Letter to the Lord Mount-eagle (advising him to absent himself
from that Session) giving light to the Conspiracy; when the King ordering a
search to be made in those Cellars, found 36 Barrels of Gunpowder, deposited
there by the Confederacy of Robert Catesby and others, while Catesby himself,
with Thomas Percy, and one Winter, about the appointed time that the Blow
should have been given, made show of a Hunting Match near Dunchurch in
Warwickshire, where they expected some people would have joined with them,
with design, as was said, of surprising the Lady Elizabeth, then at the Lord
Harringtons House in that County, and the Duke of York, if they could get him:
But the Plot being known, they are opposed on every side, when flying to Mr.
Littletons in Worcestershire, the two first were there slain, Winter taken and
brought to London, and there with another of his name, Guido Faux, Robert
Keys, Thomas Bates, Sir Everard Digby, John Grant, and others, arraigned,
condemned, and deservedly drawn, hanged, and quartered, unpitied of all; only
Sir Everard, as an honest and well accomplished person, and one that was
unwittingly drawn in, was generally lamented, while an universal joy was
expressed, even by the Ambassadors of the King of Spain, the Archduke, and the
other Foreign Prince, for so great a Deliverance. Hereupon the Lord Mount-Eagle
is nobly rewarded, and the day of the discovery being the 5th of November, for
ever set apart for a Memorial of Thanksgiving.

On the 17th of July, Anno 1606.
Christian King of Denmark, Brother to Queen Anne, with eight ships, came to an
Anchor in the River of Thames over against Gravesend, where he was met the next
day by King James and Prince Henry, attended with many Lords, who conducted him
through London to Somerset House in the Strand. There he was most Royally
entertained till the 12th of August, at which time he departed with equal
State; and the 23d of September following Francis Prince of Vaudemont, third
Son to the Duke of Lorrain, arrived at London, attended by many Lords and
Gentlemen of his own Country; who in like manner were most nobly received at
Hampton Court, where they feasted fourteen days, and then returned.

About the middle of May this year, Anno 1607.
happened an Insurrection in Northamptonshire, and the Counties adjacent, by
the common People, under the Conduct of one John Reynolds, commonly called
Captain Pouch, concerning Enclosures; but they were soon suppressed by the Earls
of Huntington and Exceter, and their Leader made an example. The April
following George Jervis, and in June after Thomas Garnet, Anno 1608.
were executed at Tyburn as Seminary Priests.

And now again, Hugh Earl of Tir-Oen (although the King had been graciously
pleased not long before to pardon him upon submission) being fled beyond Sea
with the Earl of Tirconel, and others, sollicites aid from Foreign Princes, in
order to a new Rebellion, offering the Kingdom of Ireland to the Pope for his
assistance.

This year the new Exchange in the Strand was finished by Robert Earl of
Salisbury, Anno 1609.
and being furnished the King and Queen were invited thither the 11th of April,
where His Majesty gave it the Name of Britains Burse; while His Attendants were
furnished with all things gratis. The same year the King had aid of His Subjects
of England, according to an Ancient Custom, for making His eldest Son Prince
Henry Knight, Anno 1610.
then almost sixteen years of age, who in the year following was Created Prince
of Wales.

This being the ninth year of His Majesty's Reign, Anno 1611. Baronets
instituted.
He instituted a new Hereditary Title of Honor, inferior to a Baron, but
superior to a Knight, styled a Baronet, to be conferred by Patent under the
Great Seal, the number whereof, according to that Institution, was not to
exceed 200, nor to be completed when any of them should be extinct for want of
Heirs Male. The Persons created were to be Gentlemen of three descents at the
least, to have 1000 l. per annum in present possession and to give 1000 l. in
Money toward the Plantation of the Province of Vlster in Ireland, Or maintain
30 foot Soldiers at the rate of 8 d. per diem apiece in Ireland, for three
years, whereof to advance the first year at the passing of the Patent.
for which they were to bear in their own Coat an Augmentation of the Arms of
Vlster, viz. Argent, a sinister Hand couped, Gules: an Honor at this day very
numerous, contrary to the original Institution, whereof nothing seems to have
been observed, but only the Precedence and Augmentation.

One Robert Carr a Gentleman of Scotland in favor with the King, (having been
on Easter Monday, Anno 1613.
An. 1611. created Viscount Rochester, and the 22 of April 1612. sworn of the
Privy Council) was the 4th of November this year created Earl of Somerset, and
the 10th of July following made Lord Chamberlain; when marrying the Countess of
Essex, soon after her divorce from that Earl, he by her means grew so incensed
against Sir Thomas Overbury, for dissuading and inveighing against the Match,
that he got him committed to the Tower, and there poisoned; for which Sir
Gervais Elwaies the Lieutenant, with four others, were put to death; the Earl
and his Lady condemned, but their lives spared, yet so, as never to approach
the Court, or see the Kings Face. Thus room being made for a new Favorite, Mr.
George Villers fourth Son of Sir George Villers of Brokesby in Leicestershire,
succeeds him, whom the King first Knighted, making him a Gentleman of the
Bedchamber, then Baron of Whaddon, Viscount Villers, and Master of the Horse;
afterward Earl and Marquis of Buckingham, and Lord Admiral, and lastly Duke of
Buckingham; withal creating his Mother, Countess of Buckingham; his Sisters
Husband, Earl of Denbigh; and his two Brothers, one Viscount Purbeck, the other
Earl of Anglesey. About which time the Corpse of Queen Mary the Kings Mother,
was removed from Peterborough to Westminster, and there interred under a
sumptuous Tomb of His Majesty's erection.

Sir Robert Shirley, third Son of Sir Thomas Shirley of Wiston in Sussex Knight.
having 16 years before betaken himself to Travel, and served many Christian
Princes, especially Rodolphus the Roman Emperor, by whom he was made Earl of
the Empire, and the last ten years in Persia, where being General of the
Artillery, he had the honor to marry a Sister to one of those Queens, came now
in Embassy from that Emperor to King James, to signify the Sophies great
affection to His Majesty, with a tender of free Trade throughout all his
Dominions; when staying here about a Twelvemonth, his Lady was delivered of a
son, unto whom the Queen was Godmother, and Prince Henry Godfather; which
leaving in England, his self and Lady returned into Persia.

This year being the tenth of King James, Anno 1612.
Frederick Count Palatine of the Rhine, landed at Gravesend the sixteenth of
October, and with great State was conducted to Whitehall, where the Marriage
formerly treated of between him and the Princess Elizabeth was now on St.
Valentines day, (the 14th of February) happily consummated in the Chapel at
Whitehall. The Feast being sumptuously kept at Essex house, till the 10th of
April, when taking leave of their Majesty's, he embarked with his Princess for
Holland, and so to Heydelberg. But these joyful Nuptials were sadly preceded by
the death of the most hopeful Prince Henry.

This year Charles Duke of York was in his Brother stead created Prince of
Wales, Anno 1614.
for which great Triumphs were made at London and Ludlow: In July, Christian
King of Denmark made the Queen his Sister a second Visit in England; and in
1615. was finished that great Expensive Undertaking of Sir Hugh Midleton in
conveying the New River Water from Chadwell and Anwell near Ware in
Hertfordshire, to the City of London.

King James taking his Progress into Scotland, Anon 1616. Her death.
stayed there six Months, when having settled the Affairs of that Kingdom, I. 4.
p. 5. in. Coll. Arm.
he returned for England the 15th of September.

On Tuesday the 2d day of March, about two of the Clock in the morning, An.
Dom, 16.8. deceased Anne Queen of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, at
the Kings Palace of Hampton Court, from whence her Corpse was brought by Barge
to Denmark (commonly called Somerset) House, and there set forth with all the
State and Magnificence of so great a Queen, where it remained till the 13th day
of May, being Thursday, in the year, 1619, and was then conveyed in a Solemn
Proceeding and Attendance of very many of the Nobility and Gentry in Mourning,
to the Abbey of St. Peter at Westminster, where all the Funeral Ceremonies were
performed, and then interred in the Chapel of King Henry VII. but no Monument
is yet erected to her Memory, only on a Tablature hanging on the Wall on the
North-side thereof, these Verses present themselves to your view.

Ad Potentissimum Serenissimae ANNAE maritum,
Jacobum, Dei Gratia Magnae Britanniae, Franciae,
et Hiberniae Regem, Fidei Defensorem, etc.
Annus et Anna in se redit, hic novus, illa perennis:
Cujus vir Pater et Frater Rex, Regia proles,
In coelo eternos Regina est Anna per annos
Floreat illa suis in prole aeterna Britannis
Inque suo vigeat faeliciter Anna Jacobo.
Inclyte Rex Britonum veniam da vera loquenti,
Jacobus caret Anna, et non caret Anna Jacobo
Maxim Rex Regum Regum solare Jacobum.
Obiit in Domino, Anno Domini, 1618. quarto Nonarum Martij annos nata 44.
menses 4. et dies 18.

About this time Sir Walter Raleigh, long before condemned, and even then a
prisoner in the Tower, having procured liberty to go to the West Indies, in
quest of a Golden Mine, happened to fall upon a Town of the Spaniards, called St.
Tome, which (contrary to his Engagement) he pillaged and burnt; for which, at
his return he was so severely prosecuted by Count Gundamore, the Spanish
Ambassador here, that this gallant Man, after many great Services against the
Spaniard, and fourteen years reprieve, was at last on a sudden, beheaded in the
Parliament Yard.

The Count Palatine (King James' Son-in-Law) being now (by Election) King of
Bohemia, Anno 1621.
was not only driven out of that Kingdom by the Emperor, but even out of the
Palatinate it self; for the recovery of which King James consulting with Count
Gondamore, is persuaded to a Match between the Infanta of Spain, and Prince
Charles; accordingly the Prince himself, accompanied with the Marquis
(afterward Duke) of Buckingham, takes his journey thither in February, where,
though he was royally entertained the space of 8 Months, yet by reason of some
difference between the Duke of Buckingham and the Count Olivares, or the wonted
delays, or some other design of the Spaniards, nothing being concluded, the
King sent for him home; when, at his return, a consultation is held for the
recovering the Palatinate by force, and marrying the Prince to a Daughter of
France, whom he privately had seen in that Court, in his journey to Spain.

Thus stood affair, His death. Anno 1625.
when King james having been afflicted with an Ague, l. 4. p. 32. in Coll. Arm.
removed from his Palace at Whitehall to Theobalds, where his sickness
increasing vehemently upon him, after a months languishing, he departed this
mortal life upon Sunday, between the hours of 11 and 12 in the forenoon, the
27th of March, 1625. after he had reigned over this Kingdom 22 years, and 3
days, and over the Kingdom of Scotland 59 years, 3 Months, and 12 days, being
aged about sixty years. His Body for the greater State, was by Torch Light,
conveyed from Theobalds to Denmark House, where having rested from the 23d of
April to the 7th day of May; It was then carried to Westminster Abbey to a
stately Hearse, with greater solemnity, but with greater lamentation; and there
interred in the Chapel of King Henry VII. King Charles his Son and Successor
being chief Mourner. Upon whose Coffin, on a Plate of Copper gilt, was engraven
this Memorial.

Depositum Invictissimi Princepis Jacobi primi Magnae Britanniae, Franciae, and
Hiberniae Regis, qui rerum apud Scotos, annos 59. menses 3, dies 12. Et apud
Anglos, annos 22. et dies 3, pacifice, ac faeliciter potitus, tandem in domino
obdormivit, 27. die Martij, anno a Christo nato, 1625, Aetatis vero suae, 60.
Children of JAMES King of Great Britain, by Queen ANNE of Denmark his Wife.
Prince Henry did bear the Royal Arms, with a Label of three points Argent. His
Hearse set up in the Abbey of Westminster, was adorned with the Ensigns of his
Principality of Wales, Dukedom of Cornwall, and Earldom of Chester, and with
several Scroles, containing the words, FAX MENTIS HONESTAE, GLORIA, and ME
JUVAT IRE PER ALTUM, but chiefly with his Arms crowned within the Garter. H. P.
under a Coronet, for Henricus Princeps: and the three Feathers, the Heredirary
Badge of the Princes of Wales.
19. HENRY FREDERICK STVART, Tho. Mil. p. 251.
Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall and Rothsay, and Earl of Chester, eldest Son
of King James, was born on Tuesday the 19th of February, 1593. in the thirty
sixth year of Queen Elizabeth, who by her Proxy Robert Earl of Sussex, was his
Godmother.

At nine years of age, An. 1603, he, with the Queen his Mother and the Lady
Elizabeth his Sister were brought into England, arriving at York the 11th of
June, and at Easton in Northamptonshire the 27th, where they were met by the
King, and thence conducted to London.

On the 2d of July (the King then keeping the Feast of St. George at Windsor)
he was Installed Knight of the Garter: and An. 1609. he was made Knight; for
which the King had Aid of his Subjects throughout England, and the Prince to
show his worthiness of it, performed notable Achievements at Barriers, with
great Skill and Courage, being then scarce sixteen years of age: and the year
after ( viz. the 30th of May, 1610. 8 Jac. R.) being then seventeen years old,
he was created Prince of Wales with great solemnity, Garter King of Arms
bearing the Letters Patent, the Earl of Sussex, the Purple Robes; the Earl of
Huntington, his Train; the Earl of Cumberland, the Sword; the Earl of Rutland,
the Ring; the Earl of Derby, the Rod; and the Earl of Shrewsbury, the Cap and
Coronet; the Earls of Nottingham and Northampton supporting the Prince, in his
Surcoat only, and bareheaded, attended by 25 Knights of the Bath, who kneeling
before the King whilst the Letters Patents were read by the Earl of Salisbury;
at the words accustomed, the King invested him with the Robes, Sword, Cap, and
Coronet, Rod, and Ring, and then kissing him on the cheek, the Ceremony ended.
After which he kept his Court apart, Sir Thomas Chaloner his Governor, being
made his Lord Chamberlain, Sir Edward Philips his Chancellor; and all other
Officers belonging to a Princes Court.

Thus being initiated into Royalty, and by his demeanor seeming like a King
even whilst he was a Prince only, he fell sick of a malignant raging Fever,
which at the age of eighteen years, eight months, and seventeen days, deprived
monument Illustrissimo Domino GILBERTO Comits de CLARE et Baroni de Houghton.
Cenotaphij hanc HENRICI Principis WALLIAE (in memoriam Iohannis Holles tunc
Equitis aurati postea Comitis de Clare Aui sui et Hospitij Principis ejusdem
Contrarotulatoris) Figuram. H.D.F.S.

SPES ADVVA AVDACE HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE HONI
SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE HONI
SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE EAX (...) HONESTAE GLORIA HONI
SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE I
vvat^re per altum HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE Guva^^^^ per altum HONI SOIT QVI
MAL Y PENSE HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE him of life
upon the 6th day of November, between the hours of seven and eight in the
evening, An. 1612. at St. James's House near Charing Cross; from whence his
Corpse upon the 7th of December next following, was drawn in a Chariot to the
Abbey of Westminster, and there interred in the Vault with Mary Queen of Scots
his Grandmother, being wrapped in Lead according to the proportion of his Body.
His Heart is enclosed in Lead upon his Breast in the form thereof, under which
are the Figures 1612 and under that again the Princes Device and Motto, with a
Rose and a Thistle, subscribed with the Letters H. P. all embossed. Other
Memorial he has none; therefore to supply the place of a Tomb, I have in the
preceding page, exhibited the Figure of his Hearse set up at his Funeral in the
said Abbey.

This Prince being infinitely beloved of the people, and one that had given
great hope of proving an Heroic Prince, it caused suspicion in many that his
death was not without violence offered to nature. Some said by Bunches of
Grapes given him to eat; some by Gloves of a poisoned Perfume, presented him.
But whatsoever was the cause, his death would have given a great blow to the
happiness of this Kingdom, had there not been another Prince left of a milder
spirit perhaps, but so accomplished with all excellent Endowments, that there
could be no great want of Prince Henry, so long as there was left Prince
Charles.

19. ROBERT STVART, second Son of King James and Queen Anne of Denmark, was
born and died very young in Scotland.

19. CHARLES STVART, Duke of York and Albany, third Son of King James and Queen
Anne, was created Prince of Wales, after the death of his elder Brother Prince
Henry, and succeeded his Father in the Monarchy of Great Britain, as in the
following Chapter.

19. ELIZABETH STVART, Thomas Milles, p. 241.
Queen of Bohemia, and Princess Palatine of the Rhine, Federick King of Bohemia
did bear for Arms, Quarterly, 1. Sable a Lion rampant Or, crowned Gules, the
Palatinate. 2. Bendy Lozengy argent and azure, ^avaria. The third as the
second, the fourth as the first. Over all, an Inescocheon, Gules, charged with
a Mound and Cross, Or. Which is the Insignia of the Electorate. Impaling, 1.
France and England quarterly. 2. Scotland 3. Ireland, and 4. France and England
quarterly as before. Which were the Arms of Elizabeth of England his Wife.
eldest Daughter of King James, born in Scotland upon the 19th day of August,
An. 1596. was affianced to Frederick V. of the name Count Palatine of the
Rhine, Duke of Bavaria, Silesia, etc. Elector, Cup Bearer, Penes Edw. Walker
Mil. Gart. princ. Regem. Arm. Cerem. 2. fol. 143.
and High Steward of the Empire, born An. 1596. Who landing at Gravesend upon
the 16th day of October, An. 1612. in the tenth year of King James, was with
great State conducted to Whitehall, and not long after (with Grave Maurice)
installed Knight of the Garter at Windsor; which Ceremony was succeeded by the
Consummation of his Marriage on St. Valentines day ( viz. the 14th of February)
in the Chapel of Whitehall aforesaid. The Bride being led to Church by two
Batchelors, her Brother Prince Charles and the Earl of Northampton Lord Privy
Seal. She was attired all in white, having a rich Crown of Gold upon her Head,
her Hair hanging down at length curiously beset with Pearls and Precious
Stones, her Train supported by twelve young Ladies in white Garments. The King
gave her in Marriage, the Archbishop of Canterbury married them, and the Bishop
of Bath and Wells Preached the Bridal Sermon. Which ended, she was led home by
two married Men, the Duke of Lenox and the Earl of Nottingham Lord Admiral.
These Nuptials were celebrated with stately Masks. After which the Lord Mayor
and Aldermen gave the Bride a Chain of Oriental Pearl, valued at two thousand
Pounds. And now, when all things had been performed for honoring their
Marriage, on the 10th of April the Count Palatine and the Princess Elizabeth
took their leave of the King and Queen at Rochester, and there embarking, on
the 29th of the same Month they arrived at Flushing; and from thence journied
to Heydelberg, being received in all places where they passed with great State
and Magnificence.

The Count Palatine being thus strengthened by alliance with the King of Great
Britain, was though a fit person to be King of Bohemia, and accordingly was
elected by the Estates of that Kingdom: but he was no sooner invested in the
Crown, than that the Emperor with great Forces assaulted him in Prague, and not
only drove him with his Wife and Children from thence, but took from him also
his own Patrimony, the Palatinate, so as though now a King, he was fain to fly
to the States of the Low Countries for a place of Residence.

King James, although he had never given his consent to the Palsgraves taking
upon him the Government of that Kingdom, as foreseeing in his great Judgment
what the event would be, yet in this distress, he could not forbear to take
care of the Queen his Daughter; and thereupon sent his Ambassador Sir Richard
Weston to the Emperor, to solicit the restoration of the Palatinate; but
returning without success, King James had then a Conference with Count
Gundomar, the King of Spains Legier in England, what course might be taken
therein; who made him answer, there could be no better way than to make a
Marriage between his Son the Prince of Wales, and the Infanta of Spain, the
effecting of which he said would be easy, if the Prince might have leave to
make a Journey into Spain, which after much ado was consented unto. Upon which
Prince Charles, with the Marquis of Buckingham, and others, making a Journey
thither (by the way of France) is magnificently received; but after eight
months stay in Spain, by the delay of the Spaniard rendered ineffectual: so that
this Exiled Prince the King of Bohemia, being dispossessed of his Hereditary
Estate, died of a Fever in Mentz on the 29th of November, 1632. (a Prince so
sweetly conditioned, Galliazo Gualdo lib. 5. p. 147 Englished by the Earl of
Monmouth
as that he was universally beloved by all Protestants) leaving his Queen a
Widow, who continued at the Hague in Holland till the Restoration of her
Nephew King Charles II. to His Monarchy of Great Britain; who thereupon sent
for her into England, Busellinus pars prima, in Genealogica Germaniae notitia,
p. 45.
where she arrived at London upon the 17th day of May, 1661. and continuing
till the 8th of February at the House of the Earl of Craven in Drury Lane (a
Noble Man very assistant to her in the time of her greatest afflictions) and
afterward at Leicester House in the Parish of St. Martin in the Fields
(contemplating the great mercy of God in bringing her Nephew to his rightful
Throne, which she declared was the only desire of her heart) there departed
this mortal life upon Thursday the 13th of February, in the same year, 1661.
and upon Monday following early in the morning, was conveyed to Somerset House,
from whence her Corpse in the evening was carried by Barge to the Abbey of
Westminster, being there accompanied to her Sepulcher by Prince Rupert her Son,
and many of the Nobility, and privately interred in the same Vault in King
Henry VII. his Chapel with Prince Henry her eldest Brother. Upon her Majesty's
Coffin is fastened a Plate of Silver gilt, on which the following Inscription is
engraven, viz.

Depositum

Serenissimae et Potentissimae Principissae Elizabethae
Reginae Bohemiae, relictae Erederici nuper Regis
Bohemiae, Archidapiferi, et Principis Electoris
Sacri Romani Imperii, et filiae unicae Jacobi,
Sororis Caroli primi, et Amitae Caroli ejus nominis
secundi, Magnae Britanniae, Franciae, et Hiberniae
Regum; Quae Aedibus Comitis Leicestriae die Jovis
decimo tertio Februarii pijssime in Domino obdormivit;
Anno a Christo nato 1661. Aetatis suae Sexagessimo sexto.
She left Issue by Frederick King of Bohemia her Husband, these Children
following, viz.
20. Frederick Henry, eldest Son, Count Palatine of the Rhine, and Duke of
Bavaria, etc. born upon the first of January, An. 1614, was crowned King of
Bohemia by those of his Faction, and drowned in Haerlem Mere the 7th of January
in the year 1629. and fifteenth of his age.

20. Charles Lodowick, Count Palatine of the Rhine, Ibid. p. 45.
Duke of Bavaria, Quarterly, Sable a Lion rampant Or, crowned Gules, and
Lozengy in Bend, Argent and Azure, over all, on an Escocheon, Gules, a Mound
with a Cross thereon Or. Impaling, Azure, a Lion barruly Argent and Gules,
which is Hellen.
Elector and Great Steward of the Empire, second Son of Frederick King of
Bohemia, born at Heydelberg upon the 12/22 day of December, Anno 1617. was
commonly called the Palsgrave from the High Dutch Psalizgraff, Palatij Comes.
At the age of about four years, he was conveyed thence into the Countries of
Wirtenberg and Brandenburg, then into Holland, where at the Hague and the
University of Leyden, he was educated in a princely manner. At eighteen years
of age came into England, and was created Knight of the Garter. He fought a
Battle at Vlota in Westphalia about two years after: and An. 1637. passing
privately through France to take possession of Brisack, intended to be
delivered up to him by the Duke of Saxen Weymar, together with the command of
his Army, he was by Cardinal Richlieu discovered at Moulins, and thence sent
back prisoner to Bois de Vincennes; whence, after twenty three weeks
imprisonment, he was by the Mediation of the King of England, Charles I. his
Uncle, set at liberty. In the year 1643. he came again into England, and with
the Kings secret consent (because the King could not continue unto him the
wonted Pension, whilst the Rebels possessed the greatest part of His Majesty's
Revenues) made his addresses to, and abode with the disloyal part of the Lords
and Commons at Westminster, where he continued until the Murder of the said
King, and the restitution of the Lower Palatinate, according to the famous
Treaty at Munster, An. 1648. by which he was constreined to quit all his Right
to the Upper Palatinate, and except of an Eighth Electorship, at a juncture of
time when the King of England (had he not been engaged at home by an impious
Rebellion) had been the most considerable of all other at that Treaty, and this
Prince his Nephew would have had the greatest advantages there. In the year
1650. he took to Wife Charlote Daughter of William V. Landgrave of Hessen (and
of Elizabeth Emilia of Hanaw) at Cassel, by which Lady he has Issue Charles,
born the 31 of March, 1651. at Heidelberg; to whom is lately married (...)
Sister of Christian V. King of Denmark. Frederick his second Son, born the 17th
of May, 1653. And a Daughter called Charlote, who is the second Wife of Philip
(only Brother of Lewis XIV. the French King) Duke of Orleans, Valois, and
Chartres, Earl of Blois and Mountargys.

20. Rupert Count Palatine of the Rhine, Quarterly, Sable a Lion rampant Or,
crowned Gules, and Bendy Lozengy, Argent and Arure.
Duke of Bavaria and Cumberland, Bucellinus pars prima, in Genealogica
Germanniae notitia, p. 45.
Earl of Holderness, and Knight of the Garter, third Son, born at Prague the
17th of December, 1619. (not long before that unfortunate Battle there fought,
whereby not only all Bohemia was lost, but the Palatine Family for almost
thirty years outed of all their Possessions in Germany.) He had not exceeded
the 13 year of his age, when with the then Prince of of Orange, he marched to
the Siege of Rhineberg, and afterward in England was created Knight of the
Garter. At the age of eighteen, he commanded a Regiment of Horse in the German
Wars, and in the Battle of Vlota, 1638. being taken by the Imperialists under
the command of Count Hatzfield, he continued a Prisoner above three years. In
1642. returning into England, he was made General of the Horse to King Charles
I. his Uncle, and had his victorious Sword crowned with several Successes, and
his Person rewarded with the Dignities of Earl of Holderness, and also Duke of
Cumberland, upon the extinction of the Male Line of the Cliffords, An. 1643.
But at last the Kings Forces at Land being totally defeated, he transported
himself into France, and was afterward made Admiral of such Ships of War as
submitted to His present Majesty King Charles II. to whom, after diverse
disasters at Sea, and wonderful preservations, he returned to Paris, An. 1652.
where, and in Germany at the Emperors Court, and at Heydelberg, he passed his
time in Princely Studies and Exercises, till the happy Restoration of His
Majesty now Reigning. After which, returning again into England, he was made a
Privy Councellor in the year 1662. Since which time, in several Naval
Expeditions against the States of the United Provinces, he has given many
demonstrations of his Conduct and wonted Courage. His Highness is now Constable
of His Majesty's Royal Castle of Windsor: and after all the fatigues of War,
and signal Services to this Crown, enjoys the fruit of his Labors, viz. the
favor of his King, the love of his Country, and a happy Peace.

20. Maurice, Count Palatine of the Rhine, Quarterly, Sable a Lion rampart Or,
crowned Gules, and Bendy Lozengy, Argent and Azure.
Duke of Bavaria, and Knight of the Garter, fourth Son of Frederick King of
Bohemia, and Queen Elizabeth of England, born the 17th day of December, 1620.
came over into England with his Brother Prince Rupert in September, An. 1642.
where in the War against the Rebellious Subjects of his Uncle King Charles I.
he behaved himself with much Valor and Conduct, particularly before the City of
Exeter, which being closely besieged by him, was surrendered upon Articles on
the 3d day of September, An. 1643. Several other signal Services he performed
in the time of his being in England, till the Kings Forces being totally
defeated, he betook himself to Sea, and commanding some Ships for the West
Indies, perished by Shipwreck in a Hurrycane not far from the Caribby Islands,
An. (...)

20. Edward, Quarterly Sable a Lion rampant Or, crowned Gules, and Bendy
Lozengy. Argent and Azure, Impaling Gonzaga.
Count Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Bavaria, Les Grandeurs de la Maison de
France p. 142.
and Knight of the Garter, fifth Son, born at the Hague, Oct. 6. An. 1624. He
took to Wife Anne de Gonzaga de Cleves, Daughter and Coheir to the last Duke of
Nevers in France (Sister to the Queen of Poland, and Aunt to the Empress Mary
de Gonzaga) and by her had Issue three Daughters, viz. Anne de Bavaria, married
to Henry Julius de Bourbon Duke of d'Anghien, Prince of the Blood, Pee^, and
High Steward of France, eldest Son of the Prince of Conde, and has Issue N. de
Bourbon, born in February, An. 1666. Benedicta of Bavaria, second Daughter of
Prince Edward was married at Hanouer to John Frederick Prince of Hanouer Duke
of Brunswick and Lunenburgh. N. of Bavaria, third Daughter.

20. Philip, Count Palatine of the Rhine, and Duke of Bavaria, the sixth Son of
Frederick King of Bohemia, was born at the Hague on the 16/26 day of September,
in the year, 1627. He did bear the like Armd as did his Brother Prince Edward.
He fell in the Battle near St. Stephens, the 15th day of December, 1650.

20. Gustavus, Count Palatine, the seventh and youngest Son, was born at the
Hague the 14th day of January, 1632. and died in January, 1641.

20. Elizabeth, She does bear on a Lozenge, the Palatinate, and Bavaria,
quarterly.
Princess Palatine, eldest Daughter of Frederick V. Count Palatine of the
Rhine, (and Elizabeth only Daughter living of King James, was born the 26th of
December, An. 1618. She is now living in Germany unmarried, being Abbess of
Hervorden, but of the Protestant Religion.

20. Lovisa Hollandina, On a Lozenge, the Arms of the Palatinate, and Bavaria,
quarterly.
Princess Palatine, second Daughter of Frederick King of Bohemia and Elizabeth
of England, was bred up at the Hague by her Mother in the Religion of the
Church of England; at length embracing the Romish Religion, is Lady Abbess of
Maubuisson at Ponthoise, not far from Paris.

20. Henrietta, Princess Palatine, third Daughter of Frederick King of Bohemia
and Elizabeth of England, died upon the 18th of September, An. 1651. She was
the Wife of N. Prince of Transylvania.

20. Charlote, Princess Palatine, fourth Daughter, born Anno 1628.

20. Sophia, On a Lozenge quarterly, the Palatinate and Bavaria, impapaled by
Brunswick, viz. Gules two Lions passant guardant Or, armed and langued Azure.
Princess Palatine, fifth and youngest Daughter, born at the Hague the 13th of
October, An. 1630. And in the year 1658. wedded to Ernest Auguste Duke of
Brunswick and Lunenburgh, Bishop of Osnaburgh and Free Prince of Germany, Heir
to the Duchy of Brunswick; by whom she has three Sons and a Daughter.

Of these three Princesses, Elizabeth, Lovisa, and Sophia, it is said, That the
first is the most Learned, the second the greatest Artist, and the last one of
the most accomplished Ladies in Europe

19. MARGARET STVART, second Daughter of King James VI. and Queen Anne of
Denmark, was born in Scotland upon the 24th day of December, 1598. and died
young in that Kingdom.

19. MARY STVART, She did bear a Lozenge, Quarterly of four, on the first
France and England quarterly. On the second, Scotland. The third Ireland; and
the fourth as the first. Which Arms are carved on the sides of her Tomb.
third Daughter of King James, but first born Daughter in England, Penes Ed.
Walker militem prim. Regem Arm. Ceremony 2. fol. 2.
came into this World at Greenwich, upon the (...) day of March, An. 1605. and
was there Baptized, Vlrick Duke of Holstein being Godfather, and the Lady
Arabella, and Countess of Northumberland Godmothers. S^e departed out of this
transitory life aged two years, five months, and eight days, at Stanwell, in
the House of the Lord Knyvet (unto whose Ladies charge she monuments Nobili
Erminae Elizabethae relictae Thomae Whitemore de Apley in Agro Salopiensi
Baronetti, haec Th^^^dorum serenissimi nuper Iacobi Regis Insantularum iconia
humile. D.D.D.F:S.

R Gaywood fecit
was committed) upon the 16th day of December, 1607. The 22d day of the same
Month, her Body was brought by Coach to the Dean of Westminster's House, and
the next day carried privately through the Cloisters unto King Henry the
Sevenths Chapel, accompanied with many Earls, Barons, and Ladies; and after a
Sermon Preached by Mr. Leach, was interred in a Vault on the South Side the
Lady Sophia her younger Sister, where the King her Father erected a Monument to
her memory, exhibited in the precedent page, at the head whereof you may read
this Inscription.

MARIA FILIA JACOBI REGIS MAGNAE BRITANNIAE, FRANCIAE, ET HIBERNIAE, ET ANNAE
REGINAE, PRIMAEVA INFANTIA IN COELUM RECEPTA, MIHI GAUDIUMNVENI, PARENTIBUS
DESIDERIUM RELIQUI, DIE XVI. DECEMBRIS CD DC VII. CONGRATULANTES CONDOLETE
VIXIT ANNOS II. MENSES V. DIES VIII. 19. SOPHIA STVART, fourth and youngest
Daughter of King James, Ibid, fol. 92.
was born at Greenwich upon Sunday morning the 21 of June, 1606. and was
Baptized privately the Tuesday following, At the head of her Cradle Monument
are Arms carved on a Lorenge.
and that night ended her life. Upon Thursday following the Body was conveyed
by Barge to the Parliament Stairs, accompanied with several of the Nobility,
Lords, and Ladies, and the Office of Arms, whence proceeding to the South-East
door of the Abbey of Westmnister, they were there met by the Dean and Prebends,
with the Choire; so they passed into King Henry the Seventh's Chapel, where
there was an Antiphon sung with the Organ; in the mean time the Body was
interred in a Vault at the East end of the Tomb then erecting for Queen
Elizabeth (the Lady Arabella supplying the place of Principal Mourner.) The
Tomb of this Lady Sophia is built in the exact form of a Cradle, in which her
Effigies lies, done to the life, and at the head are fixed her Arms in a
Lozenge, with a Memorial subscribed in these words:

SOPHIA ROSULA REGIA PRAEPROPERO FATO DECERPTA, ET JACOBO MAGNAE BRITANNIAE,
FRANCIAE ET HIBERNIAE, REGI, ANNAE Q: REGINAE, PARENTIBUS EREPTA, UT IN CHRISTI
ROSARIO REFLORESCAT: HIC SITA EST. JUNII XXIII. REGNI I.R. IIII. M. DC. VI.
Anno 1625. March 27.
19. CHARLES I. KING of GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE, and IRELAND, DEFENDER of the
FAITH, etc.
Surnamed The MARTYR
CHAP. II.
I have exhibited the Figures of two Seals of King Charles I. in the 515 and
516 pages of this seventh Book; the first of which bears date in the year 1627.
upon which the King is represented sitting on His Throne in Royal Robes, the
Crown on His Head, the Collar of the Order about His Shoulders, the Scepter in
His Right Hand, and the Mound in His Left. Over His Head is a Compartment
containing the Royal Arms, which are Quarterly; the first, France and England
quarterly; 2ly Scotland. 3ly Ireland, the fourth as the first. On the right
side His Throne, is the Standard of St. George, viz. Argent a Cross Gules,
supported by a Lion of England Crowned. On the left side is the Standard of St.
Andrew, being Azure a Saltir Argent, upheld by the Unicorn of Scotland, gorged
with a Coronet and Chained. On the Counter-Seal he is figured on Horseback
armed Cap-a-pee, His Casque adorned with Plumes; in His right Hand He holds a
Sword mounted over His Head, and on His left Arm hangs His Shield; His Horse
has neither Caparison nor Trappings but a rich Embroidered Saddle; by His
Horse side is figured a Grayhound, current, and under the Belly of His Horse is
represented a Prospect of the City of London. This Seal is circumscribred,
CAROLUS. DEI. GRATIA. ANGLIAE SCOTIAE. FRANCIAE ET. HIBERNIAE. REX. FIDEI.
DEFENSOR. 1627. and the same on the Reverse, excepting the Figures, 1627. His
second Great Seal differs from the former, in the fashion of the Inauguration
Chair, the Arms of which are supported by two Eagles; and the Canopy over the
Kings Head, the Curtains whereof, with the Royal Achievement, are held up by
two Angels. On the Counter Seal He is on Horseback as before, excepting the
Shield on His left Arm, which is placed behind him Ensigned with a Crown, and
charged with the Royal Arms within the Garter, having before His Horse a
Crowned Rose. This Great Seal is on both sides circumscribed with CAROLUS. DEI.
GRATIA, MAGNAE. BRITANNIAE. FRANCLAE. ET. HIBERNIAE REX. FIDEL. DEFFENSOR.
1640. he being the first King that on His Seal wrote Magnae Britanniae. That
which is most remarkable in the Seals of this King, is the Position of His
Horse, which is retrograde to all those of His Royal Predecessors the Kings of
England from William I. King Charles I. Riding toward the right-side of the
Throne, and all the others toward the left. But the former posture is
reassumed by His present Majesty King Charles II.

He continued to bear the Arms, Crest, and Supporters of His Royal Father King
James.


THis Charles, the second Son living of King James and Queen Anne of Denmark,
was born at Dumferling in Scotland, the 19th day of November, An. 1600. who
during his Infancy, was of a weak and sickly temper; but arriving to riper
years, proved to be of a very healthful Constitution. Whilst he abode in
Scotland, he was created Duke of Albany, Marquis of Ormond, Earl of Ross, and
Lord Ardmanoch; and on Tuesday the 6th of January, An. 1604. in presence of the
Lords of the Privy Council, and other Peers of this Realm, created Duke of York
at Whitehall: with him first appeared the Knights of the Bath in their Hermites
Weeds, in St. James's Park, the Heralds passing before them, with the Music;
in which Order they proceeded to the Chapel, where the Knights offered at the
Altar; thence with their Esquires before them to their Lodgings, where new
Attiring themselves in Robes of Crimson Taffata, with Hats and white Feathers,
they returned to the great Chamber, where being girded by the King with Swords,
they received their gilt Spurs: After a sumptuous Dinner, they again offered
their Swords at the Altar, and the next day came attired in Purple Satin
before the King, with diverse of the Nobility carrying the Robes and other
Ornaments; the Earl of Nottingham with the Duke in his Arms, the Earls going
before, and the Knights of the Bath following, till coming where the King sat,
under a rich Canopy of State, the Dukes Parent being read, he was invested in
the Robes, received the Coronet, and the Golden Rod; which done, the Ceremony
ended.

Count Gundomare being sent over Ambassador from the King of Spain, to Treat of
a Marriage betwixt the young Prince and the Infanta of Spain, who confidently
affirmed, there was no other way to regain the Palatinate, and to settle a
perpetual Peace in England, but by this Match. King James having a natural
inclination to Peace, gives great attention, and by advice of the Privy
Council, the Prince on the 17th of February, Anno 1622.
1622. is sent disguised with the Marquis of Buckingham, attended by Endimion
Porter of the Bedchamber, and Richard Greenham Master of the Horse to the
Marquis, who were met at Dover by Sir Francis Cottington Secretary to the
Prince; and being embarked, land at Boloigne, and so Post to Paris, where
staying one day, he had a transient view of that excellent Lady the Princess
Henrietta Maria, at a Mask, which the great Disposer of all things had
preserved for him.

On the 7th of March he arrives at Madrid, and alighted at the Earl of
Bristoll's House, then Extraordinary Ambassador there, whose sudden arrival
startled Bristoll, being altogether a stranger to the journey. The next morning
notice was given to Count Olivares, the Spanish Favorite (and by him
communicated to King Philip) of the arrival of the Duke of Buckingham, who in
private informed the King of the Princes hazardous adventure to have a sight of
the Infanta, which accordingly was afterward performed with a great deal of
seeming affection. But the crafty Spaniard could by no means be drawn to admit
the restitution of the Palatinate, but would reserve it as a Gratuity to be
freely bestowed after the Marriage.

Anno 1623.
Much time was spent, and Articles were drawn on both sides ready to Sign, when
on the sudden Pope Gregory dies, who was to give his Dispensation for the
Match; application is made to Pope Urban, which protracted much time; the
Prince being sensible of delay, disires leave to return, and with many
Complements takes his farewell of the King and Infanta, and with much danger
arrives the 5th of October at Portsmouth; the next day Posts to London, where
he was received with unspeakable joy of the people, and soon after hastes to
Royston, where the King then resided; to whom he gave an ample and large
Account of the whole proceedings: The King Communicates it to the Council, who
concluded to acquaint a Parliament with it; which accordingly was summoned to
meet in February following.

Hereupon being sat, the House after debate, desired a further Account of the
particulars of the Spanish Voyage, which accordingly was done by the Duke of
Buckingham and the Prince, to their great satisfaction; who, after mature
consideration, advise the King to break off the Treaty with Spain, and to
proclaim open War, to which the King was hardly persuaded by reason of his
peaceful disposition, and want of Money to maintain it; but at last a Council
of War is chosen, who agree that 6000 men be sent immediately into the Low
Countries, in order to their passage into Germany.

The Duke of Buckingham is now accused of Treason by the Spanish Ambassador.
The Treaty with Spain being nulled, and Prince Charles growing in years, and in
favor of the people, some Overtures are made for a Marriage with the Daughter
of France, which King James breaks to his Privy Council, who jointly applaud
it; whereupon a Parliament being again summoned, and the business propounded,
it was entertained by them with an unanimous consent, and proposed that the
Earl of Holland be forthwith sent to feel the Pulse of the French King in order
to the Match, in whom was found a ready inclination; so that the Earl of
Carlisle is sent over as an additional Ambassador to the Earl of Holland: and
the French King sends the Marquis d'Effait for England in quality of an
Ambassador. These noble Instruments ply their business so close, Anno 1624.
that on the 10th of November, 1624. Articles on both sides were Signed, there
wanting nothing for completing the Match but a Dispensation from Rome, for
which the King of France sollicites; but in the interim King James departs this
mortal life on the 27th day of March, Anno 1625.
1625. at his Manor of Theobalds, leaving his Son engaged in a War with Spain,
and an empty Exchequer: the sad News of whose death came to Whitehall just when
Bishop Laud was in his Sermon, which made him to break off in compliance with
the sadness of the Congregation; and immediately thereupon Prince Charles was
proclaimed, at the Court Gate, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland; who
presently dispatcheth Aviso's of his Fathers death to all Confederate Princes
and States. Next, he took care for the solemn interring of the Royal Corpse,
which on the 14th of May was performed with all Funeral Rites; his Statue was
lively represented on a magnificent Hearse, King Charles being present thereat.

And now, about the age of twenty five years, His Marriage.
he proceeded in the Marriage before concluded of for him with the Beautiful
and Virtuous Princess Henrietta Maria, Anno 1625.
the youngest Daughter of Henry IV. The Queens Arms were, Azure 3 Flowers de
Lize Or, France. Impaled by France and England quarterly in the first quarter.
2. Scotland, 3. Ireland, the fourth as the first.
Surnamed The Great, King of France, (and of Queen Mary de Medicis his Wife)
and Sister to Lewis XIII. the French King. Sending out his Letters of
Procuration to the Duke of Chevereux to espouse the said Lady in his name,
which Ceremony was solemnly performed in the Church of Nostredame, on Sunday
the first of May, An. 1625. by Cardinal Richlieu, and no sooner ended than that
her Majesty prepared for England coming to Boloigne, where a Fleet of twenty
one Sail attended her, with which she arrived at Dover; where she was met by
the King with a most magnificent Train, and conducted to Canterbury, and there
the Royal Nuptials were most gloriously accomplished; thence with equal
splendor they came to Gravesend; and thence by Barge to Somerset House. After
a few days they removed to Hampton by reason that the Plague was now hot at
London. The 18th of June following the King called a Parliament about the
business of the Palatinate, Anno 1625.
wherein he demanded their assistance to so honorable a War, and received very
ample satisfaction; but the Sickness still continuing, the 11th of July the
Parliament adjourned and met again at Oxford; where, in stead of prosecuting
His Majesty's desire for setting forth the Fleet for relief of the Palatinate,
many high Debates fell out among the Commons; as concerning evil Councels that
guided the Kings designs, Treasury misimployed, with many other things to the
same purpose; exclaiming against the Duke of Buckingham, and resolving to take
his Office of Lord Admiral from him, and call him to an account: whereupon the
King seeing that nothing toward his satisfaction was intended by them, he
dissolved them, and took up several Sums upon Loan from all those of the
Kingdom who were best able to spare their money.

February the 2d, 1625. was the day appointed for the Kings Coronation, His
Coronation. Anno 1625.
which was then performed by George Abbot Archbishop of Canterbury, with all
usual and accustomed solemnity, except his passage through London, omitted by
reason of the Contagion, which saved some Money, the Exchequer being then low.
It Is observable that the King was clothed that day in white Satin.

February the 6th, a Parliament was called, whereof Sir Henry Finch was
Speaker, in which, after Thanks rendered His Majesty for his Gracious Answer to
their Petition concerning Religion, their next Debate fell upon the Grievances
of the Kingdom by Evil Counselors, and clipping of the Kings Wings as to his
Privy Purse and public Grants, etc. but the principal String on which they
harped, was Religion, keeping thereon a kind of a constant Committee, whereof
one John Pym a turbulant person was Chairman; so that the Kings Ears were never
free from their noise, daily fomented by two turbulent Members of the House of
Commons, Clement Cook and one Turner a Physician, till at last the King was
constrained to send them word by Sir Richard Weston, that it was best for them
to consult of Matters of greatest importance at present; and that they should
have time enough for other things afterward.

Anno 1626.
Several thwarting accusations at this time passed in Parliament between the
Duke of Buckingham and the Earl of Bristol, for matters acted in the late Kings
time, wherein they recriminate upon each other. In fine, the Duke of Buckingham
sustains the lash of all their contumely, which though to every Article he gave
as good satisfaction as in reason could be expected, yet their rage ceased not
to prefer new matters of old Concernments against him, which though true (as he
urged) ought not then to have been remembered, since in Parliament, An. 21. of
King James, he had been acquitted besides his present Majesty's General Pardon
at his Coronation was sufficient to free him, as it did all others, from the
like Imputation. Yet all this suffis'd not; whereupon the King was forced to
dissolve the Parliament.

After this an Information was at the Council Table preferred against the
Bishop of Lincoln, by Sir John Lamb, and Doctor Sibthorp, as favoring the
Puritans, speaking dangerous words in their behalf against the King, and
opposing the Loan which now the King was about taking up in order to a War with
France: For which the Bishop, with some others of the same Faction, were
imprisoned: Doctor Lamb is murdered in the Streets of London by the Rabble, for
which the City is fined 6000 l. Notwithstanding, Epedition to Isle of The.
with much ado, shortly after that Expedition went on with 6000 Horse and Foot,
10 Royal Ships, and 90 Merchantmen, under the command of the Duke of
Buckingham, Anno 1627.
for defense of the Rochellers: who being conducted by one Monsieur Sobiesse,
had seized on that place, and diverse others for the Protestant Religion,
against their King, from whom but a little before, they had, by Mediation of
the English Ambassadors, obtained a Truce; which afterward, upon advantage of
the King of Frances Armies removing toward Italy, the said Sobiesse took an
occasion to break, by surprising the Isle of The, and attempting Port Lewis;
whereupon Lewis XIII the French King, diverting his Force fromwards Italy (with
the shipping that had been lent him for that service by the King of England)
set upon them; forcing them from their Holds, and Sobiesse into the Isle of
Olleron. When at the Duke's coming, he endeavored to land in the Isle of The
with his Men, he had a sherp Fight, Sir John Borough was there slain.
wherein many brave Gentlemen lost their lives on both sides, and little to the
purpose effected. But returning home, another Fleet was shortly provided, which
the King himself, at Portsmouth, came to view; where the said Duke being very
intent upon the Business, and laboring much to get all things in readiness,
for recovery of that wherein he had been unsuccessful, as he came down Stairs
out of his Chamber, and passing toward his Parlor, he was by one John Felton,
a Lieutenant of Foot, on the 23d of July, 1628. stabbed to the Heart with a
Knife, which, the Villain flying, left sticking in his Back; and being
apprehended, declared that he did it for the Cause of God and his Country, upon
the account of the Parliaments late Remonstrance against him, as being a friend
to Popery; for which the said Felton was executed at Tyburn.

The Parliament at this time growing stubborn against the King, Anno 1628.
would needs by a Vote take off the Subsidies granted him of Tunnage, and
Poundage, whereupon His Majesty sending Mr. Maxwell Usher of the Black Rod to
dissolve them, they deny it, till the King with his Pensioners and Guard
preparing to come himself, they quitted the House; and thus ended that
Parliament. For now, what with the continual clamor of the Commonalty against
the Introduction of Popery (as they called it) and their perpetual grumblings
against Taxes, the Puritanical Faction grow so numerous and bold, that Libels
are daily cast about the Streets against the King and Clergy, especially Bishop
Laud, and others of the Kings most faithful Counselors, which though by all
the gracious Concessions that could be the King endeavored to quiet, yet it
would not be.

It was now the 6th year of the Kings Reign, Anno 1630.
when on the 29th of May, the Queen was happily delivered of her eldest Son
(our present Sovereign Lord King Charles) whose Nativity was ushered in with a
Star seen at noonday. After which a general Peace ensued between us and all
Foreign Nations; however a damnable Rebellion not long after broke out in
Ireland, Anno 1632.
which for several years continued; and another more horrid had taken root in
Scotland. That, by the Irish Recusants, upon pretense of regaining their
Ancient Freedom from their long continued slavery; and this, upon the contrary
account, for fear of Popery: But upon the humble entreaty of the Scots, the
King in the ninth year of his Reign over England, An. 1633. takes his Journey
thither, Anno 1633.
and is solemnly Crowned at Edenborough the 18th of June, where he called a
Parliament, in which he confirmed many old Statutes, but not without the
opposition of the discontented Reformers (as they called themselves) as
supposing the same to have been done in favor of Episcopacy. The King having
visited some principal places in that Kingdom, in July returns for England.

The English Seas were about this time sadly infested with Pirates, Anno 1634.
and the Fishing almost wholly usurped by the Hollanders; whereupon the King
advising with his Attorney General Noy, he finds out an ancient President for
the setting out of a Fleet by virtue of the Kings own Writ; who thereupon
caused several Sums of Money to be raised among his Subjects, called Ship Money;
wherewith being indifferently furnished, He set forth a considerable Navy,
under the command of the Earls of Lindsey and Essex: whereby not only our Ships
passed with great security upon their Trade, but England grew so formidable to
Foreign Princes, that the King of Spain, as his safest way, made use of our
Bottoms for transporting his Bullion, which yielded an inestimable benefit both
to our Merchants for Exchange of their Commodities, and to the Kings Mint.

The good effects of the last Expedition caused the King to set out another
Fleet under command of the Earl of Northumberland, Anno 1636.
by whom the Dutch Busses were so scoured from the British Sea, that they
desired very submissively to Fish by the Kings Commission: yet by example of
one Mr. Hamden of Buckinghamshire, many denied the payment of this Ship Money,
as a thing illegal: whereupon the King was willing the same should be referred
to the twelve Judges: who all, except Hutton and Crook, gave their Judgment
against Hamden, and his Associates: which yet did no good as to the quieting of
the Malcontents, whose scurrulous Pens are now set at work to write against
the King and the Bishops: for which Mr. Prin, Mr. Burton, and Dr. Bastwick,
three violent and restless spirited Men, lost their Ears; but the Puritanical
Party knowing their own strength, Anno 1637.
were not hereby at all terrified; and those in Scotland, upon the imposition
of the English Liturgy, so highly insult, that in perfect opposition to
whatsoever the King shall order, or had commanded to the contrary, they enter
into a Solemn League and Covenant against Episcopal Government, etc. Protesting
to maintain the same with their lives by the Sword; for which purpose they
crave aid from France, and General Lesley and diverse other Commanders are sent
for from beyond Sea: Anno 1638.
whilst Marquis Hamilton, who was entrusted as High Commissioner to suppress
them, favored their designs, encouraging many of the new fangled Scotch
Nobility to trace the same steps, till at last they resolve into an Assembly,
which was once dispersed by the Kings Order; yet in despite, they meet again,
and publicly declare in direct terms against the Kings High Commission,
Service Book (which the King discharged them of) and all Episcopal Discipline,
Anno 1639.
till at last the King with an Army is obliged to force them to an
Accommodation; and they, upon the Kings too merciful Concessions, submit, their
long intended mischiefs being not yet ripe for execution.

The King, Anno 1640.
upon his return, the 13th of April, called another Parliament, who first
require of the King to be satisfied in three Points, viz. Property of the
Subject; Security of Religion; Privilege of Parliament. But whilst they
considered which was best first to be treated of, comes in that Firebrand Sir
Henry Vane, and falsely told them, that the King demanded twelve Subsidies:
whereat they fell into such a heat against his Majesty, that they resolve to
Vote against the War with Scotland; upon which, after twenty two days Session,
by advice of his Counsel, he dissolved them.

This done, the Convocation now sitting, framed a Protestation for the
settlement of the Church, wherein the Archbishop of Canterbury Dr. William Laud
showed himself very zealous against the Puritans: Hereupon a Paper was posted
on the old Exchange encouraging the Apprentices to Rifle his House at Lambeth;
which, on Monday the 12th of May, at night, they attempted, but were repulsed,
many taken and imprisoned, which were afterward by their Companions forcibly
rescued; for which one of the Ringleaders was taken and hanged.

The Scots still continuing their insolence, the King was once more obliged to
march with an Army against them toward Scotland; where, at Newburne near
Newcastle, Lesley, with his Forces, meets part of the Kings Army commanded by
the Lord Conway, upon the 28th of August, at the River Tyne; and after a hot
dispute, the Scots gain their passage, and put those Forces to flight. His
Majesty hereupon retires to York, is there contented to Treat with them,
receiving their Petition, which, in effect, contained, That a Parliament should
be forthwith called: The Reformed Religion in both Kingdoms confirmed: The Earl
of Strafford and the Archbishop of Canterbury brought to the Bar. etc. which in
respect of a Parliament, was seconded by many factious Lords of England; So
that upon condition the Scots would disband, the King at last was content to
promise them a Parliament.

The Marquis of Montross detesting the perfidious proceedings of his
Countrymen, though he had been a Covenanter, became now Loyal, as by certain
Letters to His Majesty appeared, which by the Treachery of Hamilton, were
stolen out of the Kings Pocket, transcribed, and the Copies conveyed to the
Covenanters, which rendered the Earl odious among them. However, through their
daily importunities, the King, in pursuance of his promise, called a
Parliament, The Long Parliament November. 3. Anno 1640.
which began at Westminster Tuesday the 3d of November. With which began all
the Kings misery (though with the former Parliaments he had trouble sufficient)
for the first thing they fell upon for the pleasing of the people, was the
reduction of Monopolies; receiving of Petitions from such as for their
turbulency had suffered in the Starchamber, Council Table, or High Commission
Court; and striking at the Earl of Strafford, against whom Mr. Pym is sent to
the House of Lords, with an Impeachment of High Treason.

And now came Alderman Pennington with several hundreds at his heels, bringing
a Petition of the Citizens against Church Ceremonies; whereupon it was Voted
that the Clergy in no Synod or Convocation have any power to make Canons, but
the Parliament; That the present Canons of the Church were against the Laws;
for which the Archbishop of Canterbury, as one of the chief Framers of them,
must be accused, and likewise, with the Earl of Strafford, committed to the
Black Rod, against whom the Brethren with full Mouths, now exhibit their
Charge, Anno 1640.
fraught with nothing else but inverterate Malice and groundless Conjectures;
and all for fear of Popery: The Parliament at this time taking upon them to
expostulate with the King concerning the Reprieve of one Goodman a Priest: as
though it lay not in the Kings power, without them, to pardon any Malefactor
whatsoever after Condemnation.

After many horrid Clamours, the King on the 15th of February passes that fatal
Bill for a Triennial Parliament; upon which proceeds the Earl of Strafford's
Trial, who, Anno 1641.
to every Article preferred against him, gave sufficient answer; yet, since by
the accumulation of all together, they found him guilty of High Treason; the
King unwillingly complied with what he knew was but out of Malice contrived,
and signed the Warrant for his Execution (which to His Majesty's own death he
repented) and accordingly he is beheaded on Tower Hill on the 12th of May
following. Hereupon the Parliament seem contented, and yield that the Scotch
Army should be disbanded (having Voted 300000 l. toward supply of the losses
and necessities of their dear Brethren of Scotland) which, contrary to their
former Agreement upon the late Treaty, they had kept above eight Months in
England; and the King, the more to oblige them, makes a Progress into Scotland,
where he stays about four Months; during which time the Rebellion before spoken
of in Ireland, breaks forth into action: the Castle of Dublin had like to have
been seized the 23d of October, 1641. but the same night the design was
discovered by Owen O Conally; whereupon the Lords Mac-Guire and Mac-Mahon, with
diverse others, are seized on; yet in all other parts of that Kingdom, the Plot
succeeds, many places being surprised. Forces were hereupon immediately raised
in England, to go against them, and the Marquis of Ormond made General, whilst
on the other side the Rebels elect Sir Phelim O Neal for theirs, who are the
first day of January, proclaimed Traitors. The War continues long, many Places
and Towns are taken on both sides, and many bloody Cruelties committed.

The King returns from Scotland, cause Proclamation to be made for obedience to
the Laws concerning Religion against innovation either of Rights or Ceremonies,
sommoning both Houses to appear before him, whereat they (disgusted) frame a
Remonstrance, wherein all the misfortunes that had happened since the beginning
of the Kings Reign, are remembered, and laid to the charge of the Bishops and
Papists; whereupon a tumultuous Rabble of London Apprentices and others in
Arms, came before Whitehall, crying, Down with the Bishops and the Whore of
Babylon: which by the Kings Servants out of Scotland Yard, were dispersed, but
by the Commons House gratified with a Vote (contrary to all former Laws and
first institution of Parliaments) to abolish the Bishops wholly from being
Members or having any Votes in the Parliament House: Whereupon twelve of them
protesting against the proceedings of the Commons, absent themselves, being all
of them not long after charged with Treason, ten committed to the Tower, and
two to the Black Rod.

The remaining Juncto (for a Parliament it cannot hereafter be properly called)
Petitioned the King for a Guard to be commanded by the Earl of Essex, when His
Majesty had more need of one for himself: who sending to the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen to suppress the rudeness of their Apprentices, he received no other
satisfaction than another Petition from them much to the same purpose of the
last from the Parliament; which the King denying, is informed that all the late
Tumults were chiefly countenanced by five Members of the Commons House; viz.
Mr. Hollis, Mr. Pim, Sir Arthur Haslerig, Mr. Strode, and Mr. Hamden, with whom
the Scots had held Correspondence in all their late disturbances. These were
sent for by the King, but denied to come; whereupon their Trunks and Papers
being seized, he resolves to Arrest their Persons in the House, where coming
with his own Guard he demands them, and forces the Doors, but found none of
them there. This caused so loud a Cry against the King, that all Europe rang of
it; which Clamours the Londoners maintain with their Swords in their hands,
till the King and Queen, for fear of their lives, are enforced to remove to
Hampton Court, and Sir Thomas Lundesford entertaiinng some Men at Kingston, as
a needful Guard over His Majesty's Person, is by a party from the Sedentaries
at Westminster, apprehended, and committed to the Tower, their confidence so
far hereupon increasing, that they Petition the King for the Militia to be
disposed into their hands; which being denied them, Pim in the House complains
of diverse Papists, who, by the Kings Permission were suffered to go into
Ireland; whereat His Majesty being justly offended, sent for the Earls of Essex
and Holland, with the Lord Kimbolton, to appear before him, which they denied,
the Juncto sending him word that what Mr. Pim had said, was the sense of the
whole House, wherein neither Popish Lords nor Bishops, neither had nor should
have any thing to say.

The States of Holland earnestly pressing His Majesty to have the Princess Mary
sent unto her Betrothed Husband the Prince of Orange, at this time she went
over, accompained with the Queen her Mother; after whose departure the King
being at Greenwich, receives another Petition from the Sedentaries for the
Militia, and after that, at Theobalds, another, to all which he gave the same
answer; viz. That by no Law the Militia belonged to any but Himself. Whereupon
they by Sea and Land prepare for War, and resolve to take it, sending their
Declaration to the King then at Royston by the Earls of Pembroke and Holland, 9
Martii.

His Majesty hereupon removes to York, having all the way sent such Grations
Answers to their demands at Westminster, that to any might have been
satisfactory, save only to such as were resolved to set and see the Kingdom all
on Fire; especially in that which they most cried out for, viz. The Execution
of the Penal Laws against the Papists, and the Reducement of the Rebels in
Ireland; declaring his intention to go himself in Person to chastise those
bloody People: from whence coming to Hull, he is flatly denied entrance by Sir
John Hotham, Anno 1642.
which is justified by the Sedentaries; whereupon the King summons the Gentry
of York shire to his assistance, and answers another declaration from the
Juncto. Upon this, many of the honestest of both Lords and Commons, whose
Voices had been hitherto out roard by the greater number of the rest, seeing
their treasonable intentions, withdrew themselves, and repair to the King.

The Names of the Lords were, as follows, the Marquis of Hertford, the Earls
of Lindsey, Cumberland, Huntington, Bath, Southampton, Dorset, Northampton,
Devonshire, Bristoll, Westmorland, Barkshire, Monmouth, Rivers, Newcastle,
Dover, Caernarvon, Newport; the Lords Howard of Charlton, Newark, Paulet,
Paget, Maltravers, Willougbby, Rich, Fauconbridge, Chandois, Coventry,
Lovelace, Savil, Seymour, Mohun, Dunsmore, Capell, and Gray of Ruthen, with the
Dukes of Buckingham and Richmond, (so that in a short time the Lords at York
out-number them at Westminster) and above fifty of the Commons House, who were
followed by the Lord Keeper Littleton with the Great Seal (whilst the remainder
of the Sendentaries, far more diligently make their own preparations to
withstand both.) To these the King makes his Protestation to defend the
Protestant Religion, and them, from all that His now declared Enemies should
act against them, forbidding all Levies to be made either of Men or Money
without his Order. After which, marching into Nottinghamshire and Lincolnshire,
He desires their assistance, resolving to reduce Hull; whilst, on the other
side, Essex for the Sedentaries in London and the adjacent Counties, was no
less active, the Earl of Warwick being by them made Admiral; the King
proclaiming Traitors all such as took part with them, and they the like against
such as sided with Him.

Both Armies now in the Field, the King marches to Nottingham, whence He sends
many gracious Messages to Westminster, which unless he would forsake His evil
Counselors (meaning all His best Friends) they refused. Whereupon His Majesty
was enforced to set up His Standard, The King sets up His Standard at
Nottingham, Aug. 21. 1642.
and marching to Hull, is thence repulsed by Sir John Meldram, and Sir John
Hotham. Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice in September arrive in England, and
offering their Service to their Uncle, were immediately put into Commands His
Highness Prince Rupert, with a small Body of Horse flew up and down through
diverse Counties, and gained a considerable Body together, and the King himself
moves, though with a slower pace, and had gotten a great number wherewith,
marching to Shrewsbury (a place of great concernment, as being the inlet to
Wales) He there orders a Mint to Melt down the Plate which was largely
contributed by the Gentry.

Robert Berty Earl of Lindsey, is chosen General for the King, and the general
Rendezvous of His Forces was appointed at York. Robert Deverenx Earl of Essex
General for the Parliament, appointed a Rendezvous of all their Forces at
Northampton, being about 20000 Horse and Foot.

The King with an Army of about 14000 Foot, and 4000 Horse and Dragoons, came
on Saturday the 22d of October within six Miles of Keynton, and quartered His
Army at Crepreda and Edgehill. The Battle of Edgehill, 1642.
The Earl of Essex quartered at Keynton with his Army: and on Sunday the 28th,
both Armies draw up in Opposition, the King having the advantage of a high
Hill, called Edgehill, at the foot of which was the Vale of the Red Horse,
where Essex his Army was ranged in Battalia upon a rising Ground; on the Right
Wing were three Regiments of Horse, commanded by Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir
William Balfore, and the Lord Fielding: Sir John Meldram commanded the Van; the
General, Colonel Hollis and the Lord Brook in the Rear; on the Left Wing were
twenty Troops of Horse commanded by Sir James Ramsey. The Earl of Lindsey was
General for the King, but the Battle was Ordered by the Lord Ruthen Earl of
Forth, who on foot lead the main Body of the Army with a Pike in his Hand.

The Forlorn on the Kings side was commanded by Major Blackstake and Captain
Hamond, who being come down to the bottom of the Hill; engaged the Sedentaries
Forlorn. Prince Rupert General of the Horse, commanded the Right Wing, charged
furiously the Enemies left Wing, and routed them, pursuing them to Keynton
Town, took the Carriages, the Earls Wa gons and Cloak bag, being too eager of
the Plunder.

The Earl of Lindsey too adventurous, was mortally wounded; and by reason of
the absence of Prince Rupert, the Kings main Body was assaulted with great
fury, and his Standard lost (Sir Edmond Varney the Standard Bearer being
killed) which was afterward retaken by Sir John Smith, Knighted therefore. The
Foot on both sides fight with equal Valor until night, by which they were
parted. Both Armies continue in the Field all night, the Victory being much
disputed, for there were real Signs of Victory on both sides by the taking of
Ensigns and Cannon, of equal number; and although the Parliament lost more Men,
yet the King lost more Men of Quality, the number of the slain being computed
to be between 5 and 6000.

Essex removing Westward, the King comes to Colbrook, where the Earls of
Northumberland and Pembroke, with some of the Commons, Present him with a
Treaty; but because Sir John Eveling was one of the Commissioners, who had been
proclaimed Traitor at Oxford, the King would not accept it; which so distasted
the Sedentaries, that they Voted it a refusal of the Kings to admit of a
Treaty, and send to acquaint the City therewith. Notwithstanding, within a few
days after, upon the removal of that Instrument Eveling, the King accepted of
the the rest: But all signified nothing, for by this time Essex being come to
London, and having increased his Army with Apprentices and several other
licentious Persons, came marching toward Him; which His Majesty met at
Brainford, where the 13th of November another cruel Fight was engaged in, the
Kings Party having the better, which, if well followed, Brainford Fight.
the business had been happily ended. But the next day many more Forces from
London appearing, the King withdrew from thence to Oatlands, so to Reading, and
thence to Oxford.

December the 15th, Colonel Goring landed with the Queens Standard, and some
Store of Ammunition in the North, and joining with the Earl of Newcastle at
York, they proclaim Fairfax and his Son Sir Thomas Traitors, and take Leeds.
Another Treaty is intended, and presented to the King at Oxford, in which was
proposed a Cessation of Arms. Mean while the Queen lands at Bridlington, having
been pursued and shot at by the Earl of Warwick's Ships; from whence, by the
Marquis of Mountross She was conveyed to York, and there honorably received by
the Earl of Newcastle, where She begins to model her Army.

And now to the assistance of their Brethren at Westminster, came in the Scots,
who, near Newcastle, pass the Tyne into Yorkshire, against the Earl of
Newcastle and the Queens Army. Upon this the Sedentaries recall their
Commissioners from the Treaty at Oxford the 15th of April, denying to subscribe
to the Kings most reasonable Proposals.

In the beginning of March the Lord Brook passing by Stratford-upon-Avon, falls
upon and defeats the Kings Forces commanded by Colonel Croeker and Lieutenant
Colonel Wagstaff, and from these marching to Lichfield, encounters the Earl of
Chesterfield, who knowing the City to be indefensible, retires into the Close,
where Brook attempting to follow, receives a mortal shot in the Eye; however
his Soldiers took the place, but were shortly after there besieged by Spencer
Compton Earl of Northampton; to whose relief Sir John Gell and Sir William
Brereton advancing, were sufficiently beaten, though the gallant Earl in the
Encounter lost his life. The Place within a few days after was taken by Prince
Rupert.

The 26th of April, Anno 1642.
Reading was treacherously yielded to Essex by Colonel Fielding, after it had
been bravely defended by Sir Arthur Aston: and the 23d of May the Queen is
Voted a Traitor by the Sedentaries, for her love so exemplarily expressed to
the King Her Husband.

Many Encounters happen in the West between Sir Ralph Hopton for the King, and
Sir George Chudley for the Juncto, with various success. In May this year
Robert Yeomans and George Bourcher were executed at Bristoll, for endeavoring
the surrender of that City to the King, which was followed by the death of that
grand Fomenter of this unnatural Rebellion Mr. John Pim. Mr. John Hamden, such
another, was at this time slain at Tame, where Prince Rupert encountering the
Buckinghamshire Forces, routed them. Several Conflicts happen this year in
diverse parts of the Kingdom, wherein the Kings Forces had commonly the victory.
Bristol and Exceter were both taken for the King; besides the Signal Victory of
Roundway Down, obtained by the Lord Wilmot, Earl of Caernarvan, Earl of
Crawford, and Lord Biron, against Sir Wiliam Waller.

At this the Parliament became so grievously disturbed, that now either the
powfull Preachings of their Ministry must help them, or never, to fit up an
Army for Essex and Waller in miserable distress, which was speedily mustered
upon Hounslow Heath, out of the inexhaustible Treasury of Rebellion, for the
relief of Gloucester, now besieged by the King; which upon the 5th of September
they effected, His Majesty upon their advance removing toward London; which
had He done before this last Army was raised, would in all likeliood have put
an end to the War.

Essex hereupon marched to Newberry, where the King resolves to fight him,
First Battle of Newberry, Sept, 20. 1643.
planting His Ordnance, and making choice of His Ground. The Enemy was received
with unspeakable Valor by Prince Rupert, the Engagement on both sides
vigorously carried on, with the loss of many gallant Gentlemen's lives (the
Earls of Caernarvon and Sunderland, and the Viscount Faulkland being slain)
till night concluded the Encounter, wherein the Sedentaries gained not so much
the better that they had any stomach next day to renew the Fight, but marched
away back toward Gloucester, near which, in a narrow Lane, they were so
furiously charged by a party of Horse commanded by Colonel Vrrey, that Essex's
Horse were forced to run over his own Foot, till taking the Field, they rallied
again, and put Vrrey to flight.

This was News, and cause of a Thanksgiving at London, especially for the great
honor that their Trained Bands had gained thereby: and not long after that
pernicious Confederacy (called the National Covenant) was taken by the Brethren
at Westminster. Mean while Gloucester receives many alarums by the Lord Herbert
and Sir John Winter, with a considerable Force now come out of Ireland, but the
place was too vigilantly defended by Colonel Edward Massey (which he afterward
repented) when Essex having besieged Redding, the Kings Forces withdraw out of
Gloucestershire, toward that place: whereby Waller and Massey getting some
breath, fall upon Hereford, which they take, and attempt Worcester, but durst
not stay long there for fear of the Lords Capell and Loughborough, then at
hand, with intention of relieving Eccleshall Town and Castle, then besieged by
Sir William Brereton, which at that time they effected, though presently after
the same were surrendered unto him.

The Parliament after this, issue out their Proclamation, declaring all
Traitors that assist the King; and His Majesty at Oxford summoning His
Parliament (where were assembled the Prince, the Dukes of York, and Cumberland,
Lord Treasurer, Lord Keeper Duke of Richmond, and Marquis of Hertford, nineteen
Earls, 18 Lords, and 126 Knights and Gentlemen) does as much for them, whilst
the Forces on both sides are in one place or other of the Kingdom daily
engaged. The Scots at this time entering England with an Army of 18000 Foot, and
2000 Horse, to the assistance of their Brethren. Newark being besieged by Sir
John Meldram, he is there blockt up by Prince Rupert, and made to yield upon
Conditions.

The Marquis of Mountross, upon his Countrymens advance into England, is by the
King made Governor-General in Scotland, enters that Kingdom with an Army,
gaining many of the gallantest sort of that Country to his Party. About which
time Sir William Waller having taken Arundel Castle, marches against the Lord
Hopton, and near Winchester had better success than his Cause deserved.

Oliver Cromwell is by the Sedentaries made Governor of the Isle of Ely: Fox
and Fairfax take Beaudly and Selby. Latham House, after eighteen Weeks siege,
is relieved by Prince Rupert. Essex and Waller joining together (His Majesty's
greatest Armies being now abroad) resolve to environ the King in Oxford, which
He perceiving, leaves that place by night, and marches Northward; whom the
other pursuing two several ways, Waller is at last met with by the King, and
sufficiently routed at Cropredy Bridge, from whence His Majesty followed Essex
Westward to Bath, and so into Cornwall, where once more a happy conclusion of
this Intestine War might have been made, had the advantage been but reasonably
pursued: for now was Essex pinned up in such a strait, that he had but one way
to shift for himself, which was by putting to Sea, leaving his Army to mediate
for an Accommodation; unto which the King giving too gracious a regard, the
Enemy gained so much advantage, that increasing their force in the North,
Newcastle is taken by the Scots, and the Earl of that place besieged in York.
To his relief came Prince Rupert; at whose approach the Besiegers draw of; the
Prince follows, intending to fight them; and accordingly on the 3d of July,
1644. at seven a clock in the morning, the Sedentaries Forces having the
advantage of Ground (being on the South side of Marston Moor, Battle of
Marston-Moore, July 3. 1644.
within four Miles of York) Prince Rupert with the Right Wing fell on the
Enemy, and routed part of them, General Goring and Sir Charles Lucas fell on
the main Body, and put them to flight; but pursuing too far, the Enemy rallied,
and fell on the divided Bodies, totally dispersed them, took 3000 prisoners, 20
pieces of Cannon, besides a considerable number of Officers. Immediately the
Lord Fairfax, with his Son, and the Earl of Manchester, surround York, Sir
Thomas Glenham being then Governor for the King; but by reason that all their
Powder and Ammunition was spent in the late Battle, he was compelled to
surrender the City up honorable Terms.

Prince Rupert marches into Lancashire with the broken Forces he had left, many
of the best of his Army, with the Earl of Newcastle leaving him, take to Sea,
and land at Hamborough. By which encouraged, the Sedentaries make new Levies in
the associat Counties, both of Men and Money, which under the Earl of Manchester
they send Westward: whilst Prince Rupert near Bristol seeking to pass his Army
over at Aust Ferry near Chepstow, is there incountred and worsted. However the
King now gathering all his Forces together, came to Newberry, where, with the
same preparation, came Manchester, Essex, and Waller. The 27th of October,
Second Battle of Newberry, 27 October. 1644.
1644. another deadly Battle ensuing, which concluded much after the same
manner with the former in that place; His Majesty removing toward Dennington,
was by them pursued, the Castle summoned, and in vain attempted.

The Sedentaries, as if hitherto afraid to exercise much of their Tyranny in
cold blood, proceed now with confidence to sit judicially upon the lives of
such whom they had in their hands, and deemed Delinquents; the first whereof
were the Hothams, Sir John the Father, and Sir John the Son, with Sir Alexander
Carew, all three beheaded on Tower Hill, for having been Traitors, and
intending to become honest: and after them followed the execution of the Irish
Lord Macguire at Tyburn. And upon the 10th of December, 1644, ensued the
decollation of William Laud Lord Archbishop of Canterbury upon Tower Hill,
after above an hundred times attendance on the Juncto, by the Commons Voted
guilty of High Treason: Not long after which was the Treaty at Vxbridge, which,
like to the rest, came to nothing.

In Scotland the Marquis of Mountross having seized Dumfrees, and expecting aid
out of Ireland, of which he received but 1100 Men from the Earl of Autrim,
marched into the High-Lands, and had several skirmishes with Argile: In all
which he behaved himself with much heroic Valor.

Essex at this time laying down his Commission, has 10000 l. per annum, voted
him out of Delinquents Estates, and his Command conferred on Sir Thomas
Fairfax, in whose Commission the Commons voted that the Clause (For
preservation of His Majesty's Person) should be left out. A new Model of all
their Army is effected, and Oliver Cromwell being made Lieutenant General,
beats a Party of the Kings at Islip Bridge, takes Bletchington House, and
defeats another Party at Brampton-Bush. And Massey takes Evesham by Storm,
whilst Prince Rupert on the other side relieves Chester then besieged by
Brereton, and returning Southwards again, forces the Town of Leicester.

Mean while the Lord Goring in the West, overthrows Colonel Welden near
Taunton, with some other successes at this time happening, whereby the Kings
affairs looked again with a very good aspect, Battle of Naseby, June 14. 1645.
till now succeeded the fatal Battle of Naseby upon the 14th of June, 1645.
which was lost not for want of any Gallantry in the Kings Party, but pursuance
of the Victory too far, when it was as good as gained, the Rebels being once
put to an absolute Rout, and all their Carriages taken; till Cromwell rallying,
fell upon the Kings Left Wing, whilst Prince Rupert with the rest pursued the
Enemy, and returning too late, they became Masters of the Field,
notwithstanding the King Himself, with most inexpressible Valor, had gallantly
withstood the most desperate Charge of that Villain, and no less than five
times rallied upon him; however, now at last overpowered His Majest was forced
to retire; and though hotly pursued, made good His Retreat to Lichfield. This
unlucky overthrow proved the utter ruin of all the Kings Interest, since after
this no Place stood long against the fury of the Enemy. Leicester within twenty
days was retaken by Sir John Gell; the Lord Goring shortly after routed by
Fairfax, and Bridgwater taken. In the North the Castles of Pontefract and
Scarborough were taken by Poynes and Sir Matthew Boynton: as in the West again,
was Bath, by Rich and Okey. Hereford being besieged by the Scots, they rise
with intention to march into Scotland against Montross.

All this while the King with a Flying Army which he had gotten together in
Wales, came to Leicester, fighting by the way with a Party of the Scotch Horse,
beating afterward Sir John Gell carries some prisoners to Welbeck House, and
taking Huntington, came to Cambridge, where after a small dispute he forces
His entrance; thence to Oxford, where staying not long, he passes to Ludlow,
earnestly bent for the relief of Chester, then besieged by Brereton, where he
fights Poynes at Routon Heath, and had the same fortune as formerly, to win at
first and lose at last, being forced to betake himself into the City of
Chester; where finding the place weak through Batteries, and the Enemy ready to
Storm, he passed into Wales.

Fairfax now before Sherborne, won the same from Sir Lewis Dives, the 17th of
August: from whence he sat down before Bristol, takes the Town by Storm, and
the Castle by Surrender: from thence to Exceter. Whilst Cromwell marching to the
Devises, takes that Place, Winchester, and Basing House. Pickering takes
Laycock; Raynsborough, Barkley Castle; and Morgan, Chepstow.

Montross in Scotland, (though overpowered, yet) most gallantly behaved
himself against the Kings Enemies there: His Majesty therefore, desirous to
assist him, sends Sir Marmaduke Langdale with what Forces he could make toward
him. These passing through Yorkshire, near Sherborne surprised above 800 of the
Enemy, but not knowing well what to do with them for want of a Hold near hand
to convey them to, they themselves were encountered by Copley and Lilburne, and
unfortunately made to change condition with their Prisoners. After this
followed the loss of Hereford by surprise, and Chester by surrender, after a
long Siege. His Majesty being now at Newark, upon a difference there arising
amongst the Lords of His Party, comes to Oxford: where in a short time after
Fairfax with part of his Army blocks him up; the rest encountering the Lord
Hopton in the West at Torrington, defeated him, and at Truro shut him up; from
whence he sailed into France.

The Queen also having taken her last farewell of the King her Husband at
Abington, in the month of July 1644. embarked at Pendennis Castle, and sailed
into France, where being entertained at the charge of the present French King
Lewis XIV. her Nephew, She passed a solitary and retired life until the year
1660. when after nineteen years banishment (upon the Restoration of of Her Son
to the Crown of England) she came to London, and having settled Her Revenues
here, returned with Her youngest Daughter the Lady Henrietta into France, whom
She bestowed in Marriage to the then Duke of Anjou; and in the Month of July,
1662. coming again into England, settled Her Court at Somerset House; where She
resided till May, 1665. and then crossed the Seas again to Her Native Country;
which after four years more became the place of Her death. The death of Queen
Mary.
She deceasing at Her House at Columbe four Leagues from Paris, upon the 10th
day of August, S.N. about four of the Clock in the Morning, An. 1669. in the
sixtieth year of Her Age. Her Body was exposed upon a Bed of State in Her
Chamber, and the next day Embalmed, and afterward conveyed to the Monastery of
Chaliot, attended by the Lady Marshal de Plessyes, and several other Ladies of
Quality. For a Character, Her Majesty needs no other than what is found in
the seventh Chapter of that incomparable Book compiled by Him who knew Her best.

The King, Duke of York, Prince Rupert, and Prince Maurice, were all this while
at Oxford, surrounded with the Enemies Forces, expecting only the relief of the
Lord Astley's Foot to join with the Kings Horse at Farrington; but these by the
way at Stow in the Woulds, are encountered by Brereton and Morgan, and totally
routed.

In all which defeats the Policy of the Sedentaries was very remarkable when
they found their ends near hand completed; for few or none of those successes
happened unto them, wherein they pretended not to find Letters to publish of
the Kings in favor of Popery, either in Ireland or elsewhere (not excepting
those Letters from publication which privately passed betwixt His Majesty and
the Queen) intending thereby to alienate the hearts of the people from Him,
which at the last answered not their expectation.

In Scotland only the Kings affairs at this time went well under the Conduct of
the Marquis of Montross, who in two signal Battles at Alderne and Kilsith, gave
the Covenanters notable overthrows; but was at last himself defeated by David
Lesley, and many of his Men killed and taken; yet he still continued to uphold
His Majesty's Interest till all was lost; and the King committing his Person to
the Scots, commanded the Marquis to disband his Army. Which in a sad disguise
His Majesty was now forced to do, passing from Oxford with one Parson Hudson,
and Mr. John Ashburnham, to Newark, before which Town the Scottish Army lay:
unto whom His Majesty discovering Himself, commanded the Place to be
surrendered. And now all those that had most faithfully served Him, as their
last refuge, were forced to do the same with themselves upon any Conditions
they could get. All the last Garrisons which had stoutly stood out for the Kings
Interest now surrendering, even Oxford it self. Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice
transport themselves beyond Sea; the Duke of York is brought to St. James's
where he met his Sister the Princess Henrietta Maria sent thither likewise,
upon the surrender of Exceter, and shortly after conveyed by the Lady Dalkeith
from Oatlands into France. Prince Charles being happily gotten into the Isle of
Jersey some time before.

The Earl of Essex having now lived to see an end of this fatal War whereof he
had been a most violent Promoter, dies of an Apoplexy the 14th of September,
Anno 1646.
1646. with whom (though the horrid mischief still continued that was begotten
by it) the Presbyterian Cause perished; for the common Enemy being quite beaten
out of the Field, there happened great divisions among the Commons and Army at
home; for being distinguished into two Parties under the Titles of Presbyterian
and Independent: The Independent being the most subtle and close, insinuated
into the greater part of the Army, and carried on their Designs with more
vigor and resolution than the other.

His Majesty was by the Scots brought to Newcastle (fearing that Fairfax might
have forced him out of their hands) from whence He sent to the Sedentaries for
a Treaty, Anno 1646. December. 20.
and they to Him return sixteen Propositions without ever a word of Reason,
which were therefore denied by the King, who desired personally to Treat with
them at Westminster: Whereupon the Scots having plainly told His Majesty, That
if He lost England in not complying with the Parliament, as to the settlement
of their Covenant, He should not Reign in Scotland: They for 200000 l. in Money
delivered Him up to their disposal; who presently Vote him to be brought to
Holmby House, ordering Marshal and Caryl two Factious Ministers for His
Chaplains; which He abhorring, desired two of His own, but was denied.

The Work being now done, Anno 1647.
he that first engaged them in it, began to pay many of them their Wages,
making their Servants (the only Instruments whereby all their Villainy was
accomplished) their Masters, and raising a Religious Division among themselves,
the major part Voting to have the Army disbanded; and the Army with the rest
putting them to defiance, impeaching eleven of the chiefest of them for acting
things against the Liberty of the People; and London it self now receives in
part its Reward; which not being able to sustain the insolence of the Army
lying near it, complain to their Patriots of both Houses to have it removed
further from them, and they themselves put into a posture of Defense, which at
Guildhall was on both sides so strongly Argued, that from Words they fell to
Blows, and at last the City to submission: Whereupon Sir Thomas Fairfax with
his whole Army marched triumphantly through London to Westminster, and the next
day back again to the Tower, whereof he constituted one Titchburn his
Lieutenant.

The King this while is removed to Hampton Court, from whence, being persuaded
by a specious pretense of one Hammond, that a Design was set on foot to kill
Him, He was jugled into the Isle of Wight; Anno 1648.
where while He remained, some few of His best Subjects in several Parts of the
Kingdom endeavored His Relief, and some that had been His Enemies recanting,
took their Parts. As in Wales, Powel, Poyer, and Laugherne, with Sir John Owen
and others of the Loyal Party: the Earl of Holland, with the Lord Francis
Villers at Kingston. upon-Thames: the Kentish Men, and others, with the Lords
Goring and Capell; who being forced out of Kent, pass into Essex, and fortify
themselves in Colchester: But all ere long were defeated by the two powerful
Rebels. The three first casting Lots for their lives, it fell on Poyer, who was
shot to death at London: the Lord Francis slain in the place of Fight, and Sir
Charles Lucas and Sir George Lisle shot to death by Order of Fairfax, upon the
surrender of Colchester. The rest were reserved to a further Trial, whilst Duke
Hamilton with an Army of Scots entering England, joined with Sir Marmaduke
Langdale, and sustained the same fortune with the former, being defeated by
Cromwell and Lambert, and the Duke taken Prisoner.

And now many of the Members which all this sad time had nursed the Rebellion
in both Houses, began to see the misery wherein they had involved themselves,
and upon more moderate Conditions than ever, were content to Treat with His
Majesty, and acquiesce, if Episcopacy might but down with some few
dependencices upon the same: Whereto the King not agreeing, yet for Peace sake,
so far condescended as to grant Presbytery a three years Reign; which the major
Part of the Sedentaries Vote was a ground of Peace; till from the Army they
received a Petition, seconded with a resolute Remonstrance, That the King, as
the most grand Delinquent, should be brought to Justice: Against which the far
greater part Protest, and stand to their former Vote whereupon the whole Army
coming up to London, violently enter the Parliament House, and by the Ears pull
out all them that had Voted contrary to their Remonstrance.

And thus after so much bloodshed and ruin to the whole Nation, were these
miserable Men served by their own Creatures, and in a moment both their Tyranny
and Honor laid in the dust; for at a Council of War held by the Army at the
Bull in St. Albans (where were present sixteen Colonels, besides other
Officers) a Declaration was Read of all their Grievances and Desires,
containing twenty six sheets of Paper; which was ordered to be Presented to the
House (who were now by their Commissioners in a Personal Treaty with His
Majesty in the Isle of Wight) and accordingly was done to the Commons House
upon the 26th of November, 1648. (being the day before subscribed by the
General) showing, The misgoings of the King and Parliament severally; also in
all Treaties betwixt them, especially that they are now in. They conceive the
Parliament has abundant cause to lay aside any further Proceedings in this
Treaty, and to return to their Vote of Non-addresses, and settle with or
against the King, that he may Govern no more, by rejecting those Demands of the
King, especially concerning his Restitution, and coming to London with Preedom,
Honor, and Safety; and that they proceed against the King in way of Justice;
and that a permeptory day be set for the Prince of Wales and Duke of York to
come in; if not, to be declared incapable of any Government, and stand Exiled
for ever as Traitors.

Hereupon the King is by Colonel Evers conveyed from Newport to Hurst Castle, a
very noisome and unwholesome Place; where, during his constraint, He composed
His Book, Entitled, (...). Or the Portraiture of His Sacred Majesty in His
Solitude and Sufferings: A Royal Monument which he has left to Posterity.

The House upon this Declaration sat all day and night till eight of the Clock
next morning; many Speeches were made by diverse Members of the Kings
Concessions; among the rest Mr. Prin made a long Speech, proving the Kings
Concessions to be a Ground for a settled Peace, which was afterward Voted in
the House, 129 being for it, and 84 against it. Upon this, on Wednesday,
December the 6th, some part of the Army having a List of those Members that
were to be taken into Custody, being 34 persons, they accordingly seize them,
and carry them to the Kings Head in the Strand, and diverse other places in
Westminster, having Guards upon them; but not long after many of them were
discharged by the General. The remaining Members continue sitting, to whom came
Lieutenant General Cromwell, and had their Thanks for his faithful Service both
in England and Scotland. The same day the Lords Vote His Majesty's Concession a
ground for Peace, and forthwith Adjourn; and upon the 13th of December, the
remaining part of the Commons House, Null the Vote for His Majesty's
Concessions, and Order the General to take care of the King; whereupon a
Council of War was ordered to sit to draw up a Charge against Him; and
accordingly Orders were issued out for His removal: So that upon the 10th of
December, His Majesty came from Hurst Castle to Windsor in 3 days, attended by
Colonel Harrison and a Guard of 2000 Horse, and was delivered up to the
Governor there; and upon the 28 of December, an Ordinance was brought into the
House, nominating diverse Persons for Trial of the King; which being tendered to
the Lords, was refused; whereupon the Commons the 4th of January, Voting the
Supreme Authority to be in the People, and consequently in them as their
Representatives, proceed without the Lords, and order their Commissioners for
Trial of the King, to meet on Monday in the Painted Chamber, to consider of the
Manner, Time, and Place; whereupon the Lords Vote, That the King could not
commit Treason against the Common Wealth: and, That no Act of the Commons is
binding without the consent of the Lords.

Thus laying their violent hands on Majesty, and committing an Insolence beyond
all hope of Pardon, they cannot justify themselves but by an Act out-facing
all Divinity and Majesty at once, in erecting that High Court of Justice (as
they called it) to Try their King as a Rebel to Himself; preparatory whereunto
they make Proclamation at Westminster Hall and the Old Exchange, that all that
had any thing against Him, should come in at the prefixed time and be heard;
and for the greater solemnity of their Paricide, the Law was silenced in
Adjourning the Term for fourteen days, having as a Guard to their Villainies,
ordered the Army to be quartered in and about London.

Upon Friday the 19th of January, His most Sacred Majesty was brought from
Windsor Castle, being met by a Regiment of Horse four miles from London, and
that night lodged at St. James's and on Saturday the 20th of January, from
thence He passed with a strong Guard of Foot through St. James's Park to
Whitehall, and thence by Water was conveyed to Sir Robert Cottons house with a
guard of twenty Partisans.

John Bradshaw that monstrous Traitor, was President of this High Court of
Justice, Ask a Common Lawyer, and Dorislaus a Dutch Civilian were Council, and
John Cook Sollicitor-General for the Business; the whole number of
Commissioners about seventy eight; which being sat at the upper end of
Westminster Hall, their Commission was read, together with the names of the
Regicides; whereupon Bradshaw commanded Sergeant Dandy junior to fetch in the
Prisoner, who immediately brought the King (attended by a Guard of Partisans)
and placed Him in a Chair.

And now having brought the Royal Prisoner to their Judgment Seat, they
proceed to arraign Him with not unlike impudence and impiety to that of the
Jews, when they brought the King of Kings to Trial; for they charged Him to be
a Subverter of His People, and would not endure His owning Himself to be their
King; charging Him with all the Blood that had been spilt: Who preparing to
give fitting Answers to their villainous Accuations, could not be heard: Yet had
this signal satisfaction to hear Bradshaw condemn himself first, and all his
fellow Paricides by a Reply to Him, not less absurd than observable: For his
Majesty arguing upon the unreasonableness of not being suffered to speak for
Himself, said, Where is there in all the World that Court in which no place is
left for Reason? To which Bradshaw unwittingly replied, Sir, You shall find
that this very Court is such an one. Nay (then retorted the King) in vain will
my Subjects expect Justice from you, who stop your Ears to your own King ready
to Plead His Cause.

To their denial of Justice they added so many contumelies, indignities, and
affronts, as would have tempted Him to despair, had not His Faith been as
strong as his Reason, and the greatness of his Mind more invincible than that
of his Power. Four times was his Sacred Majesty brought before this pretended
Tribunal of Justice; the second time being on the 22d of January; the third, on
the 23d; and the fourth time on the 27th of the same month. When, contrary to
all Law, Reason, Religion, Honesty, Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, several
Votes, Declarations, Remonstrances, Protestations, and Covenants, He was, by
the Mouth of that murdering Villain Bradshaw, sentenced to be beheaded.

Tuesday the 30th of January that fatal day, Anno 1648.
which they had appointed for his Martyrdom, being come, the King Prays, and
Receives the Sacrament from the Hands of the Bishop of London, who was licensed
to attend on Him, from which He received much Spiritual Comfort: and at ten of
the Clock, attended by a Regiment of Foot and a Guard of Partisans, with the
Bishop on one Hand, and Colonel Tomlinson on the other, walks on foot through
the Park: as they were going, He bids them mend their pace, Telling them He now
went before them to strive for a Heavenly Crown with less solicitude, than he
had oftentimes bid His Soldiers to fight for an Earthly Diadem. He passes into
his Cabinet Chamber at Whitehall, continuing in his Devotions, refusing to
Dine; but about twelve a Clock He eat a bit of Bread, and drank a Glass of
Claret. Near one of the Clock He was conveyed through a Window of the
Banqueting House, to the Scaffold covered with Black, attended by the aforesaid
Bishop and the Guard, where He beheld two Executioners disguised with Vizards,
the Axe and Block, with those Ropes and Rings which they had provided (in case
He had strugled with them) to bind Hun down to the Scaffold; at which He was
not at all affrighted, but declaring Himself to the World to die an innocent
Man, and a good Christian, according to the Profession of the Church of
England, Praying that His Enemies might Repent, and with St. Stephen, That His
Death be not laid to their Charge; with an heroic magnanimity endured the
fatal Stroke, thereby exchanging His Crown on Earth, for one far more glorious
in Heaven.

His Body was laid in a Coffin covered with black Velvet, and from thence
carried to His House at St. James's, where it was put in a Coffin of Lead,
there to be seen by the People: On Wednesday the 7th of February His Corpse was
delivered to two of His Servants, to be buried at Windsor, whither the Duke of
Richmond, the Marquis of Hertford, the Earl of Lindsey and Southampton,
together with Doctor Juxon Bishop of London, and diverse others repaired. There,
with much difficulty they find a Vault in St. George's Chapel, where King
Henry VIII. was formerly buried: Which being prepared, a small piece of Lead,
some two Foot long and two Inches broad, was provided, on which was inscribed,
KING CHARLES, 1648. which was sawdered to the Breast of the Corpse. All things
being in readiness, the Body was brought to the Vault by the Soldiers of the
Garrison, over which was a black Velvet Pall, which was supported by the four
Lords, the Bishop of London stood by weeping; then was it deposited in Silence
and Sorrow, the Pall being cast in after it.

Several Elegies and Epitaphs both in Verse and Prose, have been Celebrated to
the Memory of this Glorious Martys; One in Latin (written by Richard Powell of
the Inner Temple Esquire which, together with His Majesty's Portraiture at large,
and His Works in Folio under it, were Painted and set up (since his present
Majesty's Restoration) in St. Olaves Church in Silver-Street, London:) is as
follows:

M. S. Sanctissimi Regis, and Martyris, CAROLI. Siste Viator, Luge, Obmutesce,
Mirare! Memento CAROLI ILLIUS, Nominis pariter, and Pietatis Insignissimae,
PRIMI, MAGNAE BRITANNIAE REGIS: Qui Rebellium Persidia primo Deceptus, Dein
Perfidorum Rabie Percussus, Inconcussus tamen LEGUM and FIDEI DEFENSOR,
Schismaticorum Tirannidi Succubuit. Anno Salutis Humanae, MDCXLVIII. Servitutis
Nostrae, Primo, Faelicitatis Suae, Primo, Corona Terrestri Spoliatus, Coelesti
Donatus. Sileant autem Periturae Tabellae: Perlege RELIQUIAS, vere Sacras,
CAROLINAS, In Queis, Sui Mnemosynen, aere perenniorem, vivacius exprimit Illa,
Illa, (...). Children of King CHARLES I. by Queen HENRIETTA MARIA of France,
his Wife.
20. CHARLES STVART, Prince of Great Britain, who was born, baptized, and
deceased on the 18th day of March, An. 1628.

20. CHARLES STVART, Prince of Great Britain, second Son of King Charles I. and
Queen Mary of France, succeeded his Father in his Kingdoms, by the Name of King
Charles II. whose History follows in the next Chapter.

His Royal Highness does bear the Arms of Great Briain, France, and Ireland,
distinguished by a Label of three points Ermine, within the Garter, and
Ensigned with a Coronet composed of Crosses and Flowers de Lize. Which form of
Coronet His present Majesty has by Warrant granted to be born by this Duke
(His Brother) by all His Majesty's immediate Sons, and by all the immediate
Sons and Brothers of the succeeding Kings of England. Which said Grant, because
it directs not only the form of the Diadem to be used by the Son and Heir
apparent to the Crown, but also of the Coronets of other Princes of the Blood
Royal, I have for the Readers information, here exhibited the same. CHARLES R.

Trusty and Welbeloved, We Greet You well, Earl Marshalls Book 1. 25, fol. 86.
a. in. Coll. Arm.

Whereas the Sons and Descendents of Our Royal Ancestors and Predecessors Kings
of England, and other Noble Persons, who, for the eminence of their Extraction
and Merits, are, and have been Dignified with the Titles of Dukes, Marquisses,
Earls, and Viscounts, have borne and used several sorts of Coronets and
Circles, as particular distinctions of their respective Dignities and Degrees;
the which notwithstanding, have not been so established, but that they have in
several Ages admitted of alteration: Wherefore We having observed that the
Coronets used by those of Our Royal Family, have not been enough distinguished
from those used by others. We have thereupon found it fit and necessary so to
settle and establish the use and bearing of such Coronets as may not only
evidence the just esteem we have for those of Our Royal Family, but as may in
all ^imes hereafter Distinguish such from others, though of Eminent Birth and
equal Titles with them. Our Will and Pleasure therefore is, That the Son and
Heir apparent of the Crown for the time being, shall use and bear his Coronet
composed of Crosses and Flower de Lizes with one Arch; and in the midst a Ball
and Cross, as has Our Royal Diadem; and that Our most dear and most entirely
beloved Brother James Duke of York, and so all the immediate Sons of Our Self,
and the immediate Sons and Brothers of Our Successors Kings of England, shall
bear and use his and their Coronets composed of Crosses and Flowers de Lizes,
only, but that all their Sons respectively having the Title of Dukes shall bear
and use their Coronets composed of Crosses, and Flowers or Leaves, such as are
used in the composure of the Coronets of Dukes not being of Our Royal Family,
hereby commanding you Our Principal Herald and King of Arms of Our Order and
your Successors respectively in the said Office, to Emblason and set f^rth the
Arms in all Achievements whatsoever of the Son and Heir apprent of the Crown
for the time being, of Our said most dear and most entirely Beloved Brother
James Duke of York; and of all other descended of Our Royal Family, in such
manner as is hereby expressed and directed. And that you forthwith cause an Entry
to be made in the Public Register in our Office of Arms of this Our Will and
Pleasure, to the end, you, and all others whom it may concern, may duly
execute and observe the same: And for your so doing, this shall be your
sufficient Warrant and full Authority.

Given under Our Signet at Our Court at Whitehall this 9th day of February, in
the Thirteenth Year of Our Reign. By His Majesty's Command, Edw. Nicholas.



20. JAMES STVART, Duke of York and Albany, Earl of Vlster etc. his Royal
Highness, third Son of King Charles I. and Queen Mary, and only Brother living
to our present Sovereign King Charles II. was born upon the 14th day of
October, 1633. at the Palace of St. James, and forthwith Proclaimed at the
Court Gates, Duke of York; upon which several Medals of Silver were cast
abroad. Penes Rad. Sheldon de Beoley Armigerum.
The one side of which contained a Lion Seiant with a Ducal Coronet on his Head
composed of Roses and Flowers de Lize behind a compartment inscribed with the
words, DUX EBORA. NATUS, OCT. 14. 1633. and the other side, a Shield of his
Arms, which are distinguished by a Label of three points Ermine, and Ensigned
with the like Coronet, about which is circumscribed, NON SIC MILL COHORTES.

The 24th of the same Month, being Sunday, he was baptized by Dr. William Laud
Archbishop of Canterbury, and afterward committed to the Government of the
then Countess of Dorset. Bil. signat. de eodem anno.
His Royal Highness was afterward created Duke of York by Letters Patent
bearing date at Oxford the twenty seventh day of January, in the nineteenth
year of his Fathers Reign 1643.

After the surrender of Oxford, he was in 1646, conveyed to London by the
disloyal part of the Long Parliament, and, with his Brother the Duke of
Gloucester and the Lady Elizabeth his Sister, committed to the care of Algernon
Earl of Northumberland, from whom about three years after being at St. James's
(the 20th of April, 1648.) he made his escape disguised in Women's Apparel, and
was conveyed beyond Sea to Dort in Holland by Colonel Bampfield, first to his
Sister the Princess Royal of Orange, and afterward to the Queen his Mother at
Paris, where he was educated in all those Exercises befitting so great a
Prince; and at the age of twenty, entered into the Campaign, serving with much
Gallantry under that great Commander the then Protestant Marshal de Turenne for
the French King against the Spanish Forces in Flanders.

Yet notwithstanding the great Command he had in the King of France his Army,
upon a Treaty between the said King and Oliver Cromwell in the year 1655, he is
advertised to depart that Kingdom with all his Retinue by a prefixed day, not
without some Complements and Apologies for his dismission: also his departure
was respited for some space, in which he was visited and honorably treated by
that Marshal and others of the French Nobility, and likewise by the Duke of
Modena (who was at that time come into France about his marriage with Madam
Laura Martinezzi) whose Daughter the Lady Mary d'Este, his Royal Highness has
lately taken to Wife.) At length he takes leave of the King and Court of
France, and attended by the Earl of St. Albans and other English Lords,
journeys toward Flanders (where the King of Great Britain his Brother then
resided) upon the invitation of Don Juan of Austria, who, being Governor of the
Low Countries, sent to offer him, in the name of the Spanish King, all possible
service and assistance; his Royal Highness thereupon takes up Arms under him
against French then Leagued with the English Rebels in opposition to Spain,
where his magnanimity and early knowledge in Martial Affairs (though
unsuccessful) were very eminent.

Not long after, his present Majesty King Charles II. added to his other
Titles, the Dignity of Earl of Vlster in the Realm of of Ireland, by Letters
Patent bearing date the 10th day of May in the eleventh year of His Reign.

This most illustrious Prince in the year 1660 came over into England with the
said King his Brother. And as to his Titles, time of Election, and Installation
into the most Noble Order of the Garter, I shall refer my Reader unto the
Inscription on his Plate in his Royal Highness Stall at Windsor, which is as
follows,

Du tres. haut tres-puissant et Illustre Prince Jaques friar unique du Roy
nostre Seigneur, Duc d'Yorke et de Albanie, Comte de Vlster, Grand Admiral
d'Angleterre et d'Ireland, Conestable du Chasteau de Douure, Guardien et
Admiral des Cinque Ports, et Chevalier du tres-noble Order de la Jartiere,
Eleu a York le vingtiesme jour d'Auril, 1642. et au cause de la Rebellion
suivante ne sut pas Enstalle au Chasteau de Windsor, Jusque au Quinziesme jour
d'Auril, 1661. Being Lord High Admiral of England in the year 1665. in the War
against the States of the United Netherlands, commanded in Person the whole
Royal Navy on the Seas between England and Holland, where, with incomparable
Valor, and extraordinary hazard of his own Person, after a most sharp dispute,
he obtained a signal Victory over the whole Dutch Fleet commanded by Admiral
Opdam, who perished with his own and many more Dutch Ships in that Fight.

This was not the last Battle in which his Royal Highness adventured himself
for the defense of this Kingdom, when his Majesty and the whole Nation growing
extremely sensible of the great danger unto which the Kings only Brother and
the first Prince of the Blood was exposed, he was not suffered any more so to
hazard his Royal Person.

He is a principal Shield of the Regal Throne, Non sic Mill Cohortes, and in
all probability will be blessed with a numerous Off^pring.

His Royal Highness has married two Wives, the first of which was the Lady
Anne, His first Marriage.
eldest Daughter of Edward Earl of Clarendon, Azure, a Cheveron between t^^^e
Lozen^^. Or, by the name of Hide.
late Lord Chancellor of England, deceased. Which Duchess departed this World
at St. James's House upon the 31 day of March, An. 1671. betwixt the hours of
three and four in the afternoon (in the 34th year of her age) and was interred,
(with several of her Children) in the Vault of Mary Queen of Scots, in the
Chapel of King Henry VII having had Issue by the said Duke her Husband, these
Children following, viz.

21. Charles Stuart Duke of Cambridge, He did bear Quarterly of four pieces.
The 1. France and England quarterly. 2. Scotland. 3. Ireland. The fourth as the
first. Over all a Label of five points Ermine.
eldest Son, I. 4. f. 56. in Coll. Arm.
born at Worcester House in the Strand upon the 22d day of October, 1660. who
liveing not seven Months, deceased at Whitehall upon the 5th day of May, 1661.
(by his death preventing the passing of a Patent, whereby he was to be created
Earl and Duke of Cambridge;) and on the morrow being Monday, was privately
interred in manner following: First being imbalmed, then wrapped in Lead and
put into a Coffin covered with black Velvet: His Corpse was brought in a Barge
from the Privy Stairs to the Parliament Stairs, and thence by Torchlight,
proceeded into the Abbey Church, attended by several of his Royal Highness
Servants, four Heralds, and Garter King of Arms; the Pages of the Dukes Back
Stairs carried the Body; the Canopy was borne by four Knights and Esquires. The
Pall was supported by Mr. Jermin, Mr. Coventry, Sir Henry de Vic, and Sir Alan
Apisley. Garter between two Gentlemen Ushers went immediately before the Body;
and the Lord John Berkley of Stratton supplied the place of Chief Mourner,
followed by many Persons of Quality. At the Church door the Corpse was met by
the Dean, Prebends, and Choire, who proceeded to King Henry VII. his Chapel,
where being reposed till part of the Office of Burial was performed, it was
interred in the Vault with Mary Queen of Scots his Great-great Grandmother
(where, lately before, the Bodies of their Royal Highnesses Henry Duke of
Gloucester, and Mary Princess of Orange his Uncle and Aunt, had been buried)
having this Inscription on a Plate nailed to his Coffin, Depositum

Celsissimi Principis Caroli Ducis Cantabrigiae, filii primogeniti Jacobi Ducis
Eboracensis: Qui natus 22 die Octobris, 1660. Obiit in Aula Whitehall quinto
die Maij, M.DC.LXI.



21. James Stuart Duke of Cambridge, Quarterly of four pieces, the 1. France
and England quarterly. 2. Scotland. 3. Ireland. The fourth as the first. Over
all a Label of five points Ermine. These Arms were thus Marshalled within the
Garter at the Interment of this James Duke of Cambridge.
etc. second Son of his Royal Highness James Duke of York, was born at St.
James's on the 12th day of July, twenty two minutes past one of the Clock in
the morning, An. 1663. The King, and the Earl of Clarendon Lord Chancellor,
were Godfathers, and the Queenmother Godmother.

This James was created Baron of Dauntsey in the County of Wilts, and to the
Heirs Male of his Body; and also into the Dignities and Titles of Earl of
Cambridge and Duke of Cambridge, by Letters Patent bearing date at Westminster
the 23 of August, An. 16 Car. 2. 1664. He had not arrived to the age of three
years and five months, when, at a Chapter held in the Withdrawing Room at
Whitehall, on Wednesday December. 3. 1666. he was by His Majesty Knighted with
the Sword of State, and elected a Companion into the most noble Order of the
Garter, the Sovereign putting the George about his Neck, and Prince Rupert
buckling the Garter about his Leg; but the Installation of this young Duke was
prevented by his death (not seven months after) which happened at Richmond on
Thursday the twentieth of June, 1667. and on Wednesday the 26th of the same
month, his Corpse was privately brought in the Duke his Fathers Barge from
Richmond aforesaid (attended by Richmond Herald, and Rouge-Dragon, Pursuivant
at Arms) and being landed at the Parliament Stairs, was conveyed into the
Painted Chamber near the House of Lords, the Officers of Arms attending, and
there deposited upon Tressells, being covered with a fine Holland Sheet and a
Pall of Velvet of seven Breadths, adorned with eight Escocheons of his Arms;
and from thence under a Canopy of black Velvet with a deep Silk Fringe, it
proceeded to the Abbey of Westminster, Prince Rupert being Chief Mourner, and
Garter principal King of Arms passing before him bareheaded; four Barons
supported the Pall, eight Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber the Canopy, and six
Pages of the Dukes Bedchamber carried the Body, which was attended by several
of the Nobility and Gentry, who proceeded from thence through some Companies of
the Foot-guards, to the door of the Abbey; where it was met by the Dean,
Prebends, and Choire: who went before it (singing an Anthem) into King Henry
VII. his Chapel; where the Corpse was reposed on Tressels again, till part of
the Office of Burial was performed: and then (after Garter had proclaimed the
Style of the defunct) was interred with his Brother in the Sepulcher of Mary
Queen of Scots, having this Memorial following engraven on a Plate upon his
Coffin.

Depositum

Illustrissimi Principis Jacobi Ducis Cantabrigiae, etc. filii secundo-geniti
et Heraedis Potentissimi Principis Jacobi Ducis Eboraci, Qui in Aula Regia
Richmondiae vicesimo die Junii in Domino obdormivit. Aetatis suae Quarto;
Annoque Domini M.DC.LXVII.

21. Charles Duke of Kendal, This Charles did bear Quarterly of four pieces. 1.
France and England quarterly. 2. Scotland. 3. Ireland. The fourth as the first.
Over all a Label of three points Argent, each charged with as many Torteaux.
third Son of His R. H. James Duke of York and Duchess Anne his first Wife,
came into this World at St. James's the 4th day of July, at 13 minutes and an
half before five in the evening, An. 1666. His Godfathers were John Lord
Berkley of Stratton (for the Duke of Cambridge,) and the Duke of Monmouth, and
his Godmother the Countess of Ossory.

He deceased at St. James's upon the 22 day of May, I. 4. fol. 52. in Coll. Arm.
1667. not having accomplished his first year; from whence his Corpse was
brought to the Painted Chamber on the 30 of the same month, and from thence
being attended by many of the Nobility and Gentry his Majesty's and his Royal
Highness Servants, with the Officers of Arms, his Corpse was conveyed under a
Canopy of black Velvet into the Chapel of King Henry VII. and there interred
in the Vault with his Brother Charles Duke of Cambridge, and with the like
solemnity. Upon the Coffin covered with black Velvet, a Copper Plate gilt was
affixed, with this Inscription.

Depositum

Illustrissimi Principis Caroli Ducis Condaliae, etc. filii tertio geniti
Potentissimi Principis Jacobi Ducis Eboraci, qui in Aula Regia sancti Jacobi
dicta, vicesimo secundo die Maij in Domino obdormivit, vix annum habens, Anno
Domini M.DC.LXVII.

21. Edgar Duke of Cambridge, fourth Son of his Royal Highness, was born at St.
James's upon the 14th day of September, eight minutes before seven a Clock in
the morning, An. 1667. whose Godfathers were the Duke of Albemarle and the
Marquis of Worcester, and his Godmother the Countess of Suffolk.

He deceased at Richmond upon the 8th day of June, An. 1671. and was interred
in the same Vault with his three Brothers.

21. Mary Stuart The Arms of Mary Princess of Orange, are, Quarterly. 1. France
and England quarterly. 2. Scotland. 3. Ireland, the 4th as the first, a Label
of three points Ermine. Impaled by quarterly of four pieces. The first is also
quarterly, 1. Azure a Lion rampant and semee of Billets Or Nassau. 2. Or, a
Lion rampant Gules, Dietz. 3. Gules a Fess Argent, Vianden. 4. Gules two Lions
passant guardant Or Catsenelboge. Over all, on an Inescocheon Or, a Fess Sable,
Moers. The second quarter is also quarterly. The 1. and 4th Gules, a Bend Or,
Chalon. The 2. and 3. Or, a Hunters Horn azure stringed and garnished Gules,
Orange. Over all an Escocheon of Geneva, viz Chequie of nine pieces, Or and
Azure. The third quarter is as the second, the fourth as the first. And over
all is an Inescocheon Gules charged with a Fess Imbattelled Argent, by the name
of Buren.
Princess of Orange, etc. eldest Daughter of his Royal Highness James Duke of
York, and Duchess Anne his first Wife, Daughter of Edward Earl of Clarendon,
was born at St. James's the 30th day of April, past one of the Clock in the
morning, An. 1662. whose Godfather is Prince Rupert, and Godmothers, the
Dutchesses of Buckingham and Ormond.

She is a Lady of great Beauty and eminent Virtue, and is now happily become
the Wife of William Henry of Nassau Prince of Orange, etc. their Nuptials being
privately celebrated in her Bedchamber at St. James's aforesaid, on the 4th day
of November, about eight of the Clock in the evening, 1677. by Dr. Henry
Compton Lord Bishop of London; to the great satisfaction of his Majesty, who
gave her in Marriage, the Duke her Father, and joy of both Nations; some of the
most eminent Nobility of this Kingdom and of the United Provinces being present
thereat.

Which happy conjunction we hope will not be so confined, but that whole
Christendom may hereafter share in the good effects thereof. A Match so
proportionable in every circumstance, that it demonstrates the Creator of all
Beings to have made them for each other; seeming rather to be the revivers of
the former alliance betwixt the Royal House of Stuart and the Illustrious
Family of Nassau, than a new Marriage between a Prince William and a Princess
Mary; in the same degree of Consanguinity and Descent, she being the Daughter
of a Son of King Charles I. and he the Son of a Daughter of that Blessed
Martyr, in whom are equally united his Royal Blood and Kingly Virtues. It being
also observable, That this Illustrious Couple entered into this State of
Matrimony the very same day of the Month, that both this Prince and the
Princess Royal Mary his Mother, made their entrance into this World, being the
4th day of November.

21. Anne Stuart, She bears on a Lozenge the Arms of the Duke her Father.
second Daughter, was born on the 6th day of February, 39 minutes past eleven
of the Clock at night, An. 1664. at St. James's; her Godfather being Gilbert
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and her Godmothers, the young Lady Mary her
Sister, and the Duchess of Monmouth. This Lady Anne was for her health sent
into France about the year 1669. and since her return into England, (this young
Lady) has not only acquired a healthful Constitution of Body, but those
accomplishments of Mind, which are very seldom found in a person of her years.

21 Henrietta Stuart, the third Daughter of his Royal Highness James Duke of
York and Duchess Anne his first Wife, had her birth at Whitehall on the 13th
day of January, thirty five minutes past seven at night, An. 1668. her
Godmothers were the Marchioness of Dorchester, and the Countess of Devonshire,
and her Godfather the Duke of Ormond. She lived not past ten Months, and
departing this life at St James's upon the 15 day of November, 1669. Her Corpse
was carried to the Painted Chamber the 19th of the same Month, and that day
attended to her Grave with the like Ceremony as were her Brothers, and buried
in the same Vault with this following Memorial.

Depositum

Illustrissimae Dominae Henriettae filiae natu-tertiae Potentissimi Principis
Jacobi Ducis Eboraci, Quae, in Aula Regia sancti Jacobi dicta, decimo quinto
die mensis Novembris in Domino obdormivit december circiter mensium aetatis, Anno
Domini M. DC. LXIX.

21. Katherine Stuart, fourth Daughter, took her first breath at Whitehall on
the 9th day of February, thirty nine minutes past five a Clock in the evening,
An. 1670. her Godmothers being the Duchess of Buckingham and the Marchioness of
Worcester, and her Godfather, the Prince of Orange. She scarce had completed
her tenth Month, when she breathed her last at St. James's on the 5th day of
December, 1671. and was privately interred in the same Vault with her Brethren
and Sister at Westminster on Friday following, being the 7 day of the same
Month, without the Officers of Arms, or any Solemnity: upon a Copper Plate on
her Coffin, the following words are engraven.

Depositum

Illustrissimae Dominae Catherinae filiae quarto-genitae Potentissimi Principis
Jacobi Ducis Eboraci, quae in Aula Regia Sancti Jacobi dicta, in Domino obdor
mivit, vix december menses habens, quinto die Decembris, Anno a Christo nato, M.
DC. LXXI.

This most illustrious Prince James Duke of York, has taken to his second Wife
the Lady Mary d'Este, His second Marriage.
Sister to Francis the present Duke of Modena, The Arms of d'Este Duke of
Modena, are, Quarterly first Argent, an Eagle displayed, with two Heads. Salle,
2. A^^^ (...) 3. Flowers de Lize, Or, a Border, Counterindented, Or and Gules.
The third as the second, the fourth as the first.
and Daughter of Alphonso d'Este third of the name Duke of Modena, by Madam
Laura Martinessi his Wife. She was born upon the 25th day of September, An.
1658. and had not passed the fifteenth year of her age, when, at Modena, she
was married to his Royal Highness, by his Proxy Henry Earl of Peterborow, who
with a noble Retinue attended her (and the Duchess Dowager her Mother) into
France; and residing some time at Paris, they from thence came to Calais, and
thence setting sail, arrived at Dover on Friday the 21 of November, 1673. and
were there received by the Duke, where the Marriage betwixt him and the said
Duchess Mary was Consummated, by Doctor Nathaniel Crew Lord Bishop of Durham;
the same night she was bedded by his Royal Highness, then not exceeding the age
of 15 years and 2 months.

Being thus arrived, they were enterrained with high respect in the Court of
England, where the Duchess Dowager of Modena having continued (in order to the
settlement of her Daughter the Duchess of York) about the space of six Weeks;
her urgent Affairs calling her back into Italy, in the minority of the Duke of
Modena her Son; she departed from hence on the 30th day of December following,
( viz. 1673.) leaving their Royal Highnesses extremely happy in the affections
of each other; which has since been much increased in their most illustrious
Issue, God having blessed them with three Children in less then four years;
which are as follow, viz.

21. Charles Stuart, He did bear the Arms of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland, distinguished by a Label of five Points Ermine.
Duke of Cambridge, only Son of his Royal Highness James Duke of York, by the
Duchess Mary d'Este his second Wife, was born in the Palace of St. James' on
Wednesday the 7th of November, a quarter of an hour before ten of the Clock at
night, An, 1677. and the next day Baptized there by Doctor Nathaniel Crew Lord
Bishop of Durham. His Majesty and the Prince of Orange being Godfathers, and
the Lady Isabella his Sister Godmother. He died suddenly upon Wednesday the
12th of December, about eleven of the Clock in the morning, An. 1677. and was
privately buried in the Tomb of Mary Queen of Scots the next day in the evening.

21. Katherina Laura Stuart, She did bear the Arms of his Royal Highness her
Father on a Lozenge.
eldest Daughter of his Royal Highness the Duke of York, by the Duchess Mary
his second Wife, came into this World at St. James's the 10th of January, being
Sunday, twenty four minutes past four in the evening, An. 1674. She had for
Godmothers the Ladies Mary and Anne her half Sisters, and for her Godfather the
Duke of Monmouth. The place of her birth was the place of her death, where she
deceased the 3d of October, 1675. and was interred in the Vault of Mary Queen
of Scotland, the 5th day of the same month.

21. Isabella Stuart, She does bear the Arms of her Father on a Lozenge.
second Daughter of his Royal Highness James Duke of York and the Duchess Mary
his second Wife, took 0184 012 her first breath at the Palace of St. James's
upon the 28th day of August, five minutes before eight of the Clock in the
morning, An. 1676. Her Godmothers are the Duchess of Monmouth, and the Countess
of Peterborow, and her Godfather Thomas Earl of Danby Lord High Treasurer of
England. She being Baptized by Dr. John North, Master of Trinity College in
Cambridge, and Prebend of Westminster.

20. 20. HENRY STVART, He did bear Quarterly of four pieces, The 1. France and
England quarterly, 2. Scotland. 3. Ireland. The fourth as the first. Over all a
Label Argent of three points, each charged with Red Rose. Which Arms within the
Garter, Ensigned with a Ducal Coronet, were thus set forth at his Interment.
Duke of Gloucester, and Earl of Cambridge, fourth Son of King Charles I. and
Queen Mary of France, was born at Oatlands in the County of Surrey, on the 8th
day of July, An. 1640. and was Baptized the 22d of the same Month.

About the 8th year of his age, he was by the disloyal part of the Long
Parliament committed to the custody of the Earl of Northumberland at St.
James's, with his Brother the Duke of York and the Lady Elizabeth his Sister,
(whence the Duke of York making his escape) after the Murder of the King their
Father, he and his Sister were sent to Penhurst in the County of Kent, under
the Guardianship of the Countess of Leicester, Sister to the said Earl, being
there treated with great respect; which happiness these Royal Children enjoyed
not long, being thence hurried to Caresbrook Castle in the Isle of Wight, where
his Sister the Lady Elizabeth dying of grief, and his entertainment being
thought too great an expense to the Sedentaries, they resolve to set him at
liberty; and about the beginning of February, 1652. they send him, with two
Servants to Dunkrik, promising to allow him a small exhibition for his
maintenance, provided he would not come near his Brother, or any of his
Relations. But being got on that side the water, he was received according to
his birth, and from Bruxels attended to the Princess of Orange his Sister at
Breda, who received him with great joy, having been in continual fear that his
life would be taken away by those that spared not that of his Royal Father; nor
was he received with less joy at Paris, by the King his Brother, to whom, as
also his Mother the Queen, and his other Relations, he was welcomed as one
risen from the dead, being civilly treated by the King and Queen Mother of
France, and that whole Court.

In the year 1654. the King being at Cullen, kindly entertained by the Princes
of Germany, sent the Marquis of Ormond to Paris to wait on this his Brother the
Duke of Gloucester, to him; whom he the more earnestly desired to have near
him, least his youth might be prevailed upon by the subtilty of Arguments, and
temptation of Riches and Promotion, to change his Religion; whereupon he
undertakes the Journey, and having stayed some time at the Hague with his
Sister the Princess Royal, was at last accompanied by her to the King their
Brother at Cullen aforesaid, she her self staying with them in Germany till
after the Fair at Franckford.

By Letters Patent bearing date the 13th day of May in the 11th year of his
present Majesty King Charles II. his Brother, An 1659. he was created into the
Dignities of Duke of Gloucester, and Earl of Cambridge: And though he lived not
to be Installed, yet was he Elected into the most Noble Order of the Garter
(with Charles Prince of Tarente) by His Majesty at Paris, An. 1653. 5o Car. 2.
and his Investiture performed by Sir Edward Walker Garter, at the Hague on
Monday the 14th of April in the morning, in the same year, the Queen of Bohemia
his Aunt, and the Princess of Orange his Sister, with many more eminent
Persons, being present at the Ceremony. Having been thus Partaker with his
Majesty in his greatest afflictions during the long continuance of the late
unparalleled Usurpation, had at length the happiness to see him peaceably
restored to the Royal Throne of his Ancestors, accompanying him into England,
and landing at Dover upon the 25th of May the following year, viz. An. 1660.
But departed this life at Whitehall unmarried, on Thursday the 13th of
September next ensuing at nine of the Clock in the evening, I. 4. fol. 49. in
Coll. Arm.
being aged twenty years, two months, and five days, generally lamented by all
good Men, being a Prince excellently accomplished, Religious, Valiant, Wise
above his years, a Dutiful and Affectionate Brother, a good Master, and a true
Friend.

His Body being embalmed and coffined, was instantly removed from thence to
Somerset House, and placed in the Privy Chamber there, where it rested until
Friday the 21 day of September aforesaid, under a large Pall of black Velvet
lined with a Sheet of fine Holland, another lesser Pall to cover the Tressels.
The Pall was adorned with eight Escocheons of his Royal Highnesses Arms within
the Garter, and upon the Corpse was placed his Ducal Coronet and a Cap of
Estate, on a black Velvet Cushion.

At six of the Clock in the evening five Barges conveyed the Body and
Attendants by Water to the Parliament Stairs, eighteen Gentlement of the Privy
Chamber being appointed to carry it, and twelve to support the Canopy over it;
from whence to the door of the Abbey, a Guard of Soldiers was placed on each
side the Passage, through which (by Torch-light) the Funeral proceeded,
consisting of many Gentlemen, Esquires, Knights, Baronets, Sons of the
Nobility, Peers, and Great Officers of the Kingdom, who preceded the Corpse,
before which a Herald bare the Coronet and Cushion; four Noblemen supported the
Pall, and after the Body followed his Royal Highness the Duke of York, who was
chief Mourner, before whom went Garter Principal King of Arms, bareheaded, and
after him followed the Dukes of Buckingham, Richmond and Albemarle, and after
them fourteen Earls, and diverse persons of Honor. The Body being thus brought
into the Choire of King Henry VII. his Chapel, was deposited, and a Chair set
for the Duke of York, whilst Dr. Haywood read part of the Service. Then was it
carried into the Chapel on the right side of the Choire, and solemnly
Interred, He (in the absence of the Dean) reading the Office of Burial, and
Garter proclaiming his Style) in the Sepulcher of Mary Queen of Scotland his
Great-Grandmother. His Coffin being covered with black Velvet, has this
Inscription thereon in a Silver Plate:

Depositum

Illustrissimi Principis Henrici Ducis Gloucestriae, Comitis
Cantabrigiae, filii quartogeniti Serenissiuni Regis Caroli
(piae semper memoriae) defuncti, et fratris Serenissimi Regis
Caroli ejus nominis secundi; Qui in Aula Regia apud
Whitehall, Die Jovis Decimo-tertio die Septembris,
Anno a Christo nato 1660. in Domino obdormivit;
Aetatis suae vicesimo.
20. MARY STVART, The Arms of Mary Princess of Orange, were, Quarterly 1.
France and England quarterly. 2. Scotland, 3. Ireland, the fourth as the first.
Impaled by, Quarterly, also of four pieces, 1. Azure, semee of Billets, and a
Lion rampant Or, Nassau. 2. Or, a Lion rampant guardant Gules, crowned Azure,
Dietz. 3. Gules, a Fess Argent, Vianden. 4. Gules 2. Lions passant Guardant, Or
Catzenelenbogen. Over all an Inescocheon quarterly, the first and fourth Gules,
a Bend, Or, Chalon. The second and third Or, a Hunters Horn, Azure, stringed
and garnished, Gules, Orange. And over these, an Escocheon of Geneva, viz.
Chequie of 9 pieces Or and Azure.
Princess of Orange, etc. eldest Daughter of King Charles I. and Queen Mary
youngest Daughter of King Henry IV. of France, was born upon the 4th day of
November in the year 1631, at St. James's; and about the tenth year of her age
( May 2. An. 1641.) was, at Whitehal, espoused to William of Nassau, the only
Son of Henry Frederick Prince of Orange, then Commander in chief of all the
Forces of the States General both by Sea and Land.

Upon the 23 day of February in the same year, she embarked at Dover (being
thither accompanied by the King her Father) from whence with the Queen, she
sailed into Holland, and was there received with much honor by her Father
in-Law Henry-Frederick, a Prince who, by his great Valor and Conduct, had
rendered that Republic flourishing, by adding thereunto several Towns in Frise,
Over-Issel, and Gelderland, with small Expense, few Forces, and little
Bloodshed, so that he deservedly acquired the appellation of Father of Soldiers.

He departed this life (to the great trouble of that State) in the year, 1648.
leaving Issue William of Nassau his only Son beforementioned, to succeed him in
his Hereditary Honors and Commands; but these he enjoyed but a little while;
for Death growing envious of those great Actions which his Courage promised to
the World, snatched him away in the flower of his age at the Hague in Holland,
where he died of the Smallpox, upon the 6th day of November, S. N. 1650. being
twenty four years old.

The Princess Royal Mary his disconsolate Widow, was by him left great with
Child, who nine days after the death of this Prince of Orange her Husband, (
viz. the 14th of November, S. N. 1650.) at nine of the Clock at night was
delivered of a Posthumus and her only Child:

21. William Henry, born at the Hague Prince of Orange, and is now living, An.
1677. To whom were Godfathers, the Lords States General of Holland and Zealand,
and the Cities of Delft, Leyden, and Amsterdam.

In his eighth year this Prince was sent to the University of Leyden, and An.
1660. upon the Princess Royal his Mothers fatal Visit into England, his
Interest was by her recommended to the States, who finding in him an early
appearance of the rare Qualities of his Ancestors, have not only admitted him
to the same Dignities and Trust which they formerly had in that Commonwealth,
but have raised him to a pitch of Greatness and Command far above any of them,
reposing in this generous Prince a faith answerable to the eminency of his
Birth, his Royal Alliance, and his growing Courage and Virtue, which he has
most happily employed in a brave defense of his Country, with a Conduct most
admirable in a person of his youth: But what adds much to his Highnesses
felicity, and the benefit of the States, is the late happy confirmation of his
Alliance to the Crown of Great Britain, by a Marriage with the Lady Mary,
eldest Daughter of his Royal Highness James Duke of York, which was Consummated
upon the 4th day of November, 1677. of which see more page 566 and 567. His
Titles run thus, Guillaume-Henry par la Grace de dien Prince d'Orange et de
Nassan, Comte de Catzenellebogen, Vianen, Dietz, Lingen, Moeurs, Bueren,
Leerdam; Marquis de Vere et Vlissingue; Baron de Breda, etc. Burgrave d'Anvers
et Bezancon; Mareschall hereditaire d'Hollande; Governor hereditaire des
Provinces de Gueldre et Comte de Zutphen, d'Hollande, Zelande, d'Vtrecht, et
Overyssel; Captain General et Admiral Hereditaire des Provinces unies; et
Chevalier du tres Noble Order de la Jartiere.

On the 23d of Sept. 1660. the Princess Royal his Mother came over into
England, invited by His Majesty, willing once again to see her native Country,
from which she had been so many years absent; but the joy for the King her
Brothers Restauraration was very much allayed by the sorrow she conceived for
the loss of her Brother the Duke of Gloucester (who had departed this life on
the 13th of the said month) whom she her self outlived not four months,
deceasing at Whitehall upon the 24th day of December, 1660. to the very great
grief of the King and the Duke of York, to whom she had been an exceeding kind
Sister in the time of their Exile, being a Lady of a noble Soul, an admirable
Virtue, and all Princely Endowments. Her Corpse was from Whitehall immediately
removed to Somerset House, and from thence by Barge (upon the 27th of the same
Month ( viz. three days after) conveyed by water to the Parliament Stairs; and
thence proceeded in the same manner as did the private Interrment of her
Brother the Duke of Gloucester, being interred with him in the Vault of Mary
Queen of Scotland in the Chapel of King Henry VII. with the Memorial following
on a Copper Plate affixed to her Coffin covered with black Velvet.

Depositum

Inclytissimae Principissae Mariae Illustrissimi Gulielmi
Principis Auriaci Relictae, Filiae primogenitae Serenissimi
Regis Angliae Caroli (piae semper memoriae) et Sororis
Serenissimi Caroli Regis ejus nominis Secundi, Quae in
Anla Regia apud Whitehal, die Lunae Vicesimo quarto
die decembris piissime in Dom obdormivit, Anno a Christo
nato MDCLX. Aetatis suae vicesimo nono.
20. ELIZABETH STVART, second Daughter of Charles I. King of Great Britain, was
born at St. James's the 28th day of December, 1635. and baptized on Saturday
the 2d of January next following, proving a Princess of incomparable Abilities
and rare Virtues, but of a cruel and untimely fate; for being by order of the
Regicides sent prisoner to Carisbrook Castle (far more sensible of the murder
of the King her Father than loss of her own liberty) she died for very grief
(upon the 8th day of September, An. 1650.) thereby discharging her Body from a
noisome imprisonment, to rest in a quiet Grave, (at Newport in the Isle of
Wight, where she was interred the 24th of the same month) and her Soul from the
Prison of her earthly Part, to a Heaven of Joy and Glory.

20. ANNE STVART, third Daughter of King Charles I. and Queen Mary of France,
was born upon the 17th day of March, 1636. and not having attained the age of
three years and nine months, departed this life at Richmond the 8th day of
December, An. 1640.

20. HENRIETTA MARIA STVART, The Arms of Henrietta Duchess of Orleans, were,
Quarterly, 1. France and England, quarterly, 1. Scotland, 3. Ireland, the
fourth as the first Impaled by Orleans, viz. Azure, three Flowers de Lize Or, a
Label of the three points, Argent.
Duchess of Orleans and Anjou, the fourth and youngest Daughter of King Charles
I. and Queen Mary of France, was born in Bedford House in the City of Exceter
on the sixteenth day of June, 1644. during the heat of the late Rebellion, and
baptized in the Cathedral there on the third of July following, by Doctor
Burnel Chancellor and Canon Residentiary of the said Church; in the Body
whereof was a Font erected on purpose under a rich Canopy of State, Sir John
Berkley then Governor of the said City, being her Godfather, and the Lady
Poulet, and Lady Dalkeith (the said Princesses Governess) Godmothers, and named
Henrietta Maria.

After the surrender of Exceter, this infant Princess was conveyed to Oxford,
and thence, 1646. to London; whence by her Governess the Lady Dalkeith, she was
carried and escaped into France, being there educated as became her high birth;
but being left wholly to the care and maintenance of the Queen her Mother at
Paris, embraced the Romish Religion.

At the age of sixteen years she came with the Queen her Mother into England,
and six months after returning into France, was married to Philip then Duke of
Anjou (till the death of his Uncle, and since Duke of Orleans) only Brother to
the French King.

She died suddenly (not long after her return from the Visit made to her
Brother His present Majesty at His Town of Dover) on the day of June, An. 1670.
leaving Issue by her said Husband two Daughters. She had Issue a Son also,
called Duke de Valois, who deceased in his Infancy.

20. CHARLES II. An. 1648. Jan. 30.
KING OF GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE, and IRELAND, DEFENDER of the FAITH, etc.
CHAP. III.
OUR Present Sovereign King Charles the Second, is the second Son (the eldest
Son, named also Charlet, His Majesty does bear the same Arms as did King
Charles I. his Father.
dying immediately after he was baptized) of King Charles I and of Queen
Henrietta-Maria of France his Wife, youngest Daughter of King Henry IV.
surnamed The Great; from whom He has running i^ his Veins the Blood of most of
the Crowned Heads of Europe: So that for Kingly Extraction, and long Line of
just Descent, He excells all the Monarchs of the Christian World.

He was born at the Palace of St. James upon the 29th day of May, An. 1630. in
honor of whose Nativity, Medals were made impressed on the one side with these
words, IN. HONOR: CARO: PRING: MAG: BRI: FRA: ET. HIB: NOT: 29 MAII. 1630. The
other side is charged with four oval Shields in Cross, their Bases concentring;
between which Issue forth several Rays representing the Star which at his
Brith was seen (at noonday by many thousands) Such a Remark of Heaven being
never vouchsafed at any Nativity, besides that of our Savior. On the first
Escocheon are the Arms of France and England quarterly; on the second,
Scotland; on the third, France alone; and on the fourth, Ireland; about which
is circumscribed, HACTENUS ANGLORUM NULLI. Signifying that no English Man
before him was born to so high Indes and so large Possessions, He being the
first Prince of Great Britain, France, and Ireland.

He was baptized upon the 27th day of June next following, by the then Bishop
of London, Dr. William Land, having for Godfathers his two Uncles Lewis XIII.
the French King, and Frederick Prince. Elector Palatine of the Rhine,
represented by their Proxies the Duke of Richmond, and Marquis of Hamilton. His
Grandmother the Queen Mother of France being his Godmother, was represented by
the Duchess of Richmond.

In May 1638. He received the Honor of Knighthood, was Elected into the most
Noble Order of the Garter, and Installed at Windsor with great Solemnity: about
which time, by Order, not Creation He was called Prince of Wales, and had the
whole Profits of that Principality, and diverse other Lands annexed, and the
Earldom of Chester granted unto Him, holding his Court apart from that of the
King his Father.

At the age of eight years this Prince had for Governor the Earl of Newcastle,
and after him the Earl of Berkshire, and for Preceptor or Tutor Doctor Duppa
late Bishop of Winchester; He was, at the age of 12 years, with the King his
Father at the Battle of Edgehil, and soon after at Oxford was committed to the
care of the Marquis of Hertford. At about fourteen years old we find Him in the
head of an Army in the West; and afterward from Cornwall is transported into
the Isle of Scilly, and after to Jersey, and thence to his Royal Mother the
Queen at St. Germains near Paris.

In the year 1648. Anno 1648.
being at Sea with some Naval Forces, He made an attempt to rescue the King his
Father (then a Prisoner in the Isle of Wight) out of the hands of his
Rebellious Subjects. After whose horrid Murder, Jan. 30. the Sedentaries at
Westminster declare Monarchy and the House of Peers useless, and form a
Commonwealth, causing all public Instruments to be issued forth in the name of
the Keepers of the Liberties of England by Authority of Parliament, handselling
their new Government with the Blood of Duke Hamilton, the Earl of Holland, and
the most loyal Lord Capel, all three Peers of this Kingdom; who were beheaded
in the new Palace Yard in Westminster, the 9th day of March, in the same year.

His Majesty King Charles II. Anno 1650.
is in Holland saluted King, and soon after Proclaimed in Scotland, where he
landed in June, 1650. having narrowly escaped the English Fleet which lay in
wait to intercept him in his passage. Cromwell being lately constituted General
of the Commonwealths Army, invades Scotland, and upon the 3d day of September,
obtains a great Victory against the Scotch Covenanters at Dunbar; after which,
his Majesty in his twentieth year, is, on New Years Day, Crowned at Scoone near
St. Johnston, with as great Magnificence and Solemnity as the State of Affairs
would then admit of: For the loss of the late Battle, and the great disunion
betwixt the Royalists and the Covenanters, whose zeal would not admit of their
assistance, so much weakened the Kings Affairs, that the English Rebels had
overrun a great part of that Kingdom, forcing His Majesty into the most
Northern Parts; where finding he could not long subsist, He marches with all
speed into England, Anno 1651.
and is so closely attended by Cromwell's Army, that His English Friends were
thereby prevented from a conjunction with Him, very few coming in unto him of
any quality or interest, except the Earls of Derby and Shrewsbury: So that
having marched as far as Worcester, His Majesty is there encountered by Cromwell,
upon the same day of the Month that the year before he had won the Battle of
Dunbar, viz. the 3d of September, and had the fortune (much out-numbring the
Scots) to destroy the Kings whole Army, which were either slain or made
prisoners: But the King, after heroic Acts of Personal Valor, is, by the King
of Kings, not only shielded in the day of Battle, but wonderfully delivered out
of the hands of the Pursuers, who, after he had wandered in Disguise about
England for the space of six Weeks, a Sum of Money promised to those that
should discover Him, and penalty of High Treason to any that should conceal
Him, being seen and known to many persons of all Conditions, and both Sex, and
necessitated to appear in so many Places and Companies, at last found an
opportunity to transport Himself from a Creek near Shoram in Sussex, to Feccam
not far from Havre de Grace in France. In which Kingdom being for several years
received and treated as King of Great Britain; by His Mediation and Interest
with the Prince of Conde, and Duke of Lorrain, then in the head of two mighty
Armies against the French King, quenched the Flames of that universal
Rebellion, and was mainly instrumental in the recalling the then banished
Cardinal Mazarine.

The years from 1651 to 1659. in Germany, Spain, and Flanders, He passed his
time in those Studies and Exercises which became his Royal Person, in
soliciting the aid of Christian Princes, and in advising and with vigor
promoting the several Attempts of his Friends in England, until the year, 1660.
Anno 1660.
at which time his Majesty being at Bruxels within the Spanish Territories, and
observing an universal inclination and disposition of all England to receive
Him, He prudently removed to Breda in the Dominions of the States of the United
Netherlands in the Month of April, and thence in May to the Hague; whence,
after a splendid Entertainment, and an humble and hearty Invitation by the
English Commissioners, sent from the then Convention at Westminster, He
embarked at Scheveling the 23d of May 1660. on board the English Fleet, landed
at Dover the 25th, and on the 29th following, being His Birthday, and then
just thirty years of Age, He made His entrance into London, being received with
the greatest and most universal joy and acclamations imaginable.

His Majesty sat in Parliament the first day of June following; Anno 1661.
and on the 22d of April, 1661. rode triumphantly from the Tower to
Westminster, in order to his Coronation, which the next day, (being the Feast
of St. George) was there performed in the Church of St. Peter, with all the
circumstances of Royalty.

Thus was this persecuted and afflicted King miraculously preserved, and by the
Almighty Hand (notwithstanding the power and subtilty of his most inveterate
Enemies) Seated in the Throne of his Forefathers in Peace, the desire of Him,
like Lightning flying throughout the whole Kingdom, in so forcible a manner,
that He was solemnly Invited, triumphantly Received, free and unburthened from
any Conditions or Limitations, or Obligation to any Foreign Prince or
Potentate, without effusion of Blood or open Violence. This was the Lords
doing, and must for ever be marvelous in our Eyes, not at all doubting but that
the Lord of Hosts, who has delivered Him from the Paws of the Lion and the
Bear, will also deliver Him out of the Hands of the Philistine.

The Arms of Portugal are, Argent 5 Escocheons in Cross, Azure, each charged
with as many Plates in Saltire, of the first, with a point Sable, on a Border
Gules, 7 Castles Or.
His Majesty has taken to Wife the Infanta of Portugal, Donna Katherina, whose
Espousals were Celebrated at Portsmouth in May, 1662. by Gilbert late Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury. She was born at Villa Vicosa, upon the 15th day of
November, being the Feast of St. Katherine, from whom she took her Name, An.
1638. Her Father was John IV. King of Portugal, and her Mother Donna Lucia, the
Daughter of the Duke of Medina Sidonia, John Emanuel Perez de Gusman, and of
Jane de Sandoval, Daughter of the Duke of Lerme, by Katherine de la Cerda his
Wife. She is only Sister of Alphonso VI. King of Portugal, and Don Pedro the
present Regent of that Kingdom.

FINIS.
A TABLE Of the Names and Titles of Persons mentioned in this GENEALOGICAL
HISTORY; With Direction to find out the EFFIGIESES and SEALS of the KINGS, etc.
with the MONUMENTS and EPITAPHS herein Contained.
A.
A Delidis or Adeliza of England, Page 10. Adela or Alice of England, Countess
of Blois, Page 10. Adeliza of Lovaine, Queen of England, Page 26. Agatha of
England, Page 12. Allan, Earl of Little Britain, Page 9. Alexander 1. King of
Scots, Page 33. Alexander II. King of Scots, Page 85 a. Alexander III. King of
Scots, Page 93. Alice Fitz-Alan, Countess of Kent, Page 216. Alice Halys,
Countess of Norfolk, Page 206. Alice Lacy, Countess of Lancaster, etc. Page
108. Alice Plantagenet, Lady Mountague, Page 206. Almerick Montford, Earl of
Evereux, Page 48. Alphonso VIII. King of Castile, Page 70. Alphonso X. King of
Castile and Leon, Page 179. Alphonso, third Son of King Edward I. Page 138.
Amitia de Guader, Page 30. Amitia, Countess of Clare, etc. Page 49. Anne of
Bohemia, Queen of England, 193. Her Seal, 124. Tomb, p. 203. Epitaph, Page 194.
Anne Beaufort, Lady Paston, Page 324. Anne of Burgundy, Duchess of Bedford,
304. Her Epitaph, Page 305. Anne of Denmark, Queen of Great Britain, 522. Her
Epitaph, Page 527. Anne Clarges, Duchess of Albemarle, Page 423. Anne de
Gonzaga de Cleves, Page 534. Anne Hide Duchess of York, Page 564. Anne Holand,
Lady Nevil, Page 217. Anne Manny, Countess of Pembroke, Page 208. Anne
Montacute, Duchess of Exceter, Page 217. Anne Mortimer, Countess of Cambridge,
Page 225 and 367, Anne Mowbray, Duchess of York, Page. 393. Anne Nevil, Queen
of England, 405. and Princess of Wales, Page. 299. Anne Plantagenet, Countess
of Stafford and Eu, Page 232. Anne Russel, Countess of Worcester, Page 342.
Anne Segrave, Abbess of Barking, Page 208. Anne Somerset, Countess of
Northumberland, Page 335. Anne Somerset, Lady Winter, Page 340. Anne Somerset,
Wife of Henry Howard of Norfolk, afterward Earl Marshal of England, Page 345.
Anne Somerset, Page 349. Anne St. Leoger, Lady Roos, Page 376. Her Epiraph,
ibid. Anne Stafford, Duchess of Exceter, Page 217. Anne Stafford, Countess of
March, Page 225. Anne Stuart, third Daughter of King Charles I. Page 574. Anne
Stuart, second Daughter of James Duke of York, Page 567. Anne of York, Duchess
of Norfolk, Page 396. Anne of York, Duchess of Exceter, 375. Her Tomb, Page
377. Antigone, Bastard of Gloucester, Countess of Tanquervile, Page 311.
Archibald Douglas, Earl of Angus, Page 496. Arthur Duke of Britain, Page 68.
Arthur Somerset, Page 349. Arthur Plantagenet, Viscount Lisle, Page 421. Arthur
Pole, Page 418. Arthur Tudor, Prince of Wales, Page 445. His Monuments, 446 and
447. Epitaph, ibid. Anbrey de Vere, 47. Aveline de Fortibus, Countess of
Lancaster, 105. Her Tomb, 104.
B.
BAldwin of Bologne, 42. Beatrice of England, Duchess of Britain, 93. a.
Beatrice, Queen of the Romans, 97. Berengaria of Navarre, Queen of England, 97.
Blanch da la Tour, 179. Blanch of Lancaster, Lady Wake, 110. Her Seal, 102.
Blanch of Lancaster, Duchess of Lancaster, 113 and 244. Blanch of Lancaster,
Duchess of Bavaria, 269. Blanch, Queen of Navarre, and Countess of Lancaster,
105. Blanch Somerset, Lady Arundel, 341. Bourchard de Montmorency, 33. Bridget
Plantagenet, Lady Carden, 421. Bridget Whitmore, Lady Somerset, 340. Bridget of
York, Nun of Dertford, 396.
C.
CEcelie of England, Abbess of Cane, 9. Cecilie Nevil, Duchess of York, 369.
Her Arms, 370. Her Seal, 352. Cecilie of York, Viscountess Wells, 395. Charles
I. King of Great Britain, 538. His Effigies, 519. Seals, 515 and 516. Epitaph,
561. Charles II. King of Great Britain, Book 7. Chap. 3. His Effigies, 519.
Seals, 517. Charles Duke of Burgundy, 380. Charles Lodowick, Prince Elector,
532 Charles Gerrard Knight. 334. Charles Stuart Duke of Cambridge, 564 Charles
Stuart, Duke of Kendal, 566. Charles Somerset, Earl of Worcester, 327 and 325.
His Seal, 240. Tomb, 329. Charles Somerset Knight. 330 and 334. Charles Somerset,
Knight of the Bath, 339. Charles Somerset, Lord Herbert, 348. Charlote of
Hessen, Countess Palatine, etc. 532. Christopher Duke of Albemarle, 423.
Christian North, Countess of Worcester, 336. Conan le Gross, Earl of Britain,
39. Constance of Castile, Duchess of Lancaster, 244. Constance, Countess of
Britain, 67. Constance of England, Duchess of Britain, 9. Constance, Bastard
of England, Viscountess Beaumont, 33. Constance of France, Countess of Bologne,
42. Constance Holand, Countess Marshall, 211. Constance of York, Countess of
Gloucester, 360.
D.
DAvid II. King of Scots, 155. Dorothy Nevil, Countess of Exceter, 335.
E.
EDgar Stuart, Duke of Cambridge, 566. Edmond of Almaine, Earl of Cornwall, 99
and 101. His Seals, 94. Edmond Beaufort, Duke of Somerset, 326. Edmond de la
Pole, Earl of Suffolk, 379. Edmond, Earl of Lancaster, 103. f. 92. b. His
Seals, 102. Tomb, 106. Edmond of Langley, Duke of York, 357. His Tomb, 359.
Edmond Longespee, 118. Edmond Mortimer Knight. 222. Edmond Mortimer, Earl of March,
222 and 225. Edmond Mortimer, Earl of March, 366. His Seal, 353. Edmond
Plantagenet, Earl of Kent, 213 and 214. Edmond, Earl of Stafford, 232. Edmond
Tudor, 447. Edmond Tudor, Earl of Richmond, 283 and 319. His Epitaph, 284.
Edmond of Woodstock, Earl of Kent, 213 and 144. Edmond of York, Earl of
Rutland, 375. Edward of Engolsme, 189 and 218. Edward, Prince of Aquitaine and
Wales, 181, 177 and 215 His Seals, 125. Tomb, 188. Epitaph, 187, 189. Edward
Courtney, Earl of Devon, 399. Edward I. King of England, etc. 127. fol. 92. b.
Seals, 120. Effigies, 127. His Monument, 136. Epitaph, 137. Edward II. King of
England, etc. 145. 138. His Seal being Prince of Wales, 122. His Seal being
King of England, 121. His Effigies, 127. Monument, 152.
Edward III. King of England and France, 157 and 153. His Seals being Duke of
Aquitaine, 123. His Seals being King of England, 122 and 123. His Seals And
France, 124. His Effigies, 127. His Tomb, 176. Epitaph, 175.
Edward IV. King of England, etc. 381. The Seal of his Earldom of March, 354.
His Seal, 353. His Effigies, 381. His Monument inter, 390 and 391. Edward V.
King of England, 400. His Effigies, 381. His Cenotaph, 403. Edward VI. King of
England, etc. 467. His Seal, 428. His Effigies, 433. The Altar under which he
lies Interred, 471. His Epitaph, 472. Edward of Lancaster, Prince of Wales,
299. His Seal, 240. Edward Plantagenet, Son of Thomas of Brotherton, 206.
Edward Plantagenet, Duke of York, 362. His Seal, 352. Edward Plantagenet, Earl
of Warwick, 414. Edward, Count Palatine of the Rhine, 534. Edward Somerset,
Knight of the Bath, 340. Edward Somerset, Earl of Worcester, 338. Edward
Somerset, Marquis of Worcester, 344. Edward Winter Knight, 340. Edward of York,
Prince of Wales, 410. Ela Longespee, Lady Audley, 118. Ela, Countess of
Salisbury, 114. Her Seal, 57, Ela Longespee, Countess of Warwick, 116. Her
Seal, 57. Ela Longespee the younger, 117. Eleanor of Aquitaine, Queen of
England, 60. Eleanor Barry, Countess of Ormond, 339. Eleanor Beauchamp, Duchess
of Somerset, 322. Her Effigies, ibid. Eleanor Beaufort, Countess of Ormond and
Wiltshire, 323. Eleanor Bohun, Duchess of Gloucester, 227. Her Monument, 228.
Epitaph, 229. Eleanor of Castile, Queen of England, 129. Her Seal, 120.
Monument, 131. Epitaphs, 130. Eleanor de Clare, Lady le Despenser, 140. Eleanor
Cobham, Duchess of Gloucester, 308. Eleanor, the Damsel of Britain, 69. Eleanor
of England, Countess of Bar, 139. Eleanor of England, Queen of Castile, 70.
Eleanor of England, Countess of Pembroke and Leicester, fol. 86. a. Eleanor of
England, Duchess of Geldres, 155. Eleanor Holand, Countess of March, 224.
Eleanor of Lancaster, Lady Beaumont, 111. Eleanor of Provence, Queen of
England, fol. 89. a. Seals, 57. Eleanor Somerset, Lady Vaughan, 334. Eleanor
Sutton, Countess of Worcester, 328. Elizabeth Fitz-Alan, Duchess of Norfolk,
211. Elizabeth, Bastard of England, Queen of Scots, 33. Elizabeth Beaufort,
Lady Lewis, 324. Elizabeth Brown, Countess of Worcester, 332. Her Tomb, 333.
Elizabeth de Burgh, Duchess of Clarence, 219. Elizabeth Cavendish, Duchess of
Albemarle, 423. Elizabeth de Clare, Lady Burgh, 141. Elizabeth Dormer, Lady
Herbert, 349. Elizabeth of England, Countess of Holand and Hereford, 143. Her
Seal, 121. Elizabeth Gray, Viscountess Lisle, 421. Elizabeth Hastings, Countess
of Worcester, 338. Elizabeth Herbert, Countess of Worcester, 327. Her Monument,
329. Elizabeth of Juliers, Countess of Kent, 214. Elizabeth of Lancaster,
Duchess of Exceter, 251. Her Effigies, 252. Elizabeth of Lancaster, Duchess of
Exceter, 217. Elizabeth Mortimer, Lady Percy, 223. Elizabeth Nevil, Lady
Danvers, 335. Elizabeth Plantagenet, Lady Jobson, 424. Elizabeth, Princess
Palatine, 535. Elizabeth Plantagenet, Lady Lumley, 399. Elizabeth Powell, Lady
Somerset, 339. Elizabeth Segrave, Lady Mowbray, 208. Elizabeth Somerset, Lady
Fox, 334. Elizabeth Somerset, Lady Gerard, 334. Elizabeth Somerset, Lady
Guilford, 340. Elizabeth Somerset, Viscountess Mountague, 344. Elizabeth
Somerset, Countess of Powis, 346. Elizabeth Somerset, Lady Savage, 330.
Elizabeth Somerset, Wife of William Windsor, 337. Elizabeth Stuart, Queen of
Bohemia, 530. Elizabeth Stuart, second Daughter of King Charles I. 573.
Elizabeth Tudor, Queen of England, 482. Her Seal, 430. Her Effigies, 473. Her
Tomb, 493. Her Epitaph, 492 and 494. Elizabeth Tudor, Daughter of Henry VII.
447. Her Epitaph, 448. Elizabeth West, Countess of Worcester, 328. Elizabeth
Woodvile, Queen of England, 385. Her Seal, 352. Elizabeth of York, Queen of
England, 435 and 395. Her Effigies on the Tomb, inter 442 and 443. Her Epitaph,
441. Elizabeth of York, Duchess of Suffolk, 378. Emme Brain, Lady Somerset,
334. Emelina, Countess of Vlster, 116. Ernest Auguste, Duke of Brunswicke, 535.
Eustace, Earl of Bologne, 42. Eustace de Pacie, 32.
F.
FRancis Brown. Viscount Mountague, 344. Francis Hastings, Earl of Huntington,
417. Francis Jobson Knight. 424. Frances Plantagenet, Wife of John Basset,
afterward married to Tho. Monk, 422. Francis Somerset, 334. Frances Somerset,
Wife of William Morgan, 341. Frederick II. Emperor of Germany, fol. 86. b.
Frederick V. King of Bohemia, Prince Elector Palatine, etc. 530. Frederick
Henry, Count Palatine, etc. 532.
G.
GEoffry, Duke of Britain, etc. 67. Geoffry Fitz-Empress, Earl of Nants, 37
Geoffry Fitz-Roy, Base Son of King John, fol. 85. b. Geoffry de Mandevile, Earl
of Essex, 49. Geoffry Plantagenet, Earl of Anjou, 34. His Epitaph, 35. Geoffry
Pole Knight. 418. Geoffry, Archbishop of York, 71. George Manors, Lord Roos, 376.
His Epitaph, ibid. George Monk, Duke of Albemarle, 422. George Somerset, Knight.
330. George Vernon of Hodnet, 311. George of York, Duke of Bedford, 395. George
of York, Duke of Clarence, 411. Gertrude Blount, Marchioness of Exceter, 398.
Gustavus, Count Palatine of the Rhine, 535. Gervais of Blois, Abbot of
Westminster, 44. Gilbert, Bastard of England, 31. Gilbert de Clare, Earl of
Gloucester and Hertford, 139. His Seal, ibid. Gilbert de Clare, Earl of
Gloucester, etc. 140. Gundred of England, Countess of Surrey, 12. Guy, Viscount
of Thonars, 67.
H.
HAdewise Countess of Gloucester, 48. Hamon, Son of Robert Consul, 47. Hawis,
Countess of Devonshire, 51. Hellen Gardener, Base Daughter to Jasper Duke of
Bedford, 285. Henrietta Maria of France, Queen of Great Britain, 530. Henrietta
Maria Somerset, 349. Henrietta Stuart, third Daughter of James Duke of York,
567. Henry of Almaine, 98. Henry, Bastard of England, 31. Henry Beaufort,
Cardinal and Bishop of Winchester, 253. His Tomb, 255. Henry Beanfort, Duke of
Somerset. 325. Henry Beaufort, Earl of Somerset, 315. Henry of Blois, Bishop of
Winchester, 11. Henry Bourchier, Earl of Essex, 367. Henry, Crowned King, Son
of Henry II. 66. His Seal, 54. Henry III. King of Castile, 253. Henry Courtney,
Marquis of Exceter, 398. Henry IV. Emperor. 34. Henry Fitz-Count. 51. Henry
Ferrers Knight. 212. Henry Fitz-Roy, Duke of Richmond, 466. Henry Guilford Knight. 340.
Henry Holand, Duke of Exceter, 217. Henry Holand, Duke of Exceter, 375. Henry
Howard, Earl of Norwich, and Earl Marshal of England 345. Henry I. King of
England, etc. 9. 24. His Seals, A. B. Effigies, 1. Epitaphs, 27, 28. Henry II.
King of England, etc. 37.59. His Seal being Duke of Normandy, 54. His Seal
being King of England, ibid.
His Effigies, 59. Tomb, inter 64 and 65. Epitaph, 64 and 65. Henry III. King
of England, etc. f. 87. and 85. b. His Seals, 56. Effigies, 59. Monument, 92.
a. Epitaphs. fol. 92. b. Henry IV. King of England, 250 and 258. His Seal, 238.
Effigies, 258. Tomb, 267. Henry V. King of England, 268 and 270. His Effigies,
258. Seal as Prince of Wales, 239. Seal as King of England, 239. His Monument,
281 and 282. Epitaph, 282.
Henry VI. King of England, etc. 283 and 286. His Effigies, 258. Seal, 240.
Henry VII. King of England, etc. 433. His Seal, 426. Effigies, 433. His Sacel
and Tomb, inter 442 and 443. Epitaph, 444. Henry VIII. King of England, 449.
His Seal, 427. His Effigies, 433. Henry Duke of Lancaster, 110.112. His Seal,
102. Henry Earl of Lancaster, 109.107. His Seal, 102. Henry of Normandy, 18.
Henry, Lord Percy of Alnwick, 111. Henry, Lord Percy, called Hotspurre, 223.
Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland, 335. Henry Pole, Lord Mountague, 417.
Henry V. Duke of Saxony, etc. 69. Henry, second Son of King Edward I. 138.
Henry Somerset, Earl of Worcester, 332. His Tomb, 333. Henry Somerset, Marquis
of Worcester, 341. Henry Somerset, Marquis of Worcester, 347. Henry, Lord
Stafford, 419. Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley, 500. His Epitaph ibid. King of
Scots, ibid. Henry Frederick Stuart, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall and
Rothsay, 528. His Hearse, 529. Henry Stuart, Duke of Gloucester, 569. His
Depositum, 571. Henrietta, Princess of Transylvania, 535 Henry Tudor, eldest
Son of Henry VIII. 465. Henry of York, 374. Hubert de Burgo, Earl of Kent, 49.
Hugh de Audley, Earl of Gloucester, 141. Hugh le Despenser, 140. Humphrey de
Bohun, Earl of Hereford, etc. 143. Humphrey of Lancaster, Duke of Gloucester,
269 and 307. His Tomb, 310. and Epitaph, 309. Humphrey Plantagenet, Earl of
Buckingham, 232. Humphrey Earl of Stafford, 324.
J.
JAmes I. King of Scots, 316. James IV. King of Scots, 495. Jame V. King of
Scots, 497. James, King of Great Britain, etc. sixth of the name King of Scots,
519. His Effigies, 519. Seal, 514. His Depositum, 528. James Stuart Duke of
York, 562. James Stuart, Duke of Cambridge, 565 James, Lord Berkley, 212. James
Butler, Earl of Ormond and Wiltshire, 323. Jane Nevile, Lady Mountague, 417.
Jane Seymour, Queen of England, 458. Jane Somerset, Lady Mansel, 336. Jasper
Tudor, Duke of Bedford, 284. Jaquelina of Bavaria, Duchess of Gloucester, 308.
Jaquetta of Luxemburgh, Duchess of Bedford, 305. Ida Longespee, Wife to Walter
Fitz-Robert, 117. Idonea de Camvile, Countess of Salisbury, 118. Ingelrame de
Coucy, E. of Bedford, 178 Joane of Acres, Countess of Gloucester, etc. 139.
Joane de Bar, Countess of Surrey, 139. Her Seal, 122. Joane, Bastard of
England, Princess of Wales, fol. 87. a. Joane Beaufort, Lady of Hoth, 324.
Joane Beaufort, Queen of Scots, 316. Joane Beaufort, Countess of Westmorland,
256. Her Epitaph, 257. Joane of England, Queen of Scots, fol. 85. b. Joane of
England, Queen of Scots, 155. Joane of England, entitled Queen of Sicilie, 70.
And Countess of Tholosa, 71. Her, Effigies, inter 64 and 65. Joane of England,
entitled Queen of Spain, 179. Joane Holand, Duchess of York, 360. Joane of
Lancaster, Lady Mowbray 110. Joane of Morienne, Countess of Flanders. 18. Joane
of Navarr, Queen of England, 263. Her Effigies, 267. Joane Plantagenet, Lady
Talbot, 234. Joane, Princess of Wales, 184.215. John, King of England, 81, 49.
His Seal being Lord of Ireland, 55. His Seal being King of England, 56.
Effigies, 59. Tomb, fol. 85. a. Epitaph, fol. 85. b.
John, King of Castile, Duke of Lancaster, 243. His Seals, 238. Tomb, 249. His
Epitaph, 248. John I. King of Portugal, 250. John, Bastard of Clarence, 303.
John Beaufort, 323. John Beaufort, Duke of Somerset, 317. His Monument, 318.
John Beaufort, Earl of Somerset, 253. His Monumental Effigies, 302. John, Lord
Beaumont, 111. John II. Duke of Brabant, 143. John de Burgh, 142. John
Cornwell, Lord Fanhop, 251. His Effigies, 252. John Courcy, Earl of Vlster,
fol. 86. b. John Fitz-Count, 52. John de Dreux, Duke of Britain, fol. 93. b.
John, eldest Son of King Edward I. 138. John of Eltham, Earl of Cornwall, 153.
His Monument, 154. John Hastings, Earl of Pembroke, 209. John Hastings, the
younger, Earl of Pembroke, ibid. John Hastings, Earl of Pembroke, 179. John
Hastings, Earl of Pembroke, 223. John I. Earl of Holand, etc. 143. John Holand,
Duke of Exceter, 251. John Holand, Duke of Exceter, 216 and 217. John of
Lancaster, Duke of Bedford, 268.304. His Seal, 240. Monument and Epitaph, 306.
John of Lancaster, Lord of Beaufort, 107. John Montfort, Duke of Britain, 179
John Mortimer Knight. 222. John, Lord Mowbray of Axholme, 110. John Mowbray, Duke
of Norfolk, 211. John Mowbray, Earl of Nottingham, 208. John Nevile, Lord
Latimer, 335. John Plantagenet, Earl of Kent, 214. John de la Pole, Duke of
Suffolk, 378. John Savage Knight. 330. John, Lord Segrave, 207. John Somerset Knight.
343. John Sounder Knight. 189. John, Lord Wells, 396. Issabel of England, Empress
of Germany, fol. 86. a. Issabel of France, Queen of England, 145. Her Seals,
121. Issabel of France, Queen of England and France, 199. Issabel of Castile,
Duchess of York, 360. Issabel Coucy, Countess of Bedford, 178. Issabel de
Cornwall, Lady Berkley, 99. Issabel, Countess of Gloucester. 49. Issabel of
Lancaster, Abbess of Ambresbury, 110. Issabel Longespee, Lady Vescy, 116.
Issabel Marshal, Countess of Cornwall and Gloucester, 96. Her Epitaph, 97
Issabel Mowbray, Lady Berkley, 212. Issabel Nevile, Duchess of Clarence, 411.
Issabella Stuart, sixth Daughter of James Duke of York, Issabella de Warren,
Countess of Bologne, 43. Issabel of York, Countess of Essex, 367. Julian
Bastard of England, 32.
K.
KAtherine of England, Daughter of Henry III. fol. 94. b. Katherine of France,
Queen of England, 277. Her Seal, 239. Epitaph, 278. Katherine Howard, Queen of
England. 459. Katherine of Lancaster, Queen of Castile, 253. Katherine Nevil,
Duchess of Norfolk, 212. Katherine Nevil, Countess of Northumberland, 335.
Katherine Parr, Queen of England, 460. Katherine Pole, Countess of Huntington,
417. Katherine of Portugal, Queen of Great Britain, Book 7. Chap. 3. Katherine
Somerset, Lady Petre, 340. Katherine Somerset, Lady Windsor, 341. Katherine of
Spain, Queen of England, 450. Katherine Spencer, Countess of Norththumberland,
323. Katherine Stuart, fourth Daughter of James Duke of York, 568. Katherina
Laura Stuart, fifth Daughter of James Duke of York, 569. Katherine Swinford,
Duchess of Lancaster, 247. Her Epitaph, 248. Katherine Tudor, 448. Katherine
Woodvile, Duchess of Bedford, 285. Katherine of York, Countess of Devonshire,
397. Her Seal, 354.
L.
LEwellin, Prince of Wales, fol. 87. a. Lionel, Duke of Clarence, 219.277.
Lovisa Hollandina, Princess Palatine, Lady Abbess of Maubuison, 535. Lucy
Nevile, Lady Cornwallis, 335. Lucy Somerset, Wife of Henry Herbert, 337. Lucy
Somerset, Lady Latimer, 335.
M.
MAbel, Countess of Evereux, 48. Mabel Fitz-Hamon, Countess of Gloucester, 45.
Mabel, Wife of Robert de Vere, 47. Magdalen of France, Queen of Scots, 497.
Margaret of Anjou, Queen of England, 291. Margaret Beauchamp, Duchess of
Somerset, 317. Her Tomb, 318. Margaret Beaufort, Countess of Devonshire, 316.
Margaret Beaufort, Countess of Richmond, 284.318. Her Seal. 240. Her Tomb, 320.
Her Epitaph, 319. Margaret Beaufort, Countess of Stafford, 324. Margaret de
Clare, Countess of Cornwall and Gloucester, 141. Margaret of Clarence, Countess
of Salisbury, 416. Margaret de Clare, Countess of Cornwall, 101. Her Seal, 94.
Margaret Douglas, Countess of Lenox, 497. Her Epitaph, 498. Tomb, 499. Margaret
of England, Duchess of Brabant, 143. Margaret of England, Countess of Pembroke,
179. Margaret of England, Queen of Scots, fol. 93. a. Margaret of France, Queen
of England, 133. Her Seal, 120. Margaret Holand, Duchess of Clarence, 303.
Countess of Somerset, 315. Margaret Longespee, Countess of Lincoln, 118.
Margaret Marshal, Duchess of Norfolk, 207. Her Seal, 122. Margaret Mowbray,
Lady Howard, 212. Margaret Nevile, Duchess of Exceter, 256. Margaret O Brian,
Marchioness of Worcester, 345. Margaret Spencer, Wife of Thomas Carry, 324.
Margaret Stuart, second Daughter of King James, 535. Margaret Tudor, Queen of
Scots, 495. 447. Margaret Wake, Countess of Kent, 213 Margaret of York, Duchess
of Burgundy, 380. Her Seal, 353. Margaret of York, died young, 397. Mary
Arundel, Lady Somerset, 343. Mary de Bohun, Countess of Derby, 259. Mary of
Bologne, Countess of Flanders, 44. Mary Bowlayes, Lady Somerset, 330. Mary
Capel, Marchioness of Worcester, 348. Mary de Concy, Wife of Robert de Bar,
178. Mary of England, a Nun, 143. Mary of England, Duchess of Britain, 179.
Mary Beatrice d'Este Duchess of York, 568. Mary of France, Queen of Great
Britain, 540. Mary Howard, Duchess of Richmond, 466. Mary of Lancaster, Lady
Percy, 111. Mary of Lorrain, Queen of Scots, 497. Mary Roos, Countess of
Norfolk, 206. Mary Somerset, 349. Mary Somerset, Lady Gray of Wilton, 331. Mary
Stuart, Queen of Scots, 502. Her Tomb, 506. Epitaph, 505, 507. 508. Mary
Stuart, third Daughter of King James, 535. Her Tomb, 536. Epitaph, 537. Mary
Stuart, Princess of Orange, Mary Stuart, Mary Tudor, Queen of England, 473. Her
Seals, 429. Effigies, 473. Her Epitaph, 481. Mary Tudor, Queen of France, 509.
448. Mary of York, 396. Matthew Stuart, Earl of Lenox, 497. Matilda de Burgh,
Countess of Gloucester, 140. Matilda, Countess of Chester, 47. Maud or Matilda,
Empress, 34. 29. Her Seal, B. Epitaph, 36. Maud of Anjou, Duchess of Normandy,
29. Maud, Bastard of England, Countess of Britain, 32. Maud, Bastard of
England, Countess of Perch, 32. Maud of Blois, Countess of Chester, 11. Maud of
Blois, daughter of King Stephen, 43. Maud of Bologne, Queen of England, 40. Her
Epitaph, 41. Maud Chaworth, Countess of Lancaster, 109. Maud Clifford, Countess
of Cambridge, 367. Maud de Clifford, Lady Longespee, 118. Maud of England,
Duchess of Saxony, 69. Maud of Flanders, Queen of England, 3. Her Epitaph, 4.
Maud of Lancaster, Duchess of Bavaria, 113. Maud of Lancaster, Countess of
Vlster, 110. Maud, Countess of Melent, 51. Maud of Scotland, Queen of England,
24, 25. Maurice, Count Palatine of the Rhine, 534. Morgan, Provost of Beverley,
72.
N.
N. Bastard of England, Lady of Montmorency, 33. N. Countess of Cornwall, 50.
Nicholas Fitz-Count, 52. Nicholas Longespee, Bishop of Sarum, 116. Nicholas
Monk, Bishop of Hereford, 423.
O.
OLiver, Base Son of King John, fol. 87. a. Osbert Gifford, Bastard Son of King
John, fol. 87. a. Owen Tudor, a Monk of Westminster, 285.
P.
PEter de Dreux, Duke of Britain, 68. Philip II. King of Spain, 478. His Seal,
429. Philip Basset, 117. Philipe of Clarence, Countess of March, 221. Philipe
de Concy, Countess of Oxford, 178. Philipe of Henault, Queen of England, 158.
Her Seal, 124. Monument, 173. Epitaph, 172. Philipe of Lancaster, Queen of
Denmark, 269. Philipe of Lancaster, Queen of Portugal, 250. Philipe Mohun,
Duchess of York, 365. Her Tomb, 364. Epitaph, 364, 365. Philipe Mortimer,
Countess of Pembroke and Arundel, 223. Philipe Mortimer, Countess of Pembroke,
209. Philip, Count Palatine of the Rhine, 535. Piers Gaveston, Earl of Cornwall,
141.
R.
RAlph de Monthermer, Earl of Gloucester, 142. Ralph Nevile, Earl of
Westmorland, 257. Ranulph Blundevile, Earl of Chester, 68. Ranulph Gernon, Earl
of Chester. 47. Reginald II. Duke of Geldres, 155. Reginald Pole, Cardinal,
418. Reginald, Bastard of England, Earl of Cornwall, 30.35. Richard I. King of
England, etc. 73.67. His Seals, 55. Effigies, 59. His Monument, inter 64 and
65. His Epitaphs, 79. Richard II. King of England and France, 191. 189. 218.
His Seal being Prince of Wales, 190. His Seal bing King of England and France,
190. His Effigies, 127. Tomb, 203. Epitaph, 204. Richard III. King of England,
405. His Seal, 354. His Effigies, 381. His Epitaph, 410. Richard, King of the
Romans, and Earl of Cornwall, 95. fol. 85. b. His Seals, fol. 94. b. Epitaph,
97. Richard, second Son of William the Conqueror, 7. Richard, Bastard of
England, 30. Richard, Bastard of Normandy, 19. Richard, Bishop of Bayon, 47.
Richard, Earl of Cambridge, 225. Richard, Earl of Chester, 11. Richard, Earl of
Clare and Hertford, 49. Richard de Cornwall, 99. Richard Darrel Knight. 324. Richard
Fitz-Alan, Earl of Arundel, 111.223. Richard Fitz-Roy, Base Son of King John,
fol. 85. b. His Seal, 57. Richard Gray, Lord Powis, 311. Richard Longespee,
Canon of Sarum, 116. Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York, 368. His Seals, 352.
Richard Pole Knight. 416. Richard de Ripariis, Earl of Devonshire, 51. Richard of
Shrewsbury, Duke of York, 393. His Urne, 403. Richard of York, Earl of
Cambridge, 366. Robert, Duke of Normandy, 7.13. His Monument, 16. Robert,
Bastard of England, 30. Robert, Consul of Gloucester, 45.30. Robert, Son of
William Consul, 48. Robert Ferrers, 256. Robert Howard Knight. 212. Robert Spencer
Knight. 323. Robert Stuart, second Son of King James, 530. Robert de Vere, Duke of
Ireland, 178. Roger de Clarendon Knight. 189. Roger Mortimer, Earl of March, 224.
222. Roger Mortimer, 224. Roger Vaughan Knight. 433. Roger, Bishop of Worcester,
47. Rosamond Clifford, 114. Her Epitaph, ibid. Rotzock, Earl of Perch, Consul
of Moriton, 32. Rozeline, Viscount Beaumont. 33. Rupert, Count Palatine Duke of
Bavaria and Cumberland, etc, 533.
S.
SAnchia of Provence, Queen of the Romans, 97. Sibil of Anjou, Countess of
Flanders, 18. Sibil of Conversana, Duchess of Normandy, 14. Her Epitaph, ibid.
Simon Montfort, Earl of Leicester, fol. 86. a. Sophia, Duchess of Brunswicke,
535. Sophia, fourth Daughter of King James, 537. Her Tomb, 536. Epitaph, 537.
Stephen, King of England, 38. His Seal, B. Effigies, 1. Stephen, Earl of Blois,
10. Stephen Longespee, Earl of Vlster, 116.
T.
THeobald, Earl of Blois, 10. Thomas, Lord Arundel of Wardor, 341. Thomas
Barrington Knight. 417. Thomas Beaufort, D. of Exceter, 256. Thomas of Brotherton,
Earl of Norfolk, 205.144. His Seal, 121. Thomas Carry of Chilston-foliat. 324.
Thomas Courtney, Earl of Devon, 316. Thomas le Despencer, Earl of Gloucester,
361. Thomas Holand, Earl of Kent, 215. Thomas Holand jun. Earl of Kent, 216.
His Seal, 124. Thomas, Earl of Lancaster, 107. His Seals, 102. Thomas of
Lancaster, Duke of Clarence, 268.301. His Monument, 302. His Epitaph, 303.
Thomas St. Leoger Knight. 376. His Monument, 377. and Epitaph, ibid. Thomas Lumley
Knight. 399. Thomas Manney, 208. Thomas Manors, Earl of Rutland, 377. Thomas
Mowbray, called the Earl-Marshal, 211. Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,
210.208. Thomas Percy, Earl of Northumberland, 335. Thomas Somerset, 334.
Thomas, Viscount Somerset of Cassel, 339. Thomas Somerset, 343. Thomas Vernon,
of Stokeshey, 311. Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester, 227.178. His Seals,
125. Monument, 230.
U.
VIolanta of Milan, Duchess of Clarence, 220. Vrsula, Baroness of Castlecombe,
51. Vrsula Pole, Lady Stafford, 419.
W.
Walter de Cornwall, 99. Walter Dunstanvile, Baron of Castlecombe, 51. Walter de
Manney, Knight of the Garter, 207. William I. King of England, 1. His Seal, A.
Effigies, 1. Epitaphs, 6.7. Monument, 7. William II. King of England. 19.9. His
Seal, A. Effigies, 1. Monument, 22. William Adeline, Duke of Normandy, 28. His
Epitaph, 29. William II. King of Sicily, 70. William, third Son of the
Conqueror, 9. William, son of King Henry II. 65. William of Blois, 10. William
Bourcher, Earl of Eu, 233. William de Burgh, Earl of Vlster 110. William Cecil,
Earl of Exceter, 335. William Consul of Gloucester, 47, 48. William Cornwallis
Knight. 335. William Courtney, Earl of Devon, 397. William Fitz-Empress, 37.
William, Lord Gray of Wilton, 331. William of Hatfield, 177. William Herbert,
Earl of Powis, 346. William Longespee, first Earl of Salisbury, 114.71. His
Monument, 115. Epitaph, 116. William Longespee, second Earl of Salisbury,
117.116. His Seal, 57. William Longespee the third, 118. William Marshal, Earl
of Pembroke, fol. 86. a. William Mountague, Earl of Sarum, 215. William, Earl.
of Montain and Bologne, 43. William of Nassaw, Prince of Orange, 572. William
Henry of Nassaw, Prince of Orange, 567. and 572. William of Normandy, Earl of
Flanders, 16. His Seals and Monument, 17. Epitaphs, 17, 18. William, Bastard of
Normandy, 19. William Paston Knight. 324. William, Lord Petre, 340. William
Somerset, Earl of Worcester, 336. William de Tracy, B. of England, 31. William
de Warren, Earl of Surrey, 12. His Epitaph, ibid. William of Windsor, 178.
Winifride Pole, Lady Barrington, 417.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 6. line 36. for Caenomenses read Caenomanenses, p. ibid. in Margin. l.
13. for unequal r. concave, p. 18. l. 17. leave out ( Whose Mother also named
Sibil, was) p 44. l. 2. for Ramsey r. Ramsey, p. 70. l. 15. for Swenia r.
Swevia, p. 81. l. 32. for MORITONIE read MORITONII, p. 90. l. 37. f. Aquisgrate
r. Aquisgrane, fol. 91. B. l. 39. f. Gaspers r. Jaspers, ibid, l. 40. f. Tabets
r. Tablets. fol. 93. a. l. 6. f. II. r. III. p. 96. l. 38. f. Belleland r.
Beaulieu in Com. Southampton, p. 111. l. 14. f. Limsey r. Lindsey, p. 116. l.
40. f. Almain r. Almoine, p. 129. l. 40. leave out (Cheapside,) p. 130. l. 12.
f. quandam r. quondam, p. 138. l. 7. f. regimini r. regiminis, p. 140. l. 19.
f. Bannoksborrow r. Bannoksburne, p. 141. l. 3. f. Richard r. Henry, ibid. l.
18. f. Gravershithe r. Gaversithe, ibid. l. 19. f. Laughty r. Langley, p. 142.
l. 11. after Ireland, insert, This Elizabeth de Clare was also Wife of Ralph,
the Son of Alexander de la Roch of Ireland, and had Issue David la Roch, Father
of John de Rupe, or la Roch, Lord of Fermoy, who lived in the eleventh year of
Richard II. and had Issue Morice Fitz-John, Lord la Roch and Fermoy, from whom
David Viscount Roch of the Kingdom of Ireland is lineally descended, and
quartereth the Arms of this Elizabeth de Clare. p. 148. l. 35. f. York r. York
shire, p. 153. l. 4. f. Father r. Son, p. 171. l. 25. f. Laws r. Pleas, p. 178.
l. 22. f. Duchess r. Countess. p. 192. l. 10. after (dated) add (at) p. 195. l.
39. f. Sotland r. Scotland, p. 201. l. 11. f. Ravenshire r. Ravenspur, p. 207.
l. 29. f. Minories r. (the Gray Friars near Newgate,) p. 213. l. 11. f. 1031 r.
1301. p. ibid. l. 31. f. Northampton r. Cumberland, p. 144. l 78. in Margin. f.
Retton r. Ketton, p. 256. l. 24. after (Armignac) leave out (and) p. ibid. l.
27. f. Lincoln r. Lancaster, p. 260. l. 23. after (Privileges) add (knowing,)
p. 276. l. 2. f. factus r. factis, p. 288. l. 47. f. meum r. Melun. p. 311. l.
45. f. Mary r. Elizabeth, p. 331. l. 1. f. Grysley r. Greseley, p. 348. l. 24.
f. October r. August, p. 374. l. 2. f. Bleide r. Blithe, p. 391. l. 41. f.
Comendam r. Comendations, p. 396. l. 23. f. Quarenna r. Quarrera, p. 409. l.
47. f. dissolation. r. dissolution, p. 435. l. 32. f. Chandos r. Chandeu, p.
437. l. 7. f. Helding r. Hesding, p. 438. l. 38. f. Sir John Digby r. Simon
Digby Esquire then Deputy Lieutenant, p. 450. l. 28. leave out (Barons,) p. 461. l.
24. f. Pavior r. Panier, p. 470. l. 42. f. Henry r. Martin, p. 474. l. 28.
after (Termed) leave out (the) p. 498. l. 5. f. her r. the, p. 502. l. 10.
after (of the) leave out (and,) p. 512. l. 5. f. Henry r. Martin, p. 537. l.
14. after GAVDIVM r. INVENI, p. 539. l. 12. f. Grenham r. Grahme, p. 548. l.
34. f. Crepreda and Edgehill r. in and near Edgecote in Northamptonshire, p.
549. l. 17. f. 5 and 6000 r. 2 and 3000, p. 549. l. 47. f. Yorkshire r. the
Bishopric of Durham, 557. l. 43. f. composed r. finished, p. 502. l. 15. after
OCT. 14. insert (as is commonly reported) for his Royal Highness was born the
15th (at one of the Clock in the morning) as appears by an Authentic Medal
upon occasion of his Christning, which lately came to my view, having these
Words impressed thereon, within a Garland composed of the Branches of a Rose
and a Lillp, JACOBUS DVX EBOR. NOT. 15. OCT. BAPTIZ. 24. NOV. 1633.

After the page 314, make the four pages following, 315, 316, 317, and 318.


