(...): A BEAUTIFUL SWAN With TWO BLACK FEET.

OR, Magistrates Deity, ATTENDED WITH Mortality and Misery: AFFIRMED and
CONFIRMED BEFORE THE Learned and Religious JUDGE HALES, AT THE Assize holden at
Maidstone, July 7. 1657.

FOR THE COUNTY of KENT.

By HENRY SYMONS, M. A. and Minister of the Gospel at Southfleet in KENT.

Psalm. 89. 48. What man is he that lives, and shall not see death? Shall he
deliver his soul from the hand of the grave? Selah.

Non multum curandum est eis qui necessario morituri sunt, quid accidet ut
moriantur: sed moriendo quo ire coguntur. Aug. de Civ. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 11.

London, Printed by J. Hayes, and are to be sold by H. Crips at his Shop in
Pope's Head alley. 1658.

To the HONORABLE JOHN KELSY, Major General of the County of Kent, AND
Governor of Dover Castle, His much esteemed FRIEND.
SIR,
IT was the business of my Sermon to defend Magistrates, and I hope it will be
the business of Magistrates to defend my Sermon: I know full well it shall
stand in a worse place then the man in the Zodiac, many daggers will be thrust
into every part, and therefore I humbly fly unto your Honor for Patronage and
Protection: And if you demand, Quo jure? I having no interest in you, Intimacy
with you, Dependence upon you, Expectation from you, I must answer upon the
best Title, viz. Detur digniori, which you are, both as a public Magistrate,
and as a private Christian. I shall not bring this Sun of Truth to one who has
sore eyes and cannot abide the light, nor present this glass to a painted or
spotted face which will not endure the sight; Your Eagle eyes will bear these
bright beams, your Angels face can endure this clear and Crystal glass which
shows the whole proportion of a Magistrate, a capite ad calcem: Here you have
his Head, and that is of Gold, (I have said you are Gods) Here you have his
feet, and they are of earth, (you shall die like men.) Many Magistrates like
and love to hear of their Deity, but not of their Mortality, much less of
their eternal Misery; But you are well pleased with all, being not proud of
your Deity, nor insensible of your Mortality, nor afraid of your eternal
Misery: Were all Magistrates qualified with that Mercy and Meekness, Humility
and Holiness, Zeal and Severity, they would so magnify and beautify that
Office, that (as the Heathen said of virtue) Omnes in amorem ejus traheret, the
work of Ministers would be both useless and needless as for pressing Duties
to, and praising the Dignities of Magistrates; Antalcidas his Quis unquam
vituperavit? would be seasonable. I know also I shall not tender this Present
to a rugged and rigid Christian, who can like nothing but what comes from one
of his own Church, but your sweet temper is known to all; You do not express
your self distant from them in your affection, who do express themselves
different from you in their opinion; You can harbor love to their persons in
your heart, though you cannot harbor liking of their opinions in your head; a
most excellent pattern for all Magistrates, Ministers, and people fearing God,
whose great blot and blemish it is, that if they have difference with people in
their opinion, they will have distance from them in their affection;
Magistrates will not do them justice, Ministers will rail at, and revile them
in their public Pulpits, and Christians will slander them in their private
meetings.

-- Pudet haec opprobria nobis
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse, refelli.
My Brethren, these things ought not so to be, Jam. 3. 10. I speak unfeignedly
without flattery, had all Magistrates, Ministers, Soldiers, Christians, that
Moderation and Discretion to bear one another burdens, and so to fulfill the
Law of Christ, Gal. 6. 2. as you have, I am confident that both certainly and
suddenly would the Jesuit be defeated, the Profane silenced, the Neuter
convinced, the Doubtful resolved, the Godly reconciled, and all the honest
party strengthened, and we should live and love together, as becomes the
Professors of the Gospel. You see (Sir) by what tenure my Sermon holds, both in
Capite and in Cord; as you are a good Magistrate, and a gracious Christian, I
beseech you do not sue it with a Writ of Ejection, either out of your
Protection as a Magistrate, or Affection as a Christian; by granting which
request you shall much oblige him, who esteems it his highest honor to be

Your lowest Servant, HENRY SYMONS.
From my Study in Southfleet, Feb. 7. 1657.
Psalm. 82. 6, 7. I have said ye are Gods; and all of you are children of the
most High: but ye shall dye like men, and fall like one of the Princes.
TO spend or spin out time with the needless thread of curious enquiry, Whether
this be a Psalm of Asaph, or for Asaph; or whether it were composed in the
reign of Jehosaphat, or of David after the death of Saul, would be as vain, as
those Cities who spent their time to know in which of them Homer was born: or
as they, Who was the Author of that golden sentence, (...). I am sure this
Psalm was calculated for the Meridian of Israel, and may serve for England, or
any other Nation in the world. A Psalm of much use, and in much use among the
Jews, when their Fab. in loc.
Judges rode Circuit, and sat in Judicature.

This Psalm may fitly be styled and titled, The Judges Charge.

Where you have the Prophet the Crier to call the Court, and the holy Ghost the
Judge that gives the Charge: As Judges give their Charge to men, so God gives
his Charge to Judges; and as Judges expect men should attend to their Charge,
so God expects Judges should attend to his Charge. And indeed this is a
precious and profitable Charge, which might as well be written over our places
of public Judicature in letters of gold, as those Verses are in Zant:

Hic locus odit, amat, punit, observat, honorat,
Nequitiam, pacem, crimina, jura, bonos.
It would be profitable to the Judges to have this Psalm sung before them
always, before they go to their Judicatories. Sim. de Muiz.

It is worthy to be learned of all Magistrates, and to be put in all public
places of Judgment. Fab. in loc.

But Vino vendibili -- why should I hang out a bush, when the Wine sufficiently
commends it self.

In the Psalm are these three parts observable:

1. Ratio, an Introductory reason. 2. Oration, an Exhortatory oration. 3.
Peroratio, a Conclusory prayer.
First, An Introductory reason, by way of preamble, to aw and amaze the hearts
of Judges; verse. 1. God stands in the Congregation of the mighty: and he is
presens and praeses, a God present, yea the Lord President of all your Courts
and Counsels: He is Judex, and Vindex, Judge Paramount, who will certainly and
severely judge the Judges. If Father Latymer was circumspect what he answered,
because he heard a pen scratch behind the hangings, how much more circumspect
ought all Judges to be of what they say or do, because there is ever one in the
midst of them, that writes down with a pen of a diamond, all their acts,
decrees, orders, judgments.

Secondly, The Hortatory oration. Concio ad Magistratum. Wherein are three
things:

1. A severe increpation of corruptions in their judging. 2. A serious
persuasion to righteous judging. 3. A sad demonstration, or relation of the
miserable effects that followed evil judging.
1. A severe increpation of their corruptions in judging, aggravated by their
duration, and obduration in this sin, verse. 2. How long will ye judge
unjustly: Quousque tandem Catilina.

2. A serious persuasion to righteous judging, verse. 3. Defend the poor and
fatherless; do justice to the afflicted and needy. verse. 4. Deliver the poor
and needy; rid them out of the hand of the wicked.

3. A sad demonstration, or relation of the miserable effects of injustice
ushered in with a new complaint by way of admiration, v. 5. They know not,
neither will they understand, they walk on in darkness; though the unjust
judgments of those gods had brought the just judgments of God upon the Land,
yet they are woefully blind, they know not, they are wilfully blind, they will
not understand, they are wretchedly blind, they go on in perverting justice.
All the foundations of the earth are out of course, let them be. Poetica
concessio. Geneb: Though all laws and orders be violated, Estates disturbed,
Parliament privileges destroyed, Subjects liberties infringed, all things
brought to confusion, yet they weigh it not, value it not; they have that
stands clypei loco. Marl: they are armed with a Jus Divinum; they are vicarij
Dei, they who resist their laws, or rather their lusts, shall commit crimen
laesae Majestatis. This insolency is abased in the 6 and 7. v. I have said you
are Gods, etc. Its true, the power you have is from God, and it should be as
true, the power you have should be for God. But let me whisper in your ears,
as you whisper in your hearts, Ye shall dye like men, and fall as one of the
Princes: i. e. your places shall not be Targets to defend you against
judgment, but traps to let you fall lower into judgment.

And thus having ended his Sermon to the Judges with little success; for he
did but surdo fabulam, he makes his appeal and application to the supreme
Prince; which brings me to the third part.

3. The conclusory prayer, v. 8. Arise, O God, judge thou the earth; for thou
shall possess all Nations; i. e. Lord take to thy self thy power, supply
thine own place, and turn them out of the Courts of Justice, who turn Justice
out of their Courts.

My text is that part of the Psalm which answers that secret objection that
lies and lurks in the breasts and bosoms of Rulers, viz. their pattent from
heaven for their places, and therefore they think they may act any thing in
their places, though it be against heaven. Its true, as it shows a pattent from
heaven for the places of Judges, so also it shows a pattent for places in hell
for unjust Judges.

The words are the Judges Commission from his Highness the Lord Protector of
heaven and earth.

Wherein observe three parts.

1. A deputation to their places. 2. A computation for their times. 3. An
imputation of their crimes.
1. Shows their dignity. 2. Shows their death. 3. Shows their damnation.
1. A deputation to their places, I have said you are Gods. 2. A computation of
their time; they are not eternal; though they are Gods, they shall live no
longer then men, they must dye as men, both for time and manner. 3. The
imputation of their crimes which they have committed, as of bribery, extortion,
and having respect of persons, and fall as one of the Princes.
From these three parts arise three Propositions.

Doct. 1. That Judges, Rulers, Magistrates, are Gods on earth.

Doct. 2. Though they are Gods on earth, yet they are but Gods of earth.

Doct. 3. That if Gods on earth, and of earth, neglect to do their duty, they
shall be damned among Devils in hell.

I have three subjects, every one of which would afford copious matter for a
Sermon, but my intention is to speak a little to all, and but a little; it
being done to my Sermon, as the Lord Admiral was wont to do to rebels in
revolted Ships, turn the glass on them, and if they came not in within the
hour, they must be cut off; and so must my Sermon. I shall therefore do as
Mariners who have a long voyage, and but a short time, as also many Ports to
call in at, only touch and be gone, reserving the chiefest time for the Port
wherein I am to liver my lading by application.

Doct. 1. Magistrates and persons in high places of au^^^rity, are gods on
earth. I have said, one whose has said is more authentic then Pythagoras his
ipse dixit.

In the prosecution of which point, I shall follow that golden rule of
Aristotle, (...).

1. I will show you Negatively, what gods they are not.

2. Affirmatively; what gods they are.

3. How they are styled gods.

1. What gods they are not.

1. They are not Dij fictitij, feigned gods, as Apollo the god of wisdom, Mars
of war, Pan of sheep, Neptune of the Sea, and Bacchus of wine; of which
Hesiod reckons up thirty thousand: the vanity of which a Heathen Cic: lib. de
not: deorum.
does sufficiently manifest; for the opposing of which Socrates suffered death.
Which I conceive, the Apostle intends when he says, 1 Cor. 8. 5. There are
gods many, and Lords many.

2. Not dij factitij, or manufacti, gods made by the hands and heads of men, as
Idols are. Psalm. 115. 4, 5, 6. 7. Their idols are silver and gold, the work of
men's hands, they have mouths, but they speak not, etc. Their idols were their
gods; Why have thou stolen away my gods, said Laban to Jacob about his idols,
Genesis 31. 30. 32. Pretty gods that could not keep themselves from the thieves.

3. Not dij usurpantes, intruding gods, who assume this name and honor to
themselves, which is no way their due: as the Devil is called the god of this
world, 2 Cor. 4. 4. not that he is so properly, but that he would be so
accounted, though by usurpation; he is called so, a superbia, quia hunc sibi
honorem arrogat and vult adorari ut deus, Zanch: Mat. 4. 9. All these will I
give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me; it was the Devils ambition to
be exalted a god in heaven above God, and it was his impudence to be adored the
god of the earth by the Son of God.

4. Not dij sensuales; Belly gods; Whose God is their belly, Phil. 3. 19. that
dunghill deity has too many worshippers; as Polyphemus in Euripides, Se
tantum offerre victimas ventri suo, qui maximus esset deorum, Epicurus de Grege
Porci, Pamphagus, Nabal, Dives.

5. Not dij reales, real and true Gods; such as have a blessed and divine
nature, attended with those glorious properties, of eternity, immensity,
ubiquity, omnisciency, etc. for so only is God himself. Isai. 44. 6. I am the
first and the last, and beside me there is no God. 1 Cor. 8. 6. But to us there
is but one God.

2. What gods they are; they are dij mortales and caduci, mortal, earthly,
perishing gods; even such gods as the Lycaonians supposed Paul and Barnabas to
be, Act. 14. 11. gods in the likeness of men; or if you please, men in the
likeness of God: but more of this when I come to the second point.

3. How they are gods?

Seven ways.

1. Adoptive; so Bonav: God adopts them to be his sons. v. 6. And all of you
children of the most High.

Chara Deum soboles, magnum Jovis incrementum, Virg: adopted they are to place
and power, though not always to grace and holiness.

2. Analogice; so Theod: by way of analogy, tanquam in hoc deum imitantes; as
God has his seat of judgment in heaven, so these their seats and judicial
thrones on earth, where they judge the actions of men.

3. Nuncupative; so Greg: they have the titles and appellations of gods; God
stamps a name of his own upon them: it was an honor to Joseph's son, that Jacob
put his name on him, Genesis 48. 16. much more for Magistrates that God puts his
name on them, his Elohim, not his Jehovah.

4. Repraesentative; so Aug: they resemble and represent the image of God,
Gerunt imaginem dei: the very Heathen could see so much divine glory in the
face of a Magistrate, that he styled him, (...), the living image of the
ever-living God: they are (to use Nazianzens expression) pictures drawn of God;
every Magistrate, though in never so low a place, bears the image of God; a
penny bears the image of the Prince as well as a shilling.

5. Authoritative; they are ordained, appointed, authorized to be Gods. If any
sue Magistrates with a Quo warranto, or upbraid them with a Quis vas fecit
judices, they have good authority to show, they have a Pattent under Christ's
broad Seal for it. Pro. 8. 15, 16. By me Kings reign and Princes decree
justice; by me Princes rule and Nobles, and all the Judges of the earth, i. e.
God the Father has made over unto me all the powers and governments in the
world; I have the disposal of them all, I appoint such governments and
governors. Psalm. 75. 6. For God is Judge, he puts down (one government and
governor) and sets up another. This truth the Apostle fully cleares and
confirms, Romans 13. 1, 2. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers; for
there is no power, but of God; the powers that be are ordained of God. V. 2.
Whosoever resists the power, resists the ordinance of God. Beza's note on
this Text is singular; I grant that Paul does yield that God is the Author of
government; but why does he add (when he had said, no power but is of God) the
powers that are, are ordained of God. To which he answers, I think not only
the thing it self, and the power of Magistrates is from God in general, but
also the several degrees of Magistrates, and the distributions of Dignities
are from him in particular: He gives the reason of all; Vt infimis ordinibus
parendum esse sciamus.

6. Ministerialiter; they do supplere vices dei, they are his vice-royes and
vicegerents. 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. Jehosaphat tells his Judges, that they judged not
for men but for the Lord: and in Romans 13. 4, 6. they are called (...) and (...).

7. Participative; God imparts, and they participate of the common gifts of the
Spirit, whereby they are abundantly qualified for government; as the Sun, the
Primum Lucidum, communicates his rays of light to the Stars, so does God to
his substitutes: this we find in the Elders, Number. 11. 17. And likewise in
David after Samuel had anointed him with the horn of oil, 1 Samuel 16. 13, 14.
But above all in Solomon, 1 Kings 3. 12. Behold I have done according to thy
word: lo, I have given thee a wise and understanding heart, so that there was
none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall any arise like to thee: He
had large powrings out of the spirit of government: Nazianzen gives this large
commendation of Solomon, that he had (...), largeness of heart, more copious
then the sand of the seashore; witness that unparrellel'd decision of the
true mother, 1 Kings 13. 16, to the 28. in which verses you may see how all
Israel upon the judgemen^ feared the King, for they saw the wisdom of God was
in him to do judgment.

Doct. 2. That Magistrates, though they are Gods on earth, yet they are but
Gods of earth: they are not immortal Deities, neither have they everlasting
Godheads. Those Gods, as they had a beginning, so they must have an end.
Quicquid oritur, moritur; there is a Mean, Mean, on them, their days are
numbered, their time is computed: Hercules his pillar stands in their way, Non
datur ultra. You shall die as Adam.

1. As Adam signifies the proper Name of the first man; though he had a posse
non mori, yet he came to a non posse non mori at last, Jans. As sure as Adam
the first man died, so shall all men that come from his loins.

2. As Adam signifies a most vile and abject person, Geneb. in loc. they shall
die as the meanest and vilest persons. I shall not now stand to show you how
they shall die; but this is most true, as certainly as men shall die, so
certainly shall Judges die as men. Alexander flaterred by others, and his Plut.
in vit. Alex.
own heart also, yet came to this at last, Haec sagitta probat me esse mortalem.

Heb. 9. 27. Statutum est: Magistrates and Judges die by a Statute Law never to
be repealed or reversed. Every Magistrate, as well as every man, when he has
acted his part on the Stage of this world, shall have his exit. The Preacher
tells us that death is the end of all men, Eccles. 7. 2. and Job tells us that
Kings, Counselors and Princes, that had gold, as well as others, are lodged in
the withdrawing chamber of the grave, Job 14. ad 20. yea Job himself a Judge,
and a righteous one to, says, he knew God would bring him to death, and to the
house appointed for all living, Job 30. 23. Very true is that of the Poet,

Scilicet omne sacrum, mors importuna profanat, Ovid. 3. Amor. 8.

Omnibus obscuras injicit illa manus.
Doct. 3. That those Gods of earth that have not faithfully discharged their
trust, done their duties, shall be cast down among the devils in hell to be
tormented. And fall like one of the Princes: There are three several Readings
or Expositions given of the words.

1. Like the Anakims the sons of Enoch, who were of vast, huge, strong bodies,
whom Joshua slew, Josh. 11. 21. so Jansen.

2. Like one of the tyrants, as Sennacherib, Antiochus, Herod, Nero, Julian,
etc. according to that,

Ad generum Cereris sine caede, and sanguine pauci Juven. sat.

Descendunt reges, and sicca morte tyranni.
Some singular judgment not usual or common to ordinary men. Musc.

3. But the stream of Interpreters (as Aug. Hier. Theod. Basil. Chrysostom.
Genebrard. Arnob.) runs thus, They shall fall as one of the Princes of the
devils; who being Gods in heaven, abusing their places by their pride, were
cast down from the top of heaven, to the bottom of hell: 2 Pet. 2. 4. He spared
not the Angels that sinned, but threw them down to hell: (...), a word borrowed
from the Heathen, to set forth the greatness and grievousnesse of their
torments, Ad paenas tartareas damnavit, Mede.

Those that have had the highest places on earth (if they have abused them)
shall have the lowest places in hell. Wicked Magistrates shall get nothing by
their greatness, but greater punishments. (...), Greatness of place abused,
will produce greatness of punishment. Ingentia beneficia, ingentia flagitia,
ingentia supplicia, Eccles. Hist. Magd. cent. 5. Basil 1569. Epist. Ded. in
initio.
great mercies, great sins, and great punishments, are mutually twisted
together. Isa. 30. 33. Tophet is ordained of old, yea for the King it is
prepared, he has made it deep and large; the pile thereof is fire and much
wood, the breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone does kindle it: The
Holy Ghost hints in these words two things;

1. That hell is principally and on purpose prepared for great persons, as
Princes and Judges.

2. That the greatest punishments in hell are prepared for the greatest
persons: So that I may safely conclude with that usual saying, Hell is paved
with Priests skuls, and Princes headpieces. Magistrates and Ministers that have
been evil, shall have the lowest places, the hottest holes in hell, among the
worst of devils.

I shall now come to apply these three Doctrines:

1. By way of Information. 2. Of Exhortation.
First, By way of Information to three sorts;

1. Ministers. 2. People. 3. Magistrates.
1. It informs Ministers, that it is a duty incumbent on us, to put people in
mind of this truth, and that very often, that Magistrates are Gods; though not
participatione divinae essentiae, yet similitudine divinae potentiae, and
therefore always to press them to render obedience and subjection to them,
though they have no right to their places, or do no right in their places.
Titus 3. 1. Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, to
obey Magistrates: There were many in Crete infected with the leven of Judas
Galilaeus, who denied any honor or homage due to Magistrates; and that which
most encouraged them was, that they were Heathenish and Hellish Magistrates:
all which Paul well knew, and notwithstanding he calls on Titus to call on the
people to give them their due: Though Magistrates do not their duties to
people, yet people must do their duties to Magistrates. We Ministers must often
strike upon this string, though it be a jarring one, and very offensive to
peoples ears. Isa. 62. 6. Ministers are called the Lords remembrancers, not
only to put God in mind of his mercy, but also to put the people in mind of
their duty. I hope this may be a sufficient Apology for my Text and Treatise.

2. It informs Ministers how they should speak of Magistrates, high or low,
viz. with reverence and respect, even as Gods Ordinance, yea as of Gods: We may
reprove them, but we may not reproach them; far be from us (Tribunitii
clamores) invectives against them to please the fancies, and tickle the itching
ears of the rude multitude. Exodus 22. 28. Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor
speak evil of the ruler of thy people: Its a charge given Ministers as well as
others. It is put down as the mark of dreamers, to despisdominion, and speak
evil of dignities, Jude 8. Such were the Nicolaitans, and the Gnostics. Truly,
for my part, I should much doubt whether they are Ministers of Christ, that
dare speak reproachfully of the Magistrates of Christ.

3. It informs Ministers, as how to speak of, so how to speak to Magistrates,
viz. with humble and honorable addresses to speak to them; not only (as he)
(...), with silken words, but with sugared words, not saucy and surly speeches:
Job 34. 18. Is it fit to say to a King, thou art wicked? and to Princes, you
are Belial? Thou, (that Quakers word) argues too much rudeness: Belial, that
profane word, argues too much rashness. The Silkworm bragged she caught
Princes and great persons with what came out of her bowels, when the Spider
caught nothing but flies. Blanditiis obtinere solent, quae autoritate non Amb.
in 1 Timothy 5. v. 2.
possunt; Soft and sweet words are keys to open the locks of Magistrates
bosoms. See how those (that were godly to) insinuated and crept into the hearts
of Rulers, Dan. 6. 21. O King live for ever, my God has sent his Angel, etc.
And before thee, O King, have I done no hurt; and the King was exceeding glad.
Act. 26. 25. ad 32. I am not mad most Noble Festus, v. 27. King Agrippa,
beleevest thou the Prophets, I know that thou beleevest: Then Agrippa said unto
Paul, almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian. Luther pleading before the
Emperor, begged pardon for his rudeness, as not being acquainted with the
tender and delicate ears of Princes and Rulers, by which he obtained much
favor.

4. Are Magistrates Gods by name, but men by nature; it informs Ministers to
take heed of flattery, that politic Idolatry; that Quicquid libet, licet,
that Magistrates lust Quicquid Demetrius j^bet, id(...) homines ju^tum and d^^^
sa^ctum. ^lu^.
is the best law; that what Magistrates command is just with men, and holy with
God: Such sprinklings of Court-holy water, by parasitical Chaplains, have
undone the most Magistrates in the world. Poor Alexander suffered much this
way, who having in his drink slain his friend Clytus, and being troubled in his
conscience for it, that he could neither eat nor drink three days together;
Anaxarchus the Philosopher to comfort him, spoke flatteringly, The Ancients
placed Justice by Jupiter, to intimate that whatever Jupiter did, must needs be
just; and therefore whatever so great a King as thou art, do, ought to be
esteemed just; first, by Q. Curtius.
thy self, then by all others. It cost Ahab his life, and perhaps his soul, the
false and flattering Prophets advice to go up to Ramoth Gilead, with the
promise of prosperity and victory, 1 Kings 22. 6. How much more commendable was
Elijah, who told Ahab the truth, when he had killed Naboth, and took possession
of his vineyard, 1 Kings 21. 19. In the place where dogs* licked the blood of
Naboth, shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine: Or John Baptist, who told Herod
plainly, it was not lawful for him to have his brother Philips wife, Mark 6.
18. though it cost him his head: Or Ambrose, who tartly reproved Theodosius for
his sins, and took away his vain excuse of David's example, with a Quem sequutus
es errantem sequere paenitentem. Oh let us tell them that Justice ought to be
the rule of their wills, and not their wills the rule of Justice: That the people
should grow rich by them, and not they grow rich by the people: That if they do
worse then their predecessors, that God will do worse with them then with their
predecessors. In a word, that God will deal severely with them, that have not
dealt sincerely with their God.

2. Information, To the people.

1. It informs the people the Divine original of Magistracy: Government of men
over men is from God; (...). Hom. Iliad. (...).
Tenendum est illud principium Magistratus officium esse a Deo, Calv. in 1 Timothy
cap. 2. 10. Joh. 34. 35. Is it not written in your law, I said ye are Gods? If
he called them Gods, to whom the word of the Lord came, (Cui venit speciale
dominandi mandatum) An express Commission from heaven for some men to Rule on
earth, Surely then blasphemous is the assertion of Anabaptists and Socinians,
that Magistracy is from the devil. And grossly erroneous is the opinion of the
Papists, who according to Aquinas, affirm Dominium esse jure humano: It is a
strange riddle how the Pope should be Jure Divino, and the Emperor who made
him so, should be but Jure humano.

2. It informs the people, how great and grievous a sin rebellion against the
Gods must needs be: To walk, yea to war Antipodes against Government, or
Governors, is as bad as witchcraft, and deserves as much to be punished by the
Judges.

I. It is a giants sin; such persons are (...), takers up of arms against
God. Romans 13. 2. Whosoever resists the power, resists the ordinance of God.
If those that resist, then much more they that rebel against the highest
Powers, rebel against the highest God.

II. It is a sin proper to reprobates: Prove. 17. 11. An evil man seeks only
rebellion: And Sheba, who sounded a trumpet to stir up the people to rebel
against David, is called a man of Belial, 2 Samuel 20. 1.

III. It is a sin God has severely punished, even in this life; as in Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram, Numb. 16. 32. an unheard of punishment, to show how
grievously God is offended with rebels; sad judgments we read came on
Athaliah, Absalom, Zimri, Sheba for this sin.

IV. It is a sin for which God will certainly damn men, (if they do not
repent) Romans 13. 2. And they that resist, shall receive to themselves
damnation: Let Atheists, Papists, Levellers, Quakers, and such like, of the
devils litter, resist authority, but let no people fearing God. Rebellion is no
fruit of the Gospel; it is an apple of spiritual Sodom, (which like Sodom
apples, touched with the mouth, fill it with cinders and ashes.) I speak the
more, that we may never have any more Sheba's to blow the trumpet of rebellion
amongst us; but let us render unto Magistrates due obedience, (...), the good
as God, the bad for God; as Basil gives sweet and savory advice.

3. It informs the people, that seeing Magistrates are but dying, perishing
men, how vain they are who build all their hope and happiness in being in
their favor: Alas they that build their hopes on Magistrates, are like those
who build houses on mud-wals, which will certainly lay the building in the
dirt. Psalm. 146. 3, 4. Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the son of man, in
whom there is no help, his breath goes forth, he returns to his earth. Isa.
2. 22. Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils, for wherein is he to
be accounted of?

4. Shall wicked Magistrates be sent among devils, let this inform the people,
not to envy the pomp, power, prosperity of such persons; they are dealt withal
by God, as the cockles are by the Eagles,

-- tolluntur in altum,
Vt lapsa graviore ruant.
To make them the better prey. Could you see where Caligula were, who wished
all Rome had but one neck, that he might cut it off with one blow: or Nero, who
reading that of the Tragedian, (...), (...), I dead, let every thing be mingled
with fire; cried out, (...), yea whilst I live; which he did endeavor, setting
Rome on fire in diverse places, and singing for joy to see it burn: such have
fire and fury enough; you would not have their places on earth, to have their
places in hell.

3. Information, to Magistrates.

1. What good encouragement they have to proceed, both in civil, criminal, and
capital causes; they have not only Gods Warrant for it, but also Gods Word to
be with them, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. The Lord is with you in the judgment. Deus
Nobiscum, is encouragement enough to carry you on. Frederick Duke of Saxony
being doubtful whether he might proceed so far in punishment of offenses, as
to death, being much disheartened by Popish doctrine, had Luthers book De jure
Magistratus put into his hands, which when he had read, and weighed, he lift up
his eyes and hands to heaven, blessing God he saw that state was so pleasing to
him, and profitable to men.

2. Are Magistrates but men? It informs them, how vain those conceits of theirs
are, that think they are targetted against death; Deaths spear can strike
through those that have the most iron sides. Proud and profane Herod swelled
up with the conceit of an immortal Deity, from the peoples hum and clamor of
vox Dei, upon his eloquent Qui modo immertales, etc. Eusebius.
Oration, yet was suddenly eat up with worms, Acts 12. v. 23. God may suddenly,
and will certainly bring you to the grave, and cause you to remain in the tomb,
Job 21. 32.

3. Information, What great cause Magistrates have to act presently and
speedily: You are living Gods, yet you are but dying men; you are but Gods pro
tempore, therefore act ex tempore. Eccles. 9. 10. Whatsoever thy band finds
to do, do it with thy might, for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge,
nor wisdom in the grave, whither thou go. Act. 13. 36. David when he had
served his generation by the will of God, fell on sleep; i. e. David was
careful before he died to do the work of his generation: Let this be as good a
warning to you, as (...), was to Philip King Plut.
of Macedon.

4. Information, Let it acquaint Magistrates who are their best friends, even
those that press and persuade them to do their duties of Gods, that they may
avoid the damnation of devils. I know such Ministers are looked upon with a
squint eye, and are forbid to preach at Bethel, Amos 7. 13. they are called the
troublers of Israel, 1 King. 18. 17. are put into prisons, 2 Chronicles. 16. 10. yea
often are beheaded, Mark 6. 27. yet they are their chiefest friends. Those that
kept their friends awake in the time of the sweating sickness, were the truest
friends (though they thought them not so) for they kept them from death. And
reproving Ambrose, was solus dignus Episcopi nomine, as Theodosius ingenuously
acknowledged.

2. Use, Of Exhortation.

1. To Magistrates. 2. To people.
1. To Magistrates, Are you Gods? then be persuaded to three things:

1. Live as Gods. 2. Judge as Gods. 3. Defend as Gods.
First, Live as Gods.

1. In your Conversations. 2. In your Families.
1. In your Conversations: Places of Gods, and practices of devils, are
grievous solecismes. You are called Optimates, because you should be the best,
and resemble him who is Optimus as well as Maximus. Your lives, like Planets,
have great influence upon inferior bodies.

-- Non sic inflectere sensus
Humanos edicta valent, ac vita regentum. Claud.

Magistrates lives are looking-glasses, by which all their neighbors usually
dress themselves: And assure your selves Austins rule is true, Magis intuentur
quid fecerit Jupiter, quam quid docuerit Plato: The people more mind what the
next Justice does, then what the best Minister says: They more observe what
the Judge delivers, then what the Preacher. Oh therefore let the graces of God
that have been in other gods, as meekness in Moses, uprightness in Samuel,
holiness in David, wisdom in Solomon, patience in Job, courage in Nehemiah,
meet in your lives, as in so many burning glasses, whereby you may warm the
hearts of the godly, and burn the hands of the wicked.

II. In your Families: Have a care you entertain none but holy persons into
them, and keep up holy duties in them; that the ancient salutation may come
into fashion again, And to the Church that is in thy house, Philem. 2. Good
Joshua, in such a time of liberty and licentiousness as this is, keeps himself
and family to the pure service of God, Josh. 24. 15. I and my house will serve
the Lord. David makes a public protestation, that his eyes shall be upon the
faithful of the land, that they may dwell with him; he that walks in a
perfect way should serve him: that the worker of deceit shall not dwell in his
house: that the teller of lies shall not tarry in his sight, Psalm. 101. 6, 7.
Nicephorus reports of Andronicus the elder, that he was Master of such a
family, as was the very shop of virtue, discipline, and all godly exercises,
and therefore was called (...), the Sun of the earth to enlighten others: Oh
labor to make yours so, yea a little heaven.

Secondly, Judge as Gods; (...) etc. Just. Martyr proves that you had never
been put into Gods place, but to do his work, and in his way. Now God judges,

1. From an innate principle of affection to justice, Isa. 61. 8. I the Lord
love judgment; so ought Judges to execute justice and judgment, from an
inward principle of love to them: The wheels of affection within, should cause
the hand of execution to go without. Prove. 21. 15. It is joy to a just man to
do judgment. Titus was so delighted with it, that he was wont to cry, Amici
diem perdidi, I have lost that day, wherein he had done no act of justice.
Parum est justitiam facere nisi and diligas, Bern. ad Eug.

2. God judges righteously, justly, Psalm. 67. 4. Thou shall judge the people
righteously: Psalm. 119. 75. I know, O Lord, thy judgments are right, says
David: And so acknowledged Mauritius the Emperor, when Phocas had slain his
wife and children; so ought Judges. Deuteronomy. 16. 20. God gives a special charge
that you should do that which is altogether just, i. e. pure justice, free from
any mud; that what the Heathens bragged of their Aristides, surnamed Justus,
might be as true of every Judge, Justice, and Mayor in England; It were easier
to turn the Sun out of his course, then to turn them out of the course of
Justice.

3. God judges impartially, 2 Chronicles 19. 7. For there is no iniquity in the
Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking bribes. Job 34. 19. tells us he
accepts not the persons of Princes, neither regards the rich more then the
poor: which the Heathen could observe; and Phocylides speaks truly of God:

(...).

So ought Judges: Deuteronomy. 1. 17. Ye shall have no respect of persons in
judgment, but shall hear the small as well as the great; you shall not fear
the face of man. Lev. 19. 15. Thou shall not favor the person of the poor, nor
honor the person of the mighty. A Judge should be as the Sun, which shines on
the beggar as well as the noble; he must view the face of the cause, and not
the face of the person. It was a blur to Caesar that Cassius his cause was the
better, but he must deny (...). in vit. Caesar.
Brutus nothing: the poor man's cause is the better, but the rich man,
neighbor, friend, kinsman must not be overthrown. Prove. 18. 5. It is not good
to accept the person of the wicked, to overthrow the righteous in judgment;
there is a (...) in the words, more is implied then spoken; i. e. it is a very
sordid, sinful, shameful thing to be done, they that do it deserve to be hist
at in the streets, as they go from their Judicatories.

4. God judges deliberately, advisedly, making strict scrutiny and diligent
search whether the accusation be so, Genesis 18. 20, 21. And the Lord said,
because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because their sin is
grievous, I will go down now and see whether they have done altogether
according to the cry of it, which is come unto me, and if not I will know.
Greg. in loc. observes, that God does speak thus to teach men, Ne mala hominum
ante praesumamus credere, quam probare; for God cannot descend, neither need he
search to know, for all things are naked and open before him, Heb. 4. 13.
(...), dissected, unboweld, anatomized.

(...). Hes. So ought Judges to be very inquisitive, sifting, searching; they
are commanded first to examine the thing narrowly, Deuteronomy. 17. 4. And if it be
told thee, and thou have heard (of it) and enquired diligently, and behold it
(be) true (and) the thing certain, then shall thou bring forth that man, or
that woman, and stone them with stones, till they die. This was Judge Jobs
course, Job 29. 16. The cause I knew not, I searched out, i. e. the cause that
was dark, difficult and dubious, he would examine witnesses, and weigh
circumstances, that he would find (veritatem in profundo) the truth in the
bottom. It was a great stain to David that he gave away Mephibosheths living
upon the false information of Ziba, 2 Samuel 16. 2. 3, 4. And it is horrible
injustice (if true) what I have heard of the Turks, that they will put a man to
death, and then enquire whether he justly suffered: Judges must be careful
that Writs of Error be not sued upon them of this kind.

5. God judges speedily and swiftly, after full knowledge of the truth, Joel
3. 4. Swiftly and speedily will I return your recompense; e vestigio, while you
can say, what is this. How quick was he with Sodom and Gomorrha, Genesis 19. How
speedy with Corah and his accomplices, Numb. 16. So ought Judges, after
examination, fall upon execution, and that with expedition. Ezra 7. 26. And
whosoever will not do the Law of thy God, and the Law of the King, let
judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto death, or to
banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment. I will early
destroy all the wicked of the land, Psalm. 101. 1. Summo mane, I will do morning
justice. Festinanter, so Genebrad. I will hastily do it. Justice shall be on
the wing; delays are very dangerous and injurious: To delay Justice is worse
sometimes then to deny justice.

6. God judges valiantly, courageously, he is not afraid of the multitude, or
might of malefactors. The right hand of the Lord does valiantly, Psalm. 118. 15.
It Is right hand Justice which wounds the hairy scalps of them that go on in
wickedness. You have God challenging as a valiant champion, Isa. 27. 4. Who
would set the briars and thorns in battle against me? I would go through them, I
would burn them together. Gods justice against sinners, is as fire to briers
and thorns, which easily and speedily consumes them. And this is the reason the
Holy Ghost gives, why the whore of Babylon shall be so irresistably and
irrecoverably consumed, Because strong is the Lord God who judges her, Rev.
18. 8. So ought Judges to be very valiant and courageous. When Joshua came into
the place of Magistracy, God lays a charge three times; in the 1. chap. 6, 7,
9. on him, to be very courageous. Solomon's throne (which is called Gods throne)
was supported with Lions, to show, that in execution of judgment, Magistrates
should have the hearts of Lions, of all beasts the most magnanimous. The
Athenian Judges sat in Mars street, to show they had Martial hearts, and did
not bear the sword in vain, Romans 13. 4. Timidi nunquam statuere trophaea,
cowardly and timorous Judges, will never set up monuments of their victories
over sin and profaneness. It is very sad, when we may say of our Judges, as the
Heathen did of Judges in his time, they were very good, Si audeant, quae
sentiunt, if they durst but do what they ought Cic, de Mil.
to do.

Thirdly, Defend as Gods, the things of God.

1. The Book of God. 2. The Son of God. 3. The Day of God. 4. The Ordinances of
God. 5. The Ministers of God. 6. The People of God.
1. Defend and maintain the Book of God, I mean the Scriptures, those Epistolas
omnipotentis Dei, as Greg* styles them; let not (those two brethren in
iniquity) Papists and Quakers, dare to say, (...), (...), the great Bible, is a
great libell; or call Evangelium, Aven-gilion, the Gospel of life, the Gospel
of a lie; or use the scoffing phrase of Bonners Chaplain, his pretty little
Gods-book. Silence those expressions of the black Gospel, the inky Divinity,
etc. Oh do you own and honor it as a great expression of Gods love to you, and
make you expressions of your love to that. Psalm. 119. 97, 103, 105. David
through the whole Psalm shows large affections to the Word of God. Corn. a
Lapide reports of Robert King of Sicily, that he was wont to say of the
Scriptures to Petrarch, that they were dearer to him then his Kingdom, and that
if he must want one of them, he had rather want his Diadem then the Scriptures.
Much such a story does Speed in his Chronicles relate of that Queen of famous
memory Q. Elizabeth, upon the presenting of a Bible to her by the City of
London.

II. The Son of God, of whom we may better say, then they of Titus, Delitiae
generis humani, The Savior of the world, the desire of Nations, the Head of
the Church, the Beloved of the believers soul; let none scoff him with a
crucified God, but make all to kiss the Son, Psalm. 2. 12. If you neglect this,
shall not the Heathen Judges rise up against you in judgment? I mean the
Athenian, who put Socrates to death, for an irreverent speech concerning their
Plutareh. in vit. Nic.
gods. How many irreverent, yea irreligious speeches are belched out against
the only wise God, Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 1. 17. and yet our Magistrates have no
hearts to hate, no hands to punish, it were well if they had no houses to
entertain such blasphemers: All that I shall say is, consider what a dreadful
curse is denounced against such men and Magistrates, 1 Cor. 16. 22. If any man
love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha.

III. The Day of God, which is Gods holy day, Isa. 58. 13. the Christians
market day for their souls, Isa. 55. 1. Christ's Coronation day, Rev. 1. 10. the
Believers Sabbath, and day of rest, Heb. 4. 9. the Regina dierum, as Ignatius
religiously calls it; do not suffer that pure day to be so profaned; that pious
Ministers, and godly people may have as just cause to speak with shame and
sorrow (what Alstedius did of the Germans Sabbath) it was dies daemoniacus, non
Dominicus, the day of the devil, according to peoples observation of it, and
not the day of Jesus Christ. Let Nehemiahs example spur you up to do your
duties, Neh. 13. 17, ad 23. Give me leave to present you with five things from
the words.

1. He begins with the great ones; the Nobles of Judah were not so high, but he
made the Law to reach them, verse. 17.

2. He presses them by undeniable arguments, as the judgments their fathers
brought upon the Nation, by profaning the Sabbath, v. 18.

3. He begins the sanctification of the Sabbath over night, and makes the
people keep in over night, that both preparatory duties might be done, as also
their bodies refreshed with sleep, might be freed from drouziuesse in the
service of God, v. 19.

4. He set his own servants as spies to see how the law was observed, v. 19.

5. He commanded the Levites to do their duties for the sanctifying of the
Sabbath. Oh that all our Magistrates would do likewise.

IV. The Ordinances of God, those canales gratiae, those golden pipes which lie
at the springhead of grace, the Lord Jesus Christ, who by them conveighs much
of himself into the soul, Joh. 1. 16. Suffer no uncircumcised Philistines to
poison those wels of salvation, Isa. 12. 3. Let no Elephants puddle those
springs, because they cannot endure to see their ugly bodies; let them see by
your practice and punishment, that the Hearts do not more bray after the
waterbrooks, then your hearts breath after the living God, in the enjoyment of
Ordinances, Psalm. 42. 1, 2.

V. The Ministers of God, those legati a latere, legeir Ambassadors, that lie
to keep peace between heaven and earth, 2 Cor. 5. 20. those dispensers of
mysteries, 1 Cor. 4. 1. the Mercuries from heaven that bring you glad tidings,
Romans 10. 15. Christ's Paranymphs and spokesmen to woe and win souls to him, Joh.
3. 19. In a word, the very saviors of your souls instrumentally, 1 Timothy 4. 16.
do you save them, succor them, support them, supply them, do for them,
whatever lies in your place and power; it was one of the main ends of the
institution of Magistrates at first, Exodus 4. 16. Thou shall be to him in stead
of God. It was a noble speech of a Prince to his Minister, T^ me calamo, ego te
gladio, Defend me with thy Pen, and I will defend thee with my Pike. Be you
Protectors to us, and we will be Preachers for you, as well as to you.

VI. The People of God: Those Columbae and Columnae of the world, of whom the
world is not worthy, Heb. 11. 38. The saviors of Nations, Job 22. 30. the
apples of Gods eyes, Zech. 2. 8. the Commanders of God, Isa. 45. 11. the glory
upon which shall be a defense, Isa. 4. 5. Take them to your care, custody,
compassion: You are called the shields of the earth, Psalm. 47. 9. that you may
shelter and safeguard Gods Hephzibahs: You are nursing fathers and mothers,
Isa. 49. 23. that you should dance Gods darlings in your arms, and dandle them
on your knees.

Give me leave to back this Use of Exhortation with some Motives.

Motive 1. God has exalted you from very low, to very high places; he has
lifted you up (as nature did Saul) higher by the head and shoulders then the
rest of your brethren, has put you into his seat, placed his Name on you,
called you Gods, commanded all your brethrens sheaves to bow before you, and
obey you, that you may say as Iphicrates the Athenian Captain in all his glory,
(...), from what am I raised, to what am I exalted! Arist. Rhet. lib. 1. cap. 9.
May not a little inversion of David's words agree with you, Ps. 113. 7. He has
raised up the poor out of the dust, and lifted the needy out of the dunghill,
and set you with Princes, even with the Princes of his people. Or else the
words in the Magnificat, Luke 1. 52. He has put down the mighty from their
seats, and exalted them of low degree. What strong engagements are these upon
you? to exalt him that has exalted you, to act for him, that has put you into
his place; to improve those talents of place and power, for his interest, who
has entrusted you: it would be horrible ingratitude, (as bad as the Jews) thus
to requite the Lord, as to scoff his Word, crucify his Son, profane his day,
pollute his Ordinances, slight his Ministers, abuse his people.

Mot. 2. The great good you might do, if you would live, Judge, defend as Gods;
what golden, yea what glorious opportunities and prizes are put into your
hands, if God would give you hearts to employ and improve them. If the
Magistrates of England would make Religion their business, and not a design,
how easily might they suppress sin and profaneness, advance the power of
godliness, exalt Christ and his Ordinances to their place, power and purity,
encourage and increase those that are sincere and godly, take off the disguises
and vizards of hypocrites: I dare boldly say, there is nothing needful,
honorable, creditable, comfortable for the bodies, souls, estates, names,
liberties, consciences of the people, but they might easily attain it, either
by their Precept, President, or Punishment.

1. By Precept: How easily might they stop the muse-holes in good Laws, through
which drunkards swearers, etc. do use to creep. What holy and wholesome Laws
might the Protector with his Parliament make, and see observed, for suppressing
all manner of looseness and lewdness, and encouraging purity and holiness
against scoffers and scorners? They might make such Laws as should make the
proudest and prophanest in the Land to stoop to their Scepters; and so reform
Old, that it would become New England. How prosperous were the Heathen
Magistrates, as Numa, Lycurgus, Solon, in this way of new making their Country;
and why might not Christian Magistrates be much more? What made the Israelites
be so highly esteemed by the Canaanites, for a wise and understanding people?
but the keeping of those righteous Laws and Statutes: And what made the
Israelites keep those good Judgments? but Moses and succeeding Magistrates,
pressing and persuading, yea perforcing them to observe them, Deuteronomy. 4.

2. By President: There is a very great magneticall power and virtue in the
examples of godly Magistrates; when they are good, all their followers,
relations, acquaintance, neighbors, will be either seriously or seemingly
good; they will be either out of subtilty or sincerity like the Ruler. The
primum mobile causes all the other spheres to move, and the Sun draws many
flowers to be followers of him; so people are much guided and directed by their
Magistrates. Ethelbert (a Christian King of Kent) made that whole Kingdom godly
by his being godly, and countenancing of such as were godly. And Cassiodore
tells us the like story of Theodabad: But why should I trouble you with humane,
when Divine story abounds with instances of this nature, both in the time of
the Judges, as also of the Kings, who made that of the Poet true,

Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis.

3. By Punishment: Those who will not by fair persuasion, nor sweet example, be
brought on to godliness, must be by severe means forced to compliance. David
found many of Saul's old Courtiers so wedded to their old sins and
superstitions, that he found in them

-- Immedicabile vulnus
Ense recidendum:
which made him protest, Psalm. 101. 8. that he would early destroy all the
wicked of the land, and cut off all evil doers from the City of God; and so
will every godly Magistrate do. Prove. 20. 26. A godly Magistrate scatters the
wicked, and brings the wheel over them. Those who strike with the fist of
violence, Isa. 58. 4. he will strike them with the sword of Justice, Romans 13.
4. We account it a glory for Magistrates to be attended with a great train here
on earth, how much more glory would it be to see them attended with a train to
heaven.

Mot. 3. The great expectations of Gods people: When David was exalted to the
throne after the death of Saul, the eyes of all Israel were upon him, expecting
he would perform those promises he had made before to them, Psalm. 75. 2. When I
shall receive the Congregation, I will judge uprightly. Verse. 10. All the horns
of the wicked also will I cut off, but the horns of the righteous shall be
exalted. The eyes of all England are now upon our Magistrates, expecting the
performance of those promises that were made to them, That judgment should run
down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream, Amos 5. 24. Now if those
springs either are dried up, or those streams filled with cruelty, bribery,
oppression, etc. We looked for judgment, but behold oppressions; for
righteousness, but behold a cry, Isa. 5. 7. would not these verify that old
verse,

Parturiunt montes, nascetur ridiculus mus.

Mot. 4. The great comfort this will afford you in your dying hour, that you
have Lived, Judged, Defended as Gods. It will not be long before the lock of
your Deity (like Sampsons) shall be cut off by deaths sizers, and you shall
become like other men: This will be a rate cordial to you at your departure, 2
Kings 20. 3. I beseech thee O Lord, remember now how I have walked before thee
in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy
sight; what a cheering was this to good Hezekiahs heart. Acts 13. 36. David
after he had served his own generation, fell asleep: Dropped asleep, Placide
defunctus est, Gerrard. How quietly do those Magistrates lay their heads upon
their pillows, to take their last sleep.

Mot. 5. The miserableness of your condition, if you neglect to discharge your
trust: It had been better for you never to have been Magistrates, to set high
on earth, and to lie low in hell; to condemn on earth, and to be condemned to
hell, yea to a worse place there then any of those malefactors whom you have
condemned for theft or murder, would it not be extremely miserable? Potentes,
potenter torquebuntur. If Magistrates would often meditate on those two places
of Scripture, the one of which shows the place of this punishment, the other
the persons with whom they are to be punished, Isa. 30. 33. Matthew. 25. 41. Go
ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels; those
that were placed among Gods on earth, shall be placed among devils in hell;
such thoughts would make men and Magistrates hearts to tremble. The Indians do
believe when they die, they shall be turned into devils; wicked Magistrates may
believe when they die, they shall be turned unto devils.

2. Use of Exhortation, To the People.

I. To submit our selves to this present power, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4. there is a
bundle of arguments to press and persuade us to it, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Submit your
selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the
King as supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the
punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. The way to
make England flourish, must be that which made Lacedamon, Per cives obtemperare
doctos, as Theopompus spoke of it.

II. To be thankful:

1. For the blessing of Government, that we have Laws to protect, and
Magistrates to execute those Laws: What a Chaos and consusion should we soon
come to, if these were Aug. de Civ. Dei, lib. 4. cap. 4.
wanting. Remota justitia, quid sunt regna nisi magna latrocinia? Remove
government, and Nations will quickly become dens of beasts for prey,
slaughter-houses of blood, Judge. 17. 6. When there was no King in Israel, every
one did that which was right in his own eyes. What right was that? If you read
the three following Chapters, you shall find wrong enough: Mieahs house full
of Idols, Levites turned a begging, houses plundered, Laish treacherously fallen
on, the Levites Concubine abused, etc.

2. For present Governors: Give thanks to the God above, for our Gods below;
for those happy and Halcyon days of peace, plenty, prosperity; we sit every
one under his Vine and Figtree, and none makes us afraid, Micah 4. 4. yea we
hear the joyful sound, Psalm. 89. 15. we enjoy our Ordinances and opportunities
for our souls advantage.

There are two things I would not have you forget.

1. Their sparing you in crowding Oaths and Covenants upon your consciences,
mere snares to the people of God.

2. Their freeness and forwardness to provide good Ministers, as also good
Maintenance for those Ministers, and that from such moneys as were wont to go
into the Coffers of former Magistrates; very happy are many Market Towns in
England upon this account, whose Ministers bodies must otherwise have been
starved, or else the peoples souls.

Now to speak something to the particular: and First, To To the Judge.
you, my Lord, whom I may fitly call Deus umbratilis, a shadowing God, or the
shadow of God; you are a heavenly piece of coin, who have the Image and
superscription of God and Caesar stamped upon you: I would willingly present
something to you, which if it should displease, I profess it is like natures
production of monsters, which the Philosophers tell us is praeter intentionem
ipsius.

And seeing the burden of both Courts lies upon you, being alone, give me
leave to speak to you, as you are to be Judge of Life and Death.

I. You are not ignorant in what age of the world we live in, the old age,
which is full of distempers and diseases, the very dregs of sins seat and
center themselves in it; the deluge of sin has drowned the whole Nation
(except the Arks of some few Noah's.) Sin is grown impudent, a whores forehead,
Jer. 3. 3. Sin has faced and affrighted the Ministers, that few of them dare
oppose it.

1. Some, for fear their neighbous will cheat them of their Tithes.

2. Others, for fear their credits should be blasted.

3. A third sort, for fear of the loss of their living, which they see two or
three sons of Belial joining their forces together, are able to rout any
Minister, though it might be as truly said of him, as was once said of
Chrysostom, Satius est ut sol non luceat, quam ut ipse non doceat. And those
few Ministers (that will jeopardize their Livings, Liberties, and Lives in
opposing sin) are so eclipsed, and crowded with disgraces of Baals priests,
Zealous black-coats, covetous tithe-mongers, long-winded Parsons, etc. that
sin overpowers them, and gets head in despite of their heart. Now (my Lord)
put to your helping hand, oppose sin openly, correct it severely, do
something in terrorem, that all England may hear and fear, and do no more any
such wickedness, Deuteronomy. 13. 11. I have heard it spoken by a Reverend Judge (now
with God) to the perpetual praise of Judge Popham, and Judge Hitcham; in whose
days the highwaies of England were like the ways from Peloponnesus to Athens,
so full of thieves that none could escape robbing, ^lut,
perhaps not killing in his travels: Yet they by their industry, zeal,
severity, so cleared the Counties where they rode Circuits, that (according to
what one of them promised) a man might ride over Sarisbury Plain, with a purse
in his hand. By reason of our late war (which is the womb of all evil) our
Nation has swarmed with rogues and robbers, that we cannot ride safely in the
ways, nor sleep quietly in our beds for them; oh let such severe carriage, and
zealous courage show themselves against them and all other malefactors, that
the beams of a Deity may shine forth to the confusion of profaneness and
ungodliness, that when you pronounce sentence, all may say in a true sense,
what they said in a false of Herod, It is the voice of God, and not of man,
Acts 12. 22.

II. As Judge of Nisi prius.

1. Cast out all frivolous suits, all malicious, vexatious actions, those
opprobria legis, let them know,

(Non vacat exiguis rebus adesse Jovi.) that your Deity cannot attend such
sorry businesses, and that your justice shall never be executioner to their
malice.

2. Have a special care that no sons of Belial, who swear usually, be admitted
for a witness, or to take an oath; make a difference between them that swear,
and them that fear an oath, Eccles 9. 2. You know that two sons of Belial can
and will swear a righteous Naboth, not only out of his livelihood, but also out
of his life, except you interpose, 1 King. 21. 13.

3. That those witnesses who shall swear point blank one to another, (as white
is to black) that the witness who is found to swear fasly, have the reward of
perjury. It is now in England (as it was once in Rome) that persons are to be
had and hired on both sides, by which innocence is wronged, justice abused,
Judges pusled: These oaths make the Land to mourn, oh make those persons mourn
for their oaths.

Secondly, To you my much honored friends the Justices To the Justices
of peace, who are our dii titulares; I may invert Tertullus speech to Felix
(in particular) to you (in general) By your care we enjoy great quietness,
and very worthy deeds are done (unto this County) by your providence. Let me
humbly entreat these things of you.

1. Keep down and pull down those artillery gardens of sin, in which youths are
mustered, and made complete soldiers for hels service, viz. Alchouses, and
suffer not the putting down one of them, to be like the cutting off the head of
Hydra, in whose room seven more came, as has been in some places of this
County.

2. Keep a very strict and severe hand over inferior officers; know that they
are not like the heavens, that can move by an inward principle, viz. of
conscience of the fear of God, but like Clocks or Jacks that only move by the
heavy weights of a Warrant, or fear of punishment.

3. Never permit profane and ignorant persons to be chosen officers: It is
never likely that one drunkard or swearer will punish or complain of another.

4. Command the Officers of all Congregations, to bring in the names of all
such persons, as were absent from the public worship of God on the Lords day;
For many under the pretense of going to any place, go to no place of public
ordinances, but spend that day most profanely.

Thirdly, To you Gentlemen of the Grand Inquest, who To the Grand Inquest.
are dii informantes; I beseech you do something this time by way of petition,
that may make for Gods glory, and the good of this County. Oramus, non pugnamus
Caesar, was lawful in a Heathen Magistrates reign, much more in a Christian
Magistrates rule; one who has valiantly rescued our Liberties for us, of whom
we in England may as truly say, as the Grecians of their General Q. Flaminius,
(...), (...), our Savior, our Savior.

It would be too great impudence at least to suspect that He who has purchased
our Liberties for us, would any ways keep them from us. It would rather be a
Christian and charitable Metonymie, to attribute (Adrians Motto) unto him, Non
Mihi, sed Populo. It shall therefore be my earnest request unto you and for
you, That the Lord would grant you the Spirit of Wisdom and of Knowledge,
whereby you may improve your selves in your places, Instruments of Gods honor,
his Peoples interest, and the flourishing of this County.

FINIS.

