A TREATISE OF Matters Beneficiary BY Fra Paolo Sarpi, The Author of the
History of the Council of TRENT.

Newly Translated out of ITALIAN, according to the best and most perfect Copy
Printed at Mirandola, Anno Dom. 1676.

Wherein is Related with the Ground of the History, how the Alms of the
Faithful were Distributed IN THE PRIMITIVE CHURCH.

The Particulars whereof the Table shows.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Hodgkin, and are to be sold by William Crook, at the
Green Dragon, without Temple Bar, and Richard Bently, in Russel Street, Covent
Garden. 1680.

TO THE KING'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY,
May it please your Majesty,
TO give me leave most humbly to offer unto your Majesty's perusal, a small
Posthumus work, of a poor Theatine of the Order of Servi newly taught English,
who Lived and Dyed in the Communion of the Church of Rome, yet happily as
worthily Great, as that or any other Age, either before or since has produced.
Great, for universal Learning, for wisdom in Councils, for discerning right
reason from Sophistical-School-quirks, for faithfully recording Ancient
Monuments and customs of the Church, so that every one that reads them may
safely swear, not only to the truth, but to the Impartiality of them, being
written without respect to this or that Church in particular, but to Holy
Church in general. Great, for soundness of Judgment, for admirable dexterity in
summing up intricate, wrangling and prevaricating disputes, into short
perpicuous and pithy Results: Great also, for Holiness of Life and
Conversation, contentedness and moderation of desires, not seeking high things
for himself (thereby imitating Christ himself, who when the Multitude would
have taken him by force to make him a King, withdrew himself into a Mountain
alone) never altering his Habit, Condition, or Cell, though esteemed the very
Oracle of Venice; who stoutly, yet with great Modesty and Reverence toward his
Holy Father the Pope, defended the just Rights of that Wise Republic, against
his Holiness and all his Conclave, to his eternal Honor, confounding all the
wits (which were not few) of that Age by the effort of invincible reason,
fairly appealing to the Judgment of all the world by his Pen, and at the end
and close of the Accommodation, refusing to give Rome it self the satisfaction,
though but of words, and esteemed as insignificant the Popes Breve offered for
taking away his Censures and his Instrument of Absolution, and the Instrument
for the delivery of the Prisoners, and the decree of the Senate for the
Restitution of the Religious, etc. All wyles and tricks of the Court of Rome
granted (Covertly and with design to Cajole) unto the Cardinal of Joyeuse,
which they did not dare to divulge in formal Copies, but only dispersed
underhand some Abridgements of them to Amuse, and cheat the World. He so
Confounded the Jesuits that that State so Solemnly Banished them their
Dominions, that they were never to be readmitted, nor the Decree revoked,
unless the whole Process against them were first read in full Senate, whereof
five parts of six should give Suffrage for their Revocation: And who, though by
the Constitution of that Republic, as an Ecclesiastic could not formally sit
in their Council, yet that State had that Esteem for him, that they so far
dispensed, as that he was permitted to sit therein behind a Curtain, that he
might be Master of all their Debates and Advisoes, and in due time and place
give his own. I might add much more concerning the Articles of his Faith,
whereof there are 54 at the end of his History of the Inquisition, Published in
Latin by Andreas Colvius, Printed at Roterdam 1651, where he is Styled Splendour
and Ornamentum Orbis, the Glory and Ornament of the World, but I forbear, lest
under pretense of an Epistle Dedicatory, I should seem to write an Epitaph. If
I have too far transgressed already, I can only plead for my excuse, that he
being rested from his Labors, it is but just, that his good works should
follow him, and his praises celebrated.

This very work of his, though small in Bulk, yet very rich in Cargo, not only
for the Excellency, but for the Curiosity and Rarity thereof, there being
nothing Extant so succint, particular and exact, for full, perfect and distinct
information comparable to it, nor so methodically declaring their genuine
History and pedigree of their first Institutions and right uses, the Alternate
Gradations of their rise, growth and deviations by which they degenerated into
Abuses, and seems as if it were Calculated for the very Nursing Fathers of Holy
Church, of which your Majesty being the great defender, the Dedication hereof
has so just a pretense to your favorable Acceptance and perusal, that it
would be injurious to your Majesty to doubt thereof. I pray God guide your
Majesty with his Councils, while you Live, and afterward receive you to Glory.
So Prays

Your most humble and dutiful Subject and Servant, WILL. DENTON M. D.

THE PRINTER TO THE READER
I Think it my duty to advertise thee, that I have Printed this small Treatise
in this large Volume, that it may suit and be Bound with the Authors other
small works, lately Printed with his History of the Council of Trent, to which
ere-long I hope more may be added. And the Numbers of the following Index,
relate and Correspond to the Numbers in the Margent of this Edition, as also to
the Pages in the Italian Copy.

I hope there are no Errata but Litterals, only p. 75. no 223, l. 15. for
Obverting, read Advising or Intimating.

A Table or Index of the Contents of this Treatise.
A ABbots, how and by whom Founded and did increase, No. 45, 46, 95. Exempted
from the Authority of the Bishops, but Subject to the Pope, 46. gave themselves
to Temperal Employments, 47. Abbeys made Rich, 45. Abuses in the Administration
of Goods Ecclesiastical, no. 1, 2, not altogether irremediable, 2. St.
Augustin's Opinion concerning them, 22. Annates, or First Fruits, who Invented
them, reputed Grievous, Universally Condemned, 173. Justified by some, 175,
176. Anselme, Bishop of Lucca, wrote in favor of the Election of Bishops, by
the Clergy and People of the Diocesses, n. 161. Arms Spiritual, or
Excommunication employed for the defense of Temporal Possessions, 75.
Aspettative. Exportancies or Reversions blamed and restrained, n. 133.

B BAronius not able to excuse the disorders of Ecclesiastics, n 72. he
contends about the intromission of Princes, and of the People in the Election
of Popes and Bishops, 126. Beneficij, their Original and cause of their name,
n. 45. Antiquity knew no distinction between Order and Benefice, it being the
same thing to Ordain and give a Benefice, 50. whether of Divine or Human Right,
76. their distinction into Compatible and Incompatible, 143. Pluralities, 143,
211. Commendaes, 149. Unions, 157. their Reservations to the Pope, 220. Laws
made concerning Benefices, 21, 25, 26, 166. Beneficed are not the Patrons, but
the Administrators, n, 236. St. Bernard Reprooved the Court of Rome, about the
Collation of Benefices, Exclaims against those that ill dispose the Revenews,
n, 133. Bishops, their Election, called by Anselm Bishop of Lucca, Popes, 27,
60, 95, 162. their Care, 38. made Patrons of Church Goods, 14, 25. their
practices 30. Bull of the Pope of small Effect, n, 205. Various Clauses
inserted, n, 186.

C CAnons, the Original of the Name and their Institution, n. 66. Canonists,
and their Sentiments, n, 79. 144, 145, 161, 223, 227, 228. Cardinals, their
Original from the word Incardinato, n. 52. Cardinal Caietan, his Opinion
concerning the Government of the Revenews of Benefices, n. 239. Carolo magno
Reforms Ecclesiastical matters, n. 58. but ill observed by his Successors, n.
61. Cathedratico, of Bishops what, n. 44. Censure of the Church how feared, n.
75. Clergy ought to Administer Ecclesiastical goods according to the Canons,
n. 227. they are Masters of that which they receive for their Labor, 241. the
Church may not possess Stable Goods, n. 14, 15. its Governments was
Democratical, n. 64. Church of Rome receives Donations from all sorts of
Persons, n. 125. the Church of Italy and out of Italy in a sad Condition, n.
73. Christ the Head of the Church, and Patron of the Goods thereof, n. 89. St.
Cyprian Complains that the Bishops keep that which ought to be distributed to
the poor, and of other Abuses, n. 14. Coadjutors, Ancient and laudable with
future Succession, 201. opposed and defended, prohibited by the Council of
Trent, n. 202, 211. Collections, to what end, n. 11. Commendaes good in their
Institution, n. 149. their Abuse, 150. Commendaes for Life, 151. Prohibited by
the Council of Trent, 214. but in vain, 216. Councils, when they began, 64, 65.
of Constance, 194. of Pavia, 196. of Basil, 199, 203. of Trent, 210.
Consistory, n. 65. Concordato above the Council of Basil, n. 204. of Leo the
10th, 207. of Francis the 1st, n, 209. the Observance is Interrupted under
Henry the 2d, n. 209. but in France it remained, n. 210. Confusions in the
Popedom in the 10th Age, about Ecclesiastical Affairs in Italy, n. 72, 92.
Contentions of the Pope with the Princes, about Investitures, n. 107, 112. of
Boniface the 8th, with Philip the fair, 212. Court of Rome having acquired
plenary Authority, to dispose of all Ecclesiastical Benefices, aimed only at
Money, 158, 182. Conscience ought to resolve doubts, n. 243.

D DEcretal of Gregory the 9th, n. 137. Disorders sprung from the Ordinary,
without giving Benefice, n. 54. during Schism, 182, 184. Deacons, their first
Institution, by whom chosen, n. 10. in following times, 27. Dispensations
reserved to the Pope, n. 144. Dissolutions, n. 125. Dominion of Goods
Ecclesiastic, to whom it does belong, n. 84. Donations made to the Church, n.
89. without particular use, 17. in fee, 76.

E ELections of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, n. 26. the manner of their
Elections, 117, Arts to draw Elections to Rome, 134. Anciently they did not
belong to the Popes, Contrary to the Canons, 160. Epistles, Suppositious under
the names of Popes, n. 15. Exemptions of Ecclesiastics was just in former
times, n. 18. whether of Divine or Humane right, 78. Expectancies or Reversions
blamed and restrained, 133.

F FEuds their name and Original, n. 45. gifts in Fee to the Church. 76. Found
of Goods Eclesiastical, n. 11, 27. France, the Kings gave the Bishoprics, n.
35. the decree of Paschal, 11. forbidding Laics to Collate Benefices, was not
received in France, 103. the Regalia remain in France, 110. the Contentions of
Boniface 8. with Philip the fair, 112. Disposition of Benefices, 156, 157. St.
Lewis makes the Pragmatica, 158. Edict of the Kings against the Reserves, 185.
Opposition to those that would Erect the Mendicants, 193. they proceeded
against the Court of Rome, 194. Regresses given to the Pope only, were
Condemned by the French, 201. Lewis the 2d revokes the Pragmatica, 208.
Concordat of Leo the 10th, with Francis the 1st, 207. First Fruits, 122.

G GErmany, the Emperors reserve a right to give one Canonship in many
Churches, n. 111. refuses to be Subject to the Reserves, 184. Emperor
Constantine, 17. Carolo magno, 58. Henry 3.97. Henry 4.98. Henry 5.103. Ottone
Sassone 93. gl' Ottone 96. Lothario Sassone, 109. Leone, 166. Gratiano Collects
all that is reputed proper for Papal Grandeur, n. 137. St. Gregory refuses to
Ordain without the Consent of the Citizens, n. 29. Exclaims against those that
abuse the Incomes of Benefices. 237. Goods Ecclesiastic, Anciently disposed to
Pious uses, but now otherwise, n. 1, 2. their beginning, and how Administered in
Christ's time, 3. under the Apostles. 7. their Foundation, 4. their Lawful use,
11, 12. changed by little and little, 14, 15. they did not Consist at first in
Stable Goods, when Stable Goods were given to the Church, 16. Confiscated,
restored, 17. Goods given to the Church without special Obligation of any
particular work, 17. increased by being Exempted from public Contributions,
18. given with zeal, though false and indiscreet, 20. Laws remedying their
Abuse, 21. their increase, 23. their Ancient distribution lasted till 420.23.
after the separation from the Empire, it was retained in the Eastern Church,
25. in the West, the Bishops became Patrons, 25. how the Goods were divided,
the found of them still remaining undivided, 21. whether Jure divino or Humano
and who had the Dominion of them, 76. they were not Exempted from common
necessities, 167. few new Acquisitions in these last times. 243.

I INdulgences, their Institution, Abolition by P. Pius the 5th, but without
Effect, 191. Jesuits, their Institution, rich, poor, mixed, 244. Investitures,
England, after long Contention yields them to the Pope, n, 108. takes away
the Benefices from Roman Courtiers, who in a manner engrossed all, n. 152.
Edward the 3d opposes the Reserves, 180. the Emperor renounceth the Reserves,
105. Contentions about them in France, 108. Lothario the Saxon left them to the
Pope, 109. Italy, its Church in a sad Condition, n. 73. ample Authority of the
Pope convenient for Italy, 152. Provisions made there against Abuses, 186.
Stat. of Italy changed after the Council of Trent, 210.

M MEndicants, their grant to acquire goods, 193. France Opposes them, 194.
Militia of the Holy Land, 199. Ecclesiastic Ministers paid nothing, 124.
Monks, their Original, they were Secular, n. 30. they chose their Abbots, 32.
they were admitted into Affairs of State and of War, 115. Monasteries, their
Original, n. 30. joined with the Sea of Rome, 46. In Commenda Condemned by the
Council of Trent, but without Execution, 220.

N NAvarro Canonist holds that the Clergy are not Patrons, but dispensers, and
Obliged to Restitution, 239. Normans help the Pope. 101.

O OFfice Divine given to Canonical hours, 141. Ordinato and Ordine, 50.

P PApacy is a Benefice, n. 69. Titles of most Holy and most Blessed, and Name
of Pope, 70. Pope Confirmed by the Emperor, 61. Administrator not Patron, 86.
practices of Popes concerning Benefices Conferred by Kings, 112. they dispense
contrary to Canons, 132. draw Elections to Rome, 134, 151. they Prohibit to
Alienate, 169. their Authority is doubtful, 225. they binder Abuses in other
Churches, but not in their own, 222, 225. Popes, Benedict, 12, 178. Boniface,
8. 112. Clement 4, 171. Clement 5, 181. Clement 6, 180. John 22.144, 171.
Gregory 7, 100. Gregory 10, 171. Innocent 6, 181. Paschal 103. Pius 5, 192.
Symacho, 165. Popes Patrimony, what, 40. the Revenues of the Church, 43. Pacts
in matters Beneficiary how Symonaical, how not, 223. Pensions, their Original,
diverse sorts, 214. diverse sorts, 215. mean profits, 216. more profitable than a
Benefice, 217. to extinguish them, 236. the People have part in Elections, 28,
Possessions of the Church, 76. Possessors or owners drawn to the Secular
Courts, 201. Pragmatica is published in France, 169. Pius 2d disputes it, 206.
maintained by the French Clergy and University of Paris, 206. Lewis 12, revoked
it, 206. after that be restored it, 207.4 Popes Opposed it, but in vain, 207.
Abolished by the Concordate of Leo 10, with Francis 1st, 207. Precaria, what a
Contract called Precarius, 71.

Q QUestions, whether Ecclesiastical Benefices are of Divine or Human Right,
76. who has Dominion of Goods Ecclesiastical, 84. if the Pope has Supreme
Dominion of the Goods and Benefices Ecclesiastic, 225. to whom belongs the
Fruits and Revenues of Goods Ecclesiastic. 236. Quindennio, what it is, 177,
178.

R REgalia, what, 110. Regresso, what it is, n. 199. reserved to the Pope only,
Condemned in France, 201. Prohibited by the Council of Trent, 211.
Resignations, their beginning, 188. their Lawfulness for Favor, 189.
Restitutions disputed, 238. Reformation of the Abuses of Goods Ecclesiastic,
difficult but not impossible. 2 Remedies of the Court of Rome against the ill
observance of the Concordate over the Council of Basil, 205. Renuntiations
reserved to the Pope only, 191. Residence to whom Commanded, 139. who Exempted,
141. Ordered by the Council of Trent, without declaring whether by Divine or
Human right, 212. Reservations of Benefices Vacant in Court, in favor of the
Pope, 170. Benedict 12, Established them only during his Life, 178. Clement the
6th, made the same, 180. Edward 3d of England Opposed it, 180. Mental
Reservations by whom introduced, 197, 198. the Council of Trent did not mention
them, and wherefore, 213. numbering of Benefices reserved to the Pope, 220.
Robert Bishop of Lincoln Opposes the Pope, curious History. 154.

S SChism of Bolonia, 176. of Florentini, 186. of 3 Popes raised by the Council
of Constance, 194. an other in the Council of Basil, 196, the Tenth Age
monstrous in the Person of the Popes, 72. Seculars provide against the Abuses
of the Bishops in dispensing Goods Ecclesiastical, with Prohibition to
Alienate, 165. Simony, Opinions of the Canonists about that which is Committed
in Beneficial matters, 223, 224. Synods, 65. Spain receives quietly the
Innovations of the Court of Rome, about Investitures, 114. deludes with
Prudence the Arts of the Court, 115. Spoils which the Chamber of the Pope
receives, their Original, 250. Probiluted in France, 251. Paul 3d, his Bull
thereon, 252. and of Pius 4th, on the same, 253. the right of Spayls, 254.
Successors, is done diverse ways, 203.

T TEmplars, the Institution of this Military Religion, and with what Success,
121. Temporals of the Church under the Old and New Testament, in what it
Consists, from whence they came, 250. Theologues, their Sentiments concerning
necessary provisions for the Ministers of the Church, 82. Titular Bishops
without the burden of a Diocese, from which they took their Title, 55. Titular
Benefices without Fruit, 198. Titles of Dukes, Marquises and Earls given to
Bishops, 110. Title of a Benefice resigned at pleasure only without Fruit, 198.
St. Thomas asserts the Pope to be principal Dispenser, but not the Patron, 86.
Tribute, the Clergy Exempted from it by the Law of Constance, 26. Paid at first
by the Ecclesiastic Possessions and remitted by diverse Emperors.

V VAcancies of Benefices in Court, reserved to the Pope, the Popes use
diversely such reserves, 156, 157. Bishops, their Election, called by Anselmo
Bishop of Lucca, Popes, 27, 60, 95, 162. their care, 38, made Patrons of Church
Goods, 14, 25. their practice, 30. Vicars Obliged to perpetual residence, 142.
Unions of Benefices, v. Benefices, University of Paris Opposes the Concordate
of Francis 1st, with Leo the 10th, and appeal to a future Council.

Z ZEal falls to enrich the Church.

A TREATISE OF THE Beneficiary Matters, OF FRA PAOLO SARPI.
Wherein is related, with the Ground of the History, how the Alms of the
Faithful were distributed in the primitive Church.
THE ancient Fervor of Christian Charity being grown cold, which not only moved
Princes, N. 1.
and private Persons to give temporal Riches plentifully to the Churches; but
also induced the Ministers of the Church to bestow them holily on pious
occasions, N. 2.
it is no wonder if at present faithful Stewards seem to be wanting, and others
diligent only in gaining and retaining have succeeded in their stead, so that
it has been necessary to moderate by Laws the excessive gains, and a
continual desire is kindled in godly men to see the Administration of the goods
possessed by the Churches once more restored, if not to that ancient
Exemplariness, at least to a tolerable Moderation.

The Defects which appear to us in these days, entered not into the Clerical
order all together, neither grew they so Eccessive at one instant of time; but
from a supreme, or rather from a divine Perfection they descended by degrees
unto Imperfection, which is now manifest unto all, and confessed by the Clergy
it self, and by some esteemed irremediable: Notwithstanding that if it pleased
God our Lord to give unto his faithful as much grace as he gave to our
forefathers, we should not loose the hope of seeing the same wonders yet in our
Age: It is indeed necessary that as by Degrees we came to this depth of Misery,
so by Degrees we may ascend toward that height of Perfection in which the Holy
Church was. The which cannot be done, N. 3.
but by knowing what was the Administration of temporal things from the
Beginning, and how this good Government came to fail, it is particularly
necessary before all things, to tell how the Church from time to time acquired
temporal Riches, and how upon each alteration it appointed Ministers to bestow,
or to possess them, which will discover to us the hindrances which in these
times prevent a good Reformation, and will show how to overcome them; and this
is my Design in the present Discourse so ample concerning beneficial matter.

The beginning of Ecclesiastical Benefices was whilst our Lord Jesus Christ,
Conversed in this world, and their Stock was nothing else but the Oblations of
Pious and devout Persons, N. 4.
which were kept by a Minister, and distributed for two works only; one for the
Necessities of our Lord, and of the Apostles preachers of the Gospel; and the
other for Alms to the Poor. All this is clearly seen in St. John, where the
Evangelist says that Judas was he who bore the Purse, wherein was put the
Money presented to our Lord, he spending the same, and buying things necessary
for them, or else distributing to the Poor according to what our Lord commanded
for the day. St. Augustine considers that Christ having the Attendance of Angels
who Ministered unto him, was in no necessity of keeping or preserving of Money:
nevertheless he would have a Purse, to give an example to the Church of what
she ought to do, and therefore the Church always understood that from his
Divine Holiness by his own Example the Form of the Ecclesiastical Money might
be instituted, N. 5.
instructing from whence it should be taken, and wherein it should be laid out.
And if in our days we see not this holy institution observed, we ought to
consider that for our instruction, and for our consolation the Divine Scripture
relates, that then Judas also was a Thief, and usurped to himself the goods
common to the Apostolical College, and came to such a Height of Covetousness,
that what he stole seeming not sufficient for him, he proceeded so far in
wickedness, that he sold to the Jews the very person of Christ our Lord, to
make his sum of Money greater. And if we either in reading Histories, or else
in observing things occurrent in our Times, we shall believe that
Ecclesiastical Goods are in a great Part spent in other uses than Pious, and
that some of the Ministers not content of usurping to themselves that which
ought to be in common to the Church, and to the Poor, have gone so far as to
sell Sacred things and Spiritual Graces to make Money, N. 6.
we ought not to refer this to a Particular Misery of our or of any other
times; but to ascribe it to the Divine Permission for the Exercise of the Good,
considering that the Beginning of the Infant Church was subject to the same
Imperfections: Indeed we ought every one according to his Degree and Vocation
to procure a Remedy, and he that cannot do otherwise by his Prayers, and he
that can hinder the Evil by preventing and opposing the Abuses, considering
that although Judas had no humane Punishment, because those who ought to have
punished him were Accomplices in his Offense, nevertheless divine Providence
showed what Penalty he deserved, and appointed that he should be his own
Executioner, for a Document of what those ought to do, who are given for Tutors
and Defenders of the Church in following Ages.

After Christ our Lord had ascended into Heaven, the holy Apostles followed in
the Church of Jerusalem the same Institution of having the Church money for
the two Effects abovesaid, N. 7.
that is, for the Need of the Ministers of the Gospel, and for Alms to the
Poor: and the Stock of this money was likewise the Oblations of the Faithful,
who also making all their Goods common, sold their Possessions to make money
for this use: So that the Community of the Church was not distinct from the
Particular of each faithful Man, as is practiced still in some Religions which
observe those first Institutions.

The Christians in those primitive Times were very ready to strip themselves of
their Temporal Goods, to bestow them in Alms, because they looked for the end
of the World to be at hand, Christ our Lord having left it to them uncertain,
and although it was to last as long as he pleased, they considered it no
otherwise but as being to end then, holding for certain that the Figure of this
World, that is, the State of this present Life passes away; wherefore the
Oblations increased always the more; yet the Custom of not having any thing of
ones own, but all things in Common, N. 8.
so that there was neither poor nor rich, but all lived equally, went not out
of Jerusalem; For in the other Churches which the Holy Apostles planted, it
was not instituted, neither did it last long in Jerusalem.

Whereupon 26 years after the Death of Christ it is read that the public was
distinct from the private, every one knowing his own, but the money being
common in that Church as in others founded in Oblations, which placed in
Common, served for the Ministers only and for the Poor, and it was not Lawful
for him, who had wherewithal of his own, to live upon the Churches Stock;
whereupon St. Paul ordained that Widows who had Kindred should be relieved by
their Relations, that the Church Goods might be sufficient for those who are
widows indeed, that is, Widows and poor.

The first day of the week which for that cause was called the Lords day, the
Faithful met together, N. 9.
and each one offered that which he had set apart of the foregoing week for the
Necessities of the Common.

The care of these Goods which our Lord whilst he was in this Mortal Life gave
unto Judas, was administered by the Apostles themselves for a short Time after
the Ascension, but afterward perceiving that Murmurings and Seditions did
arise amongst the Faithful, about the Distributions that were made, it
appearing to some that they were not so great Sharers of the Common, as they
willingly would have been, and believing that others had more than they ought,
so as the Common Evil in all Times in dispensing the Goods of the Church, the
Apostles knew they could not attend this perfectly, together with preaching of
the Word of God, they determined to retain to themselves the Ministry of
Preaching and teaching, appointing for this Office of having care of Temporal
things, another sort of Ministers quite different from that which we see done
in our Times, wherein the chief Prelates of the Church attend the Government of
Temporal things, N. 10.
and the Office of Preaching and teaching the Word of God, and the Doctrine of
the Gospel is left unto the Friars or Brethren, or to some inferior Priests in
the Church.

But these new Ministers which the holy Apostles instituted for governing
Temporal things were called Deacons, Deacons.
for which purpose Election was made of six from all the Body of the Faithful,
which the Apostles appointed for that Ministry, and wheresoever they founded a
Church, they also appointed Deacons in the same Manner, as also they ordained
Bishops and Priests and other Ecclesiastical Ministers, Fasting and Prayer
preceding, and the Common Election of the Faithful following after, Observing
inviolably this order of never deputing any man to any Ecclesiastical Charge,
who was not first elected by the universality of the Church, which is of all
the Faithful together.

This Custom continued in the Church in such a Manner for about 200 years, N.
11.
maintaining the Ecclesiastical Ministers, and the Poor also with the public
Goods, there being no other Stock but the Oblations which were made by the
Faithful in the Church, which Oblations were in great Abundance, because out of
Fervency of Charity every one offered all that he could according to what he
had, so that when the means of the Faithful in one City were abundant for the
supplying the wants of their own Church, they made Collections for other poor
Churches also: For which cause St. James St. Peter and St. John, when they
acknowledged St. Paul and St. Barnabas for Consorts and Companions in the
Gospel, they recommended this Work unto them, to Collect some Alms for the
poor Church of Jerusalem, for which St. Paul also mentions the having made a
Collection in Macedonia, in Achaia, in Galatia, and in Corinth, and this Custom
was observed not only during the Apostles Life times, but also after their
Death; and in the Church of Rome where Riches were plenty, the Offerings also
were Abundant, N. 12.
for about the year 150 they not only served to Maintain the Clerks and poor
Christians of that City, but also to administer abundantly unto other Churches,
not only to the Neighboring, but also to those at a Distance, giving Food in
diverse Provinces unto poor and miserable Christians Condemned to Prisons, and
to working in Mines, and to show the Abundance of the Oblations, I shall only
say this that Marcion about the year 170, Marcion. Ao. 170.
made an Oblation in the Church of Rome at one time of 5000 Crowns of Gold, and
because he had certain Opinions not Convenient in Matter of Faith, he was
expelled from the Congregation, and all the money restored to him, that holy
Church esteeming it self polluted in retaining the Goods of a Heretic.

Afterward the Church of Rome increased so in Treasures, that after 220 years
the Roman Emperors were desirous of them; Ao. 220. Decius the Prince.
whereupon Prince Decius Arrested St. Lanrence a Roman Deacon to take the
Ecclesiastical Treasures from him, they being grown so Copious; but that Prince
was Mistaken, N. 13.
believing that the Treasures were Collected and preserved, for that holy
Deacon was aware of the Tyrants Greediness, and foreseeing the imminent
Persecution bestowed all at one time, as they were wont to do in such like
Dangers; and the most part of the Persecutions made against the Church after
the Death of Commodus were for that Cause, that is, because the Princes or the
Governors finding themselves short of Money, were willing to make themselves
Masters of the Christian Churches Stock that way.

After the Churches were enriched, the Clerks also began to live more at ease,
and some not being content with the ordinary daily food of the Church, would
live separately in their own Houses, and receive from the Church their separate
proportion in Money every Day, or for a Month together and longer; a thing
which although it declined from the Primitive Perfection, N. 14.
was nevertheless tolerated by the Fathers. Besides, the disorders did not
stand at this stay, but the Bishops began to fail the Poor in their usual
Alms, and to keep for themselves that which ought to be distributed, growing
rich with the Common Goods of the Church, dealing in usury for to increase
them, and leaving off the care of teaching the Doctrine of Christ, all busied
themselves in Covetousness, which things St. Cyprian laments that they were
practiced in his time, and concludes that God (to purge his Church of these
Errors) might permit that great Persecution which was under the Empire of
Decius, because his divine Majesty has always reformed his Church, either
mildly by the means of Lawful Magistrates, or when the Excess is gone too far,
by the Instrument of Persecutions.

But although the Church possessed so much wealth, No Stable Goods at first.
yet it had no settled or Stable Goods; first, N. 15.
because they cared not for any upon the Reason abovesaid, for they esteemed
the End to be at hand, and all Worldly things to be Transitory, and of a great
weight for one who tends toward Heaven; and again because no Society,
College, Communalty, nor Corporation according to the Roman Laws could be
given to, bequeathed, or have left by Will, any Goods immovable, nor for any
cause whatsoever, could possess the same, unless it were approved of by the
Senate, or by the Prince; neither can this be doubted of, although, Some
Epistles go about under the Names of old Popes, which give a Reason why the
Apostles should sell their Possessions in Judea, and the succeeding Christians
should preserve them, by saying, that was because the Apostles foresaw that the
Christian Church ought not to remain in Judea, but indeed amongst the Gentiles,
as if in the Gospel the cause of selling were not expressly shown when Christ
said to his Church: Fear not, O little Flock; N. 16.
sell what ye possess and give Alms, that although Jerusalem were destroyed,
at its Building again there might be an Abundance of Christians, and yet have
not been destroyed in the Cities where the Churches amongst the Gentiles had
Possessions; But laboring to show this Falsehood is superfluous, being a
certain thing that these Epistles are Suppositious, Ao. 800.
and were framed about the year 800, by those who preferred (as is still done
at this present) Riches and Pomps to the Apostolical Moderation Instituted and
Commanded by Christ: But the Confusion which was much continued in the Empire
after the Imprisonment of Valerianus, the Laws being but little observed,
chiefly in Africa, in France, and in Italy, some left or gave Stable Goods to
the Churches, which in the year 302, were all confiscated by Diocletian, and
Maximian, though in France the Emperors Decrees were not Executed by the Bounty
of Constance Cloro Caesar who Governed it; But these Princes having renounced
the Empire, eight years after Maxentius restored all the Possessions to the
Church of Rome, and a little after Constantine, N. 17.
and Licinius granted freedom of Religion to the Christians, approved of the
Ecclesiastical Colleges called Churches, granted generally throughout the
Empire, that they might gain or acquire Stable Goods as well by Gift as by
Testament, exempting also the Clergy from personal public Services, Exemptions
of Ecclesiastics.
that they might attend the duties of Religion more Commodiously.

The Custom of our times of giving or of leaving ones Estate to the Church,
with a special obligation of some particular work, as of Building, of Marrying
young Damsels, of providing for Orphans, or others, neither with Obligation to
Masses, Anniversaries, or to other Ecclesiastical Offices were not then in
Account, nor in Use for a long time after; But Persons gave or bequeathed
absolutely, and the Gift or Legacy was incorporated into the Common Mass, N. 18.
which was the Stock for the Expenses of all pious Works, wherefore speaking of
ancient Ecclesiastical Goods, it is most true that they are not dedicated to
any particular Work, but it is not true that they may be laid out in what a man
will, but in the generality of Pious Works only. The Exemptions which Princes
granted unto Ecclesiastical Goods, freeing them from public Contributions was
a great increase to them, Exemptions of Ecclesiastical Goods.
and it was formerly observed every where inviolably, with great satisfaction
to Princes, and with the Approbation of the People, N. 19.
for it proved not dammageble to the Public, nor burdensome to the Commonalty
for two Reasons, one, because Ecclesiastical Goods were finally the Poors of
the People, and exempting those who had not, and leaving the Contributions to
those who had wherewithal, was always accounted just; the other, because
Exempting a man when he has little, and less than what suffices, is no Burden
unto others. Nevertheless no man should infer that the same liberality of
Princes toward the Church, would be just and Convenient in these times also
when it is grown so Rich, that it possesses a quarter, and without doubt more
than what the remainder of the Persons, and this is not laid out any longer for
the Poor; so that to Exempt them would be contrary to what good Princes have
done, in Exempting the Rich, and in laying their due burdens on the Poor.
Wherefore the Princes at present are no less pious than those then, but the
Subject is different: For these would also grant Exemptions to the Church if it
were poor, and those would not have granted it, if it had been Rich.

The great Devotion of Princes and of the People, as it caused the Wealth of
the Clergy to increase abundantly, so it excited a great Thirst in the
Ecclesiastical Ministers, to Multiply it or heap it up; from which excess not
so much as the wel-minded men were free; for seeing how the Distribution of
Ecclesiastical Goods fell to the Glory of God, N. 20.
and to the Common Good, they concluded that the more the Church had to
Distribute, the better it was, whereupon they made use of all Ways and of all
Arts to gain Wealth, not considering whether the Means they used were Lawful
and suitable unto Equity; so that if the Effect did but ensue, viz. that the
Church might gain by any means whatsoever, She seemed to have made a Sacrifice
unto God: And certainly immense and innumerable Evils proceed from this sort of
Zealous Persons, who do not use Discretion with their Zeal, because it seeming
to them that every thing sent for A Religious End by what way soever to be
Good, they oftentimes Act against Piety and against Humanity, putting the World
into a confusion; thus it happened in the Primitive times, that the Church
obtained Power to acquire real Estates, it was believed by some Religious Men,
to be a Service of God to deprive their own Children and Kindred, to give to
the Churches, for which cause also they Omitted no Art to induce Widows,
Damsels, N. 21.
and other easy Persons to deprive their own Families, to leave to the Church:
The Disorder passed so speedily the Bounds of being overcome, that the Prince
was necessitated to provide against it, and in the year 370, Statute of
Mortmain. Ao. 370.
a Law was made, which although it did not deprive the Churches from Acquiring
or Purchasing absolutely, yet it Prohibited the Clergy from going unto Widows
Houses and Orphans, and from receiving by Gift, or by Will any thing from
Women, not only directly, but also by means of any third Person: Which Law St.
Hierome confesses to have been a Remedy against the Corruptions entered amongst
the Clergy, and gone too forward in the Desire of getting Temporal Estates,
neither did that suffice; For within few years after, that is in 390, Ao. 390.
another Law was made, that a Widow who devoted her self to the service of the
Church, could not give or leave to it by will any real Estate or precious
Housholdstuff, which is discoursed of at large elsewhere.

This Excess of getting was not very pleasing to St. Augustine, N. 22.
who lived in those days, for he openly declared, that it pleased him better
that Inheritances should be left to the next of Kin, than to the Church, and
indeed he refused some Inheritances left unto his Church, saying openly, the
Ecclesiastical Ministry consisted not in Distributing much, but in Distributing
well.

Likewise he reproved a new way the Church had of purchasing found out in those
days, which was buying real Estates with the Advance made upon the Incomes or
Rent, which way that Holy man always abhorred, neither would he ever permit it
in his Church, for he declared in his public Sermons, that he had rather live
upon the Oblations and Collections which were wont to be made in the Primitive
times of the Church, than to have a Care of Possessions, which were burdensome
to him, and hindered him from attending entirely upon the Principal Charge of a
Bishop, that is, of Spiritual things; adding further, that he was prepared to
renounce all Possessions, N. 23.
if a livelihood were provided for the Servants of God, and Ministers, as in
the old Testament, by way of Tithes or of other Oblations, without being
subject to the Distraction, which the Care of Earthly things brought along with
it.

But for all the Checks of the Holy Fathers through their good Exhortations,
and of the Princes by their good Laws, the Ecclesiastical Goods could not be
hindered from increasing above what they ought only the ancient manner of
Governing and of bestowing them remained and lasted till the year 420, without
any notable Alteration; Besides all the Oblations and other Ecclesiastical
Incomes proceeding from Real Estates were in Common, and governed by the
Deacons by the Subdeacons, and by other Stewards their Assistants, and
Distributed for the Maintenance of the Ecclesiastical Ministers and of the
Poor; the College of Priests and the Bishop were principally the Intendants,
and in short an Account of all Receipts and Disbursments was kept, so that the
Bishop Disposed of every thing, the Deacons Executed it, N. 24.
and all the Clergy lived upon what the Church had, although all did not
administer. St. John Chrysostom makes mention that in those days the Church
of Antioch fed above 3000 Persons at the Public Expense: It Is also a thing
certain, that the Church of Jerusalem bore the Expenses of an infinite
Multitude of Persons, which happened there from all parts of the World. It is
Recorded in Histories that Atticus Bishop of Constantinople, Assisted the
Church of Nicea in Bithynia by reason of a great Concourse of poor People in
that City, which were Numbered to 10000 in one day.

But after France, Spain, and Africa were divided from the Empire, and erected
into distinct Kingdoms, and the Succession of Theodosius Extinct, Italy after
the Inundation of diverse Barbarous People being fallen into the hands of the
Kings of the Goths, Division of the East from the West.
and the East divided from the West, the Churches were also differently
Governed, the Eastern Church followed the Common Government already instituted;
N. 25.
In the Western, the Bishops by Administrators and Superintendents began to
make themselves Masters, and to Govern the Goods of the Church in an Arbitrary
manner, from whence proceeded a great Confusion, in the Distribution of the
said Goods, and chiefly to the Damage of Buildings, which fell to Ruin, and of
the Poor who were forsaken: For which Cause about the year 470, 'twas ordained
in the Western Church, Ao. 470. Division of Goods Ecclesiastical.
that four parts should be made; one should be the Bishops, the second for the
other Ministers, the third for building of the Church (which Comprehended not
only the Building of the Place where the People met together, but also the
Habitations of the Bishops, and other Clergy-mens, and of the sick and Widows)
and the fourth for the Poor: But these Poor amongst most of the Churches as St.
Gregory relates, were meant only the Poor of the place, because all the
Hospitality belonged to the Bishop, page 26.
who upon the Expense of his own Portion was Obliged to Lodge the Foreign
Clergy, and to feed the Poor which came from abroad. Yet it is not to be
believed, that this Division was in four Arithmetical and equal Parts, but
Proportionably; because in some Churches the Number of the Clergy required,
that their Expenses should be greater than for the Poor; on the contrary the
great Number of Poor, and the small Number of Clergymen required otherwise,
even as in the greatest Cities, the Charges of Building was great, but not so
in the ordinary ones; because every Church accepting the Decree of Dividing
into four parts, made the Divisions with different proportions, according to
their own different Necessities.

I know that some do attribute this Division to Pope Sylvester, who was 150
years before, grounded upon some feigned Scriptures after, with little Honor
to that Age, which was not then much Polluted.

In the Theodosian Codicil, Ao. 359.
there is found a Law of Constantius and Julian, page 27.
in the year 359, Exempting the Marchant-Clergy from paying Custom or Tribute,
because what they gained, was the Poors; so far are we that the Church Goods
should be Divided, that they left their gains in Common, Ao. 550.
but in these years which were about 500, although the Rents were Divided into
four parts, yet the Estates were not Divided, neither the real Estates, nor the
Oblations and Alms, but all Governed together by the Deacons and Subdeacons,
and the Incomes Divided into four Parts; which thing has been necessary to be
mentioned in this Place, because in Succeeding times, there will be declared
such a change of Government, which in and through all things proved Contrary to
the Ancient, as also the Manner of Choosing Ministers was, (as is abovesaid)
Instituted by the Holy Apostles, that Bishops, Priests, Election of Bishops and
(...)
and other Ministers of Gods Word, and the Deacons Ministers of Temporal
things, should be Elected by the Universality or Generality of the Faithful,
and should be Ordained by the Bishops, with laying of Hands on the Head, a
thing which lasted without alteration.

The Bishop was chosen by the People, page 28.
and Ordained by the Metropolitain, in the Presence of all the Cumprovincial
Bishops, or else by their Consent granted by Letters from those who could not
be present, and if the Metropolitain was hindered, the Ordination was made by
three of the Neighboring Bishops, with the Consent of him, and of those that
were Absent: And after that, many Provinces for a better Form of Government
were Subject to one Primate, his Consent was also required for Ordaining. Then
the Priests, Deacons, and other Clergymen were presented by the People, and
Ordained by the Bishop, or else Nominated by the Bishop, and with the Consent
of the People Ordained by him.

An unknown man was never received, neither did the Bishop ever Ordain one who
was not approved of and Commended, or rather presented by the People, and the
Consent or interveening of the People was Judged so necessary, that Pope Leo
the first treats amply, that the Ordination of a Bishop could not be valid
nor Lawful, which was not required, or sought for by the People, and by them
approved of, N. 29.
which is said by all the Saints of those times, and St. Gregory esteemed that
Constance could not be Consecrated Bishop of Milan, who had been Elected by the
Clergy, without the Consent of the Citizens, who by reason of Persecutions were
retired to Genoa, and prevailed, that they should be first sent unto, to know
their Will, a thing worthy of being noted in our days,
when that Election is declared to be Illegitimate and Null, where the People
have any Share; Thus things are changed, and passed into a quite Contrary
Custom, calling that Lawful which then was accounted Wicked, and that Unjust
which then was reputed Holy. Sometimes when the Bishop was grown Old, he
nominated his own Successor; Thus St. Augustine nominated Eradius, but that
Nomination was of no value, unless it were first approved of by the People, all
which things are necessary to be kept in mind, to compare them with the Customs
and Manners, which were seen to be practiced in subsequent times.

It Is necessary now to make a little Digression for a new Cause, N. 30.
which has brought a very great Increase to Ecclesiastical Estates, and sprang
up in these very times about the year 500, and this was another sort of
Religious Colleges, called Monasteries. Ao. 500. Monasteries Monkery. Ao. 300.
Monkery began in Egypt about the year 300, those who fled from the
Persecutions, and from thence past into Greece, where by St. Basil, about the
year 370, it was formed in the manner which yet continues in those Countries.
But in Italy about the year 350, it was brought to Rome by Athanasius, Ao. 350.
where he had but few followers, and little Applause in that City, and in the
Neighboring Places, until that time of about the year 500, when St. Equitius,
and St. Benedictus gave it a settled Form, and difused it, though indeed the
Institution of St. Equitius Extended it self but little, and soon failed, but
that of St. Benedict, spread it self all over Italy, and went beyond the
Mountains. Monks nor Clerks but Seculars.
The Monks in those days and for a long time after, were not Clerks, but
Seculars, and in the Monasteries which they had without the Cities, they lived
upon their own Labors of Husbandry, and other Arts, together with some
Oblations made them by the Faithful, all which was Governed by the Abbot: But
in the Cities they lived by their work, N. 31.
and by that which was appointed for public Expenses by the Church. These
retained their Ancient Discipline much longer; The Clerks after the Stock of
the Church was divided, lost sufficiently of the Peoples Divotion, whereupon
there were few who either gave or left any more Goods to them, so that the
Acquisitions and Purchases of the Church would have been at an end; But the
Monks continuing the living in Common, and in Pious Works, were cause that the
Liberality of the People was not extinguished, but forsaking the Clerks turned
toward them who were greatly Instrumental in Increasing Ecclesiastical Wealth,
and in progress of time, augmented greatly in Possessions and Incomes, given to
them and left by Will, which indeed was then spent by them in the Maintenance
of a great Number of Monks, and in Hospitality, in Schooling and Education of
youth, and in other Pious Works.

The Abbot Tritemius makes account that the Monasteries of Benedict in Monks
were to the Number of 15000, N. 32.
besides the Prepositures and lesser Convents. Prepositure.


The Monks themselves chose their own Abbot, who Governed them Spiritually, and
Ruled also as well the Goods, which came by the Charitable Offerings of the
Faithful, as of those which proceeded from the Labor and Art of the Monks, and
in progress of time those also which came from settled Revenues; But the Bishops
in these days which Succeeded the year 500, Ao. 500.
being become absolute Dispensators of the fourth part of the Church Goods,
began also to mind more Temporal Things, and to make themselves to be followed
in the Cities, whereupon Elections were no more used as the End of Divine
Service, but with Seditious Practices, Proceeding oftentimes from Practices, to
Public Violences, for which cause Princes who until then took but little
thought of whom should be Elected unto this Ministry, began to bethink
themselves of it, N. 33.
being advertised by the Holy men of those times, that God had Committed the
Protection of his Church unto them, and therefore they ought by the Command of
his Divine Ministry, to take such care that Ecclesiastical Affairs should be
Lawfully Managed.

The Princes also saw evidently how great Impediments were brought against the
Quietness of the State, and against the good Government of the Commonwealth,
by the Private Interests of the Ambitious Clergy, and by the Seditious
Practices, which they used to acquire Ecclesiastical Dignities; whereupon,
partly out of Divine Respect, and partly for Human, they began to prevent the
Clergy and the Laity from providing themselves after their way according to
their Affections, as well because Affairs being altered and the Bishopric no
more shunned, but coveted, they made Parties, from whence proceeded Seditions,
and sometimes popular Slaughters by means of the Concurrents, as also because
sometimes Factious Persons were chosen for Bishops, who held private
Intelligence with the Princes Enemies, which were never wanting in the Western
Confusions, N. 34.
and sometimes Persons were chosen, who having gained a Train of People,
Attempted some Design to Attribute the Jurisdiction of the Magistrate to
themselves, and would stir up the People to Defend their Enterprises;
whereupon, the Princes Ordained that no Person Elected, should be Consecrated
without their Consent or the Magistrates, the Prince Reserving to himself the
Confirmation of the great Bishoprics, as in Italy of Rome, Ravenna, and of
Milan, leaving the lesser Bishoprics to the Care of the Ministers; But taking
more heed to the Substance of the thing, than to the Appearance, when in a City
there was an Eminent Subject known to the People, to whom all were inclined,
and the Prince satisfied that he pleased the People, Occurrenza.
when an Occurrence came, he was Consecrated without more ado: Sometimes also
there happened through Accident of War, or of Plague, that one had been
Ordained, before he had the Confirmation of the Prince, N. 35.
as happened to Pelagius the 2d, Predecessor to St. Gregory; Rome being
Besieged by the Lombards, after the Siege was raised, he sent Gregory, who was
then Deacon, to make Excuse to the Emperor, beseeching him to Confirm what
Necessity had Constrained him to do. In this manner Popes were Elected, and
Bishops in Italy until the year 750, Ao. 750.
with the Imperial Confirmation; but in France, and in other places beyond the
Alps, the Regal or the Princes Authority was herein more absolute, for the
People totally desisted from the Election, when the Prince took it in Hand;
good men forbore, because believing themselves to be well provided with Kings,
esteemed their Interventions Superfluous; evil men, because they were not
certain of being able to bring their Designs to pass; whereupon the Kings gave
the Bishoprics to them only throughout the Kingdom.

In all Gregory Turonensis' History from Clodovius, the first Christian King of
France, unto the year 590, no Bishop was known to be made but by the Command or
by the Consent of the King, N. 36.
and St. Gregory who was made Pope that year, writing to the Kings of France
upon different occasions, Complains to them that the Bishoprics were not
bestowed on sufficient men, and prays them to make choice of good and
understanding men. He never reprehends the Provision made by the Kings, when
the Person provided was deserving.

As for Bishops who were chosen without the Authority of the People, it was
easy to exclude them also from the Election of Priests, Deacons, and other
Ecclesiastical Ministers, reducing the Power of nominating them to the Prince
only, without the Intervention of the People, part of them having withdrawn
themselves totally from meddling in Ecclesiastical Congregations, to attend
their Domestic Affairs, others through the Inconveniences which did arise
amongst popular Factions, and some others for seeing themselves disrespected by
the Bishop grown Potent, as well by the Riches he had to spend, as by his
Dependence on the Prince, by whom he was Nominated to, or Confirmed in the
Bishopric.

The Prince sometimes Nominated those that were to be Ordained, N. 37.
at other times he left the Care wholly to the Bishop, chiefly when he was
fully Consident, which Considence was also Cause that the Prince oftentimes
made use of the Bishop, either to compose Difficalties amongst the People, or
to determine Difficult Causes, the Respect of Religion being the Cause, that
they were more believed than the Magistrates; whereupon they were more intent
upon that, than in teaching the Christian Doctrine, which at first was given
them in Charge; Therefore when making of a Bishop was in Question, it behooved
rather to have Respect unto a wise Wordling, than unto one understanding in
Matters of Faith, which remains still unto this time, it being said, that
excepting the Places bordering on the Insidells, it is better making a Bishop
of a good Jurisconsult or Lawyer, than of a good Divine; and truly it is a
reasonable thing, if the Principal Office of a Bishop were to judge Causes. N.
38.
Christ our Lord Ordaining his Apostles, said, as my Father has sent me, so
send I you, by which they understood to be sent to Teach: If now all be
sufficiently instructed, and there be no more need of it, he may attend
somewhat else: Heretofore the Principal Care of the Bishop was to Teach, and
the next to oversee the Government of the Poor; so that in the second, as well
as in the first, there was some Relaxation, and therefore in making the
Division into four parts abovementioned, the Administration of the Goods being
in the Hands of the Clergy, and those were they who divided after their way, so
that where the Bishop and the Priests were Conscionable men, the Division was
Justly made; But where they did not forget themselves (there being none to
Protect the Poor, and as few to take Care of the Buildings) the Shares of these
two were very small, and in some places nothing belonged to either of them, but
all was Divided between the Bishop and the Clergymen.

Besides also, where the Division was made with due Proportion, nevertheless
the Administration of the Buildings, N. 39.
and the Shares of the Poor remaining in the Hands of the Clergy, they came to
diminish by little and little, and the other two waxed greater; which evidently
appears, for that in very few places the Buildings have any proper Income, and
for the Poor there remained nothing but the Hospitals, which are of no Ancient
Institution.

In the Beginning the Share of the Clergy was not Divided amongst them, but the
Bishop had a Care of dealing with each one according to his Merits, but
afterward they took upon themselves the Office of Dividing, the Bishop being
Excluded, and they having their Share, where neither Bishop nor others had to
do, they Divided again amongst themselves, so that each Particular man began to
know his own, and ceased from living in Common. But although the Rents or
Incomes were thus Divided, nevertheless all the Stocks or Estates remained in
one Body, Governed by the Deacons and Subdeacons, and the Rents proceeding
from thence Consigned to the Bishop, and to each one of the Clergy, according
to the Proportion of their Shares.

And in Italy in those times the Possessions of the Church were called
Patrimonies, N. 40. Patrimonies.
which I was willing to mention here, that no man might think that this name
may signify any Supreme Dominion, or some Jurisdiction of the Roman Church, or
of the Pope. The Possessions of each Family which came from their Ancestors in
the times we speak of, were called the Patrimony thereof, and that Estate was
called the Patrimony of the Prince, which he had in Propriety, and to
distinguish it from the Patrimonies of Private men, it was called Sacrum
Patrimonium, as is Read in many Laws of the 12o of the Codice, after which for
the same Reasons, the name of Patrimony was given to the Possessions of each
Church: There are seen named in the Epistles of St. Gregory, not only the
Patrimonies of the Roman Church, but also the Patrimony of the Church of
Arimini, the Patrimony of the Church of Milan, the Patrimony of the Church of
Ravenna.

The Churches placed in Cities, N. 41.
whose Inhabitants were of but indifferent Fortunes, had no Possessions left to
them out of their District. But to those of Imperial Cities, as Rome, Ravenna,
Milan, where Senators and other Illustrious Persons dwelt, Possessions were
left in diverse parts of the World. St. Gregory makes mention of the Church of
Ravenna's Patrimony in Sicily, and of another there belonging to the Church of
Milan; The Church of Rome had Patrimonies in most parts of the World.

Mention is made of the Patrimony of France, of Africa, of Sicily, of the
Cottian Alps, and of many others; but in the time of the said St. Gregory,
there was a Difference, or suit at Law, between him and the Bishop of Ravenna,
for the Patrimonies of both Churches, which was accommodated by Transaction.

To gain also greater Respect for the Possessions of the Church, they were wont
to give it the name of Holy, which that Church had in great Veneration; So the
Church of Ravenna Nominated her Possessions of St. Apollinare, N. 42.
and that of Milan, of St. Ambrose, and the Roman called it the Patrimony of
St. Peter in Abruzzo, St. Peter's Patrimony of Sicily, etc. After the manner of
Venice, where the Public Revenues are called St. Marks. As for the Patrimonies
of Princes when they were not appointed to the Soldiers, a Governor was placed
with Jurisdiction over Causes which concerned that Possession: Some Clergymen
there were of the Roman Church, who endeavored to usurp such Rights in the
Patrimonies of that Church, being willing to right themselves without having
Recourse to public Judicatures; which Introduction St. Gregory Rebuked and
Condemned, forbidding the doing of it upon pain of Excommunication.
Ecclesiastical Possessions paid Tribute to the Prince, as appears manifestly by
the Canon, Si Tributum, Tribute.
which is St. Ambrose. And it is clear, that Constantinus Pogonatus in the year
681, granted an Exemption from the Tributes which the Roman Church paid for the
Patrimony of Sicily and Calabria. 681. Exemption of Tributes. 687.
And Justinian Ritmeno in the year 687, remitted the Tributes which the
Patrimonies of Abbruzzo, and Lucania paid.

The Roman Church received not such great Incomes from its Patrimonies as some
believe; because as Histories relate, N. 43.
Leo Isaurus in the year 732, Consiscated the Patrimonies of Calabria and
Sicilia, N. 732.
both which are mentioned to yield three Talents of Silver, and half a Talent
of Gold, which make in our money (not to lessen the Account upon the variety of
Opinions how much answers each Talent exactly) no greater sum than 2500 Crowns,
and the Patrimony of Sicilia much larger paid no more than 2100 Crowns.

It is not beside the Subject of our Discourse, to know the Particulars which
happened whilst the Possessions of the Church remained in an entire Body, and
under the same Government although the Incoms were divided, which could not
last long by reason of the Contentions which arose amongst those to whom the
Administration belonged, N. 44.
and the others who remained upon their own Discretion. Whereupon for greater
Expedition, each Minister began to retain the Oblations for himself which had
been made in his Temple, the which formerly were wont to be carried to the
Bishop, that he might divide them, but for an acknowledgment of the Episcopal
Superiority, each one gave the third part to the Bishop, and something over and
above for Honor, which was called afterward Cathedraticus, Cathedraticu^^
because it was given out of Reverence to the Cathedral or the Episcopal See.

Moreover they divided the Estates, and appointed every man his own share, but
these Alterations were not made in all places at once, nor by a public Decree,
but as the Uses and Customs happened to all, they began in some places, and
Communicated them Successively unto others, chiefly the bad ones which have the
swiftest Course, and the least hindrance.

In those days when the Ecclesiastical Affairs were reduced to this Condition,
the Public Stocks or Estates were Distributed by the Princes unto Military
men, with a charge that some should keep the Marches or Borders, some should
serve the Prince in Civil Governments, N. 45.
some to follow him to the Wars, some were to Guard Cities, Forts, or
Strongholds, and they were termed or called Frank, or Fees, by the Lombards;
and in the Latin Tongue, which was not yet extinct they were called Beneficia,
as given out of the Princes Beneficency, Benefices.
for which Respect also the name of Benefice was given to the Portions of
Ecclesiastical Estates, or to the Right of Possessing them, because they were
given by the Prince, as Bishoprics, or by the Bishop; of whose Consent and
Concession other Livings are bestowed; and also because Clergymen are
Spiritual Soldiers, keeping Guard, and exercising a Sacred Warfare.

The Abbeys beyond the Alps were at last made more ample and more Rich, Abbeys.
by reason the Masters of the Palace assumed to themselves the Authority of
making the Abbot, Maestri di Palazzo.
and that with a reason apparent enough, because the Monks then (as has been
said) were Laymen without any Ecclesiastical Ordination. N. 46.
It is true, they did not always give him to them, but sometimes out of favor
he granted the Monks leave to choose themselves one. But in Italy the
Monasteries being not very considerable in wealth, Ao. 750.
until the year 750. the Kings of the Goths, then the Emperors, and the Kings
of the Lombards, made no great Account of them; whereupon the Election was left
to the Monks, with the sole superintendency of the Bishop. But the Bishops
sometimes being intent to grow great, they molested the Monasteries too much,
wherefore the Abbots and Monks desirous of freeing themselves from that
subjection, Exemption.
found a way by having Recourse to the Bishop of Rome, that he might take them
into his immediate Protection, and exempt them from the Authority of the
Bishop. This was easily consented unto by the Popes, making use of them, as
well to have other persons in Cities immediately depending on them, as to
amplify their Power over the Bishops, it being very important, that a
Corporation so Notable as were the Monks, who in those times almost wholly
attended on Learning, N. 47.
should depend totally on the Sea of Rome.

A Beginning being made of these Exemptions, all the Monasteries in a very
short time remained united to the Sea of Rome, and separate from their Bishops.

In France the Bishops made by the King, and much more those who were made by
the Masters of the Palace, (the Kings Authority being lessened) betook
themselves all to Temporal things, which the Abbots did likewise, who furnished
the King with Soldiers, and went to the Wars in Person, not as Religious men
to perform the Offices of Christ's Ministers, but Armed and fighting also with
their own hands; for which cause they were not content with the fourth part of
the Goods, but drew all to themselves: Whereupon the poor Priests who
Administered the Word of God and the Sacraments to the People in Churches,
remained without a livelihood, wherefore the People out of their Devotion,
Contributed unto them part of their own Estates, which being done in some
places more liberally, N. 48.
and in others more sparingly, Querimonies or Complaints arose about it
sometimes, because when 'twas often treated how much that should be, which was
to be given to the Vicars or Curates, it went for a Common Opinion to be
convenient after the Example of Gods Law in the old Testament, to give the
Tenth, Tithes.
which being Commanded that people by God, it was an easy thing to represent
it under the Gospel of Christ, as due also; though indeed nothing else be said
of it by our Lord, and by St. Paul, but that necessary maintenance is due from
the People to the Minister, and that the Minister or the Labourer is worthy of
his hire, and he that serves at the Altar, ought to live by the Altar, without
prescribing any determinate quantity, because that in some Cases the Tithe
would be but little, and in other Cases the hundredth part would suffice; But
because this is a clear thing, and that hereafter we have need of handling it
more diffusedly, I Will say no more now, but that in those days, and for an Age
afterward, N. 49.
the Sermons which were made in Churches (excepting the Matters of Faith)
tended to nothing else but to Proofs and Exhortations to pay Tithes, a thing
which the Curates were forced to do both for need, and for utility or profit,
and in the Amplifying as it behooved like an Orator, they went often so far
that they seemed to place all Christian Perfection in paying of Tithes, of
which not well Content, and the Praedials not seeming sufficient for them, they
began to hold the Personals also for necessary, that is, what a man gains by
his Labor and Industry, of Hunting, of all Arts and Handicrafts, and also of
the Military pay.

Of these Sermons many being found without the Authors Name, some through Error
or on purpose were attributed to St. Augustine, and to other Ancient writers;
But besides that the Style shows they were made about the year 800. Histories
are clear, that neither in Africa nor in the East, they never paid Tithes, and
that their Beginning, N. 50.
sprung up in France, as has been said.

I Will pass unto Italy, No man ordained without a Title.
where for several hundreds of years no man was ever Ordained, to whom there
was not appointed both his proper and special Office and Charge, unless that
some man famous in Doctrine or in Holiness, who to attend on his Sacred
Studies, refused to be applied to any particular Cure; the Priest was Ordained
without giving him any proper Parish on which he might attend. St. Hierolamo
was Ordained Priest of Antioch, and St. Paulinus at Barcelona, and this
occasion eccepted, Olim no distinction between Ordination and Benefice.
Antiquity knew of no Distinction between Ordination and Benefice, and
Ordaining was then the same thing as to give an Office, and the Right of having
ones Livelihood from the Common Goods of the Church; But afterward that in the
Confusions which Wars had caused in States, many worthy and good Clergymen
were driven from their Ministry, they recovered or had Recourse to some other
Church, where they were received and maintained as their own Clerks, at the
Common Charges, N. 51.
and sometimes some Minister of that Church happening to fail by Death, or
otherwise, his Office was appointed him to be Minister therein, and that Clerk
was then said to be Incardinated, whereas he who had first been exalted to an
Office, Cardinals. Incardinato. Cardinato.
was said to be Ordinated or Ordained thereunto, but who being dispossessed of
his own, and provided with another was called Incardinated. This manner began
in Italy before the 600th year of Christ's Birth, when through the Incursions of
the Lumbards, many Bishops and other Clergymen were driven from their Charges,
for which cause when such like Offices were vacant in other Churches they were
Incardinated therein, and the Bishops were called, Episcopi Cardinales, and the
Priests, Presbiteri Cardinales.

Those who were driven out from their own places, having Recourse to the
Churches of Rome and Ravenua, which were the Chiefest and Richest in Offices
and Ministeries, N. 52.
those Churches (I say) as most Rich and most abounding received most of those
Strangers; and therefore they had more Cardinals, which was also received in
the abovesaid Churches, because by that means they gained from all places the
most notable men, as is done in these days, and therefore they very Seldom
Ordinated any of their own, but very often Incardinated strangers, whereupon it
remained, that in those two Churches all were called Cardinals. In that of
Rome, the name remains still; in that of Ravenna it lasted until the year 1543,
when Paul the third by one of his Bulls abbrogated the name of Cardinal in that
Church; thus the name of Cardinal which declared Infirmity, changed the
signification, and became the name of the greatest Dignity, and is come to be
said they are Cardinals, (that is) Cardines orbis Terrarum; and that which had
neither degree nor order in the Church, but brought in by chance, is raised to
the Greatness and Dignity wherein we see it now adays. But he that shall
consider or look upon the Councels held in Rome, where Italian Bishops, N. 53.
and Roman Cardinal Priests did Interveen, shall see that the Cardinals did
always underwrite after the Bishops; Cardinals inferior to Bishops.
and that no Bishop was made a Cardinal Priest in succeeding times. The first
Bishops made Cardinals were some chief ones driven from their Churches, as
Conrad of Mentz driven out for a Rebel by Frederik the first Emperor, was
embraced by Alexander the third, Cardinals no Habits to distinguish till 1244.
Red Hat. Red Cap.
and made Cardinal of Sabino. Neither had the Cardinals of Rome any Habit or
Token of Distinction until Innocent the fourth in the year 1244, who upon
Christsmass Eve gave them the Red-hatt, to which Paul the second added also the
Redcap, the Regulars Excepted; But Gregory the 14th in our days granted it to
them also. This little Narration has been necessary, because that upon a
Dignity, which at present is Supreme in the Church, and for which it seems
sufficient Titles could not be found, the present Pope Urban the 8th, by a
peculiar Bull, has reduced them to Eminency.

From the Beginning until a little before the year 500, N. 54.
as has been said, every Clerk was Ordained unto some Office, and lived upon
the common Maintenance, No Ordination without a Benefice till afterward.
after the Benefices were made, 'twas the same thing to Ordain it, and to
appoint the Office of exercising, and the Benefice from whence to receive their
Living, none being Ordained without a Benefice; but in Progress of time when
there appeared any person fit to Act the Clergyman, although there were no
Room or Benefice vacant, not to lose that Subject or Person, the Bishops
Ordained him without any Office or Title, and therefore without Benefice also,
in Expectation that one might become vacant; and those men Ordained without
Title did help or assist those who had Livings, from whom they received their
Maintenance; But in progress of time this sort of Clerks Ordained without Title
or Benefice grew to such an excessive number, Inconveniences from Ordination
without a Title.
and the Charity of the Beneficed in giving them Maintenance being much
lessened, that a multitude of Indecencies and Scandals arose, that it behooved
to provide for them by Laws, and constrain the Bishops who Ordained without
Title, N. 55.
to furnish the Ordained with a Livelihood; and these Provisions which were
Established in the Beginning, somewhat stilled the disorder, which nevertheless
sprang up again ere long, and being often suppressed, always returned, whereunto
two things have given a joint cause; one was the desire many men had of making
themselves Clergymen, to enjoy the Exemptions and to free themselves from the
Subjection of Princes; the other, the Ambition of Prelates of having a
sufficiency of Subjects whom they might Command, which Disorder is not yet well
provided for, it causing many Indecencies in several Kingdoms, and making the
People to lose their Respect for Religion.

The Episcopal order has been no less exempt from this Inconveniency, but
bishops have been Ordained with a Title only, or with a name of Derision, hold
nothing; yet they are not vulgarly so treated or styled, as other unbenefic'd
Clerks; for though indeed they Ordained Priests, N. 56.
Deacons, and other inferior Ministers without Charge either in fact, or in
name; yet 'twas never usual until now to Ordain a Bishop without a Diocese from
whence he was denominated, wherefore if a City were assigned him possessed at
present by Infidels from whence he takes his name, and no Christians being
there, the Bishop ordained remains with a Name only without People, and lives
by serving some great Bishop who cannot, or accounts it a thing inferior to
him to exercise by himself the Episcopal Functions.

There was a great number of such Titular Bishops before the Council of Trent,
now it is much lessened.

But because the Jesuit Fathers at present propose a question, Whether the Pope
can ordain Bishops without any Title, either true or feigned, as Priests and
Deacons are ordained, and they decide that he may: God grant that this Power
may not be put in practice, lest the Reverence to that Order should be lost, N.
57.
which heretofore was great toward all Ecclesiastical Orders when none was
ordained, but he that was appointed to an Office, as has been said, for which
cause all of them resided or dwelt upon their Charge, which could not be left
vacant, Residence and Non-residence.
there being none to supply it, all being occupied in their own: in like manner
the distinction of Benefices was unknown, which sought for Residency, and
sought it not; and whether the Benefice were rich or poor, either of a heavy or
of a light burden, it behooved that the Possessor should serve it personally.

But after they began to ordain without Title, the Titulars having who to put
in their room, the charge was left to one with some small Provisions for
attending, and they attended on somewhat else. So in France, the Bishops served
the Court and the Parishes also, somo poor Priest being substituted.

They began to provide against the Disorder, not with Laws and Constitutions,
but by punishments of Censures, and of Privations; so that in the times whereof
we speak, N. 58.
that is immediately before the year 800. they were refrained by these
chastisements, but so that the Division of Benefices, as also the Ordination of
non-Titulars, and the Provisions for the Residency did not pass without some
diversity between place and place; even in the same Church it passed not
without some variation, caused indeed by the different minds of the Bishops who
succeeded one another; as also through diverse Provisions made from time to time
by Princes, to prevent the disorders caused by the willing of too much in some
Clergyman, Troppo volere.
or by the impatience of some popular man, who could not see himself totally
excluded from Ecclesiastical affairs.

Much Alteration happened unto Charlemain, who having reduced under his
obedience Italy, France, and Germany, reformed also the Ecclesiastical affairs,
reducing them to an Uniformity, which in diverse places had been differently
instituted, renewing many of the old Canons and Councels, worn out of use, N.
59.
and making of Ecclesiastical Laws for the distribution of Benefices according
to the Exigencies of those Times, he partly restored unto the Parishes the
Possessions which the Bishops had drawn to themselves, ordaining that every
Priest Curate should have one of quantity appointed him, which then was called
Manso. Manso.


At that time the Custom of giving Tithes unto Parish Churches passed over into
Italy, which long before had been introduced in France. Tithes in Italy.
Therefore Charles added anew, that the Bishop as Superintendant, and
Pastor-general, might give that order upon the Distribution of Tithes, as he
thought fit; wherefore the Bishops, where the Tithes were many and fat ones,
disposed of them different ways, part they attributed to themselves, part unto
the Priests of the Cathedral, and they appointed also some share unto the
Monasteries, with a charge that they should place a Vicar in the Cure, giving
him a convenient Portion; and besides the Bishops Appointment. N. 60.
Sometimes the Non-parochial Churches appropriated some share to themselves
which in progress of times they defended afterward by Prescription. The
Princes also applied some unto the Churches toward which they had the greatest
Devotion. Charles restored to the People the Liberty of choosing Bishops, The
People choose Bishops.
granting that the Clerus and the People ought to choose one of their own
Diocese, who should be presented to the Prince, and when he was approved by
him, and invested by giving him the Crozier and the Ring, he was to be
Consecrated by the neighboring Bishops. He restored also to the Monks the
Power of choosing the Abbot of their own Monastery: Monks choose Abbors.
He established also that the Bishops ought to ordain those Priests who were
presented by the People of the Parishes. Charles established also the Pope of
Rome, in like manner as he had been instituted when the Emperors of the East
had the Dominion over Rome, N. 61.
viz. That the Pope should be elected by the Clergy and by the People, Pope
elected by the Clergy and the People.
and the Decree of the Election should be sent to the Emperor, upon whose
Approbation the Elected was consecrated.

True it is, that Charles being dead, when the Emperors of his Posterity were
weak in Power or in the Brains, the Popes elected by the People caused
themselves to be Consecrated without expecting a Decree from the Emperor. So
did Paschal with Lewis the Son of Charles, though indeed he sent afterward to
have it excused, that it proceeded not from his will, but from the Force of the
People who would have it so. There have been some called Lewis who have
renounced the Faculty of confirming the Pope, and therefore they allege the C.
Ego Ludovicus, which other men of much Doctrine by many Reasons show to be false
and feigned, wherein it is needless to toil ones self, because that certain it
is that Lotharius the Son of Lewis, and Lewis the Second his Nephew did confirm
all the Popes elected in their Ages.

In these Times, N. 62.
and in those foregoing, and succeeding, when waiting for the Confirmation of
the Prince who was sometimes absent, that some Months past before the Elected
were confirmed and consecrated afterward; He, before the Consecration, behaved
himself not as Pope, neither did he administer, except that some particular
thing whereto urgent necessity constrained to provide for at the present:
neither was there any other who attended therein, as happened to St. Gregory;
neither was he called Episcopus, but Electus.

Much less did he hold the chief place, but the Archpriest held it, who gave
himself this Title also; Servans Locum sancti sedi Apostolicae: But after the
Princes were excluded, as shall be spoken of in its place, the time was never
long between the Election and the Consecration; and it was not said that the
Election alone gave the Popedom, but the Consecration; wherefore if any one
elected, died before he was consecrated, he was not put into the Catalogue or
number of the Popes, as happened to one Stephen, N. 63.
chosen after the death of Zacharia, Anno 752. he was not consecrated, and
therefore not put into the Catalogue. Pope Nicholas the Second for what appears
was the first who declared Anno 1059. that if the Pope Elect could not be
enthroned by reason of Wars, or through the Malignity of men, nevertheless he
should have Authority as a true Pope, to govern the Church of Rome, and to
dispose of its Goods, nevertheless some Relics remain still; for if the Pope
makes a Bull before his Consecration, he says not, Pontificatus nostri Anno
primo; but says, a die sascepti a nobis Apostolatus Officii, and men have not
been wanting upon occasion to say, that the Pope ought not to be called Bishop
before, but Elect, neither can he use a Bull; and such oppositions were made
against Pope Clement the 5th, whereupon he, Anno 1306 made a Bull, where he
forbad under pain of Excommunication, that no man should expose these
Difficulties abroad; A campo.
so that it is held at present for an Article, against what Antiquity believed,
that by the sole Election of the Cardinals, the Pope receives all the
Authority, N. 64.
and therefore the Writers of these times have labored hard to put into their
Number and Catalogue that Stephen of whom we have spoken: wherefore they have
altered the Number of the other Stephens following, calling the second third,
and the third fourth, and so to the ninth, which they number to be tenth, with
much confusion amongst ancient and modern writers, sprung up only for the
interest of maintaining this Article.

In the beginning the Government of the Holy Church had altogether a
Democratical Form, all the Faithful intervening in the chiefest Deliberations;
Government of the Churuh first Democratical.
thus we see that all did intervene at the Election of Matthias unto the
Apostleship, and in the Election of the Six Deacons, and when St. Peter
received Cornelius a Heathen Centurion unto the Faith, he gave an Account of it
to all the Church.

Likewise in the Council celebrated in Jerusalem, the Apostles, the Priests,
and the other faithful Brethren did intervene, and the Letters were written in
the Name of all these three Orders. N. 65.
In success of time when the Church increased in number, the faithful retiring
themselves to the Affairs of their Families, and having left those of the
Congregation, the Government remained only in the Ministers, and became
Aristocratical, saving the Election which became Popular; Then Aristocratical.
whereupon all Affairs were resolved with Councils: The Bishops of the same
Province with the Metropolitan assembled at least twice in the year, making a
Provincial Synod, the Clerks with the Bishop made a Diocesan Synod, Provincial
Synod. Diocesan Synod. Consistory.
and they held an Assembly almost daily, which was called the Consistory in
imitation of the Assembly of the Emperors Counselors, to which that name was
given.

In the Ecclesiastical Consistory the Chief of the City Churches did intervene
with the Bishop, a thing grown out of use in all places, only in Rome the Image
remains. There they proposed, discussed, and resolved all Ecclesiastical
Affairs; but after that Benefices were erected, the Priest having his Living
separate, took little care of the Common Affairs, and ceased from intervening
in the Consistory; N. 66.
whereupon that grew out of custom, and instead thereof the Bishops made an
Assembly of all the Clerks of their Cathedral Church, to make use of them as
well for Council, as for Ministers in the Government, who receiving the Share
of their Living from the common Mass or Stock, every year, every month, every
day, from whence they were called Canons, Canons.
from the word Canon, which in the Western Empire signified the measure of
wheat which sufficed for a Private man's food, or for a Families, or for a
Cities; and this Institution of Canons did a little precede the times of
Charlemain, by whom they were also better settled.

Here it is also requisite to be noted, that in those times by reason of the
Wealthiness of the Benefices, they created for Bishops the chief men of the
Court, and of the City, to whom the Prince likewise committed a great share of
the Political Government; first extraordinarily, and then seeing it succeeded
well, N. 67.
ordinarily, though not in all Gities after the same manner, but according to
the Occurrences of the place, and to the worth or goodness of the Bishop, and
also according to the little aptness of the Lord or Earl, C^nte.
who was sometime supplied by referring unto the Bishop, which was the cause
that when the Posterity of Charles was afterward degenerated and plunged into
the depth of Ignorance, the Bishops thought it better for them not to
acknowledge any more that Authority of the Prince from whence it came, but to
attribute it to themselves only, and to exercise it as a Peculiar of the
Bishops, Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.
and to call it Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: And such was the Beginning of that
which we now see contended for with Princes, and which puts a little confusion
sometimes in the good Civil Government.

The Affairs established by Charlemain had no long duration, N. 68.
through the little worth of the Princes of his Posterity who held the Empire;
whereupon beyond the Alps things easily returned to their first Abuses; the
People in few places, and very seldom had any share in the choosing of the
Bishops, and not much in the choice of the other Ecclesiastical Ministers; but
the Bishops ordained and gave Benefices to whom they pleased, except when some
man was proposed by the Prince, in which case they failed not to obey. The Pope
of Rome was always elected by the People, and confirmed by the Emperor before
he was consecrated, and the other Italian Bishops were not consecrated unless
the Emperor had first approved of them. In France and in Germany much more. If
the Pope was willing to favor any one in the Neighboring Bishoprics of Rome,
he had recourse to the Emperor, beseeching him he would vouchsafe to give him
the Bishopric, and if any instance were made to him, that he would grant the
Consecrating of any one who had not the Emperors Letters he refused to do it,
bringing to mind they should be first obtained.

But the Posterity of Charles being driven out of Italy in the year 884. N. 69.
Adrian the 3d. made a Decree that the Pope should be consecrated without the
Emperor.

It was not besides the Argument, that having designed to treat of Benefices,
we have discoursed of the Popedom, and are yet to discourse of it for the
future, That being one amongst the Benefices, and especially named for a
Benefice by Clement the 3d. in a time when the Popedom of Rome was not only
ascended to its height of Greatness, but had also some peculiar Dignities to
distinguish it from others.

And it is a most noted thing, Pope.
that anciently the name of Sanct us and Sanctissimus, Beatus and Beatissimus
was common to all the Faithful in Christ, when all men still aspired to perfect
Sanctity; afterward that Secular men had attained to much more conveniences
in worldly Affairs, these names remained amongst the Clerical Order, and after
the declining of the inferior Clergy, they remained amongst the Bishops only.
N. 70.
Finally the Bishops being given to worldly Affairs, they remained to him of
Rome only, who has retained them since, not as Titles of Goodness, as they
were, but as Titles of Greatness. The Names of Pontifex, Pope, or Chief Priest,
were, and are common to all Bishops; yea, there are yet some Canons extant
wherein all Bishops are called Chief Priests. The name of Papa or Pope which
seems the most proper, was given to each Bishop. St. Ciprian Bishop of Carthage
was called Pope; St. Hierome gives that Title unto St. Augustine, but in times
much more recent Sidonius Apollinare called many Bishops Popes, and is called
Pope by them. Many Canons are in the Decree of Gratianus, in the Inscription
whereof Martin Bishop of Bracara in Portugal, is called Pope. Gregory the
seventh in the year 1076, The name of Pope First made peculiar to the Bishop of
Rome by Gregory 7th.
was the first who Decreed that the name of Pope should be peculiar to him, and
not attributed unto others, and it proceeded so far in Opinion, not to say in
Faction, that Anselmus Lucensis, one of his followers, said that the Plural of
the name God was no less improper and impious, than that of Pope.

But returning to the times which followed the Line of Charlemain; N. 71.
In France was a Fashion invented, which though it appeared in favor of
Secular men, the Churches thereby increased unto immense Riches, and this was a
Contract called Precarius, Precarius.
by which Precarius to whomsoever that gave his own to the Church, the Church
granted him to possess the same in his Lifetime and twice as much besides, and
if he would divest himself of the Usu-fruit also, they gave him to enjoy three
times as much of other Goods of the Church, afterward this went over into
Italy also. The Contract for that time proved profitable to him who tripled his
Incomes, and accommodated those who were without Posterity, or who took care
for the present, without caring for Posterity, but indeed the Profit was the
Churches, who after his Death got the Estate entirely.

Great Confusions in Italy followed upon these times, as well in the Civil
Government, as in the Ecclesiastical, and specially in the Popedom, unto the
year 963, wherein for 80 years, N. 72.
none sought after a true Form and Face of the Churches Condition, but only for
a general Preparative for a change, and a Chaos of Impiety. Popes were
Excommunicated by their Successors, and the Acts made by them were Annulled,
and cut in pieces, and the Sacraments Administered; Six Popes were driven out by
them who would put themselves in their Room, and two also killed, and Pope
Stephen the 8th, was so ill favouredly deformed in his Face, that he never
showed himself in Public.

John the 10th, was made Pope by Theodora a notable Roman Harlot, through the
Faction which her Public Lover had in Rome.

John the 11th, who was a Bastard-Son of another Pope dead 18 years before, was
made Pope at the Age of twenty, and so many inconveniences did arise in those
years, that the Writers say that those times afforded no Popes, but Monsters.

Cardinal Baronius not knowing how to excuse any of these Disorders, said that
the Church then was for the most part without a Pope, N. 73.
but not without a Head, its Spiritual Head Christ being in Heaven, and
forsakes it not; and it is very certain that Christ has not left, nor never
will leave his Church, neither can his Divine Promise fail, that he would be
with it unto the end of the World, and in this every Christian ought to feel
and to Believe what Baronius says, thinking also that what then happened, came
to pass formerly, and as in those times the sole Assistance of Christ preserved
his Church, so it will preserve it in all such like Accidents, in the like
manner, although there were no Papal Ministry. Each one of himself may judge
how the other Churches of Italy were used, considering what is the Condition of
all the Members, when the Head is grievously indisposed. Bishoprics given to
Soldiers and Boys. F. 58.
Therefore they were no better out of Italy, where great men gave Bishoprics
unto their Soldiers, N. 74.
and even unto Boys in their Childhood. Earl Herbert, Uncle of Hugh Capet,
made his Son of five years old Archbishop of Reims, and Pope John the 10th,
Confirmed that Election. In those times no man had Recourse to Rome out of
Devotion, but always he that designed something against the Canons, and
customs of the Church, if he found not Approbation of it in his own Country, he
fled to Rome, where Dispensations were given for every thing, and the Ambition
or Covetousness was covered with an Apostolical Dispensation. The Popes being
such as is abovesaid, made no distinction of what they were able to do,
esteeming every thing an Increase of their greatness, which could be upheld by
any Powerful man, who for his Interest defended what was desired.

The People partly through their simplicity, and partly through Terror of
Potent men, approved of that which they could not hinder; whereupon an Opinion
was grounded, that what thing soever if it had its Confirmation from Rome,
every past error was covered.

Some might believe, N. 75.
that the little care which the Ecclesiastical Order had of Spiritual things,
would have cooled the Fervency of Secular men, in giving to the Churches, and
that the new Purchases or Acquisitions of the Clergy men would have been at an
end; nevertheless it was not so. For by how much the Spiritual Cure was
diminished in the Prelates, by so much they were intent in the preserving of
their Temporal Goods, and they had Converted the Spiritual Arms of
Excommunicating, Excommunication.
which was used only for the Correction of Sinners, into the Defense of their
Temporal Possessions, and for the Recovery of them also, if by chance the
little Care of the Predecessor had let any thing be lost, and the Terror of the
Censure was so great amongst the People, that nothing put them into a greater
Fright, and 'twas a wonderful thing that Captains and Soldiers, most wicked in
other things and without any fear of God, usurping their Neighbors Right
without any regard of offending his Divine Majesty, preserved with great
Respect the things of the Church for fear of the Censures.

From hence, N. 76.
many of slender Power, being moved with desire of securing their own from
Violences, made Donation thereof to the Church, Bequests on condition.
upon condition that it should give it in Fee, with a slight acknowledgment.
This secured the Estates which belonged not to Potent men, as those whose
Dominion belonged directly to the Church, afterward the Heirs male of the
Feoditaries Failing, which often happened by frequent wars and Popular
Seditions, that the Estates fell to the Church.

Seeing that hitherto we have declared in what manner Ecclesiastical Estates
have been acquired, and the Reason of Tything those of the Laity, this place
persuades that the question debated in our times should be treated and resolved
before we pass any further; that is to say, whether Ecclesiastical Estates be
Possessed by Divine or Humane Right, Question concerning Ecclefiastical Estates.
and who should have the Dominion of them?

The Common opinion distinguishes the Possessions left to the Churches by
Will, N. 77.
or by Donation of the Faithful, or acquired in some other manner, by Tithe, by
First Fruits, or by other Oblations: And as to the Possessions all agree they
ought to be called Temporal Goods, and that the Church enjoys them by Humane
Right: Wherefore it is certain as has been declared above, that the Purchasing
of Estates being prohibited to all Colleges whatsoever, the Church at first by
Permission, and afterward by grant from the Emperors, had the Power of
Purchasing, and there is the Canon annexed: Quo Jure d. 8. wherein is affirmed
that by the only Fundamental of humane Laws, it is said this Possession is
mine, this Servant is mine, and that taking away the Laws of the Prince,
neither Church, nor any one else can say, that any thing is their own. And no
man can doubt, but that the division of Possessions was by the Civil Law, and
likewise the manner of Transferring Dominions from one to another, as the
giving, the bequeathing by Will, and all Contractings and Disposings are humane
Laws.

Commonwealths and Kingdoms have been where the Testament has been unknown,
Jure Romano, N. 78.
it is granted to the Citizens of Rome only to make a Will; It is not possible,
that the manner of Purchasing should be by humane Right, and the Continuation
of Purchasing should be by Divine: When any thing is given or bequeathed to the
Church, there being a difficulty in it, whether the Title be valid or no, it is
judged by humane Laws, and holding the Lawful Right, Possession is given
according to them; Therefore still in Virtue of them, and not otherwise, one is
continued in the Dominion and in the Possession: But because every one agrees
in this, i will go no further, only I shall add as for a Corrollary, which is
clearly resolved from hence and without Difficulty, whether the Exemptions
which Ecclesiastical Possessions have, Exemptions.
are by Jure Divino, or humano; Seeing that Possessing and the manner of
Possessing proceed always from the same Law; and the Jurisconsults say, that
from thence proceeds the Bondage, or the Freedom of Estates in Land, from
whence also Dominion is derived. N. 79.
It would be a great Contradiction to say, that the Church should have a
Possession (Jure Vaneto) by the Right or Law of Venice, which should have a
Liberty (alio Jure) by another Law.

But as touching Tithes, there are two opinions, one of the Canonists, Tithes.
the other of the Divines, and of the Canonists who together study Divine
Scripture.

The Canonists say that Tithes are Jure Divino, because in the old Testament
God gave Tithe unto the Levites, as the Holy Scripture Relates, and it is no
wonder that they say so, because they are not versed in the Readings of the
Sacred Books, their Profession not being to understand the Mysteries of
Christian Religion, which is that God gave by Moses to the Jewish People the
Law, which as to Ceremonial and Judicial things, was proper to that Nation
until the coming of Christ, who was to take away the obligatory Power of it, so
that the Law of Tithes is indeed Mosaically Divine, but not a Law Naturally
Divine, N. 80.
nor Christian, and it obliged only that People at that time, now it obliges
none. He that Governs a Common Wealth, may make Laws like unto those, but they
shall not oblige as Divine, neither ought they to be called such, but Civil
Laws of the Prince who Constitutes them; there was a Mosaical Divine Law, that
a Blasphemer should be put to Death, this obliges us not now, neither does he
sin who kills him not, and the Prince may impose a Capital punishment for
Blasphemy, and it would be just, and ought to be observed, but it should not
therefore be called a Divine Law, although God gave it formerly to the Hebrew
People, but a Politic Law of the Prince. In these and in many other
occurrences where these men allege the old Scripture for their Interest,
subjoyning thereunto that it is de Jure Divino, it behooveth to distinguish
their Equivocation, that That which is de Jure Divino Natural or Christian,
obliges us, but that which is de Jure Divino Mosaical obliges us not, and he
that has a Government making a Statute like unto that, it is de Jure Humano.

I cannot forbear saying, N. 81.
that they deal not in this manner out of ignorance, Jus Divinum.
but to deceive the incautelous, and to strengthen their own Affairs, by and
with the Name of Jus Divinum, and to give it Reputation, but they may be
convinced here, and have their mouths stopped. In this same Contest of the
Scripture where God commands Tithe should be given to the Levites, Tyther.
he Commands also that they should not Possess any Land, and that they should
be contented with the Tithes. If by this Precept the People be (de Jure Divino)
obliged to give them the Tithes, they shall be obliged to have no Possessions.

But besides; God Commanded the Tithes only of the Fruits of the Earth, and the
Canon Laws say, they must be paid also out of Merchandise, out of the Militia,
out of Hunting, and out of whatsoever Handiwork whereby gain is made. If God
gave the Hebrew People Command for Predial Tithes only, they are forced to say
the Personal is not commanded but by humane Law. N. 82.
The Divines (for I name never a one in Particular, because none is excluded)
and many Canonists with them say unanimously, it is a Precept of Divine natural
Law, that the Minister of Religion should live by his Office, which he affords
by serving the People in Divine things, and that it is a special Precept of
Christ our Lord in the Gospel, that the Minister who serves the People in
Preaching the Word of God, and in Ecclesiastical Ministry, should be furnished
with a Livelihood, in what quantity is not determined, because that according
to the number of Persons, and according to the Condition of Places and of
Times, abounding at one time, and wanting at another, so that allowing a share
to the Minister of Christ, is de Jure Divino. But that this share should be a
Tenth, or a Twentyeth, or a greater or a lesser Proportion, this is established
by humane Law or by Custom, which are of equal value. And when it is Read in any
Decretals, that God has instituted Tithe, or that the Tithe is de Jure Divino,
N. 83.
they mean a part determined, for one undetermined, meaning Tithe to be that
share, which is requisite and necessary, or else that God has instituted Tithe
in the old Testament, after the manner that the Law has instituted the same in
the new Testament. Wherefore we may generally say, that Ecclesiastical Estates
of whatsoever kind they be, are all under the Dominion of him who is Patron
thereof, and are possessed by humane Laws. Neither does any man make a doubt
concerning this undetermined share, which is requisite or due by a Divine,
Natural, and Evangelical Law, because as Lawyers observe well, there is a
difference in a thing being due or requisite, and in having a Dominion; the
thing whereof one has a Dominion, may be claimed directly in Judicature or
Judgment (as they say) Action Rei Vindicationis, neither is he to be satisfied
by giving him an equal value; but the Creditor only may by personal Action
require his Debt, the Debtor being obliged to give him so much, but this man no
more than that.

By this Resolution it remains also easily decided, whether Benefices or
Livings are de Jure Divino, N. 84.
or de Jure Positivo? because Estates in Land and Tithes being Possessed de
Jure Humano, the Benefices also being grounded upon them, will have the Power
of the same Law, besides one may certify ones self hereof more easily from the
things above said: For if the Church has been so many years with Estates
enjoyed in Common, and not divided into Benefices as is abovementioned, it is
an evident thing that Benefices have been Created by men in progress of time,
and in this all agree. I will not enlarge my self further, only shall say, that
if these Considerations seem somewhat subtle, yet they are necessary, as the
following matters shall declare.

From the Resolution of the first Question, it would be clear what to Answer
unto the second, by him that has the Dominion of Church Goods (I mean of
Estates in Land, because of Fruits shall be spoken of in its place, which is
the fourth Question) for if they be Possessed by Humane Laws, N. 85.
there remains but to see unto whom these Laws has granted them. Some say,
that these Goods are from God, and without doubt they say true, because Divine
Scripture says plainly, all the Earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof.
But in this manner all things are from God, and no more these Goods, than any
others; the Divine is a kind of Universal Dominion, another Dominion has every
Prince who is Supreme in his State, which according to Seneca may be called,
Dominion of Empire, or else according to the Doctrine of the Jurisconsults
Dominion of Protection, and of Jurisdiction: Another, each private man has,
which is the Dominion of Propriety, whereof we speak, and wherein we now make
enquiry; one cannot say that God has the universal Dominion of all things, but
that he has therewith the Propriety of those Goods, as the King has the
universal in all the Kingdom, and nevertheless he possesses in Private, and
has the Propriety of that Portion which belongs to his own House. N. 86.
Wherefore one may make an Addition to the universal Dominion of the Prince,
with the Particular of Propriety, whereby it increases, and is Augmented; but
Gods Dominion has an universality so excellent and so infinite, that it can
receive no Addition, and repugneth to be particularized, as it also repugneth
to be Communicated to any Creature whatsoever, therefore no man can say, God
being Master of these Goods, I who have the same Tribunal, the same Consistory,
and the same Court as he, I am Master also, but rather he is no less a Servant
of whomsoever is least.

Notwithstanding others vending or uttering freely without fear, say, Pope
Dispensator not Dominus.
that the Pope is Master and has the Dominion, and this they prove by the
Decretal of Clement the 4th, that the Plenary Disposition of all Benefices
belongs to them.

St. Thomas opposes himself to this opinion, in saying, that the Pope indeed
may call himself chief Dispensator, but in no wise may he be called, either
Master, or Possessor, N. 87.
which Doctrine Cardinal Gaetanus explaineth, adding that the Pope cannot give,
nor in any wise dispose of Ecclesiastical Goods, but only do with them as much
as may be done, being upon the Term of Dispensator.

And Gaetanus's Reason is very clear and Efficacious, these Goods were at first
belonging to a Master, who has transferred his Dominion by Donation or by
Testament, but none of these had ever Intention to give or leave to the Pope;
therefore the Dominion has not passed unto him; wherefore the same Gaetanus
and Adrian 6th Pope say, that the Dominion of Estates is in the Church, that is
in Generality or Universality of the Faithful of the place, to which the Goods
or Estates is left, so that the Dominion of the Goods of the Roman Church, is
in the Universality of the Romans. It Is known by all, that Universality in
Right is like a Person capable of Possessing, in which manner it is said, such
a thing is common to the City, that is, no man's in particular but all men's
together.

They leave many Wills after this manner, N. 88.
as I leave to the School of St. Rocco, Rocco.
to the Monastery of the Friars, etc. This Doctrine is very well Confirmed by
the Ancient Custom of the Church, and by the manner of speaking of the Canons:
There is no doubt, that if they were to denominate Estates in Land by the name
of a Person, they would denominate it from him who has the Dominion; but all
the Canons and the Ancient Custom calls them Church Lands or Goods, therefore
she has the Dominion of them, neither have those any other opinion who say
these Goods are Christ's, because all the Christian Churches from most Ancient
times have been denominated, not only from the name of the City, but also from
the name of him who has been the first and the most famous Bishop therein, as
the Roman is called St. Peter's, that of Alexandria St. Marks, that of Ravenna
St. Apollinare's; whereupon the Lands of those Churches took the name of the
same Saints, and the Lands of the Roman Church are called St. Peter's; wherefore
these kind of Phrases are Read amongst all the Ancient Writers, N. 89.
viz. St. Peter's Patrimony, St. Peter's Lands, the Possessions of St. Peter; the
Patrimony of St. Apollinare, the Revenue of St. Apollinare, etc. And because
Christ is universal Head and Protector of all Churches, that which belongs to
the universal Church, and to any particular Church, is called Christ's
Patrimony, Christ's Goods or Lands, etc. which signifies so much as belonging to
the Church, whose Head Christ is: Not otherwise, that the Lands of the
Republic of Venice are called St. Marks, that is, belonging to that Republic
which bears St Marks name. And truly that universality of the Church, was
Mistress of all that was gained when the Clergymen in each Diocese were in
Common, because all Donations, and all Testaments were made thereunto. Certain
it is, that these Estates were not, neither could they be Purchased, but by him
to whom the Law granted the Power of Purchasing, but the Laws of Constantine,
granted that Donations might be made to the Christian Colleges, N. 90.
that is, to the universality of the Christians which were in Cities, then the
Dominion belonged to those Colleges; but after the divisions were made, and
the Benefices Instituted, Legacies or Donations were made unto particular
Churches, or rather for the most part, for some particular Pious work in those
Churches, wherefore it cannot be said, who is the Master of any thing
whatsoever, without seeing the Bequeathing of the Wills and of the Donors,
whereto we being to speak fundamentally, we can say no more, but that Prelates,
and other Clergymen, are the Governors, Administrators, and Dispensators of
the Church Goods, to do therewith according to the Bequest of the Donor or the
Leaver, and not otherwise, and that Person is Master either Particular or
General in favor of whom the Donation or the Legacy was made. Wherefore also
every Rector of a Church ought to see diligently after the obligations left him
to perform, and if it be done otherwise, it must be imputed to humane
Imperfection, no man can be persuaded that through length of time, N. 91.
he may have a Prescription, because that Presupposes a good Faith which never
was in any man, every one knowing in his Conscience, that those goods were not
left to be done with, as they do.

But in whose Dominion shall those Church Lands be, whose Institution is not
known? The Natural and the Civil Law is, that in those whose private Patron or
Master has totally failed, the Community shall Succeed, therefore the Church
must remain Mistress thereof. So that in few words men who are beneficed, are
Dispensators of the Goods of the Benefices, but Master he is not in favor of
him who made the Donation or the Will, and if it be not known, the Church
remains Mistress.

It Is no obstacle hereunto, that there be Princes Laws and Ecclesiastical,
which forbid Alienation, for the Pupil is true Master of his own, and yet he
cannot Alienate; N. 92.
Dominion is a Right of doing what one will with a thing, when the Law permits,
which binds some sort of Persons with Conditions, who have need of the
Government of others, such is University or Community.

No man ought to wonder, if so many modern Writers in such like Questions as in
this, which makes the Pope absolute Master of all the Benefices, and of all
Ecclesiastical Estates, do defend Opinions contrary to Antiquity, and contrary
to those Institutions which had their Rise from the Apostles themselves, and
from Apostolical men, because that as St. Cyprian very sensibly Complained,
that it is one of the Imperfections of man, that whereas Customs should be
Conformable to good Doctrine and to Laws, on the contrary, the Doctrine of
Interessed men accommodates it self to the Customs, and it is observable, that
in all the course of so many Ages, there has been no Novelty introduced, even
concerning Religion, but immediately it has met with Defenders.

What a wonder will it be, N. 93.
that this should happen in those Novelties and Introductions, which serve for
Wealth, Ease, and humane Concerns whereunto many may aspire?

The Confusion which was in Italy in Politic Affairs, by reason of so many
Kings and Emperors which were made in those times, caused also an extreme
disorder in other Cities about Ecclesiastical Affairs; Bishops and Abbots being
sometimes made by Princes, and sometimes intruded by their own Power, and other
Ecclesiastical Ministers likewise were sometimes made, by those who bore sway
in the Cities, and sometimes by the Bishops; and now and then Benefices were
Possessed by him who had Power or popular Favor.

In the year 963, Otho a Saxon brought his Arms into Italy, and became Master
of it, and to give Form unto the Government, he Assembled a little Council of
Bishops, deprived Pope John 12th, who being made Pope in his Minority under the
Age of 18, by the chief of the Roman Nobility, and by a great Concourse in that
City, N. 94.
and lived in the Popedom, Committing Adulteries, Perjuries, and other
irreligious Customs, Otho made him to be renounced by the People, and by Pope
Leo the 8th, Created by him instead of John: The Authority of creating the
Pope, and the other Bishops in Italy, he retained, and his Son and his Nephew
of the same name, unto the year 1001, for the space of 36 years, and during the
number of twelve Popes which were in that time. Two of them were Created
quietly by the Prince, the others in Seditions, for which cause the first Otho
carried one Prisoner into Germany, and Otho the third carried another; one was
strangled by him, who had a mind to be made in his Room; one run away having
Robbed the Treasury of the Church Ornaments, and another withdrew himself into
a voluntary Exile, so that in these years we meet with Popes, yet as Baronius
says, Scontriame.
they are in the Catalogue only to fill up the Number, for as to the Rest, the
Church had no other head but Christ. The other Bishops and the Abbots were
Created by the Emperors without any Contradiction, N. 95.
and the manner was that when a Bishop dyed, his Crosier-Staff and his Ring
were carried to the Emperor, who having determined on whom to bestow the
Benefice, he invested him by giving him the Ring and the Staff, upon Receiving
of which Tokens he went into Possession, and got himself Consecrated by his
Metropolitan, or by the Neighboring Bishops, which Custom was observed also in
France and in Germany: Other smaller Benefices were Conferred by the Bishops or
by the Abbots under whom they were, unless the Prince Nominated any one to a
Vacant Benefice: For to such a one it was given without any Reply, or if he
were Recommended by the Prince to have a Benefice when it should be Vacant, who
by reason of that Expectation granted by the Prince, came to be provided by the
Bishop with the first Vacancy: Thus did the Otho's Govern without Contradiction
from the Popes, although the second of them dwelt a very long time in Rome,
where he dyed also, and was buried.

After the Death of the Othos, N. 96.
there was preserved among the Succeeding Emperors, the same Power of Bestowing
of Bishoprics and Abbeys, and also of Nominating unto inferior Benefices, or
else of giving Expectancies of Benefices which were to become Vacant. Indeed
the Imperial Authority diminishing in Rome, the Confusions returned into that
Church, for the People having reassumed the Authority of Electing the Pope, and
chose three of them quietly; Benedictus, Octavus, and John the 20th, Brethren
were Elected one after another with some show of Faction, and this last being
dead, Benedictus 4th their Nephew was Chosen at 12 years of Age, who besides
many other Excesses, sold a part of the Popedom to one Sylvester the 3d, and
another part to Gregory 6th, and all three sat in Rome at the same time with
much Confusion, chiefly that this Gregory having Armed himself with Soldiers,
Foot and Horse, N. 97.
and with great slaughter gotten the Possession of St. Peter's Church, he
enlarged his Part by Arms; wherefore the Emperor Henry the Black, went into
Italy, put Benedictus to Flight, sent Sylvester away, Banished Gregory into
Germany, and deprived the People of Rome of the Power of making any more Popes.
And he made three Popes successively, all Germans by Nation, who being chosen
by the Emperor, took upon them the Pontifical Habit and Ensigns without any
thing else; the third who was Brunus Bishop of Zul, having by the Emperors
Deputation taken upon him the Habit in Trisinga, and therewith taken his
Journey as far as Clugni, Hildebrand a Monk Foster-Son of St. Peter's Church in
Rome, a man of singular subtilty, would by Art restore the Election to the
Romans, Counseled Brunus, who Clothed in his Pontifical Habit, was called Leo
9th, to Cloth himself like a Pilgrim, and so to go to Rome, and that he would
be more acceptable to the Roman People; N. 98.
Leo Consented, and entered Rome in a Pilgrims Habit, and by the Suggestion of
Hildebrand was Proclaimed Pope of Rome by the People; But this Art did not
prevent the Emperor, when Leo was dead, from choosing in Mentz Geberard of
Aichstat, who immediately put on the Habit, and was called Vector the second;
the Emperor then did not only bestow Benefices, but also made Constitutions
against those who obtained them by Symonie, Pardoning the Errors Committed
until that time, and Imposing Penalties for the Future.

Henry the Black dying, left the Empire to his Son, Henry the 4th, who
Succeeded him in a tender Age, during whose Minority, although the Popes were
Created by the Consent of the Emperors Tutors, and the Bishops and the Abbots
were Invested by him with the Ring and the Crozier Staff, the Popes
nevertheless making use of the Occasion, gained by little and little some
greater Liberty, adhering also to one side or party of the Tutors, who differed
about them, and made Factions, whereupon Nicolas 2d, N. 99.
made a Constitution about the Election of the Pope, Ordaining it should first
pass through the Cardinal Bishops, then should be proposed to the Cardinal
Clergymen, in the third place to the Clergy and to the People, and in the
fourth place the Emperors Consent should be sought for, in which manner
Alexander 2d, his Successor being Elected, the Emperor would not Confirm him,
nor accept of the Excuse which the Cardinals sent by one of them to make by
Embassy, saying it was done to avoid a sharp Civil Dissension, but all with
great Respect to the Emperor the Elected being his Friend; yet the Emperor
chose the Bishop of Parma for Pope upon the Instance of Gerard of Parma his
Chancellor. But three years after, the Affairs of the Imperial Court being
altered, and Gerard the Chancellor Deposed, the Bishop of Parma was also
Deposed from the Popedom, and Alexander accepted, who in the year 1072, there
being made in Germany a Conspiracy of the Bavarians and Saxonians against the
Emperor, he joined with them and entered into the League, and the year following
cited the Emperor unto Rome, as imputed of Simony for having conferred
Bishoprics for Money. The Pontifical Action was much admired, N. 100.
never any Pope having come so far, but it soon passed under silence by the
death of the Pope, after whom Gregory 7th, a Monk of Sienna attained the
Popedom, who was Hildebrand above Nominated by the Emperor, but in the year
1076, having been three years in the Popedom, finding the Emperor yet young,
and Germany full of Commotions, he deliberated to exclude him totally from the
Election of Bishops and Abbots, and made him a Monitory, that for the Future he
ought not to intrude therein; the Emperor made a great Resistance, whereupon
the Pope Excommunicated him, absolved his Subjects from the Oath of Fidelity,
and suspended him from the Administration of the Kingdom of Italy, and of
Germany: He Excommunicated also the Bishops his Ministers, Colleagu'd himself
with his Rebels, provoked the Emperors own Mother against her Son, and during
the time which lasted until the year 1085, when the Pope dyed in Banishment at
Salerno, N. 101.
he Excommunicated the Emperor four times, and made a general Decree, that if
any Clergyman should receive a Bishopric or an Abbey from a Laymans hand, he
should be accounted no Clergyman by any one, and should be deprived from
entering into the Church, and the like for him who shall receive other
Benefices, unto which Penalty he Subjected also the Emperor, the King, the
Duke, the Marquess, and the Earl; and every Power or Person Secular that should
dare to invest with Benefices.

The Emperor maintained his Cause by his Arms, against the Pope and his
Colleagues, and was followed by most part of the Bishops: Whereupon the Pope
was in a grievous Danger; but he who had formerly Excommunicated the Normans as
Usurpers of the Kingdoms of Sicily and Puglia, had Recourse to their
Assistance, granted them all that for which he had Persecuted them, and
absolved them from the Excommunication; and if for this Cause Robert King of
Naples, and of Sicily, N. 102.
who heretofore was a Persecutor of the Popes, had not turned to his Defense,
to make a Counterballance to the Emperor, he had maintained his Cause with a
total Victory, but by the help of Robert the Pope was supported, although in
Exile; and he being dead in his Assistance and three Rogers of the same Family,
the same Contention continued likewise with the two Successors of Gregory, both
Monks of the same order, the last of which was Urban 2d, who in Reward of the
Services done by the Normans, gave one of them a Bull for the Monarchy of
Sicily, really granting them a greater management in the Affairs of the Church,
than that he would take from the Emperor: Which to do, besides the
Excommunications he often repeated against the Emperor, and the Rebellions he
stirred up against him, making his Eldest Son to Rebel against him also, and by
his means excluded the Emperor almost out of Italy. But he being dead, the Pope
who Succeeded, repeated the Excommunications against the Emperor, and raised
many Rebellions, making his other Son to Rebel also, with whom the Father
engaged in War, N. 103.
one time overcome, and another time Victorious, came finally to conditions of
Agreement wherein he was cheated, and reduced to a Private Life, left the
Empire to his Son, who was called Henry.

Henry 4th being dead, Paschal, for so was called the 4th Pope amongst them,
for beginning from Gregory 7th, they fought with Excommunications and spiritual
Weapons, for the taking away of the Investiture of Bishops, and Abbeys from the
Emperor; he assembled a Council at Gnastalla, and then at Troyes in France, and
renewed in them both the Decrees of Gregory 7th, and of Urban 2d, that no
Layman should hinder the Conferring of Benefices. In France the Decree was not
accepted by the King, but he continued according to Custom, and also the
Emperor Henry 2d the Son opposed it, who in the year 1110 came Armed into
Italy, for the Crown of the Empire, to which the Pope having opposed himself by
Controversies depending between them, they agreed that Henry should go to Rome
for the Crown, N. 104.
put the Controversy of Investitures to silence, neither party being to speak
of them. Henry went to Rome, where Pope Paschal appearing to him to be Superior
in strength, not remaining firm in the Conditions, he would have him to
renounce the Investitures, and Henry confiding in his bold Forces, proposed on
the contrary, that the Pope should revoke the Decrees, saying, he would not be
inferior to Charlemain, Ludovicus Pius, and other Emperors who had given the
Investitures Peaceably and quietly; whereupon the Contentions increasing, the
Emperor took the Pope Prisoner, and the most part of the Cardinals, carrying
them from the City; an Accommodation was treated on, and finally the Pope
agreed to Crown him, and to let him have the Conferring of Benefices, without
Excommunicating him for it, and he Swore to the observation of the Agreement,
and the Mass being Celebrated, the Pope divided the Wafer, N. 105.
and with one half he Communicated himself, and the Emperor with the other
half, making Cursed and dreadful Imprecations, for which of them should be a
Violater of the Agreement.

The Pope gone back to Rome, said he would observe the Agreement, but yet his
Legates Excommunicated the Emperor and he two years after in 1112. Called a
Council, Confirmed the Decrees of Gregory and Urban, that no man should receive
Investitures from Laymen, and caused the Council to annull the Agreement made
with the Emperor, and finally in 1116, Excommunicated him besides. Pascal dyed,
and Gelasius the 2d Succeeded him at first, then Calisto the 2d, with whom the
Contention lasted, and by whom and by all of them the Emperor was Successively
Excommunicated. These three Popes did not only make use of Excommunicating, but
also stirred up many Seditions against the Emperor. The chief of one was
Lotharius a Saxon, who took up Arms, and had many Victories; finally in the
year 1122. Henry perceiving himself in so many difficulties, renounced the
Investiture, N. 106.
and a Tumult was appeased which had lasted 56 years, under Six Popes, by
Excommunicating an infinite number of Persons, both Ecclesiastical and Civil,
who adhered to the Emperor, and by the Death of numberless Persons on both
sides, in threescore Battles fought by Henry the Father, and in eighteen fought
by Henry the Son; tantae Molis erat, to lay the Foundations of that Building,
which we have seen brought up to the Top of the Battlements, whereof we are to
speak.

In the Occurrence abovesaid happened between Pascal, and Henry, the Judgment
of the World was various, some saying, that the Assent yielded unto by the Pope
was Null, as done out of fear, finding himself and so many Cardinals in the
Emperors hand, and therefore with Reason Pascal opposed him, and ceased from
observing it: But on the other side, it was said, that if the Popes Assent were
invalid for being extorted with Fear, N. 107.
no less ought to be held for invalid the Assent yielded to by the Emperor, for
Fear of so many Excommunications and Anathema's, of so many Rebellions and
Machinations; for which cause he is subject to restore that which is done for
Fear of Imprisonment and not that which is done for Fear of Anathema's, and for
Fear of seeing all his Dominions and People in Confusion, and in Civil Wars.
Some men in Counsel in the presence of Pascal, made use of this Dilemma; if the
Decree, and the Bull of his, by which he granted Investiture unto the Emperor
were Lawful, they ought to be observed, if they were unjust, and as some say
Heretical, then was the Pope Author also Heretical, and unjust: It Is true
indeed, that a thing just and due although done out of Fear, is valid, and that
no man whatsoever is blameless, if for any kind of Fear he acts contrary to
the Law of God.

The Contention of the Popes with the Emperors, about this matter of giving
Investiture of Bishoprics and Abbeys, stopped not only in Italy and Germany,
Kingdoms of the Emperor, but in the same times also in France, some of the
Bishops stirred up by Example, and through Interest, N. 108.
opposed the King for the same cause; but because all were not agreed to make a
League with the Pope against the King, the King for the most part overcame him,
and the Popes were content to gain that by little and little, which was
Impossible for them to do all at once together.

In England the King having always conferred Bishoprics, and Abbeys, in the
year 1102, Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury refused to Consecrate the Bishops
provided by the King, he adhering to the Decrees made by the Popes, and the
Contention lasted many years, the King maintaining his Authority, and the
Archbishop by the help of the Pope defending his Opposition; the King believed
himself able to persuade the Pope to that which he reputed Just, therefore he
sent an Ambassador, who received such rough Answers and Threatenings from the
Pope, that to take off his Edge, the Ambassador thought fit to tell him, the
King would not lose his Authority, although he were to lose his Kingdom, to
which the Pope replied with no less boldness that he would not permit it,
although he were to lose his Head.

The King remained Constant, N. 109.
and it behooved Anselm to depart the Kingdom, incapable of returning, without
Consenting to the King's Will. But the King dying without Heirs-Male, and some
Civil Wars happening, 'twas easy for the Clergymen to prevail, and to
introduce That into England, which had been introduced in the Empire, where
after the Cession of Henry, of which has been spoken, the Pope obtained his
intent; true it is, that in the year 1132, Lotharius the Saxon Successor of
Henry the 5th Emperor, being sought to by Innocent the 2d, engaged in a Schism,
that he would acknowledge him for Pope, and not his Adversary; refused to do
it, unless the Investitures Renounced by Henry were restored to him; and
perhaps the Pope would have granted them, but St. Bernard very intimate with
Lotharius persuaded him to desist, proposing to his Consideration, that he
having made War against Henry his Predecessor and Lord, upon Pope Paschals
Instance for that cause, N. 110.
afterward to be willing to make himself a Defender of Henry's Pretention, was
to declare himself a Rebel, and that he had made War against his Lord, while he
was defending a just Cause.

That which usually happens after great Victories, namely when all the Forces
of the Enemy are not Extinct, the Fragments or the Remainder of the overcome
Party, oftentimes spring up again with old Pretensions, which the prudent
Vainquisher temporizeth dexterously, rather than oppose himself openly by
renewing a War, so it fell out in these present occasions.

The Popes not being able to have the Victory, of such a great Pretention so
entirely, but that in some Places, some Benefices would remain in the Power of
the Laity, and that a Prince sometimes for some Necessity of his Government,
without Regard to the Pope, would bestow some Bishopric after the first
manner; There remained in France the Regalia, N. 111.
which is a Right of the King to Confer all single Benefices Vacant by the
death of the Bishops, until the Successor be Created; There remained in Germany
a Right of the Emperors, of giving only one of the Canon-ships in many
Churches, and so diverse particular Authorities were retained by some Princes.

The Popes that they might not (by Contending for these particular uses) renew
the Contention with hazard of losing the whole, or else by letting them run on,
they might do prejudice to the general Cause, thought it requisite to make
Provision, both by Negotiation and Art. They found a Temperament or Compliance,
by causing the Canonists and other Scribes depending on them, to Write that
these Princes enjoyed that Authority, through Privilege granted by the Pope:
This served the Popes for a Reputation, to make appear that Princes had no
Right, but by their grace and favor, and assured them also that they might
pretend further, and 'twas easily passed over by the Princes, to whom it
seemed, that it was to secure them from the Molestations which the Popes might
give them, N. 112.
and by adding an Ecclesiastical Title to their own Possession, make it more
secure. But the Event showed that to be Poison, which was esteemed Physic; For
about 1300, Boniface the 8th, exercised sharp Contentions with Philip the fair
of France, that he should yield up the Authority of the Regalia's abovesaid,
and they proceeded so far, that this Kingdom was exposed to great Danger, by
Excommunications and Interdictions, by depriving the King, and by granting the
Kingdom to Albert the Emperor. At first when 'twas assented to, it was not well
thought of, to whose account it would turn by the Apostolical granting to
preserve that which was the Princes Peculiar; For the Popes since pretend they
can revoke the Privileges granted by their Predecessors, even without a cause,
though indeed they never want Pretexts to feign a cause, and whosever
Possesses by a Title of his own, and is content to acknowledge it for another
man's Favor, is like him who leaving his own ground, goes to build on another
man's.

But on the other side when some Prince having broken Patience, N. 113.
conferred some principal Benefice, which the Kings of England and of Sicily
oftentimes did, the Popes not to engage in Contentions, said nothing more to
the Prince, but not to let themselves be prejudiced, they wrought by Practices
through the Monks means, that the Elected should renounce into the Popes hand,
promising him he should be invested by the Pope, and so should have that
quietly, wherewith if he had not been contented, the Pope would have opposed
it, and brought all into difficulty.

Of these Practices then used frequently by the Popes, Florentius of Wingerin
and Ivo Carnotensis, who were Writers in those times, make a long Relation, as
of a thing usually done in Germany and in France, with this Form of Words, that
the Popes took with one hand, and gave again with the other. This agreement was
easily accepted, as that which freed one from Trouble and Molestation, and the
same King if he came to reflect afterward, N. 114.
whether he past it as a thing which made no Alteration in effect, without
considering, that it might import for the Future: Which manner they now make
use of against the Catholic Bishops in Germany, who do not obey their
Reservations, as shall be spoken of in its place.

In Spain the quiet and prudent Disposition of the Nation, together with the
good Government of the Kings, were cause that in so universal a change they
passed it quietly; perhaps forwarded hereunto by the Exercise the Saracens gave
them, which made them think of remaining united to their King, and of living in
Quietness; The Kings never went about subjecting the Clergy more than
convenient, and they never made a League with Strangers, to exempt themselves
from the Kings more than their due. As soon also as the Kings perceived, that
the Popes of Rome had by Power, by Terror, or by Practices obtained something
in other Kingdoms, they endeavored to accommodate themselves according to
those things, N. 115.
in such a manner as might make the least alteration possible in their
Government, for as touching the Custom of times past, the Bishops, and other
Ecclesiastical Ministers were ordained according to the Ancient Custom, the
abovesaid Alteration being made in other Kingdoms and States, they would not
lay hold on a Contention with the Popes, but by a prudent Compliance they were
contented, that no Bishop should be Ordained without their Consent, and
Alphonso the 6th, the better to secure himself, sought for Urban the seconds
Approbation, who granted to the King the JVS PATRONATVS of all the Churches in
his Kingdom. Those Kings have proceeded quite otherwise than the Germans,
French, and English; They were content to acknowledge for another favor that
which was their own, so that it might serve to enjoy it more Peaceably; These
have striven that they might not acknowledge their own from another man's, but
all with Prudence.

These saw there was a way to lose all, N. 116.
and to become Subjects, because the Popes Demand not the utmost scope of his
Intention, but a Degree of proceeding further; his Subjects considered, chiefly
the Clergymen inclinable unto Liberty, not to say License, and therefore ready
to agree with the Stranger, to diminish the Authority of their Prince,
whereupon they saw it necessary, that there should be no Door open, by which
they might have Recourse.

But the Spaniards being confident of the quietness of their Subjects, had no
Reason to fear, that suddenly they would move for a Recourse out of the
Kingdom, but considering the Anxiety of their Affairs in those times, they had
good cause to fear, lest those who had been able to make Subjects Rebel against
Princes so much greater than they, should use the same Arts; and therefore they
resolved most Prudently, to receive speedily that which greater than they were
constrained to tolerate after much Wars.

Now for a Conclusion, N. 117.
In the time which past between 1122, that Henry made his Renuntiation, unto
1145, it was established almost every where, that the Bishop being dead, the
choice of the Successor should be made by the Chapter of Canons, and should be
Confirmed by the Metropolitan, and if the Abbot were dead, the Election should
be made by the Monks, and Confirmed by the Bishop, if the Monastery were
unexempted: If it were exempted, it should be Confirmed by the Pope: Other
Benefices which were de JVRE PATRONATVS were Conferred by the Bishop on the
Patron's Presentation: All others were at the free Episcopal disposing. The
Popedom of Rome remained, for the Prince being Excluded, it seemed that it
ought to return to the free Election of the People, but from the year 1145,
Innocent the 2d having a Difference with the Romans, and being driven from the
City by them,
he in Counter-change deprived them of the Power of choosing the Pope.

In the Troubles which happened for the causes abovesaid, many Cities were in
an Uproar by the Bishops Confederate with the Pope, which revolting from the
Emperor, N. 118.
and were headed by the Bishops, whereby they obtained the Public Incoms, and
the Regal Rights or Duties; and when the Differences were Composed, they had
taken so firm Possession, that the Prince was Necessitated to grant them in
Feudo or Fealty, that, which de Facto they had usurped to themselves, by which
they acquired also the Titles of Dukes, Marquisses, and Earls, as many of them
are in Germany, who remain still such, both in Name, and in Fact; but in Italy,
in Name only, which made Clergymen a great quantity of Secular Goods, and the
Augmentation was very notable, not only during the Troubles of which we have
spoken, but also in those which followed under the Swevian Emperors.

The Monks in this time had intermeddled greatly, in favoring the undertaking
of the Popes against the Princes, for which they lost somewhat of their
Reputation of Holiness; and indeed there was also lost much of the Discipline,
N. 119.
and Regular observance in Monasteries, because they intermeddled or crept into
the Negotiations of State, and of War, wherefore their acquiring or purchasing
ceased also, unless in some little Congregations newly instituted in Tuscany,
who intermedled not in these Commotions, but preserved their Discipline, and
therefore the Devotion of the People continuing toward them, they were
instruments of acquiring New Estates, but yet not many, they being but few.

But another Occasion happened which caused great Acquisitions in the times
whereof has been spoken, which was the Warfar of the Holy Land, and the heat
of zeal was then so earnest, The holy War Contributed great Wealth to the
Roman-Church.
for going and for contributing to the gaining of it, that men making no
account of Goods, of Wives, and of Children, engaged themselves in this Warfar,
and selling their own, went beyond Sea; yea the very Women without having
Respect to their Childbearing, sold their Goods to contribute toward the War.
The Popes with their Priests, and other Prelates received under their
Protection the Houses, and the Affairs of the Cruci-Signati (so were called
those who went to the War) and that brought to the Churches such an increase,
as is wont to bring the being Tutor, N. 120.
Curate, or a Procurator for Widows, Orphans, and Persons under Age; neither
could the secular Magistrate so much as think of defending any one, for Terror
of the Censures which they made use of without sparingness.

A great Point was added, which Eugenius the third Constituted, that for this
Pious work, every one might alienate the Fee-Farms he held, which if the Patron
could not receive, yet against his Will they might be taken by the Churches,
which opened a broad way to the purchasing very largely. It happened also that
the Popes of Rome made use of the Arms prepared for the holy Land in some
Enterprise, whereby they augmented the Temporal Estate of the Roman Church: And
also the Popes Legates, and the Bishops of the place where the said Arms were
met together to unite themselves for the Voyage, they made use of them for
diverse Augmentations of the Churches Temporality.

There being also offered and gathered a great quantity of money, N. 121.
taken from the Faithful, especially from Women and others who were unfit to
serve in the Wars personally, likewise to free ones self from a vow made, as
also to obtain Indulgences and other Grants, all was not spent in that War, no
doubt but some Prince might partake of it, but a notable share remained still
in the hands of the Prelates, whereby Ecclesiastical Affairs made some
Augmentation. After this were instituted the Military Religions of the
Templars, Hospitallars etc. for the defense of the Temple Built at Jerusalem,
for the Pilgrims who went thither, and for to fight against the Saracens, which
although it was a new thing to institute Religions for the shedding of blood,
yet it was received with so much Fervor, that in a very short time they gained
great store of Wealth: All these ways brought great increase of Riches to the
Church. There was also another way of giving a very notable increase to the
Wealth of the Church, or Clergymen, N. 122.
the Reviewing well the matter of the Tithes, and where they were not paid, to
proceed with Censures that there should or ought be paid not only the Predials
of the Fruits of the Earth, but mixed Tithes also, which are the Fruits of
Cattle, Reviewing of Tithes added more Riches.
and likewise the Tithes of Personal Industry and humane Labor.

Unto the Tithes were the first Fruits joined also, First Fruits.
which were first instituted by Alexander the 2d, herein imitating the Mosaical
Law, which commanded that People to pay them; the quantity of them was not
Established by Moses, but left to the Arbitrament of the Offerer.

The Rabi^s afterward, as St. Hierome Testifies, determined the quantity,
which was not more than the 60th, nor less than the 40th, which indeced has
been imitated by ours in the most profitable manner, having settled the 40th,
which in our times is called the Quartese.

Alexander the third about the year 1170, determined that they should proceed
with Excommunications, to cause the entire payments for the Tithes of Mills to
be made, N. 123.
and of Fishing, of Fur, of Wool, and of Bees, and that the Tithes of every
thing should be paid, before the Charges made for the gathering of the Fruits
should be deducted; and Celestin the 3d, in the year 1195, established that
they should proceed with Excommunications, to cause payment to be made of the
Tithes not only of the Wine, Corn, Fruits of Trees, of Gardens, of Sheep, of
Merchandise, of Soldiers pay, of Hunting, but also of Windmills. All these
things are expressed in the Decretals of the Romish Popes; But the Canonists
have gone much further, saying, that the Poor are obliged to pay Tithe, for
that is given them by Alms in begging at doors, and that the Harlots are bound
to pay Tithe of their Gain by Whoredom, and of such other things which the
World could not receive into use.

Tithes were paid unto the Curates, for the service which they afforded to the
People, in Teaching the word of God, in Administering the Sacraments, and in
performing other Ecclesiastical Functions; so that for these Ministeries
nothing was paid; N. 124.
some Pious and Rich Persons gave if they pleased, something for the Burying of
their dead, or for receiving the Sacraments, and the custom went so far, that
Courtesy was turned into a due Debt, and the quantity how much was to be paid,
was also brought into a Custom, and came to Controversies, Secular men refusing
to pay any thing, for the Administration of the Sacraments, because they paid
Tithes therefore, and the Clergymen denying to perform their Functions, unless
there were given them that which was Customary; About the year 1200, Innocent
the 3d remedyed this Disorder, by forbidding the Clergy indeed from Contracting
for any thing for their Administration, and to refuse it to those who would not
pay them, and commanded they should perform the Functions without more ado. But
after this was done, by Censures the Seculars were forced to observe the
Laudable Custom (as the Pope calls it) in paying that which was usual, putting
a great Difference between forcing beforehand by Contract, and forcing
afterward by Censures, N. 125.
approving this as Lawful, forbidding the other as Simoniacal.

Another Novelty was also introduced contrary to the old Canons, Other ways of
gain.
which Contributed much toward their Gain. It was Prohibited by the Canons, to
receive any thing by Donation, or by Will from several sorts of Public
Sinners; as from Sacrilegious Persons, from him who remained in Discord with
his own Brother, from Harlots and other such Persons; all these Respects were
quite laid aside, and all indifferently received, especially the greatest and
most frequent Legacies and Gifts are from Harlots, and from Persons who through
disgust with their Relations, leave or give to the Church. Thus the Popes of
Rome used great diligence to help forward the Purchasing, as well as to
preserve the Power of Distributing what was Purchased, which (as has been
said) was with so much Labor and so much Blood, snatched or drawn out of the
hand of Princes, N. 126.
and reduced to the Clergy. To which all the Ecclesiastical order, for their
own Interest not only consented, but helped it by Preaching, and by Writing,
always inculcating that it was an Usurpation of the People, and a Tyranny of
Princes to have any share of meddling with the Distribution of Benefices, and
chiefly with the Election of the Pope; and in our days one of the Arguments
treated on by Barentus, throughout all his Annals, with all opportunity and
importunity is this, that it was with an Impious and a Tyrannical Usurpation of
those Princes and People, to intermeddle in the Election of Bishops, and
chiefly of the Pope; not considering that the best Popes have been provided by
Princes, and that always when Clergymen only have made the Election, infinite
disorders have sprung up: But that which imports more, is, that Popes of a most
holy Life, and Emperors of perpetual memory, have commended that Practice, and
judged it necessary, neither can it be now blamed, without slandering two Dozen
of holy Popes, and particularly St. Gregory, N. 127.
and the Ancient Doctrines of the Councils, and of the holy Fathers. If at
first the Mystery had been discovered, whereto would have tended this taking
away the Investitures from Princes, the Clergy would not have been persuaded
unto Novelty; but they believed their own Interest and liberty were concerned,
wherefore the Practice began of bestowing Benefices in manner abovesaid, every
one in his Diocese, some by the Election of the Chapters, some by Collation or
settling of the Bishop; and likewise the Pope bestowed those in the Diocese of
Rome, and meddled not with giving Benefices out of his Diocese, unless sometimes
in one case only, that is, when any Prelate being gone to Rome, either for
Devotion or for Business dyed there, and in his company there happened to be some
noted Person of the same Nation, the Pope immediately Created him in the place
of the Deceased, and sent him back, writing to the Diocese, or to the
Monastery, Lamenting the death of the Deceased, and consolating them with the
substitution of the Person he had sent them; This thing was easily consented
unto, as well because it happened but rarely or seldom, N. 128.
as because it appeared to be the Popes favor also, there being no cause of
refusing a Person deserving, and of the same Country; but when the news of the
death came to the Place, if the Pope had made no Provision already in manner
aforesaid, they stayed no longer, but provided of themselves according to
Custom. In nothing else did the Pope meddle with Ecclesiastical Causes out of
the Diocese of Rome.

The Pope of Rome nevertheless was very deserving from all the Clerical order,
seeing that so many Popes with so much Toil and Labor, together with so much
Bloodshed had gained them that Power and Dominion over Benefices, and excluded
the Princes, who from ancient times, and the People who from the beginning had
Possession of that Right, wherefore he was held in great esteem by the Bishops,
who sought to gratify him all the ways they could; which put the Popes in
mind of dealing with the Bishops after that manner as the Emperors were wont,
N. 129.
which was, to recommend one to them to be provided with a convenient Benefice:
At first these Requests seemed very strange to the Princes, they opening a door
by which Strangers or Outlandish men got an Inlet to be Beneficyed in their
Kingdoms, and yet they were favorably accepted, and answered by the Bishops
with gratification, who only were intent on the Excluding of Princes, never
thought that another by depriving them could assume to himself the settlement
of Benefices. But shortly after through the Profitableness which the Court
received from those who made Presents to obtain the Popes favor, and for the
Charges of Bulls, they began to multiply the desires and the Recommendations of
the Pope in such a manner, that the Bishops became deprived of almost all
Collations: Whereupon they were sometimes forced to pass without complying with
them; the Popes found a Remedy for this, by adding Commands unto his Requests,
which were obeyed at first, N. 130.
but for being too frequent, it constrained the Bishops to transgress the
Command, and without Respect thereunto, or to the Censures therein Contained,
they made Collations in regard to themselves and to their Churches, and it
behoov'd the Pope afterward to be content for a thing done, and to pardon
them, seeing there was no other Remedy.

The course whereby Benefices were obtained in Rome, would have been easily
stopped, but there was a Remedy invented for it at Court, for besides the desires
and commands, they added an Executor, who if the Bishop would not confer the
Benefice, he was to confer it, and to punish the Bishop besides for
Disobedience. However they used that Method but sparingly, and when the Bishop
had been stubborn. But at last for a quicker dispatch they came to yield to
Prayers, to the Mandate, and to Execution altogether. Wherefore the Churches
and the Bishops felt themselves much aggrieved, N. 131.
and the Princes and the Nations complained not only for being deprived of
their Faculties, but also because by that means, the Benefices which by a most
ancient custom were bestowed on the Natives, fell all unto strangers, who were
at the Court of Rome, whereupon oftentimes those were made Bishops and Curates,
who understood not the Peoples Language, which they were not apt to learn by
reason of the great Difference, as many Italians who were Beneficed in England,
and the disorder grew so great that he (chiefly the Curate) who understood not
the Language of the People, was forbidden by the Pope of Rome from having any
Benefice, reserving to himself the Power of Dispensing, Power of Dispensing.
which did not remove the disorder, but only increased the Charges of the
Solliciters or Entreaters, and the Profits of the Court, they not sticking to
give the Reversions unto strangers, granting them afterward a Brief of
Dispensation. But although such ample Authority which the Court of Rome had
assumed to it self, was displeasing to men of good zeal, yet it was most
grateful to a great number of Clergymen and other Persons desirous of
Benefices, N. 132.
who were subject to Canonical Impediments, which rendered them incapable: This
sort of Persons no Bishop durst to promote, as retaining the due Reverence to
the Canons; Nevertheless that which no man would do, the Pope did easily,
dispensing against Canons and Ecclesiastical constitutions, introducing the
saying; de Plenitudine Potestatis; and the little clause, non obstantibus, (a
thing unknown and not heard of in so many Ages) which is now put into every
Beneficial Bull, yea the Popes themselves in the distribution of the Benefices
of the Roman Church, in good time or times of Prosperity, made Profession of
being greater observers of the Canons than any other Bishops; and one of the
glories of the holy Popes, as may be seen in St. Leo, and his Successors was
the punctual observance of the Canons, first by themselves, then by others;
neither ought it to be said, that these were of less authority, N. 133.
but certain it is they were of greater goodness and knowledge, and they durst
not do otherwise, than what was permitted unto others, whereas afterward every
thing was done at Rome, which others durst not do elsewhere.

St. Barnard who lived in the first times of these Introductions, which
although they had not past so formerly as happened afterward, writing to
Eugenius, the third, rebukes them sharply, complaining that the City of Rome
was the place, whereto the Ambitious, the Covetous, the Simonists, the
Sacrilegious, the Concubine-keepers, and the Incestuous had their Recourse to
obtain Benefices, for they found none who would receive them in other places,
Rome being the only place, which made that Legal or Lawful, which every where
else was reputed unlawful.

The Popes themselves could not deny, but that the granting of these
Expectancies or Reversions were burdensome to the Churches, yea Gregory the 9th
C. Mandatum de rescrip. confesses it with open words, wherefore they were
restrained by inserting this little Clause, If we have not written for another,
bringing into Custom, N. 134.
that every Pope might grant a Reversion upon any Church, and no more. Besides
they were wont afterward at their entrance into the Popedom, to revoke all the
Reversions granted by their Predecessor, that their own might take place more
easily, or else that those who had obtained them, might be necessitated to have
new ones at new Charges, for to Confirm them therein; as for Elective
Benefices, which are Bishoprics and Abbeys they gave no Expectancies or
Reversions, there being no Example of it, for they had been bestowed by the
Princes, but the Court invented other Modes or Ways, whereby they often drew
the Collation of them to Rome, setting forth many Conditions which were
necessarily to be observed, before coming to the Elections, and others in the
Celebration thereof, and requiring diverse qualities in the Person of the
Elected, N. 135.
adding thereunto, that if any of these were not observed, the Electors were
for that time deprived of the Power of Choosing, which devolved it self to
Rome; Besides this also, and for diverse Respects of the Electors, or for other
Causes, there arose amongst them difficulties about the Election, for which
cause one of the Parties would Appeal to Rome, where most commonly the wrong
was given to both, and the Election made invalid, and the Collation of the
Bishopric or Abbey for that time was drawn to Rome. Also when the Court heard
of a vacancy of some good Bishopric or Abbey which had happened, it dispatched
immediately a Letter Preceptory, that there should be no proceeding to the
Election without his knowledge, and with an honest show or color of helping or
preventing disorders which might happen, he sent a Person to assist and preside
in the Election, through whose means by diverse ways and managements, the
Election was made to fall on him, who was to be the greatest Benefactor to Rome.

There happening then for the causes above written, N. 136.
that few Elections of Bishoprics and of Monasteries were Celebrated, but for
some of these Respects were examined at Rome, whereupon the Pope mediated or
interposed himself in most of the subsequent Elections, covering it with the
honest Title of Devolution for the public service, seeing that the usual
Electors wanted of that which was their due, they thought it convenient to put
to their hand also, either by commanding when it seemed to them, that the
Electors should not come to the Election without their leave, or that they
should not choose, but by the Counsel of some Persons nominated by them; thus by
different ways they came to assume some share in the Elections also. These
methods variously used according to the Exigency of Accidents, had not the
Power of a Law, but of Customs, or of Reasonableness unto the year 1227, when
Gregory the 9th having considered how Theodosius formed the Politic of the
Empire, Collected his Rescriptions or Decretals and those of Preceding Princes
into a Book, N. 137.
which was afterward called the Theodosian Codex: And Justinian having
accommodated the Ancient Laws, according to the times then being, and reduced
the Decrees of his Predecessors into a Body, he called them the Justinian
Codex. So the same Gregory the 9th, framed a Politic, having reduced into a
Body all the Rescriptions or Decretals, together with the Accidents which
happened, serving to the Roman Greatness, and having extended that to a common
use, which had been established for a particular place, and perhaps for that
special case only, and having abolished others, called that Book the Decretal
of Gregory the 9th, which began to lay the Foundation, and to establish the
Roman Monarchy, chiefly in Beneficial matters, in which Book there is much more
concerning the Edification of Law-fruits, than concerning the Edification of
Souls.

The old Collectors of Canons, Particularly Gratian, made a Collection of all
that he accounted proper to the Papal greatness, yet not without Changes, N.
138.
Alterations, and Falsifications also of the Places from whence the Sentences
were taken; and 'twas believed by him he had raised that Authority to the
greatest height it could attain unto, and for those times he was not mistaken;
but Affairs being altered, that Compilement was not for his purpose, but after
that which he called his Decree, followed this Decretal, which gave no
satisfaction neither, but from time to time as the Popes advanced in Authority,
they framed new Rules for themselves, so that in the matter of Benefices,
neither the Decree, nor the Decretal, nor the Sesto have any more Room, but
other Rules as shall be spoken of.

The great Method which the Court of Rome used in bestowing of so many
Benefices, drew thither all sorts of Clergymen, those who had none to gain
some, and those who had, to aspire unto greater or better: So that besides the
old causes this also was added, that many became non-Resident; which the Court
could not dissemble, for every Diocese complained that the Churches were
without Government, N. 139.
and attributed the cause of the Evil where it truly was, wherefore 'twas
resolved some Provision should be made for it. Therefore it seemed not
convenient to the Popes of these times to proceed as formerly with
Castigations, because the disorder was too common, as also because it would
have been a means to send all out of Rome, which if it should have been done,
the Court would have remained empty, and every one would have endeavored to
obtain Benefices from his Bishop, near to whom he was personally, rather than
to send Salaries, and Messengers to Rome, for the obtaining of Expectancies or
Reversions; However a Medium was found by making of Laws, which commanded
Residency to that sort of Beneficed men, who could expect but little from the
Court, speaking nothing of others; Thus Alexander the 3d in the year 1179,
commanded Residency to all Beneficed Persons who had the Cure of Souls: The
'twas added also, all those who had Dignities, N. 140.
Administrations, or Canon-ships; of other inferior Beneficed men 'twas never
said they were obliged to Refidency, and much less were they commanded to
Reside, wherefore by little and little they accounted themselves not obliged to
it; in such manner there arose a Distinction of Benefices, some of which
required Residency, and others simply which obliged not thereunto; wherefore
the Doctors declared the Progress, that de Jare all are obliged unto Residency,
not being able to say otherwise without perverting Antiquity, but through
custom they say single Benefices Excepted.

It was a most common saying: Beneficium datur propter Officium, wherefore
these being disobliged from Residency, having no Office, it seemed that the
single Benefice remained as a vain thing in the Church. For which they found a
remedy by an Equivocation. The Canonical hours which at first were Celebrated
in the Church, by all the Fraternity, and afterward some made it Lawful for
themselves to say them privately, about the year 800, they acquired the name of
Officium divinum, N. 141.
which being Celebrated by all, either in common or in private, the truth of
the Proposition was saved: Beneficium datur propter Officium; that is to say,
for repeating the divine Office, not for serving the faithful People residing
in the Churches, and exercising the charge as formerly, and this is that
Officium, answerable unto Beneficium. Therefore the Conscience of many
Beneficed men being secured by this means, that they might be absent from the
Church of the Benefice, it seemed also necessary to find out a way that when it
had been needful to cause any one of those to remain at Court, who was obliged
to Residency, it might be done without derogating from the Laws. Whereupon
Honorius the 3d about the year 1220, declared that he who was in the Popes
Service, should not be obliged to reside; nothing else remained, but to find a
way how they might take away Residency from some Rich Benefice under Cure,
which failed not; N. 142.
for it being an ordinary thing for the Parson of the Parish at times when he
is Lawfully hindered, to appoint a Vicar to serve for him, allowing him a
convenient Stipend; so it is found, that they might (but with the Popes
Authority) Create a perpetual Vicar, appointing him a sufficient Portion, and
leaving the remainder to the Rector, obliging that Vicar unto Residency,
although the Rector draws the greatest part of the Income, and remains free
himself, whose share becomes as a single Benefice, and that of the Vicar
remains for the Curates Provision. And as it was unknown to the Ancient Church,
that any Benefice was given but for the Office sake, and therefore every one is
obliged to execute his Office Personally; so there was never one man deputed
unto two Charges or Offices, not only for being impossible when they are to be
exercised in different places, but also because those holy men accounted it no
small matter to perform one well, and there are many Canons, to which ancient
Institutions are referred, that one cannot be Ordained to two Titles, nor serve
in two Churches. N. 143.


In those times when Benefices were distinguished into such as have Residency,
and such as have not; Consequently it is come to be said, Benefices with
Residency and without.
that of those, where it is not necessary to serve in ones own Person, a man
may have more than one, and there arose a distinction of Compatible, Benefices
Patible and Incompatible.
and of Incompatible Benefices; those which require Residency, are Incompatible
amongst themselves, a man being not able to divide himself into different
places, but these with others, and they amongst themselves are Compatible,
seeing it is not necessary to serve Personally.

However in the Beginning, they proceeded in this matter with great Respect,
and went no further than to say only, when a Benefice was not sufficient for
the Clerks Living, he might have another Incompatible, but they never durst go
on to the third, much less unto the second, if the first had been sufficient.
The Authority was never extended farther unto the Bishop, N. 144.
but 'twas added to the Pope, that he might have Authority to grant more than
two, if both were not sufficient for a Living, and this sufficiency for living
is cut out very largely by the Canonists, for they say that a mere Priests
Living, comprehends not only the Maintenance of the Person Beneficed, but for
his Family, for his Kindred, for three Servants, and for one Horse, and also to
receive strangers; But when the Beneficyed was Noble or Learned, so much more
besides that, as might equalize his Nobility, and that which they say for
Bishops is wonderful; and for Cardinals, let the Common saying of the Court
suffice: Aequiparantur Regibus, Equal to Kings. But all this proceeding with
the ordinary terms, that through dispensation every Canonist holds that the
Pope may grant to one, to hold what number of Benefices he pleases, and de
facto, Dispensations of the plurality of Benefices went on so far, N. 145.
that John the 22d, about the year 1320, revoked them all, restraining the
Dispensations unto two Benefices only, which being done with reserving to
himself the disposing of others, (as shall be declared in speaking of reserves)
'twas not then believed, he had done it to take away the Abuse, but for gain,
chiefly, because that Pope was a subtle inventor of ways to increase the
Treasury, and time gave Testimony thereof; for it returned not only to its
Pristine Plurality, but also unto greater, and as far as our times, we have
seen, and do see, Dispensations without measure. All the Canonists and the
Casuists agree that such Dispenses ought still to be given for a Lawful Cause,
and that the Pope sins, if he grants them without it: But if that which is of
value in the Dispensation granted without Lawful Cause, be excused, they do not
agree.

Others say, that it excuses before God, and before men; others that it serves
to avoid the Penalty of the Canonical Laws, and that in Conscience, and before
God it avails not. This opinion is followed by the most Godly men, N. 146.
the first is most grateful to the Court, who is not pleased to have any Law
imposed which may regulate the Popes Authority, chiefly in Beneficial matters;
because some of them hold also, though with great contention of others, that
the Pope can also grant many cured Benefices through Dispensation, however they
have not made use of that opinion, seeing they have found out other ways to
bestow many cured Benefices, with Color and Pretext which should appear but
one, Union and Commendation.
and these Inventions took beginning in the times abovesaid. One of these
ways is Union, the other Commendation, of which it will behoove us to speak
anon.

'Twas a most Ancient thing, that when a People by Accidents of War, of Plague,
or by Inundation was reduced to such a small number that it could not support
the Charges for the Maintenance of a Minister, the Bishop gave the Cure of that
People unto the Neighboring Parish, and together with that, applied the small
Incomes, and this was called Uniting of two Parishes. N. 147.
In like manner when Cities were diminished or wasted, and therefore could not
maintain the Bishop conveniently, the Metropolitan with the Bishops assembled
in Council, gave two or more to one Bishop, and these Cities were called
United; as likewise on the contrary, when the number of People increased, and
that one man only could not supply all, one Cure became divided into two; yea
unto these present times these Methods are Commendably used, which are for the
Service of God, for Spiritual Benefit, and for convenience of the People. But
after they proceeded to make unions also for the Convenience of some Pious
Place, by which means some Benefices became united to some Bishopric, or to
some Monastery, or to some poor Hospital, by virtue of which union the Party
Beneficyed seems indeed to have two Benefices, but in truth he has but one.
Humane subtilty invented, (being willing to give two incompatible Benefices to
one Person) to unite the one unto the other during his Life, N. 148.
so that giving him the Principal, the United was also given by Consequence, by
which means it saves very well the Law of having but one Benefice in
appearance, but in the Existence there is nothing but the observance of th
words, with Transgression of the sense; The Jurisconsults call it the Fraud of
the Law. This served also that they might give a Cured Benefice to a young
striplin or boy, or to any other illiterate Person, and without being obliged
to receive Sacred Orders, by uniting the Cured Benefice to a single one, during
Life, and Confering the single one in Title, the Beneficyary remained the
Curates Patron also; and the words of the Law were very well observed. But the
Power of Uniting Benefices for Life, was never granted to the Bishops for any
Cause whatever, but reserved to the Pope of Rome only: Some Lawyers call it an
Union in the Name, but in Fact it is a Relaxation of the Law, and they hold it
for Damnable, wherefore also in some Kingdoms it has been prohibited. It was
long used by the Roman Court, N. 149.
now it is no more in use, no more than many other Cantelous things, not to call
them Frauds like these which speak too Legally for the Causes, as shall be
declared when we come to our times.

The Commendum had also a good Ancient Institution, Commendums.
for when an Elective Benefice became Vacant, either Bishopric, Abbey, or else
a Living which was Jus Patronatus, for which the Ordinary out of some Respect
could not provide immediately, the care whereof was recommended by the
Superior, to some worthy Person, until Provision should be made, nevertheless
that Person had not Power to make use of the Incoms, but only to Govern them,
and for this an Excellent man was chosen, who usually was a Beneficed man, to
whom the recommended Cure was a burden, with which he was to be contented for
the Church service only. This could not be called, N. 150.
having a Benefice recommended unto him but very improperly; and therefore in
Reality he had not two Benefices, although to make no difficulty of speech,
there arose a Maxim amongst the Canonists, that a man might have two
Benefices, the one in Title, the other in Commendum, which Commendum at first
lasted but until Provision were made, afterward they Commended for a good
while, which sometimes was long enough, wherefore the Pope of Rome forbad the
Bishops from Commending for above six months, not making the Rule for himself,
but by a Court Style the Commendum contracted a little Custom not altogether
Commendable, which was, that when the Pope had a mind to give any man a
Benefice, it could not be done, either for want of Age, or because the Benefice
was Monacal, and the Person Secular, or for some other respect he Commended it
to him so long, that he might acquire the necessary qualities for to have the
Title of it.

But finally about the year 1350, all Respects being laid aside, the Popes
holding the other Bishops strictly to the Term of six months, N. 151.
they Proceeded to give the Commendum for Life, which if it be given to one who
has in Title another Incompatible Benefice, he observes very well the words of
the Law, that two Benefices cannot be given, but one in Title, and the other in
Commendum; but the sense is defrauded, because that which is Commendatory for
Life, as touching the Profits, is like unto the Titular; also giving a Benefice
in Commendum to one who has not the qualities required by the Canons, does not
disagree with the Words thereof, but it is given to him in Deed, and not given
to him in Words: the Commendums of Bishoprics and other Benefices are almost
out of use in Italy: There remains some Abbeys for the Causes which in our
times shall be declared.

By the means abovesaid, the Popes drew to themselves great share of the
Beneficial Disposals, in all the Christian Kingdoms of the West, but in the
Eastern Churches, he was never suffered to dispose of an Atome, not only in the
last Ages of that Empire, when the Greeks were totally divided, N. 152.
but likewise in the first Ages also, when they were united into a Body, except
that in Syria and in Greece, in the times and in the places which were under
the Dominion of the French, and of the Venetians. But the Popes Letters which
disposed of Benefices in manner abovesaid, although they were indeed for the
most part obeyed, yet nevertheless not without some Complaint and Murmuring,
putting it often to dispute, whether the Pope could do this or that.

In Italy none opposed the Pope, unless some Pious man for Respect of
Conscience, and for the Service of God, it being besides profitable to the
Italians, for such were the Roman Courtiers, who by means of the Popes ample
Authority, received Incoms from Beyond the Alps. In Spain the Prudence of that
Nation in their Practice, deluded the Arts of the Court.

In England, as in a Region where the Benefices were many and Rich, the Roman
Courtiers made great gains, wherefore in the year 1232, a League was made in
that Kingdom, N. 153.
between the English Clergymen, and the Soldiers, against the Roman
Clergymen Beneficed in that Island, who were spoiled of their Goods and
Incoms; The Pope Commanded the King under pain of Excommunication, that he
should Chastize or Punish, and Persecute them with Temporal Arms, and that the
Prelates should Excommunicate them; But they were found to be so numerous, that
the King durst not meddle with them, neither did the Prelates dare to make use
of their Spiritual Weapons. The Affairs remained quiet for a few years,
whereupon Pope Innocent the 4th, a Genoese took fresh Courage, and sent one
Martin his Kinsman, by whose means he renewed the Fashions of the Court, upon
which the English had Recourse to the King, Complaining that the Italians got
Possession of all Benefices; The King Banished Martin from the Kingdom, and
causing an Account to be made of how much the Pope drew out of England, he
found it to be equal to his own Revenue, which is sixty thousand Marks; The
King proposed some of these Differences to the Council at Lions, making
Complaint of the abovesaid grievances, whereto the Pope answered, the Council
was not Assembled for that purpose, and that it was no time to harken to it.

In the said City of Lions during the time of the Council, N. 154.
the Pope would have given to his Kinsmen some Prebendaries of those Churches,
upon which there was a great Commotion in the City, and the Pope had notice
given him, that they should be thrown into the Rhone, wherefore the Pope sent
them away privately. Rhodano.


For all this the Court left not off its Designs, but in the year 1253, the
same Pope Commanded Robert Bishop of Lincoln, (a man in those times Famous in
Doctrine and in Goodness) that he should confer a certain Benefice upon the
Genoese against the Canons, which appearing inconvenient and unjust to the
Bishop, he answered the Pope, that he Honored Apostolical Commands Conformable
to Apostolical Doctrine, wherefore that non obstantibus is a Deluge of
inconstancy, a Breach of Faith, a disturbance of the quietness of Christendom;
that it is a grievous Sin to defraud the Sheep of their Pasture; that the
Apostolical See had all Power to Edification, none to destroy. N. 155.
This Answer received, the Pope grew wroth exceedingly; But Cardinal Egidius a
Spaniard, being a Prudent man, endeavored to Mitigate him, representing to
him, that to proceed against a man of such Reputation, for a cause so abhorred
by the World, could not bring forth a good Effect. But whilst the Pope studied
to show his Resentment, Robert fell sick, and to the end of his Life held the
same Reasons, and dyed with an Opinion of Holiness, and 'twas famed that he
wrought Miracles. The Pope hearing of his Death, caused a Process to be formed
for the King, to dis-inter the dead man's Corpse: But the night following, in a
Vision or in a Dream he had Robert in Pontifical Robes, who Rebuked him for
persecuting his memory, and smote him on the Flank with the But-end of his
Crosier-Staff: The Pope awoke with an excessive Pain in that Place, which
afflicted him unto his Death, that happened within a short time after.

In the year 1258, Alexander the 4th Excommunicated the Archbishop of York for
the like Cause, who persevering in his Deliberation, N. 156.
endured the Persecution with much Patience, and drawing near to his Death,
wrote a very Prudent Letter to the Pape, exhorting him to imitate his Holy
Predecessors, and to take away the Dammageable Novelties from the Church, and
from his own Soul; He dyed with the Opinion of a Saint and a Martyr.

In these times 'twas likewise necessary in France, to make a Provision, which
I shall relate after having given notice, that for these and for other
Impediments which the Princes and the Bishops opposed against the endeavors of
the Court, which never thought of giving over: For Clement the 4th, in the year
1266, resolved to lay the Foundations, whereby he, or his Successors, might
declare themselves to be absolute Patrons in all the Collations of Benefices
throughout the World, and remove the necessity of finding out Ways and Arts to
draw the Collations unto Rome, and made a Bull, which concluded nothing else
but the Reservation of the Vacanti in Curia, saying, that the Collationing of
them by an Ancient Custom is reserved to the Pope, and therefore he approved of
this Custom, and wil'd it to be observed; N. 157.
But to conclude this alone; So much an Hyppothetical Premium can do, in saying
that although the plenary Disposal of all Benefices, Premio Hippotetico.
belongs to the Pope of Rome, so that he may not only confer them when they
become Vacant, but he may also before Vacancy grant a Right for the acquiring
of them; Nevertheless the Ancient Custom has more especially reserved the
Vacanti in Curia; Wherefore we approve of that Custom. If the Pope had made a
concluding Edict, that the Disposal of all Benefices belonged to him, the World
would have stirred in it, and as well the Clergymen as Princes, and other
Lay-Patrons would have declared their Reasons. But this Proposition being put
into a Conditional without a Conclusion, went on easily without any notice
taken of how much it might Import. But two years after, that is, in the year
1268, without having any Respect unto this Bull, N. 158.
St. Lewis King of France, seeing that the Provisions made by the Queen Regent
his Mother, during his Minority, and during his Absence in the Holy Land, were
not sufficient to remove the Confusions introduced in the matter of Benefices,
Pragmatic Sanction.
made his famous Pragmatick, wherein he Commanded, that Cathedral Churches
should have their Elections Free, and the Monasteries likewise, that all other
Benefices should be given according to the Disposition of the Law, and that no
Imposition of the Court of Rome could be levied upon Benefices without his
Consent, and the Churches of his Kingdom. This Holy Kings going into Africa
against the Mores, and his Death which happened in the year 1270, and the need
the House of Anjou had of the Popes Favor, to settle his Kingdom in Naples,
and to recover that of Sicily, and the Power which the Pope granted to the King
of imposing Tithes under Pretext of the War of the Holy Land, were cause, that
the French easily permitted the Court of Rome to regain the same Authority; N.
159.
whereupon in the year 1398, Boniface the 8th placed the Constitution of
Clement in the Decretals, and made that That which was said Hyppothetically and
Incidentally, became the Principal, and to give it the greater Authority, he
exposed under the name of Clement, leaving it dubious, whether it were the 4th
or the 3d. Therefore now in some Copies it is Read the 3d, in others the 4th.
For which cause this Proposition was given to be believed at first, i. e. That
the plenary Disposal of all Ecclesiastical Benefices belongs to the Pope, which
is pretended to be meant in a Sense not altogether perverted, which is, that
the Pope should have full Power, but yet Regulated by the Laws, and by Reason:
A little after Clement the 5th made void all good understanding, by saying,
that the Pope had not only full Power, but also free over all Benefices, which
freedom is understood by the Canonists, Exempt from all Laws, and Reason; so
that he may do all that he pleases, notwithstanding the Reason, or the
Interest, of whatsoever Church, or of Particular Person, yea even of a
Lay-Patron. This Proposition is put into the Bulls upon every occasion, N. 160.
and there is no Canonist but passes it for clear, yea for an Article of
Faith, saying, that the Pope in the Collation of any Benefice whatever, may
Concur with the Ordinary, and also prevent it, and if it so please him, he may
also give Authority to whom he thinks fit, enabling him in like manner to
Concur with the Ordinary, or to prevent it, as they have since given this
Faculty unto Legates, with a general Constitution.

There is nothing more Wonder-worthy in the Consideration of Benefices,
Election of Ministers belonged to the Faithful.
than (it being as clear as the light at noon day) that the Election of
Ministers was at first by the Faithful People, then it passed unto the Princes,
after the Christian Faith being received, they minded the Affairs of the
Church, and finally it was reduced unto the Ecclesiastical Order only, N. 161.
the Seculars being excluded by the Management of Gregory the 7th, and his
Successors, yet there still remained in each Diocese, the Election and the
Collation of Benefices, and of their Offices, which since by little and little
the Popes of Rome have assumed to themselves by the ways abovesaid, and to be
said hereafter; Nevertheless the Canonists (either out of Animosity, or because
it is not their Profession to know any thing besides the Decretals) have said,
and do say in our days, without Respect unto the Notorious Truth which is
against it, that heretofore the Pope provided all Bishoprics, and other
Benefices, and that he afterward out of Favor, granted the Election to the
Chapters, and the Collation unto the Bishops, it is not to be doubted but one
day it ought to be answered in the Articles of our Faith, for making a Doctrine
to pass into the Church, which is so directly contrary to what they caused to
be Preached in Former times, when Anselmus Bishop of Lucca, who wrote three
Books against Gilbert the Antipope, in favor of the said Gregory the 7th,
which are still to be found, throughout all the second of which by the
Authority of the Popes, N. 162.
of the Holy Fathers, of general Councels, by the Custom observed from the
Apostles time unto his, who wrote in the year 1080, Proves that the Election of
Bishops by him called Popes, belonged to the Clergy and to the People of the
same Diocese, and that the most Pious Emperors Constantine, Constant,
Valentinianus, Theodosius, Honorius, Carolus, Ludovicus, and other excellent
men for Faith, and in Religion never violated such a Custom observed in the
Holy Church from the Apostles time, and a Constitution of Carolus, and
Ludovicus Pius, being born or Contained in the Chapitolar, that Bishops should
be elected by the Clergy and by the People of their own Diocese according to
the Canons, says, that this Constitution is most agreeable to that of the Holy
Fathers, and no less than if by the Nicene Council, or by any other General
Synod it had been Promulgated by the Holy Ghost, through the Mouth of those
Emperors, where it is seen that to take the Election out of the Hands of
Princes, they held for a Tradition, that, the Contrary of which they are
willing now adays, should be Written by the Canonists, N. 163.
and Believed by us, so that of necessity the Canonists must Err, or else the
Allegations of the Bishop of Lucca have erred: And if the Ordination of Bishops
in their Diocesses after the manner aforesaid, was the Liberty of each one of
the Churches, as the Fathers and the Councels taught, and granted them by our
Lord Jesus Christ; Let not those talk so disorderly, who say the Court has put
all the Churches in Bondage under pretext of defending them their Liberty.

Seek this time, that having spoken in diverse Occasions of different ways of
gaining Estates to the Churches, I touched the manner of preserving them, which
is by Prohibiting all manner of Alienations; Alienations.
a thing Diametrically contrary to that which the Primitive Church observed.
Wherefore if when 'twas Lawful by the Laws of the Prince, for the Churches to
purchase Estates in Land, N. 164.
they might retain those which were given or bequeathed, 'twas therefore in the
Bishops Liberty, not only to make use of the Incomes, but also to sell the very
Estates to discharge the necessary Expenses in Maintaining the Ministers and
the Poor, as also to give or bestow according to Exigencies; And the Authority
of Dispensator granted to the Bishop, did not extend to the Fruits only, as at
present, but also unto the Estate it self, and to other Chapters, which at
first was Administered with Sincerity, so that there arose no inconveniency
thereby, and lasted a long time in Poor Churches, where the Estates being but
small, and the Bishops of no great Authority, there was no matter or cause of
Transgression: But in Rich Churches, and great ones, where the Reputation
Emboldened the Bishops to attempt that which would not have been permitted unto
all, and Abundance gave matter of being able to make use of some part
Arbitrarily, the Bishops began to exceed the Bounds of Modesty, from
Dispensing, they came to Dissipating, against which it was requisite to
provide; neither the Provision proceeded not from the Clergymen, but from
Secular men, to whose prejudice it was; N. 165.
For the Public Estate of the Church being lessened, the Clergy were not
suffered to take their Living, who were the first, but the Poor who remained to
the last.

In the most Principal Churches, which were Rome, and Constantinople, the
Provision was also first necessary, wherefore Leo the Emperor, by a Law of his,
Anno. 470, Prohibited the Church of Constantinople from every Alienation, and
in the year 483, Basilius Cecina Prefect us Praetorius of King Odoacre in
Rome, the Sea of Simplicius being Vacant, by a Decree made in the Church,
Ordained that the Estate of the Roman Church should not be Alienated, which was
not found strange by three Succeeding Popes, but in the year 502, Odoacre being
extinct, and all his Power, Simmacus the Pope Assembled a Council of all Italy,
wherein he proposed as a great Absurdity, that a Layman should have made
Constitutions in the Church, N. 166.
and by Consent of the Council declared them Null: But lest it should appear
that this would tend to disorder, a Decree was made in the Council, that the
Pope of Rome and the other Ministers of that Church, should not be able to
Alienate, specifying that the Decree should not oblige other Churches, but the
Roman only.

The following times showed there was need of the same Law in all the Churches,
wherefore Anastasius extended Leo's Law to all the Churches subject to the
Patriarch of Constantinople, to all which he Prohibited the Power of Alienating.

But Justinian the Emperor, in the year 535, made a Constitution General for
all the Eastern, Western, and African Churches, and also for all Pious Places,
Prohibiting the Power of Alienating, excepting only to Feed the Poor in case of
extraordinary Famine, and to release Prisoners, in which Cases Alienation was
granted Conformable to the Ancient Custom, N. 167.
of which St. Ambrose makes mention, that not only Possessions, but also the
Vessels were sold for such Causes. Justinian's Law in the West was observed in
following times, until that Rome remained under the Eastern Empire, and there
are many Epistles of St. Gregory's, which make mention of Estates Alienated for
the Redemption of Slaves. But from the times of Pelagius the 2d, unto Adrian
the 1st, for 200 years the Expense was incredible which the Roman Church made
for to recompense it self on the Lumbards, as well to cause them to raise the
Sieges, as that they should not molest the Country, and St. Gregory gives good
Testimony of it in his time: The Doctrine which runs at present was not then in
Credit, that Ecclesiastical Estates are exempt from Common necessities, but
quite Contrary; those were the first that were to be expended before they came
to lay Contributions upon private Houses.

Much less did it ever come into thought of putting into Controversy the
Authority of Princes, about making Laws; because besides the perpetual
observance, N. 168.
there was the solid Foundation, that these were the Churches Goods, that is,
belonging to the Common, and to the Congregation of the Faithful, so that it
concerned the proper Office of the Prince, to procure the Conservation of them.

Afterward, when the Empire was Established on Charlemain, the Roman Laws
remaining without Authority, the abuse returned, whereupon diverse Prohibitions
were made by diverse Councels, Prohibitions.
chiefly in France where the Dissipation was greater.

But after that, the Roman Popes had assumed the greatest share of the
Government of other Churches, seeing that a General Prohibition wrought but
little Effect, the Prelates wanting no Pretexts, to except every particular
case from the Common Law, they made diverse Ordinances from the year 1000, unto
the year 1250, prescribing certain little Forms of Solemnity, which served for
a Bridle, and for an Impediment. But in this time whereof we speak, Innocent
the 4th, began to declare Null the Alienations made without those Conditions,
N. 169.
and Gregory the 10th, in the Council at Lions Anno. 1274, Ordained they should
not be able to Alienate, without leave from the Pope, besides the Solemnities
abovesaid also; which has been observed, and is still observed unto our days,
never granting any Alienation but upon evident Utility, which has not wanted
for those who have noted it for an express Iniquity, seeing that in Contracts
never any man seeks for other, than for Equality, and more cannot be, but with
detriment to another, specially the Canonists, to specify what thing this
Utility ought to be, which the Church ought to receive in Alienation, some say
it ought to be the Fourth part, others the Third part of the Value; So that
they quite left off selling, to feed the Poor in time of extraordinary Famine,
or to redeem Captives, it being Interpreted to be a damage, and not an Utility
to the Church. Thus things are turned about, that which heretofore was a work
of a high Perfection in Christians, as selling, and giving to the Poor, N. 170.
would now be subject to grievous Censures, but Perfection is in retaining
Ecclesiastical Estates, which much less cannot be exchanged without Evident
Utility, Abuse of Prohibitions.
and the Prohibitions for Alienating, which were made against the Clergymen,
in favor of the Laity, are turned about against the Laity, in favor of the
Clergy.

But returning to the Declaration of Clement the 4th and 5th, and to the Common
Doctrine, that the Pope may Concur, and prevent every Collator of Benefices,
this was of no great Profit, saving in the Vacant Benefices of the Neighboring
places to the Court, so that the Vacancy might be speedily known there, for as
touching those at a Distance, his being able to Concur, or to prevent, was of
little use, because before it could be known at Court, the Provision was made
by the Ordinary, and had issued the Effect, or cast Lots: Wherefore 'twas
invented, that which became a total Mutation in the matter of Benefices, and
destroys totally the Ancient Institution of all the Catholic Church,
Reservations.
this is the Reservation, which is a Decree whereby the Pope declares before a
Benefice becomes Vacant, that when it shall be Vacant, no man shall confer it,
N. 171.
and the Collation which any one shall make, is to be of none Effect. And
because this is an odious matter as the Gloss says well, to make it be
received by the World, and swallowed down sweetly, 'twas in its beginning used
sparingly, by reason the absolute Reservation seemed too hard, which Clement
the 4th had made of the Vacanti in Curia, whereupon Gregory the 10th restrained
it to a month only, permitting the ordinary Provisions might be made after
that. Clement the 5th added thereunto the Reservation of the Cathedral Church,
and of St. Cros's Monastery in Bordeaux for once; Pope John the 22d, his
Successor stretched the Step a little further, and made a Constitution to Reform
the Plurality of Benefices, Prohibiting the keeping of more than one Curate,
and another without a Cure with Dispensation, excepting the Cardinals,
Commanding that he who had more, should resign them, N. 172.
and for the future that he who had one Cured Benefice, and should receive
another, was to resign up the First, and those which were resigned, should be
reserved to his Disposal; The Bull for the apparent end of taking away the
Plurality of Benefices, was a specious Reservation, though it had no other end
than the Profit of the Court, passed away as a thing accessory, and which
seemed at first sight without Burden, because as yet the end whereto it tended
was not discovered.

Here it is necessary to make a little Halt, because this Pope gave many
Examples unto his Successors for the Collationing of Benefices, which served to
heap up Treasures: He divided many Bishoprics, and when a Rich Benefice became
Vacant, he was wont to give it to a man who already had another somewhat
inferior to it, giving that which was Vacant to another, prevailing so far in
this manner, that sometimes for one Vacant, he made six Provisions or
Promotions, by transferring always from one less Rich, N. 173.
to another more Rich, and by providing the least or Poorest with a new
Beneficiated; so that all were Contented and all paid. Annatae.
He invented also the Annatae or first Fruits, a burden upon Benefices never
heard of before him, and which for sometimes Created very great Scandals. When
Emperors or Kings Conferred any Benefices, if those who aspired to them made
any Donative, or else Contracted with the Prince or with his Ministers, to give
any share of the Fruits and Incomes of the Benefices for to Obtain them, this
was then most sharply rebuked by the Popes, who called it an unlawful thing,
alleging the Gospel; Gratis accepistis, gratis date, and calling the Receipt of
gifts, or of a part of the Fruits, a sale of Spiritual things, and a Contract
by Symonie, some proceeding to call it Heresy, though some were not wanting in
those times to give their Opinion, and say, that the Ministry of Christ, and
the Authority of loosing and binding was a different thing from the Possession
of Temporal things annexed to a Benefice, and that by reason of this
Temporality, it was not disagreeing, that the Prince should receive some share
for the necessities of the Common Wealth, N. 174.
and of this a Solemn Dispute was also made.

But this Answer satisfied not Pious and learned men; for although the Revenue
of Benefices be a Temporal thing, yet the Right and Title by which they are
Possessed, is a Spiritual thing: It appeared to all men, and still it does
appear, that with good Reasons these Methods of the Popes were reproved, and
called Simony. This Defect was made use of for the first Pretext for taking
away the Collation of Benefices from Princes. But the Pope of Rome, having by
the Progresses above written, gained great part of the Power whereof the
Emperors were spoiled; John the 22d, Anno. 1316. Ordained that for three years,
every man who Obtained a Benefice of a greater Income than 24 Ducats, ought at
the Expedition of his Bull pay a years Revenue; The three years being expired,
N. 175.
the same was continued as well by him, as by his Successors, although some
Resistance was made in diverse places, and in some others they were received to
pay half a years Rent only, and in other places a certain sort of Benefices,
was only obliged to pay, the others remaining excepted.

The bringing in of this, was accounted very Burdensome to private Families,
the years Revenue being paid by the Beneficyed or Incumbent out of the Household
Stock, there being a Hazard that he may dye before he makes good that money to
the Family, and Princes found it a great grievance to their Government, such a
notable share of the Cash being drawn out of their Dominion, without receiving
any Profit for it, and so much the more grievous, as this Work is accompanied
with the Expense of Bulls, Dispensations, and Presents or Gifts beforehand, all
which carry away the Money which is the sinew of Potency, and it never returns
as it does by way of other Commerce.

When this Novelty was introduced by the Pope, N. 176.
the ordinary Persons could not perceive what difference there was betwixt this
Payment, and that which was so much blamed in those days when Princes bestowed
Benefices, but learned men in those primitive times Condemned it universally,
as savouring too much of Simony.

In Progress of time, some men studied ways to justify it, so that they were
divided, one sort rebuking it as a thing unlawful, Simoniacal, and forbidden by
Divine and by Humane Laws, others Commending it as a thing Lawful, yea
necessary and due to the Pope of Rome, these proceeding so far as to defend
that the Pope may not only demand a years Fruits, but more also, as he that is
absolute Patron, yea of all the Fruits, not of one part only, who they also say
cannot commit Simony for any Contract he shall make in the Collation of
Benefices; And certainly if he were Patron as they say, the Consequence would
be clear, because every man may Contract for his own, in what manner seems best
to him, without doing wrong to any one; N. 177.
but neither God nor the World seem to consent to it. This Pope was so intent
in drawing money from every thing, that it twenty years Popedom, he heaped up an
incredible Treasure: Certain it is, that in his Expenses, and Gifts, he was no
more straightned than his Predecessors, and yet he left 25 Millions at his
Death. John Villano relates that to one of his Brethren of the College of
Cardinals after the Popes Death, Charge was given to make an Inventory of the
Money, which he found to be 18 Millions in Coined Money, and seven Millions in
Vessels and in Ingots weighed by him.

The First year Fruits in his Institution from Pope John the 22d, L'Annata.
Extended but unto Benefices which were Conferred, and which were paid for in
the Expedition of Bulls, a thing which Continued unto that time; but afterward
there was also laid an Obligation upon all Benefices, to pay the first year
Fruits or Revenue every 15 years, because that being united unto Monasteries,
Hospitals, or to Pious places, N. 178.
they never become Vacant, which Imposition was therefore called Quindennium,
Quindennium.
which Paul the 2d about the year 1470, Constituted only concerning Benefices
united after the year 1417, by the Pope of Rome, but Paul the 4th extended or
enlarged it likewise to all the Benefices united before, and Sixtus the 5th
Comprehended not only those united by the Apostolical See, but also those which
had been united by Legates, Nuncio's, Bishops, and by others.

But returning to the first Original of these year Incoms or Fruits, those who
opposed against the Invention of John the 22d, with zeal of hindering that the
year-Fruits might pass no further, they have not only brought about his Design,
but have been the Cause of defending and extending it also; even as some who
then opposed the Reservation, brought forth a contrary Effect, the Popes never
failing to get any Abuse whatever to be Justified by Doctrines; Wherefore after
this Benedictus the 12th, Anno 1335, under pretense of being willing to provide
or furnish Livings with fitting Persons, he reserved to his own Disposal and
Providing for his Life time only, all the Benefices Vacant in Curia, as had
been done formerly, N. 179.
and also all those which became Vacant by Privation of those who were
Beneficiated, or else by Translation unto another Benefice, and also all those
which were renounced in the Court, and all the Benefices of Cardinals, of the
Court Officers, of Legates, Nuncio's, and of other Rectors, and Treasurers of
the Roman Church Lands, likewise the Benefices of those who went to Court upon
Business, if in going or coming they happened to die within 40 miles Distance
of the Court, and likewise all those which became Vacant because the Possessors
of them had received another Benefice. These Reservations Comprehended a
multitude of Benefices, restraining much the Power of the Ordinaries, and they
caused many Benefices to be settled upon Forrainers, this was received however
because the Reservation was only for during his Life. Yet it is never to be
believed that a thing useful to him that Governs, instituted for some short
space of time, N. 180.
should remain Circumscribed thereby; For Benedictus the 12th being dead,
Clement the 6th his Successor made the same Reserve; wherefore the King of
England, Edward the 3d perceiving that for this Cause and by reason of
Reversions, all the Benefices of the Kingdom fell unto Forrainers. He Commanded
upon pain of Death that the Popes Beneficyal Provisions should not be received
within his Kingdom. The Pope wrote to the King, showing sorrow for it, desiring
he would forbear. The King answered beseeching the Pope to Reform the things
which were a shame to the Church, and a scandal to the People: adding further
that his Predecessors had Enriched the Churches, which by the Provisions and
Impositions of Rome are Possessed by Strangers and unworthy men, contrary to
the mind and intention of the Testators, whereby the Kingdom also became
weakened, That the Pope ought to feed and not shear the Sheep, that heretofore
the Kings gave the Benefices, that they have granted the Election unto the
Clergy, upon the Popes Petition, and now the Popes will take away the Election
introduced by them, N. 181.
and usurp it to themselves. Wherefore 'twill be convenient to return to the
first Institution, that Benefices are to be conferred by Princes.

This Contention which lasted while the Pope was living, was occasion that
Innocent the 6th Successor to Clement revoked all his Reservations, by a
Constitution of his, which begins: PASTORALIS. The same at present is not to be
found, but many famous Canonists make mention of it, the like has happened to
many others, whereby the Abuses, and the Usurpations would be made manifest, as
in like manner all things were taken out of the Glosses, which favored not the
Court, but the expurgatory Index's made with the Doctors show worse, besides
the fitting them for his Interests or purposes before they were exposed to the
Press.

But few years after they were restored again, wherefore Edward An. 1373, sent
an Ambassador to Gregory the 11th, at Avignon, making Instance that the
Reservations should be quite annulled. The Business was taken in hand, N. 182.
which lasted two years, at last in the year 1375, the Pope Annulled them
totally.

But he being dead, the beginning of the great Schism happened in the year
1378, by which there being two Popes, there were also two Roman Courts, and the
Expenses or Charges were Duplicated, and those also were much greater than
Ordinary, through the necessities of spending which the Popes had for the
Persecuting of one another, and for the defending themselves against one
another, whereby each of them set on foot all the ways imaginable for the
raising of Money, and Simony was most manifest in each of the Courts, Benefices
being freely sold, and they took all they could out of the Hands of the
Ordinaries.

The Roman Court had not openly discovered it self until this time, for they
aimed at nothing else but at Money, of all their undertakings the Cause was
rendered with some appearance or show of providing better for the Churches than
the Ordinaries did, or else of providing some deserving Person with a Benefice.
But Urban the 6th declared himself why 'twas introduced into Benefices with
Ordaining, N. 183.
that the Impetration should be Invalid, if mention were not made of the value
of the Benefice. Heretofore the Benefice was chiefly given for Spiritual
things, the Temporals became Accessories, then of the Spirituals there was no
mention made, the Charge or Office was not Considered; but the Emolument.

The same Institution lasted also unto our days, and Authority being given to
Nuncio's, to Confer some of the lesser Benefices, by the value of the Incomes
it is determined which are the great, and which are the little ones: And in the
Reservation of Monasteries there is no care of the Spiritual, those are
Reserved which exceed the value of 200 Crowns, and the inferior ones left free.
This serves to the end, the Chamber may receive the Annata or Fruits more
exactly, for if two men impetrate one Benefice, and one of them expresses the
value to be greater than the other, the Bulls or Papal Breives of him that
expressed the less, will be in vain, and those of the greater will be attained.

Some say this is an exposing it to a sale or outcry, and giving to whom bids
most, others say it is to the end the Chamber may not be defrauded of its
Right, N. 184.
but this Consideration belongs to the Chapter of First Fruits.

Coming back to the time of the Schism, no man denies but the Disorders in the
Roman Courts were great, which increased also the more, because some Kingdoms
and Provinces, Scandalized at such various and different Methods, they reduced
themselves to acknowledge neither of the two Popes, whereupon it behooved them
to raise and receive from those which remained, as much as from all.

Germany refused to remain Subject to the Reservations and Expectancies or
Reversions, and the Ordinaries Conferred Benefices without any Regard to the
Ordinances of Rome. On the Contrary Innocent the 7th for this Cause in the year
1359, sent a Legate into Germany, to give new Bulls or Papal Letters to those
who were gotten in by the Episcopal Collation, paying them for them, and to
cause them to make Composition for the Fruits received, leaving some part unto
the Chamber, N. 185.
but by this means much Money being like to go out of Germany, the Emperor
Charles the 4th opposed it, and Prohibited the Extraction, saying, 'twas
requisite to Reform the Customs of the Clergy, not the Purses. All these
Confusions increased more and more when there came on the third Pope in the
year 1409, to whom although the French did adhere, and yielded Obedience,
nevertheless they stuck close to one of the Kings Edicts made 3 years before,
by which they Prohibited the Reservations, the First Fruits, and other
exactions of the Court, until that by a Lawful general Council might be
provided for.

The King was not very Capable of the Government, but Lewis Duke of Orleans who
Governed him, was Author of all the Edicts, wherefore he being Killed 'twas
easy for Pope John the 23d to regain Authority for Conferring Benefices in
France, giving to the King, to the Queen, to the Dolphin, and to the House of
Burgundy, the nomination of most of their Servants, and then prevailing with
the Remainder, preserved it until the Death of that King, wherefore Charles the
7th his Son who Succeeded him, N. 186.
renewed the Edicts.

In Italy also there were made several Provisions by diverse States in different
manners, all which tended to take away the Abuses. Baldus testifies that as
much as the Bologneses made Beneficyal Provisions, and Particularly Ordained
that they should not be Conferred, saving only upon the Natives of that City,
and of the Country belonging to it, neither were the Popes much esteemed by
them, for John the 23d being in Florence with his Court, a certain disorder
arose about the Collation of a Benefice, for which that Commonwealth deprived
him of the Power of Conferring Benefices in their State for five years.

In these times were invented inextricable Clauses to be put into Bulls, as
making a difference between Petitions Signed by Concessum, and those which are
Signed by Fiat, between the dispatches with the Clause Motu Proprio with
others, New tricks and devices sound out.
and the Clause Anteferri, which makes the better Conditions, from which
Invention several Bulls were Obtained upon the said Benefice, N. 187.
and besides the more Fruits paid, there arose Lawsuits also, which were to be
handled at Rome, with the Benefit of the Court. There was added, the
Constituting of another Antagonist at Law, if he dyed, that the end of him
might not be the end of the Lawsuit, but by his Death there was taken or
received another years Revenue, and the Continuation of the Lawsuit, which
Multiplying also, the Clauses were invented, Si alteri: Si neutri: Si nulli:
Whereby the Benefice was given to a third man also, but only during the
Lawsuit or Contest of the two first, which Constrained Princes, for the
Removing of Confusions, Disorders, and Contentions amongst their Subjects, to
bring back to the Secular Bar, or Court, the Cognizance of the Possessorio of
the Benefices, a thing, which although Legitimate, had been by the Connivance
of Princes taken away from the Secular Magistrates, and Assumed by the
Ecclesiastical Court.

From the Provisions which were made by some Princes to stop the new
Introductions into matters Beneficial within their Dominions, N. 188.
the Court took occasion to invent others, as well to work the same Effects
under other Pretexts, as to Multiply methods whereby they might do, and
therewith supply what they could not do, where Provision was made.

In these times Resignations were found out, not good and Commendable ones,
Resignations.
for they are very Ancient, but certain others, which the World at present
Commends not.

It was never Lawful for him, who was put into an Ecclesiastical Charge, to
leave it of his own Authority, and it was very agreeable that he who had
dedicated himself to a Ministry, and had received the Reward for it, which was
the Benefice, should persevere Administering, nevertheless for some Lawful
Causes it might happen to be necessary, or at least for the Public, or for the
Private good, that some one might divest himself of it, 'twas introduced for a
Custom that it might be, and with the Authority of the Superior for some Lawful
Cause, he may renounce; and the Causes wherein 'twas practiced were, if through
Infirmity of mind or of Body, or became incapable by old Age, N. 189.
or if by enmity of Potent Persons on the place, he could not make his
Residency without Danger. When the Renunciation was received by the Bishop, the
Benefice was esteemed as Vacant, and he to whom the Collation belonge'd
Conferred it in the same manner, as if it had been Vacant by Death. The
Renunciat was introduced in these times, not for any urgent Cause, but only to
bring to pass that the Benefice might be Conferred upon one nominated by the
Renunciator, and as unto a new thing, it behooved also to give it a new Name,
calling it Resignatio ad favorem, because it was only made to favor the
Resignation, that he might have the Benefice, it is indeed at the Superiors
Liberty, to receive the Renunciation or not, but he cannot receive it, but by
giving the Benefice to the Person Nominated.

Although this was a way for introducing Hereditary Succession unto Benefices,
and therefore Dammageable unto the Ecclesiastical Order, N. 190.
it proved more profitable to the Court, by how much the more frequently the
Benefice was Conferred, and by it the First Fruits Received. Covetousness and
other Worldly Affections taught many to crave for, and to receive Benefices,
not with a mind to continue in them, but with thoughts of enjoying them until
they could obtain better, or else until some design of Marriage, or other kind
of Life were brought about, or else until some Youth might come of Age, at
which he might afterward renounce, a thing which by Pious men was never
excused, and it is held for a Common Opinion, that whosoever receives a Benefice
with a design of Renouncing it, cannot with a good Conscience receive the
Fruits, which some of a larger Conscience, they do not mean so generally of
all, but of those only who do it with an intent to forsake the Clerical Order.

As for Renouncings ad Favorem, which became Emoluments to the Receiver, the
Court that the Fruit might be all its own, Prohibited the Bishops from
receiving such Renouncings, and reserved that the Pope of Rome only was able to
do it. N. 191.


And because many Beneficed men when they felt themselves near unto Death, made
themselves a Successor by such a way, 'twas Ordained by a Rule of Chancery,
that the Renouncing made in favor of another, by a sick Beneficed man should
not be of value, unless the Renouncer Survived twenty days after Consent
granted.

In these times the Fountain of the Oblations of the Faithful, seemed to be
drained or lessened already while the War of the Holy Land lasted, and
afterward for some years, whilst there was hopes that it might be renewed,
through which means much Gold came unto the Ecclesiastical Order, but all hopes
being lost, the Oblations were stopped: Nevertheless Example was taken by this
work, and the giving Indulgences, Remissions, and Concessions introduced for
those who would lay hold on, and Contribute thereunto by some good and Pious
work, for daily there were new works Instituted for each City, N. 192.
for which Indulgence was granted from Rome; this brought forth much Fruit to
the Clerical Order, and to the Court which did partake of it, and this went so
far that in the year 1517, there sprang up in Germany the Novelty which every
one knows. Helping hand
Pope Pius the 5th Provided for our Age by a Constitution, whereby he Annulled
all the Indulgences granted by the Clause of Helping-hands, that is, with
Obligation to offer Money, a thing which has not yet stopped the Course of this
Harvest.

For although Indulgences are now given without that Condition, nevertheless in
Churches are set forth Chests, and Trunks, and the People believe no Pardon to
be Obtained, unless they Offer.

But returning to these years of the Schism, for what Concerns the gaining or
acquiring of new Incomes, and settled Estates for the Churches, the hope seemed
to be quite lost. The Monks already had no more Credit of Holiness, the
Fervency of the Sacred Militia not only Lukewarm, but Extinct. The Friars
Mendicants, (for all were instituted after the year 1200) had therefore Credit,
N. 193.
because they had totally divested themselves of the Power of Purchasing
Estates, and made a vow to live upon Oblations only, and Alms; whereby it
appeared that the Augmentation of settled Estates would Cease, but a good way
was found out, which was the granting to the Mendicant Friars by a Privilege
from the Apostolic See, to be able to purchase Estates, which by Vow and by
Institution was Forbidden them, many of their devout Persons were most ready to
Enrich them, there wanted nothing but the manner how, this found out,
immediately the Convents of Mendicants in Italy, Spain, and other Kingdoms were
become very Commodious in Estates within a short time. France only Opposed this
Novelty, saying, that as they were come into the Kingdom with those
Institutions of Poverty, it behooved they should persevere in the same, neither
would they suffer them hitherto to purchase, whereas in some other places their
Acquisitions have been very Notable, chiefly in the times of the Schism, N. 194.
when all the Remainder of the Clerical Order were in small Credit.

The Schism of the Council of Constance was raised, one of the Popes having
renounced, and the other two being deprived, and Martin the 5th was Elected in
Council, Anno. 1417, all were in hopes, that by the Council, and by the Pope
all these disorders in Beneficial matters would be Regulated, and indeed the
Council proposed to the Pope the Articles for Reforming the Reservations, the
First Fruits, the Favors, the Expectancies, or Reversions, the Commendings and
the Collationings, but the new Pope and the Court desiring to return home, and
all the Fathers of the Council being weary of the long Absence from their
Houses, the treating of a matter so difficult which required so much time, was
easily put off till the next Council, which was intimated to be Celebrated in
Pavia five years after, which moved the French to be unwilling to expect a new
Council, wherefore 'twas ordered by a Decree of the Parliament, that no
Obedience should be yielded to the Pope, unless the Kings Edict were first
Intimated and accepted by him, which Edict took away the Reservations, N. 195.
and the Exactions of Money, therefore Martin having sent a Nuncio to give the
King an Account of his Election, the King answered, he would have accepted it
upon Condition that Elective Benefices were Conferred by Election, and the
Reservations and the Reversions were taken away.

The Pope was Content for that time, but in the year 1422, having gained the
favor of some of the University, he endeavored to cause the Reservations to
be received, however he could not obtain his intent, and they proceeded against
his Promoters by Imprisonment. The Pope laid the Interdiction at Lions, and the
Parliament Ordered it should not be served, and the Contention lasted until the
year 1424, when the King Compounded with the Pope, that his Holiness should
have the Collations until that time for Lawful, and for the future all Commands
should be received; But the Attorney and the Advocate General with many of the
Lords Opposed the Execution of it, and having Represented to the King the
damage of the Kingdom, they made this Agreement with the King, to vanish into
Smoke.

In this Interval the Council of Ravia was held, which after begun, N. 196.
was transferred to Siena, and dispatched with great Celerity, nothing of
moment being Treated therein, but only hope given that in the Council to be
Celebrated seven years after at Basel, all should be Reformed. At the end of
which seven years Martin dyed, and Eugenius the 4th Succeeded in the Popedom,
under whom in the Council of Basel Anno. 1431, the so much necessary and
desired Provision was made against disorders in matters of Benefices; the
Reservations were Prohibited except the Vacanti in Curia, the Reversions, the
First Fruits, and all other Exactions of the Court were also Prohibited.

The Pope seeing his Power restrained, and his Wealth not able to Support, he
Opposed the Council, he endeavored to transfer it elsewhere, to a place where
he might manage the Prelates, which being repugnant to them, he could not
Succeed, and many Contentions past between the Pope and the Council, wherein
Pious men Interposing themselves by daily Labor, found out a Medium, N. 197.
but at last being fully resolved to provide against Extorsions of Money, and
the Pope to preserve his Authority, and Convenience, they came to an
irreconcilable Breach. The Pope Annulled the Council, the Council deprived the
Pope, and chose another, whereupon a Schism grew in the Church. That Council
was accepted in France and in Germany, and in the year 1438, 1438.
there was Published in France that Famous Pragmatica, whereby the Elections
were restored to the Chapters, and the Collations to the Ordinaries, and
Reservations were forbidden as in the Council of Basel. That Council was not
received in Italy, where all adhered to the Pope, so that Reservations took
footing, and every Pope renewed them without difficulty, and Introduced new
Grievances besides in the Collation of Benefices, none of them ever moderating
himself, unless when a Method was found to work the same Effect by an easier
way: Julius the 2d. and Leo the 10th introduced Mental Reservations, which they
so called, and by another name, Reservations in the Breast, which were not made
public like the rest, neither were they known, N. 198.
unless when a Benefice became Vacant, if the Ordinary Conferred it, or if any
one went to crave it, the Datary answered, that the Pope had reserved it in his
mind, a method or fashion which lasted some years, but then 'twas left off,
because it became incommodious to the Court of Rome also. All other methods
were carried on to excess, for as touching Resignations in Favorem introduced
heretofore, and practiced, there was added the Resigning the Title only of the
Benefice, reserving to himself all the Fruits thereof, which in existence was
nothing else, but remaining Patron of the Benefice just as before it was
renounced, he Constituting to himself a Successor, who was in Name Titular,
before the Death of the Renouncer, but in Fact he had no Right, and that the
new Titular Person (who having a mind to gather the Fruits for the behoof of
the Renouncer) might not make himself Master of any thing, there was added
also, that not only all the Fruits were Reserved to the Renouncer, N. 199.
but also that he might exact them by his own Authority.

There was nothing which might make the Resignator different from the entire
Patron, but that if in Case the Titular dyed before him, all the Fruits of the
Benefice remained to him, but he could no more create himself a Successor, and
the Title might be given by the Collator to whom he pleased that should Succeed
after the Renouncers Death.

The Court wanted not for an Excellent Remedy for this likewise, which was the
Regress. Regress.


In the Primitive times of the Church there was a Holy and a Commendable
Custom, that when a man was appointed to a Church, he never left his Charge in
all his Life, for to have a Benefice of greater Income or of greater Honor; it
seemed enough for every one to perform the best of his Office; sometimes for
necessity, when there was not a fit Person for a great Charge, the Superior
took one who was Occupied in a Less, N. 200.
and by Obedience transferred him to the Greater, a thing which afterward was
sought after by some, either for greater Commodiousness or for Profit, whereby
the Translation which was unusual, became most Customary, and the Solicitation
of every one was such, to raise his Degree, that oftentimes having left that in
Possession, and impetrated for another, his Impetration proving vicious, he has
been deprived of both, which being inconvenient, Custom obtained, that if the
Impetration of the second place could not take Effect, the Person Beneficyed
might return to the first without more ado, and this was called the Regress.
Regress.


In like manner to this there was invented the granting a Faculty to the
Resignant, that whenever the Resignatory should dye or Renounce the Title, he
might without more ado return to the Resigned Benefice, and by his own
Authority take Possession anew, and make it his own as if he had never
renounced it; and if he should not have taken to himself the first Possession
of the Renouncement (in which case the Regress cannot take place) he may by
Access, N. 201.
and by Ingress take Possession likewise by his own Authority, without any
other Ministry of the Judge, and this is called a Regress. Therefore the
receiving and the admitting the Renouncements upon these Conditions, and
therewith to give Title to the Resignatory, has never been permitted by the
Pope of Rome to others, but has reserved it to himself only. This Method was
Condemned by all the Writers, chiefly by the University of France, and
Prohibited by the Parliament, neither could it be covered with any fair Pretext
of Antiquity, wherefore there were some who made a Conscience and were ashamed
to use it, for whose satisfaction there was found out another of an Ancient
Original, but according to Custom fitted for the present Occasions. Coadjutors.


This was the Coadjutory, a most Ancient and a most Commendable Custom there
was in the Churches, that when any Minister, or Prelate, or other became unable
or less fit to perform his Charge through old Age, or by Infirmity of Mind or
of Body, or for other Cause he took to himself, N. 202.
or the Superior gave him an Assistant, who together with him might bear the
Burden, but he had nothing to do with the Office or Benefice, but whilst he
lived, whose Coadjutor he was, who being Dead, a new Titular one was made.

This Provision was always Commended, and never was any Opposition made
against it.

Afterward 'twas Considered, that if it were Ordered, that the Coadjutor might
Succeed, a greater Benefit would arise; First he would be more diligent in
managing a thing which was to be his own, others would love him, and would
repute him more as their own, than another; upon which the Coadjutor was made
with a Succession to come, a thing which had Defenders and Opposers. 'Twas
Opposed by saying, that every Succession in Ecclesiastical Benefices is
Condemnable, it offers Occasion of procuring or desiring another man's Death.

'Twas defended with the Famous Example of St. Augustine, who by Valerius his
Predecessor was made Coadjutor with future Succession, N. 203.
which Example serves not very well, because St. Augustine himself blames it
afterward, and would not follow it, and was not ashamed to say that it was
done by him and by his Predecessor out of Ignorance. But in the times we speak
of, they not only gave Coadjutors with future Succession, unto Prelates, and to
others which have Administration, but also in single Benefices, where is no
need of being Assisted, so that the Coadjutor retains only the Name, there
being nothing Real, but the future Succession, which is a thing so abhorred by
the Canons.

'Twas practiced or used in these times, that whatsoever Beneficyary who would
make himself a Successor indifferently according to his different pleasure, or
make a Coadjutor with a future Succession, or resign in his favor reserving to
himself the Fruits, and with Regress, but yet this was Reserved to the Pope
only, and in no wise granted to other Collators.

The Council of Basile was received in Germany by some, and by others not, and
therefore Beneficyal Causes were differently understood. N. 204.
To provide against the Diversities and Dissentions 'twas agreed in the year
1448 between Nicolas the 5th, and Frederick the Emperor in this manner, that
Benefices Vacant in Curia should be reserved to the Pope, and for the Remainder
of the Elective Benefices, they should proceed by Election; As for others,
those Vacant in six Months should be the Popes, in the other six they should be
distributed by the Ordinary Collators, adding also that if the Pope had not in
the term of three Months Conferred those which belonged to him, the Collation
should devolve to the Ordinaries. The Agreement was received throughout all
Germany, and until the year 1518, some Diocesses observed the Council of
Basile, which annulled all Reservations. But in Progress of time, those also
who received the Agreement at the beginning, forbore to observe it afterward,
and excused themselves, saying, that the Agreement was not generally received,
and has lost its force through disuse, so that (we treat not of those Cities
where the Bishops and Chapters are departed from the Roman Church) but also in
the Churches which remain under Obedience, little or nothing was observed.

Clement the 7th, in the year 1534 made a severe Bull, N. 205.
but it took but little Effect. In the year 1576 Gregory the 8th made another
without better Success. In the Diet at Ratisbone Anno. 1594, 1576.
Cardinal Mudrutius a Legate of Pope Clement the 8th, made a great Querimony
about this in the name of the Pope, no Fruit appeared. At present there remains
the same variety and Confusion; The Romon Court has but two Remedies only, one
by the means of the Confessions of Jesuits, which work by terms of Conscience,
that Beneficyaries provided by Ordinaries, are Content to take the Bulls from
Rome, and some do it; the other Remedy used by the Court but in Benefices of
Importance and with Persons partly depending on them, is, that an Election or a
Collation being made contrary to the Agreement, the Court annull's it, but
afterward Confer's it on the same Person, N. 206.
a Remedy much used heretofore upon other occasions also, not because it helps
at that very time, but because keeping those Writings, they make use of them in
Succeeding times, to show that they had Obedience; as so many other Decretals
which took no Effect, are nevertheless in the Decretal Books for the same
design.

In France the Pragmatica was rigidly contested by Pius the 2d, which the
French Clergy and the University of Paris opposed Constantly, wherefore the
Pope turned himself unto Lewis the 11th, showing him how it was unseemly to
him, that in his Kingdom they should observe the Decrees of the Council of
Basel, against which he being the Royal first born, departed from the Father
out of distaste, went with Arms, received Moneys from Pope Eugenius the 4th to
disturb the Council; for which Reasons King Lewis Anno. 1461, Pragmatick
Sanction revoked.
Revoked the Pragmatica and made it to cease, but there following a Reclamation
of the University, and Remonstrances from the Parliament, which are yet to be
found, N. 207.
wherein they represented to the King, the grievances of the Kingdom, and of
the Ecclesiastical Order, with an Account made up distinctly, And restored.
that in three years, four Millions were gone to Rome for Beneficyal Causes.
Three years after the Pragmatica was restored by the same King. Sixtus the 4th
then opposed him, and made an Agreement to destroy it, which is still to be
found, but they would not receive it, and the Pragmatica remained. Innocent the
8th, Alexander the 6th and Julius the 2d used all means to Abolish it, but
could never Obtain it; Finally Leo the 10th made an Agreement with King Francis
the First, And taken away again.
by which the Pragmatica was taken away, and 'twas Ordered that the Power of
Choosing Bishops and Abbots should be quite taken away from the Chapters of
Cathedral Churches, and from the Conventuals, but Bishoprics and Abbeys
becoming Vacant, the King might name a fit Person, on whom the Pope was to
Confer the Benefice.

That the Pope of Rome could not give Reversions, nor make general or special
Reservations, but that Benefices becoming Vacant in four Months of the year,
should be Conferred by the Ordinaries on the Graduates of the Universities, N.
208.
and the Vacants in the other eight Months, might be freely Conferred by the
said Ordinaries, only that every Pope in his life time may Charge any Collator
of Benefices to Confer one according to the disposal of his Holiness, in case
there are to be Conferred between Ten, and Fifty, and if there be above Fifty
or more he may Confer two; and although there were many Difficulties in
Accepting the Agreement, and the University appealed to the next Lawful
Council, nevertheless the Authority and the Vtility of King Francis overcame,
and the Agreement was Proclaimed in France, and put in Execution. In such
manner that after so many Popes from the year 1076 unto 1150, strove by the
Excommunicating an infinite number of Persons, and by the Death of Innumerable
more to take from Princes the Conferring of Bishoprics, and giving the
Election to the Chapters; contrary-wise Pius the 2d with five of his Successors
have striven to take the Election from the Chapters of France, and give it to
the King, and Leo the 10th did obtain it at last; N. 209.
Thus the Alteration of Interests bear along with it the Change and Contrariety
of Doctrine.

Some Speculative men have accounted the Reason of this to be, because the
Example that the Bishop and the Clergy might Confer, may keep alive the
Practice, and the most general Doctrine of the Church, Contrary to the Modern;
others because it is still more easy to take it out of the hands of a King,
who may be of a weak Spirit, or may stand in need of the Pope, than from the
Bishops and Clergy.

King Francis made many Laws besides to regulate the Possessory of Benefices,
and the Agreement was observed by him, but the Execution was interrupted for
some years by his Son Henry the 2d, when he was in War with Pope Julius the 3d,
because of Parma; wherefore in the year 1550, the King Prohibited that any
Provision of the Popes Benefices should be received, and Commanded that all
should be conferred by the Ordinaries; but Peace being made, all was Composed,
and the Observance of the Agreement returned.

But in the year 1560, the States were held at Orleans in Charles the 9th's
Minority, where the Collations of Benefices were regulated, N. 210.
and many things abolished which were Contained in the Agreement. Great
Confusions and Wars happened in the Kingdom, and the Cardinal of Ferrara was
sent Legate into France, who Obtained that the Ordinances of Orleans should be
superseded, with a Promise that the Pope within a short time should provide
against the Abuses, for which the Ordinances were made, of which nothing was
done afterward, so that now the Concordate remains; Thus went the Affairs in
Germany and in France.

But the State of Italy which we have lately described, was greatly altered by
the Celebration of the Council of Trent, which made several Decrees on this
Matter, to provide against the Abuses abovesaid then reigning, and although
from its beginning, which was in the year 1547, it began to attend these
Corrections, and made many Decrees which were not put in Execution until after
the end of it, which was Anno. 1563, wherefore it may be said, that all the
Provisions are to be referred unto this time. N. 211.
'Twas the Intent of this Council to remedy three things; First the Plurality
of Benefices; Secondly, 1 Pluralities 2 Hereditary Succession. 3 Absence.
Hereditary Succession; Thirdly, the Absence of Beneficiated men, and to
Prohibit all kind of Plurality, 'twas Ordained that one, although he were a
Cardinal, could not have more than one Benefice, but if that were so small that
it might not serve or be sufficient for the Expenses of the Beneficyed, he
might have one more, which was therefore to be without Cure of Souls: It
Prohibited the Commendum's of Benefices, Curati ad Vitam, which was a Pretense
to make a man Obtain two; it Ordained also that Monasteries for the future
should not be Commended, and those that were so till then, when they became
Vacant should be reduced into a Title; It Prohibited also the Unions ad Vitam
which was another pretext of giving diverse Benefices under the name of one; It
Prohibited totally the Regresses, and the Accesses to take away Succession; It
Prohibited also the Coadjutorships with future Succession, absolutely,
excepting in Cathedrals, and Monasteries, wherein was Admonished, N. 212.
that they should not be granted by the Pope but for just Causes, but the
Prohibition is without Effect.

In the 14 last months Residency was treated with some Contention; Residency.
because there was sprung up a Question among the Doctors a little before,
whether the Residency of Bishops and of other Curates in their Churches were de
Jure Divino, or Canonick, for which cause the Council was divided in such a
manner, that in April Anno 1562. a Scrutiny being made of the number of both
Parties, there 67 found whose Opinion 'twas de Jure Divino, 33, who opinion'd
it to be de Jure Positivo, and 30, who were of Opinion that this Point ought
not to be decided without first treating with the Pope. Of the first number
were the Northern men and other cast-off Bishops, on the Second and the third
the Dependents on the Court. If Residency should have been made de Jure Divino,
it would follow that the Pope could not have been able to dispense it, but that
the Authority of the Bishop also would have been de Jure Divino, and no man was
able to restrain it, N. 213.
these were things which Squinted at the Depression of the Courts Greatness,
wherefore the Opinion was Maintained by both Parties with much boldness; The
Business came to Practices, so that after fourteen months Residency was
Commanded, yet not declared quo Jure the Curate should be Obliged, only
Penalties were enjoined upon non-Residents, as to other things, they were left
in their first Estate or Condition, but those who were at the Council, and have
left any works especially of Divinity, have Maintained Residency to be de Jure
Divino, proceeding so far, that to affirm the Contrary, they esteemed it a
deluding of the Holy Scripture, and natural Reason it self, and all Antiquity,
but not to provoke the Court against its self, they have found out Exceptions
by which the Pope may make us Dispensations.

The Council spoke not of Reservations chiefly, Reservations.
(which were increased above measure) because they Concerned the Popes own
Person, N. 214.
wherefore they still remained; yea they were Increased afterward. It seemed
that in taking away the Unions, and the Commendums ad Vitam, the Regresses and
the Coadjutorships were in a great share proceeded if not totally, yet the
greatest part; however a speedy Remedy was found out which not only did the
same, but much more, yea greater than the four above named, Pension.
and that was the Pension. It Is an observation of Godly men, that in those
times the Court would never be induced that a gainful Abuse should be Abolished
or Corrected, until it had prepared a greater and a more profitable one, but in
this it is very certain to be so; and therefore it is to be observed, that it is
not a thing of these our times only, the laying a Pension upon Benefices, only
the manner is new, and the frequency is peculiar to our times.

When the Church Goods were in Common, the name was unheard of, after the Rule
or Canon practiced by all was made, that Benefices should be Conferred entirely
and without Diminution. N. 215.


After that the Clergy among themselves gave a beginning of going to Law with
them, when the Cause was doubtful, one side yielding up his Rights, if a part
of the Incomes was granted him with the name of a Pension: Likewise if two
Beneficyaries for some good Respect with Authority of the Superior should
interchange Benefices, if the Incomes were not equal, they patched up that with
a Pension, which the Richest left.

Afterward also when any one Resigned with License of the Prelate, Pensions.
a Pension was left him, on which he might live. There are Popes Decretals of
these three sorts of Pensions, which were about the year 1200. And these sorts
the French admit of also by Jurisdictions, refusing to admit of the others,
which are those that are given only to afford a livelihood to one, to another
because he is well-deserving from the Apostolic See, to another because he is
Learned, or because he is of a gentile Behavior, or because he has served the
Church or the Prelate, also because he has the Popes favor only; N. 216.
Also to a Youth, because his Genius presages a good event or Success; All
these are just Causes say the Canonists, why Pensions may be given, and they
have no Regard to add, that without any Cause the Pope may give a Pension upon
any Benefice, to any Person he shall think fit, and he that receives likewise
without any Cause, but out of the Popes good Will only, with a safe Conscience.
Now therefore instead that two Cured Benefices were held, one in Title, the
other in Commendum, were United ad Vitam, and the Party Beneficyed was forced
to allow a stipend to him that served in one of them, at present it is given to
him in Title, and to himself for a Pension the same which he takes, and it
turns to the same, yea to his greater Advantage, because he was Subject to give
Account of the Errors which his Substitute had Committed, and there was some
necessity for his taking care of it, but thus nothing lies upon him, and the
Profit is the same.

In the like manner he that made a Coadjutor, N. 217.
or renounced with a Regress, ought to take some Care of the Benefice of which
he had a share, and the which might become all his own, but renouncing, with
reserving a Pension to himself, he remains free from all Care and thoughts, and
if the Resignatory dies or yields up, it concerns him not, he has his Pension
free, and without Molestation.

Moreover it is more Profitable to have a Pension, than a Benefice; first many
Benefices require Holy Orders, and the Age of being able to receive them, as
for the Pension, the first shaving is sufficient, and sometimes the Age of
seven years. Besides Pensions are given to Laymen also, as Commonly to the
Knights of St. Peter, Instituted by Leo the 10th, and to those of St. Paul
Instituted by Paul the 3d, and to the Pious Knights, Instituted by Pius the
4th, and to those of Loreto, Instituted by Sixtus the 5th, which may have, some
150, some 200 Crowns Pension, and to whomsoever the Pope pleases; Again of
Benefices, in the times when he that held more than one, there was always some
fault found with him, or they had a saying to him, and a Dispensation was
necessary, which caused some Expenses, notwithstanding this, the Doctors put it
in doubt, whether a man Secured himself in Conscience, N. 218.
or no. Pensions may be had to any number without Scruple, and there is no
Pension Incompatible. A Pension may be given with Authority, to transfer it to
another according to ones own Will and Pleasure, a thing which cannot be in
Benefices without passing through the Bounds, and through the Ceremonies of
Renouncing, and Renouncings were invalid, unless the Resignatory survived
twenty days, but the Pension might be transferred also at the Point of Death.

That which chiefly Imports is, that the Pension may be Extinguished, which in
Italian signifies to make a Sum of Money of it, for every Contract made about a
Benefice, is accounted as Simony.

To extinguish a Pension, signifies nothing else, but to receive a quantity of
Money, to free the Beneficyary from paying the Pension, which quantity is Taxed
by Agreement, according to the greater or to the lesser Age of the Pensionary.

Formerly before our Age, N. 219.
there was no way to make ready Money of a Benefice, that would have been with
an Infinite Offense before God, and before men; now it is done Lawfully. I have
a Benefice of 200 Crowns. I renounce it unto Antony, reserving to my self a
Pension of 100 which I extinguish as soon as 700 are received, that is, I
renounce it, and so have made of my Benefice 700 Crowns ready Money without
sin. Some are so little Penetrating, that this circling about, seems to them to
be the same, as if I should sell my Benefice for 700 Crowns, but they show a
gross Judgment. There are many other things wherein the Pension is much more
Commodious, as is used at present in Unions, in Commendums, in Coadjutorships,
and in Regresses.

Some Magnifying the Commodiousness of making Money, which the Pope has for
the necessities of the Apostolic See, do say that if he should open the
Regresses, he might raise as much as he would, and they show they understand
not matter of Benefices, there would not be a Farthing gotten by this; The
Pension is much more useful and Commodious, wherefore 'twas easy to execute
the Council, because it became Convenient likewise; N. 220.
but the raising Monasteries with Commendums which the Council Commanded in
like manner, has not been put in Execution hitherto, but many which were in
Title have been Commended anew, there being no way found out to do it
Commodiously.

The Pension cannot be Imposed by any, but by the Pope only, a thing of a great
Emolument to the Court of Rome.

This Alteration has Italy made for the Council of Trent, which having not
Treated of Reservations, and those being also increased, and are every day
increasing, there remaing of the Benefices in Italy at the Popes Disposal, with
good hopes that the Sixth which remains may be to Complete the Whole.

By the Rules of Chancery all the Benefices are Reserved to the Pope, which
John the 22d and Benedict the 12th reserved to themselves, and afterward all
those Obtained by any Person being an Officer of the Court, N. 221.
although it were after he was gone out of Office. All the Patriarchies,
Arch-Bishopricks, Bishoprics and Monasteries of men are also reserved, which
exceed the value of 200 Gold Florins, and also all Benefices belonging to the
Collation of whomsoever, and becoming Vacant by the Cession, by Privation, or
by the Death of the Collator, until that the Successor shall have taken quiet
Possession: Also the Chiefest Dignities after the Pontifical in Cathedral
Churches, and the Principal Dignities in Collegiate Churches, Priories,
Prepositures, and other Conventual Dignities, the Preceptories of all the
Orders, excepting Military, the Benefices of all the Popes Familiar
Acquaintance, and of every Cardinals, although they be no more in their
Service, or because they be gone away, or because the Cardinal is Dead, also
all the Benefices of the Collectors and Sub-Collectors, all the Benefices of
the Roman Courtiers, which dye in a Journey when the Court Travels, all the
Benefices of Chamberlaing and Cursori, N. 222.
besides all these Benefices which Comprehend all the Chiefest, and a great
part of the rest, the Pope Reserves to himself all Benefices of any kind
whatever, which become Vacant in eight Months of the year, leaving only four
Months unto others, and this as touching other Benefices not above named.

Besides these, there are reserved also by a Constitution of Pope Pius the 5th,
all the Benefices becoming Vacant for Cause of Heresy, or for Confidence, and
all those which shall not be Conferred according to the Decree of the Council
of Trent; He that shall put together all these Reservations, will find that at
the least 6/5 ths are the Popes, and th belongs to all the other Collators
together.

To give Commendations to whom they are due, the Diligence used by the Popes of
Rome is not to be omitted, not to suffer that the Bishops and other Collators
of Benefices should give place to any Abuse, they never permitted them the
Power to unite Benefices ad Vitam, neither the Commendings ad Vitam, N. 223.
they have not permitted that they could dispense upon a Plurality of
Incompatibles, nor to grant Regresses or Coadjutorships with a future
Succession, and using the same Diligence at present, they do not give leave
that a Pension though but small, shall be laid upon the Benefice; In like
manner they do not admit that they may receive the Resignations ad Favorem, but
in receiving the absolute Resignations which have been used most Anciently in
the Church, Pope Pius the 5th Anno. 1568, Prohibited under most grievous
Penalties all Ordinaries which having received the Resignment of a Benefice,
from Conferring it on any Kinsman, Relation, or familiar Acquaintance, or
friend of the Resignant, Obverting, that neither by Words nor by Signs or
other Shows, they should have Demonstration of another Person to whom the
Resignant had a desire the Collation of the Benefice should be made.

It Is Constantly Affirmed by all Canonists and Casuists, that every Contract in
matter of Benefice is Simoniacal, if it be made without the Popes
Participation, but with his Intervention every thing is Legitimate, N. 224.
holding for Constant this general Proposition, which is, that the Pope in
Beneficial matters cannot Commit Simony, which gives no very good Edification
to the World, yet the most Modest Canonists do limit it, distinguishing some
kind of Simony to be forbidden by Divine Law, and another by the Law of man,
adding that the Pope only is exempt from Committing Simony forbidden by Humane
Law: But notwithstanding this, they stumble upon the same Difficulties, because
that which is not evil by its own Nature, nor forbidden by God, deserves not
this name, and it is superfluous to make a Humane Law not to observe it, and he
that shall look into it, and not make himself a Pretext with Words, shall see,
that all is forbidden by God, and certainly it cannot be said, that in this
Part of holding the other Bishops in Office, the Pope should have failed, and
it has been a very great Grace of God shown to the Popes, that they have been
able to keep the Remainder of the Church sincere from Simony, N. 225.
and yet they have not been able to extend this good to themselves, nor to
their Court; And if one day, as there is hopes, that it may come into some good
Popes mind to Reform the Court, it would be a most easy thing to do it, only
by receiving those Laws for himself, which are given to other Bishops; and we
might shortly expect such a Profitable Reformation, if Flattery kept it not off
at a distance, by Proposing to the Popes, that they being in Possession at
leastwise in Italy and in a few other places, were not Subject to any Rule, it
being not good to Deprive themselves, and do that Prejudice to the Apostolic
See, quite Contrary to the Doctrine Professed by the Ancient Holy Popes, and
Doctors. But by the things abovesaid, it is very clear, whether the Popes of
Rome may have full Authority over Ecclesiastical Estates and Benefices, so as
not to be subject to any Rule in the managing of them; wherefore proceeding by
Reason, N. 226.
if the Church of each place be Mistress of the Estates which she Possesses,
because the Dominion has been transferred to her, by him who was the first
Master of them, with the leave of the Prince, who by Law has granted to her
Purchasing; it remains that the Estates ought to be under the Government, and
Administration of those who are appointed for that Charge, First according to
the Disposition of the Law, and then according to the Conditions which the
Donor Prescribes, and the Testator formerly Patron of it, and finally,
according as the Church has granted, who is made Mistress of it, yet not going
contrary to the Disposition of those, from whom it has Cause. And this is so
Evident and Clear, that it cannot be put in Doubt, unless by one who has not
Common sense, or else, who in treating and speaking, follows not that which he
is inwardly sensible of.

The Clerks or Clergymen are become Administrators of these Goods by Laws
which have granted unto Christian Colleges, the Power of acquiring Estates, N.
227.
both by Wills and Donations of those who have bequeathed their Goods, and by
the Authority which the Church has given unto the said Clergy in the Canons;
therefore they are Obliged to Govern and to Dispense these Estates according to
the Laws, Dispositions, Donations, and Testamentary Dispositions, and according
to the Canons: and that which might be done Contrary to it, cannot be called
otherwise than Injustice, Injury, and Usurpation.

The Canonists say, that the Pope has most full Power over the Goods and
Benefices Ecclesiastical, so that he may conjoyn them, diminish them, erect new
ones, give them ad nutum, Confer them before they become Vacant, lay upon them
Servitudes, Burdens, and Pensions, and generally that in Beneficial matters,
the Popes Will is in the stead of Reason or Right.

This Suffices not, but they add, that the Pope may alter or transform into
other Works, the Legacies ad Pias Causas, and may alter the Disposition of
Testators, applying that to another, which they shall have appointed for a
Pious Work, and it cannot be denied that this is the Practice which has
changed all the Government and all the Ancient Institutions, N. 228.
but it remains still in Doubt, who does amiss and errs, the Ancient or the
Modern, if so much as a Doubt may happen.

Martin Navarr with some of the more Moderate Canonists, limits this
Proposition, that the Pope may alter the last Wills, only restraining when
there is a Lawful cause of doing it, which otherwise would be to deprive a man
of his own, and of the Power granted him by the Natural and by the Divine Law,
coming down also to this Particular, that the Pope cannot without Cause give
that to one Church, which is left unto another, therefore how much less unto
Persons not called. Navarrus says also, that the saying of the Gloss approved
by the Canonists: That is, in Beneficyal Matters, the Popes Will is instead and
takes the Place of Reason, is to be understood only in things which are de Jure
Positivo, but not in that which cannot be done without disagreeing with Natural
and Divine Law: And those who give no unlimited Power unto the Pope, N. 229.
would also exclude the Canons of the Universal Church, not to fall into the
Absurdity, that in a Matter of such Importance the Universal Church should have
erred, and done amiss, and that the Court should do uprightly. The said
Navarrus adds further, that it being said in the Clementines, that the Free
Disposal of Benefices belongs to the Pope; The word Free is or ought to be
understood, without License, Leave, or Consent, and notwithstanding the
Contradiction of any man soever, but yet without Prejudice of the Third; if we
should admit of this Exposition, as it seems Convenient to be admitted, there
would be seen a great Opposition to Reservations, because they are Prejudicial
to the Bishops in the giving of Benefices unto Strangers, because it is with
Prejudice to those of the Country, in whose Favor the Wills are made, and it
would not be very favorable to the Pretension, to have Power or to be able to
alter the last Will and Testament, being Prejudicial to the Memory of the
Deceased. I know well that others answer to this, that all is true, N. 230.
when there is no Legitimate Cause; but the Point is, who shall be Judge of the
Lawfulness of the Cause, for if it belongs to himself, whose Authority is to be
restrained; it is as good to give him the Absolute Authority, as that which is
limited with a Lawful Cause, unless the Law be above it. Navarrus adds very
Notable things, saying, that in our Age, the Opinion of the Jurisconsults which
expatiate so much the Papal Power in Beneficyal matters, is in much Credit to
please those who are Ambitious of many Benefices, which they accept as fitted
for their Ambition and Covetousness, who heard a Divine say Publicly, and a
Famous Canonist, that they would willingly accept of all the Benefices of the
Kingdom, if the Pope would Bestow them upon them, but on the Contrary Pius
Quintus told them, that the Jurisconsults are wont to attribute more Power than
Convenient to the Pope, whereto he answered, that there are some also which do
not Extol, but that it behooveth to walk in the middle way, having Respect unto
Divine and Humane Laws together, N. 231.
not doing like the Modern Jurisconsults, who Magnify Humane Laws so much,
that they answer against the Divine.

However I intend not to Contradict the Opinion which gives so much Power for
the Reverence due to the Pope of whom is treated, although it Comprehends not
how it agrees with Divinity and with Reason, I shall only propose some
Difficulties, which are wont to be Promoted by Writers on such an Opinion,
which when they shall have resolved, truth in this matter will be most clear.

And first, If the Pope has such an Ample Authority, who has given it him?
Not Christ; because the Authority given by him is only is Spiritual things for
loosing, and for binding, that is, for remitting and for retaining of Sins. And
then the Ecclesiastical Estates are Possessed de Jure Hamano, and not Divino,
and for such it has been resolved above, and therefore he has not receive
this Power from God, much less from the Laws of Princes, from Testamentary
Dispositions, N. 232.
nor from the Canons of the Churches; because all these have given the
Administration to the Clergymen of each Church, over the Estates and Benefices
thereof, and prescribedly also with limited Conditions, that they may not be
altered, therefore he has it not from these. There are no other Patrons in
being, nor none can have Authority, unless granted by these, therefore it
remains to be Considered from whence, and by what other way it has been given
him.

To this Doubt a second may be added; if the Pope has this Authority, what is
the Cause that his Predecessors for a Thousand years and more have never
Exercized any, nor any Ancient Doctor, nor Council, nor Historian, nor Father,
nor Canon, has so much as made mention of it? It cannot be Attributed that
there is a necessity for that now which was not in those times, because that in
the Ages that past between the years 800 and 1100, for 300 years the Disorders
were so great throughout all Europe, that in Comparison of those, N. 233.
these at present are Tolerable, and indeed no Pope did so much as intrude
himself into the Estates of other Churches, which had great need of being
Governed.

And after the Popes had begun to interpose themselves in some places, until
the time of Clement the 4th, no man ever pretended to such an Ample and
Absolute Power, but the said Clement has not directly published such a Power,
but dealing otherwise, and almost Incidentally, a way which is not wont to make
an entire Proof, because the things incidentally spoken in one way, being
directly Considered and Examined, are oftentimes expressed after another way.

Neither can it be said, that this Authority serves for or tends to good,
because it appears thereby, that almost all the Abuses have been Introduced.
From hence proceeded the Commendums, the Pensions, the Regresses, the Unions,
the Resignations, the Expectancies, the Reservations, the Yearly Payments, and
the Quindenniums, and other kinds which no man defends, unless by excusing them
with the general Corruption of the times.

There remains yet a third Doubt, N. 234.
no less Considerable in this matter, which is, that since the Popes have begun
to make use of this so absolute Authority, the Christian Kingdoms have always
Complained of it, and have made some Opposition against them, as is above
mentioned in this History, so that the Popes have been necessitated to Moderate
themselves. And the Moderation was not in their Condescending to forbear the
exercise of their pretended Authority, but by way of Transaction practiced in
dark Reasons, making agreement with Kingdoms, and by Form of Contract,
resolving unto what Terms or Bounds their Power was to extend, a thing which
might not have been done in Prejudice to their Successors, if that Authority
had been thus free in the Popedom.

Pope Leo the 10th, Pragmatica Sanctio Concorda.
to take away the Pragmatica, makes the Concordat, and so he himself calls it
in his Bull: He that has a most Ample Authority makes not a Concord, but
Treats with his Subjects like a Superior, and by way of Concession; I offer no
Violence to the word but in all the thing it self, N. 235.
Leo not only calls it a Concordia, but says also; Illam very contractus, and
Obligationis inter nos, and Sedem Apostolicam praedictam ex una, and Praefatum
Regem ex altera Partibus Legitime initi. Some man may require that it be
declared. The Popedom of Rome having a Difference with the Kingdom of France,
the Pope pretending to have an absolute Authority over Benefices, to reserve
them to himself, etc. And the Kingdom pretending, that the Authority belongs to
their Prelates, they form two Parties at Law, and to put an end to the
Controversy, they make a Lawful Contract of Obligation, whereby they declare
what ought to be the Authority of each, how can any man say, that the Popes
Pretension was Legitimate and Clear? I cannot say that I am able to answer any
of these Difficulties, if there be any Answer, I Refer it to the Judgment of
the Wise; well may I say, that Observing that which for above a Thousand years
has been Observed, that Ecclesiastical Livings have been Administered in each
Diocese, N. 236.
their own, by their own Ministers, all Difficulty is avoided, and if Examples
ought to Instruct, they will be better and more fruitfully dispensed than now
they are.

In the three first Questions has been Treated of the Stocks or Estates of the
Clergy, the 4th now remains, wherein follows the Treating of the Fruits, or
Rents, or Incomes thereof. The Holy Fathers who have Written before the
Division of the Estates into four Parts, have all said Unanimously that the
Estates of the Clergymen are the Poors, and that the Ecclesiastical Minister
has no other Power over them, but to Govern them, and to dispense them
according to the necessities of the Poor, declaring those Ministers to be not
only Thieves, but also Sacrilegious, who made any other use of them besides
their Institution.

All Clergymen did not Manage the Estates, though indeed all were dispensed by
them, as likewise the livelihood was Administered to Widows, to the Poor, and
to other Miserable Persons; but according to the Example of the Institution of
the Holy Apostles, only the Deacons, N. 237.
Subdeacons, and other Stewards were appointed thereunto, and gave an Account
to the Bishop, and in some places to the Presbyter or Priest. The Division
being made, and the Benefices Instituted; although it would seem that the
Bishop, the Priests, and the other Clergymen might do what they would, with
the Beneficial Incomes, as with their own; yet the Writers speak in this
manner, saying, that a Clergyman cannot make use of the Incomes of a Benefice,
but as far as his Moderate need requires, and the overplus he is obliged to
spend in Pious uses, and with much Reason, because the Division alters not the
Substance of the thing, and an Estate if it comes to be Divided, both parts
remain under the same Obligation. Amongst others who write after the Dividing;
St. Gregory, who was a little above 100 years after, and St. Bernard, who was
almost 1000 years after, exclaim most heavily against those who spend the
Incomes of Benefices in ill uses, N. 238.
as against Persons Usurping the Common Stock, and Murderers of the Poor which
ought to be Maintained by them.

Thus all the Doctors Wrote, until the year 1250, when they began to handle
things more Subtly, and holding it for Constant, as spoken by all the
Ancients, that it was a sin to mispend that which exceeds the Moderate
necessity of the Clergyman, 'twas enquired into, that if Beneficed men not
spending of that in due uses, which exceeds above their need, whether they only
sin as a man sins who mis-spends his own, or whether also besides the sin they
be Obliged unto Restitution, as ill Consumers of other men's Goods.

If they be Patrons of the Fruits of the Benefices, or as the Laws say,
Vsufructuaries, although they sin by ill Administration, yet they do Injustice
to no man, neither are they bound to make any one amends, because they have not
in Government any thing of another man's, but their own: But if they are
Dispensators with Power only to receive their own needs, which the Law calls
Vsuaries, N. 239.
when they Dispense not uprightly, they remain under an Obligation of restoring
or making good as much more as they have Consumed, much more those who receive
from them by Contract gratis, that is, those to whom they give or leave by
Testament, are Obliged to restore it, as having received it from one who was
not the Master of it.

Conscience obliged me to set this Doubt on foot, which having been handled or
treated on these 350 years, remains still in Controversy with equal number of
Authorities on each side, and at last with severe Oppositions and Apologies,
'twas in Controversy between Martin Navarr a Canonist, and a Casuist of great
esteem, and one named Sarmiento: Navarr holding that the Clergymen are not
Patrons, but Dispensators, so that they not only Commit sin, but are Obliged
unto Restitution. Cardinal Gaetan was of a middle Opinion, that it was a
different thing between speaking of Bishops and Rich Abbots, and those who had
only what was decent, or a little more, and that these having no more than
their own share, N. 240.
are Masters of it.

But the Richest have also amongst their Incomes, the part or share of the
Church and of the Poor, and therefore are Obliged to give Alms, and to do
other Pious works for Righteousness-sake, that is, with Obligation of
Restitution, both to them, and to him that Receives from them, descending to
this Particular also, that those are Obliged to Restitution who receive from
the Pope, Ecclesiastical Estates, for the Enriching, Exalting, or for the
Ennobling themselves, every Donation of Church Goods, which is not grounded
upon Piety, or upon Necessity being a Dissipation and an Usurpation.

I believe that without a Subtle Disputation, all the Doubts Occurrent in this
Matter may be Resolved, and first, to speak Separately of those Incomes, which
by Testaments, or other Original Institutions are Dedicated and Ordained to
some Pious work, to which I believe them so Obliged, that to appropriate them
to ones self, or to other Worldly uses, may be called freely Usurpation of that
which is another man's, and if any of the Beneficed Clergymen forbears to
Execute the Institutions which he has in Charge, N. 241.
applying those Incomes to himself or to others, I do not believe he can under
pretense of any Excuse or Bull whatever, Excuse himself from being in an equal
Degree with every Executor of a Will, who should apply to himself that, which
is left by the Testator, unto another, and I make account that every man who
will not deceive himself, will hold this for a Constant truth.

On the other side Duty requires, that he who is served, should pay the
workman his Reward, who may do with it what he pleases, neither can it be
Doubted but the Singing man, the Organist, and others which serve in the
Church, are Masters of the Reward which they have therefore. It is not
Inconvenient to say, that the Priests likewise, and other Clergymen ought to
have their Reward for the Services which they afford to the Church, of which
Reward they are Masters, and when a Benefice is Instituted with a particular
Obligation to serve the Church in a determinate thing, N. 242.
as are many Canonships, Mansionaries, Theologal Prebendaries, and such other
Benefices, it is not Inconvenient to say, that it is a Reward of that Work.

Benefices are of such Antiquity, that the Memory of their Institution is lost,
and therefore it is not known, whether they had any Obligation, or no; But a
Conscientious man will be well Certified, when he shall Consider the quantity
of the Incomes, and the Service which he lends or yields to the Church, because
if these two were weighed in the Scale, he may believe that the Benefice is his
Sallary, but if the Incomes exceed it by much, he can never fain himself to be
Simple, who believes that so many Incomes were left him to do what he will
with, and should not know it to be necessary, that the Institution should bear
with it some Obligation, it being not likely that so much should be Assigned
for him only.

The Controversy amongst the Doctors which is difficult disputing in General,
is most easy and without difficulty practiced in particulars; and the
Conscience of him who has not Choked it through his own Malice, N. 243.
resolves easily all Difficulties inwardly upon the Particular, which God has
not left unto any one in uncertainty, who is willing to walk according to his
Commandments.

As to the New Acquisitions, every prudent Person would have thought that they
were at an end, or at least that they could acquire or Purchase but slowly.

There are now no more Persons who bear a Devotion toward the Clergymen,
Monks, and Militia; The Mendicants who heretofore had the Power of Purchasing,
cannot hope to put it in Execution, whereas they have not been able to do it
hitherto, and where they have Purchased or Gained, if therewith they have not
lost the Devotion, they may yet hope for some Augmentation, but very slight:
Those others who have caused themselves to be excluded from the Privilege,
which the Council of Trent has granted to all of Purchasing, as the Capucins,
who preserve the good Opinion by Reason of their Poverty, whereas immediately
that they should change their Institution in the least part, N. 244.
they could not Purchase Estates, and would lose their Alms. It seems therefore
that no way is left to go any further. He that would Institute an Order with
Power of Purchasing, would have no Credit; He that would do it with mere
Begging cannot hope to purchase thereby, nor to have Credit if he should change
it. But notwithstanding all this, there has not wanted Proper ways and
Singular in our Age, Institution of Jesuits.
and nothing Inferior to all the former, and that has been the Institution of
the Jesuits, which professing a Mixture of Poverty and of Abundance, with
Poverty it gains Credit and Devotion, and has the other hand Capable of
Possessing, which receives that which the Company gains. They have Instituted
Professing Houses, Professing Houses. Colleges.
with Prohibition of being able to Possess Estates, but the Colleges with
Power of Purchasing, and Possessing; they say, and that truly, that no single
Government in the World is perfect, but that a Mixture is useful to every
thing; That the Condition of Evangelical Poverty taken up by the Mendicants, N.
245.
has this Defect, that it cannot Govern it self therewith, Evangelical Poverty.
but the foregoers, whose Number cannot be great, but they in the Colleges
receive and Instruct Youth, and render them apt and sit after the gaining of
Virtues, to live in the Evangelical Poverty, wherefore Poverty is indeed the
Scope and their Essential end, but Accidentally they receive Possessions.

Besides all this, it is better to ground ones Credulity upon that which is
effectually seen, than upon that which is Preached in Word, they Write unto
this presen time to have one and twenty Professing Houses, and 293 Colleges,
by the Proportion of which numbers, every one may Conclude that which is
Essential, and that which is Accidental to them: Certain it is, that the
Purchases made by them are exceeding great, and that they Proceed still toward
Augmentation.

Even as all the Temporals which the Church Possesses, comes from the Alms
and Oblations of the Faithful, even so likewise the Building of the Ancient
Sanctuary in the Old Testament, N. 246.
was made by Alms and Oblations, then when the People had Offered as much as
suffized, yet the Oblations were Continued; The Overseers of the Fabric had
recourse unto Moses, saying, the People carries too much for the Work which the
Lord has Commanded, and Moses sent forth a Proclamation, that no man should
make any more Offering to the Sanctuary, because there had been Offered enough,
and to spare.

It Is seen that God was not willing to have Superfluity in his Temple, and if
in the Old Testament which was Worldly, he would not have all for his
Ministers, much less will he have it in the New: Where are these Purchasings to
end? When it is to be said amongst us, the People has Offered more of it than
Suffizeth. When that the Ministers of the Temple were the 13th part of the
People, Tithes.
they received the Tenths, and 'twas not Lawful to exceed them; now that they
are not the 100th, they have perhaps above a quarter.

It Is not Convenient, that the increase of Ecclesiastical Estates should be
infinite, N. 247.
and that all the World should be reduced to be Tenants; Humane Laws amongst
Christians have not limited the quantity of Estates that any one Possesses,
for he that Purchases to day, alienates to morrow: A Perpetual Condition of
Persons is very singular, which may always Purchase, and never Alienate. In
the Old Testament the Tithes were given to the Levites, because they were Gods
Inheritance, and therefore they were Forbidden to have any other share, a thing
which pertains to those who are willing to make use of their Privileges,
taking all to themselves, and not only that which behooves their own Profit.

It has been abundantly spoken of, how the Ecclesiastical Estates have been
gained, to whom the Care of them has been Committed, and how Dispensed.

Nothing has been spoken of that which was done, when at the Death of the
Beneficyary they found some of the Fruits not yet disposed of, whether he
disposed of them by Will, or whether from the Intestateman they passed unto
other Persons.

Whilst the Estate of each Church was in Common, and Governed by one Earl only,
Conto. 248.
it is a certain thing, that so much as was found in a Ministers hand was
Incorporated with the Whole, and Governed in the same manner by the Successor;
But Benefices being erected, there were also Canons therewith made, that
whatever part was found in the hand of the Beneficyary at his Death, should be
the Churches; and by the Church if it were Collegiate and had a Common Table,
was understood the College thereof; But if the Beneficyary was without
Colleague, by the Name of Church, was understood the Successor, who was to
Administer that Remainder or Residue, after the same manner as the Deceased
Predecessor was Obliged unto, so 'twas wont to be done until the year 1300. But
because the Beneficed Clergymen had oftentimes other Goods of their own
Patrimony, or else gained by his own Art and Industry, 'twas therewith said,
that of these he was the Absolute Master, and might leave them by Will to whom
he pleased; but of the Incomes of the Benefice he might not Dispose, by reason
of Death. From whence it followed, that Clergymen Possessors of small
Benefices, not exceeding the expenses, made a Will of all they had, and if by
sparing they had Advanced any thing to the Benefice, Conto. 249.
they reputed it gained by Industry, and Disposed of it in the same manner,
which has brought in a Custom in many Christian Kingdoms, that men of Inferior
Benefices may make their Will, likewise of the Incomes of their Benefices, and
not making a Will, the Heirs of the Intestate Succeed, as also in the
Patrimonials. But that which was left by the Bishops, remained to the Church
according to the Ancient Canons.

After this, the Bishops also through Custom in many Christian Kingdoms
acquired the Power of making Wills, even of the Ecclesiastical Fruits, so that
about the year 1300, in diverse Countries there were three Different Customs
found; 1. One where no Clergyman might Dispose of the Incomes of Benefices
advanced them, 2ly, The other where the Incomes were upon the same Account, as
things Patrimonial and their own, 3ly, the third where Inferior Clergymen
bequeathed or disposed, but what was left by the Bishops went to the Church. N.
250.


In the times after 1300, when the Popes of Rome had more need of Money than
ordinary, they sent their Ministers into the Kingdoms where the Churches were
wont to Inherit the Deceased Beneficed man's Estate, who before the Successor
was Chosen, applied all to the Popes Chamber, which thing Succeeded easily,
because the Benefice becoming Vacant, there was none would Contradict it for
his own Interest, and the Successor being Created he acquiesced in a thing done
without any more ado. They began to send such Ministers into all places where
they could, and to lay claim to that which was left by the Deceased, Booty or
Spoils. Collectors.
by the Name of Booty or Spoils, and the Popes Officers sent for them, were
called Collectors. The Popes took these Spoils where they could in this
manner, silently without any Order or Law therein which might grant the same,
but always with some Murmuring, as well by the Heirs of the Deceased Priests,
as also by other Persons, N. 251.
through the severe Extorsions which the Collectors and the Sub-Collectors
made, who brought into the Account of Spoils or Booty, the very Ornaments of
the Churches, and gave also much Molestation to Heirs upon Goods gained by
Industry, or received from the Patrimony, endeavoring to make them appear to
be taken out of the Benefices, and doubtful of what quality they were, giving
Sentence that they belonged to the Chamber, vexing and tiring those who Opposed
them, with Excommunications and Censures.

In France the use or custom had Introduced that the Spoils of Bishops and
Abbeys should be applied to the Pope. And in the year 1385, Charles the 6th
Prohibited it, Ordaining that Heirs should have the Succession as well in them,
as in Patrimonial Goods; In many Countries the Custom being Introduced, is
Continued unto this Age, when by the Extorsion of the Collectors, the
Complaints of many increased so much, that some had the boldness to Oppose it
openly, and to deny that the Spoils of the Deceased Clergymen belonged to the
Popes Chamber. Wherefore in the year 1541, Paul the 3d was the first who made a
Bull upon this matter, N. 252.
where it is Related that some Curious Persons to Usurp to themselves the Rights
of the Apostolic Chamber, and to Defraud it, did call in question, whether the
Estates of Prelates, and of other Ecclesiastical Persons called Spoils
belonged to the Chamber, there being no Apostolical Constitution which
Appropriates it, though indeed by the sending Collectors into diverse places, it
appears clearly to have been the mind of the Apostolic See, to reserve them
and apply or appropriate them to the Chamber, wherefore he Declares, Ordains,
and Constitutes, that to the Pontifical Chamber shall belong the Spoils of all
the Clergymen Deceased in whatsoever Kingdoms and Dominions, as well on this
side, as beyond the Alps, so likewise on this side, as well as beyond the
Seas, although Collectors have never been appointed in them.

So that the over-Diligent being willing to free some few Provinces from this
Grievance or Burden, have been Cause they have been Imposed all the World
over: But yet it is not come to Execution, N. 253.
except in the usual places, but it has thus happened in all things, as the
World makes of Novelties, left off for sometime without Execution, and
afterward with a good Opportunity, as if they had been Executed in due time,
and by the Malice of some brought out of Use, by Censures and other Violences
they are put in Execution.

The Spoils unto the year 1560, Comprehended nothing but that which was found
at the Clergy-mans Death, proceeding from Ecclesiastical Incomes.

In the year above said Pius quartus made a Bull; that under the Name of
Spoils, which throughout the World, in all Dominions on this side and beyond
the Alps and the Seas, belong to the Chamber, is to be understood also, all
that which the Clerk shall gain by Unlawful Merchandise, and otherwise Contrary
to the Canons, a thing which Comprehends Sufficiently, because Unlawful
Merchandise they call where the thing such as it is bought, so it is sold. And
then by the Canons the Clergymen are forbidden many kinds of Games in use, and
many Services, N. 254.
by which ways there is gotten sufficiently, so that hereby was returned a
great gain to the Chamber, and 'twould be a great Income, if the Bulls could be
Executed throughout half Italy, where they are not yet in Execution, and in
France, and in Germany, and in other Kingdoms which have not yet received them;
like as in the Kingdoms of Castilia they make not Spoils of all the
Clergymen, but of the Bishops only, by the Laws of Carolus quintus, and of
Philip the 2d.

The Canonists Defend the Right of the Spoils with this Foundation, that the
Pope is Patron or Master of all Ecclesiastical Incomes, and those who speak the
most Modestly, say, Administrator; by which Doctrine there is also Introduced
into Rome, that if any one has unduly Usurped to himself any Benefice, or
otherwise shall have Robbed the Church, if he agree with the Apostolic
Chamber, to give a share of it thereto, he may hold the Remainder with a good
Conscience, N. 255.
and the Agreement being made and paid as much as was limited, let every one
say, he is Absolved of the rest, and may hold it Lawfully as his own, because
the Pope is as has been said, either Master or Administrator General; and this
they call Compounding with the Apostolic Chamber, which comes to be very
largely Extended, so that those who in Conscience know, or at leastwise doubt
of having something not their own, and there is no -- that either it is not
known whom to Restore it, Composition is made.

FINIS.

