A SATYR AGAINST PAINTING; IN Burlesque Verse: Submitted to the JUDICIOUS.

BY An Eminent Hand.

-- ridentem dic^^e Verum
Quid Vetat? -- Horace.
LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper at the Black-Boy over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet.

A Satyr against Painting.
BY Shadowing Art, (that She- Impostor)
Highly provoked; we thus accost her.
Deceitful Face! bewitching Air!
Whose sweetest Features most ensnare.
Thou driv'st a subtle cheating Trade,
By Union of thy Light and Shade.
Foul Fiend i'th'shape of Angel Bright;
Mere Phantom thou, and yet no Spright;
Appearing only in the Light.
To teach who often do pretend;
When to delude's thy chiefest end.
Thou gain'st our Gold, we nothing get
From thee, but what is Counterfeit;
Banquets of Fruit, and Cornucopia.
Horns of Plenty;
Our Eyes well fed, but Stomachs empty.
Or where a Portrait you present,
It Is surely with a bad Intent:
That by your Drawings and your Sketches,
You may abuse some simple Wretches,
Who for a Line drawn by Apelles,
Will Not stick to rob their Backs and Bellies;
And for a Touch of Raphael's Hand,
Will frankly give both House and Land.
O may it never be your Lot,
To be encircl'd by Giott!
Minds thus enchanted are unsound, ho!
By always doting on a round Exactness and Perfection, as that of Giotto's
Circle made without help of a Compass.
O.
If ye are caught by Buonaroti,
His Stout and Swelling Vein will bloat ye.
If the Brisk Coloring of Titian
Charm ye, you are gone too (with submission.)
If you are in love with Tint'ret's Fury,
Ye'll be so hot brained (I assure ye)
That naught but Hellebore can cure ye.
If Sarto's Delicacy seize ye;
After that nothing else will please ye.
There Is Fascination in each Piece,
Whether from Italy, or Greece:
The Softness, Sweetness, and Facility,
Grandeur, Decorum, and Ability,
Beauty, Elegancy, Brightness,
Freeness, Airyness, and Lightness,
Motion, Spirit, and Vivacity,
Take every Fancy and Capacity:
The Invention, Order, Symmetry,
Force, Short'ning, and Success agree,
To charm our Curiosity:
To Wound and Captivate the Heart,
Each Artist's Pencil proves a Dart;
And makes us often, as most Men do know,
Embrace a Cloud instead of Juno.
In Landskips there is nor Bush nor Brake
That Is Fair, but what conceals a Snake.
And none but who has Heart of Oak,
Can stand against a Master-Stroak.
To what end's this Impertinence?
Ye make Dumb Poetry commence,
A Speaker in its own defense.
Is 't fit to rail against handsome Faces,
Because ye cannot resist their Graces?
To damn a sweet and harmless Pleasure,
Because ye love it out of measure?
In me, perhaps, ye'll find some Good,
When that I Am better understood.
I at my Will and Pleasure can
Make a Protuberance of a Plan.
It Is I, in 'midst of Frost and Snows,
The Verdure of the Spring expose;
And though from hence it very far is,
I can in London show ye Paris;
Nay, when as Calm as Calm can be,
Can show a dreadful Storm at Sea.
Show ancient Heroes long since rotten,
That they may never be forgotten.
Can make what is past, as if 'twere present;
What Is very old, as very recent.
Of Souls not only show the Case,
But can the very Mind Express,
Without a Hieroglyphick Dress.
A Wise Man I can make appear,
Tho Beardless, a Philosopher.
Could tell ye, (if I once were fired)
I came from Heaven, and am inspired.
To me alone's ascribed the Glory,
That I exceed the force of Story.
What by feint Hearsay That does show,
I represent unto your View.
And where the Art of Sculpture fails,
My noble Faculty p^evails.
Carvings ape me, where they are tender,
But cannot Copy Light and Splendour.
No King a Consort seeks from far,
But makes me his Ambassador.
Although you bear your Head so high,
As if you meant to reach the Sky;
Yet we your Origin can display,
And s^ew you sprung from Cole and Clay:
Scra^ling and Dawbing you begat,
Of t^ese you are the sorry Brat.
As D^wbing 'gat, Dawbing supports you,
They sooth and flatter you, who court you;
And of a Paltry Thing (which odd is)
Would make you think your self a Goddess.
We grant you Pretty, yet art Vicious,
Vain Impudent, and Meretricious;
An over-glazing Superficies.
A Specious Treasure you set forth,
But have not any real Worth.
Were all your Jewels Oriental,
You might enrich one who had spent all;
And be no longer counted Trash,
But be at Par with Plate and Cash.
Might pierce a Man unto the Quick,
Did you not over- patch and lick.
But now thy Artifice is seen,
Now thou have got a graceless Mien.
Thy Primitive Simplicity
Has utterly forsaken thee.
Thou strutt'st about in gaudy Dresses,
Foplings to lure to thy Caresses;
But all thy Pomp and Pageantry,
The Wiser sort of Men defy;
They know thy Glories quickly tarnish,
Of fading Colors made, and Varnish:
Yet thou do keep thy self in Fashion,
And have but too much Veneration.
Pity it is a Jilt so great,
Should ever ride in Coach of State;
And in a Palace dwell, or Church,
Who leaves her Followers in the lurch.
On Sign-Post in the open Air
Hang her, in form of Bull, or Bear,
Of some good use she may be there.
But see that BRUIN wear a Chain,
Lest (as of old) when it does Rain,
The awkward Brute go off again.
Now some, who by fair Looks are smitten,
Though by their falsehood, often bitten,
Will cry, This Censure is too smart;
Painting's a Brave and Liberal Art.
Liberal! Pray let themselves be Judges,
Are not its chief Disciples Drudges?
Their Bodies much impaired by Toils,
And stinking Scent of Poisonous Oils:
Their Minds often over-charg'd with Care,
About the drawing of a Hair;
And value more a Hand that is ready,
Than any Head, though Learned and Steady.
Others there are who never were Scholars,
Nor can pretend to Skill in Colors,
Yet are per saltum Masters grown,
And with their Works defile the Town:
Dawbings, which they by Dozens vend;
Dawbings, of which there is no end.
Of these Base-brothers of the Brush,
A Dozen are not worth a Rush.
A Pencil does not (as you know well)
So well become them, as would Trowel.
Such do the very Art bespatter,
And Wound it more than sharpest Satyr.
As Mean, as Cheap it does appear,
Vending its Works by Auctionier:
Who cries, This Head is by Vandyke;
Here is a Battle (Sirs) by Wyke.
This Piece, (pray see it) It Is somewhat small,
But yet a right Original.
Here Is a choice Venus drawn on Board;
Bid up, -- it is fine upon my Word.
This History's by Rubens done,
(Of Ruben's Works, tho he has none)
Twenty pound; Once -- Twice -- Thrice -- It Is gone.)
A Modern Piece sometimes is sold,
When Smoked and Mellow'd, for an Old.
Besides, 't has Setters to entice,
And if need be, to raise the Price.
Thus, whilst it does each Piece expose,
It leads its Bayers by the Nose.
This Practice sure is not the part
Of Liberal, but of Vulgar Art.
Yet to avoid the Name severe,
What can be farther said let us hear.
It Is a great Curiosity:
So is a Spider's Web, you see.
It speaks all Languages, all Tongues:
The more diffusive are its Wrongs.
It does amuse and entertain --
The Idle, Wanton, Proud, and Vain.
Strange Novelties it often produces;
Harpyes and Centaures! Strange Abuses!
A Mine it is most richly Vein'd:
'Twas so, but now it is almost drein'd.
It can deceive a Skilful Eye:
With a poor (...)
Curtain or a (...) Roman^.
Fly.
But not to give our selves more trouble,
About an empty Painted Bubble,
About a thing that to the brim
Abounds in Magottry and Whim;
The Dream of Men that are awake,
A Libertine, a very Rake;
A Prodigy of Ostentation,
Nay, the arrant'st Prostitute in the Nation.
And what is enough to stifle Lenity,
A great Supporter of Obscenity.
One, who to mend Defects in Nature
Pretends, but still deforms the Creature.
Pretends to a discerning Pallat,
Yet only feeds on Sauce and Sallet.
Does so admire a Picture fair,
As if naught with it could compare;
When Well Penned Works of those that Write
Are Paintings too, in Black and White;
And full as long they will endure;
As any other Clare-Obscure.
Another fault 't has got of late,
It Gouty things still reckons great:
Thinks That the best and noblest Figure,
The larger always is and bigger.
But this Mistake we little heed,
Therefore to greater Faults proceed.
Its Heads and Faces need Correction,
And must not escape our just Reflection:
After the use of fine Carnations,
And after three long Operations,
The Life's often lost, or so diminished,
You Would swear the Piece were scarce half finished;
And so unlike the Natural, Phyz it is,
It cannot be termed a true Effigies:
Yet what it wants o'th Mystery,
With Trick and Fucus does supply.
The Sad, the Sour, and Crabbed Feature;
It nicely touches, and makes sweeter.
The Matron of Complexion torrid
Is likewise flattered, and made florid.
What though the Sitter be no Beau,
Our Face-mender will have him so;
And make a Scurvy Head look big,
In Steenkirk, and in Flaunting Wig.
If Beautiful above what is common,
It will transform him to a Woman;
And out of great Civility,
Rob him of his Virility;
Knowing no Beauty but the Fine,
None that is Strong and Masculine.
Hence it is each Face is made too light,
And an huge Waste often drawn in White:
No Black nor Darkness must appear,
Though It be to Shadow Grief or Fear;
But in the Hair, Eyes, Lips, and Nails
Resplendent Parts, where White prevails,
Of such Profuseness there it fails.
If here it fails, we cannot expect,
In Motion, it should be Correct.
Motion's the quick and active part,
The Soul and Spirit of the Art;
It has the force of Sympathy,
From which but very few are free.
Does the Object Laugh? it moves to Gladness,
Or does it Mourn, it causes Sadness.
When Modern Works do (by the by)
Move and affect quite contrary.
'Twould put a Man into a Flame,
To see its Figures look so tame,
To see it give to subtilty,
The Hog's most dull and sleepy Eye.
If its Intention, or its will is,
To Paint a Nero or Achilles,
It Is odds but that it will set out
The Hero Cruel, Tyrant Stout.
Tho this looks somewhat like Disgrace,
It will not mend its wonted pace,
But jogs on in the common Road,
With Trappings, and but little Load:
'Thas no regard to Life and Passion,
A Motist now is out of fashion;
Or acts but in a low degree,
In Boor-Pieces or Drollery.
In Shadowing of Nudities,
(Which often are but Crudities)
Affects a Manner of its own,
To Nature such as seldom known;
An Over-ruddy, Black and Gray,
And this is called the Italian Way:
An ancient Fault, yet we'll not spare you,
Tho it is cum Patribus errare.
If that it shuns one evil Course,
Runs commonly into a worse.
If it from Coldness does retire,
Is apt to Blaze with too much Fire.
When nauseous Hardness it declines,
With Faintness Languishes and Pines.
When it Correctness does intend,
Of Emendation knows no end.
Thus over-careful how to please,
Does err as did Protogenes.
'Tween Comb and Glass much time does wast,
And knows not when it is fully dressed;
Or else regardless is of Fame,
And makes Riches its chief aim:
An Aequipoize or golden Mean
Is difficult, and rarely seen.
As to its Dress and Garniture,
Who can its Luxury endure?
Have you not a fair Lady seen,
Bedecked with Pearl, like any Queen;
Yet utterly devoid of Grace,
Because the Gems out-shin'd her Face?
So now its By-works do excel,
And much eclipse the Principal.
Besides, it is of an abject Mind,
To mean and narrow thoughts confined,
That never strives for to advance,
And be the foremost of the Dance;
But lays aside all Aemulation,
Content with servile Imitation;
Like little Child afraid of falls,
Often Creeps on Ground, or goes by Walls;
Treading as tenderly and nice,
As if it walked upon the Ice.
But far more wary it is than wise,
If falls, it fears 'twill never rise,
Without contending there is no Prize.
Nay more, some practice but a part,
And will not search the whole o'th Art.
They do consume their precious hours,
In Painting barely Fruits or Flowers.
Sea-Pieces, Still-Life, Fish, or Fowl;
Shall Men of such degenerate Soul
Be Painters deemed, without control?
No; only he who is apt for all,
Must have a Talent general.
No more then of this grovelling Practice,
But somewhat, which no less defect is;
On Coloring next we'll cast an Eye,
And many Artless Teints descry.
What are its several kinds of Pigments,
With which it does express its Figments?
The Lilly, Cowssip, Saffron, Violet
And Damask.
Rose (of Blue that has an Eyelet)
Ash, Azure, Purple, Columbine,
Green, Crimson, Murry, Gridelin,
The Strawberry, the Brown, the Bay,
Dun, Sorrel, Chestnut, and the Gray;
The Kite Color, and Col^r mortui foli^.
Philamot,
The Tawny; Minim, and what not.
Mixtures of late so ill compounded,
That they are rather quite confounded.
Yet their Ingredients are but few,
Black, White, Red, Yellow and the Blue:
Of which, some burnt are, some are raw,
Some costly, some not worth a Straw;
Some coming forward, some retiring,
Some heavy, some light and aspiring;
Some Lovers of Society,
Some will not Mix wi' Company,
Some transparent, some Opaque,
With which it does great pother make.
Some of them bad, and some are good,
And all as thoroughly understood,
As Transmutation is of Metals;
Or turning into Gold, Brass Kettles.
There are but few we can exalt,
Most being spoiled by Grease or Salt,
Or by foul Pencils gather Soil,
Or Tawny made with too much Oil.
They very rarely do appear,
Lively, Bright, Beautiful and Clear,
Except in Insects, Gems, Shells, Flowers;
In Natures Paintings, not in Ours;
They at the best unequal are,
The following therefore most prefer,
But in the use of them do err.
Some do affect the Tyrian Dye,
Which they through fondness mis-apply;
Clothing the Villain and the Varlet,
With Royal Purple, Richest Scarlet.
Others are fond of, and go still on,
To use in Faces much Vermilion*
Their Works abound with this fierce Teint,
Which makes them look too much like PAINT:
Vltramarine with some prevails,
This is true Blue which never fails;
Yet many are with this too bold,
And make their Flesh-colors too cold.
Taking the Art (such is their blindness)
Chiefly to lie in Colour's fineness:
When as in truth it most does lie,
In finest Skill and Manag'ry.
But willing now to make an end,
To Shorthand Painting we descend.
Its Migniature is over- fine,
Too Nice, Petite, and Feminine.
Is not Discernable at Distance,
Without the Eye have some Assistance.
The Women therefore do engross it,
As Toy most fit for Lady's Closet:
For Men's use only serves to adorn,
Snuff and Tobacco-Box of Horn.
But to Olivar's or Cooper's Hand,
We must not give so foul a Brand.
Therefore to the old we'll add not new ills,
Owning such Works, not Toys but Jewels.
Like Jewels very rich and fair,
But yet exceedingly more rare.
Many Faults more we could recite,
And set it in a clearer Light.
Could show how dull and blockish it is,
Committing gross Absurdities;
How Images impure, or vain,
Most Sacred Places often profane:
And turn the Church (Sans Raillerie)
Into a Picture-Gallerie.
That as incongruous as this,
Is Angelo's famed Judgment-Piece,
Stained with Indecent Nudities;
With things Unnat'ral and Unjust,
Young Men and Women too Robust;
And stretched beyond their due Proportions,
With too extravagant Contortions.
But there is nothing without failing:
Good Caution against farther Railing.
Now, had this Rage unfeigned been,
The effect of Choler or of Spleen,
The Doggr'el Cant had proved more keen;
For Painting now we may enroll,
In Pancirollus List or Scroll,
Among the lost Inventions,
Of the Sagacious Ancients.
It Is Vanished, -- what is left in Sight,
Is but the Shadow of their Light.
FINIS.

