The Order and Ceremonies Used for, and at THE SOLEMN INTERMENT OF The most
High, Mighty and most Noble Prince GEORGE DUKE OF ALBEMARLE Earl of
Torrington, Baron Monck of Potheridge, Beauchampe and Teyes, Captain General
of his Maties: Forces, Gentleman of his Maties: Bedchamber, one of the Lords of
his Maties: most Honorable Privy Council, and Knight of the most Noble Order of
the Garter A.o. 1670

Collected by Francis Sandford Gent Rouge-Dragon, one of His Maties: Officers
at Arms; and Published by His Maties: especial Command.



The Order and Ceremonies used for the Solemn Interment of the Most High,
Mighty, and Most Noble Prince, GEORGE late Duke of Albemarle, Earl of
Torrington, Baron Monck of Poutheridge, Beauchampe, and Teyes, Captain General
of His Majesty's Forces, Gentleman of His Majesty's Bedchamber, One of the
Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and Knight of the Most
Noble Order of the Garter, in the Year of our Lord 1670.
UPon the Third day of January, An. 1669. His Grace GEORGE Duke of Albemarle,
departed this Mortal Life, at his Lodgings in the Cockpit, at Whitehal; and the
same day Mr. Williamson (by command from the Lord Arlington, Principal
Secretary of State) wrote to Sir Edward Walker Knight, Garter, Principal King
of Arms, signifying, That His Majesty was resolved to pay all the Honors and
Respects imaginable, to the memory of the Lord General deceased; and that He
had commanded some of the Lords of the Council, to consider of fitting
Solemnities for his Funeral; and to that end, That he should prepare what he
thought fit to offer to His Majesty, and their Lordships. Whereupon Master
Garter, with some of the Officers of Arms, attended His Majesty in the
Council Chamger, on the Eighth day of January following, where was present HIS
MAJESTY. His Royal Highness. The Lord Steward. The Lord Chamberlain. The Earl
of Sandwich. The Earl of Carlisle. The Earl of Craven. The Lord Arlington. The
Lord Ashley. Mr. Secretary Trevor. Sir John Duncomb.


There they presented to His Majesty several Presidents, one whereof His
Majesty having approved and made choice of to be followed, Did then give
directions in several particulars, relating to the Rooms, to be prepared at
Sommerset-House, where the Body was to Lie in State for some time.

After this, the Lord Chamberlain directed several Warrants to the Earl of
Sandwich. Master of the Great Wardrobe, for the furnishing Three Rooms at
Sommerset-House; for the placing the Effigies there in State; for the covering
and adorning the Hearse at Westminster; for Escucheons, Shields, Banners,
Bannarols, etc. All which were to be delivered to Mr. Garter, or to such
persons as he should appoint.

The Duke of Buckingham, Master of the Horse, did also send a Warrant to the
Earl of Sandwich, for providing and furnishing a Chariot, and for coverings of
Black Velvet for the Chariot and Horses, etc.

Another Warrant was sent by the Lord Chamberlain to Dr. Wren, Surveyor of the
Works, to prepare a Frame of Timber; for a Hearse to be set up in Westminster.

As also a Warrant to the Earl of Sandwich, to provide Gowns and Hoods, and
other Mourning, for the Lords, Gentry, and other Persons, who were to officiate
at the said Funeral.

The Three Rooms at Sommerset-House were furnished in manner following;
THe First Room was hung with Bays from top to bottom, adorned with Escucheons,
and furnished with Sconces, and Wax-Candles unlighted; and Forms placed about
it, covered with Bays.

The Second was hung with Cloth, adorned with Escucheons, and furnished with
Sconces and Candles, unlighted, the Forms about it covered with Cloth; at the
upper end, a Haute-pass floored with Bays, a Canopy of Black Velvet, the
Vallance Fringed, the Pendant within half a yard of the Ground; a
Majesty-Escucheon of Taffata, a Black Velvet Chair with Arms, and a Footstool.

The Third Room was hung with Velvet, floored with Bays, adorned with
Escucheons, and Black Sconces, with White Wax Tapers, and at the upper end upon
a Haute-pass, a Bed of State of Black Velvet was placed with Black Plumes at
the Four corners of the Tester; at the Head a Majesty-Escucheon, and another in
the midst of the Tester. Upon the Bed was placed a Coffin covered with a fine
Holland sheet of Eight bredths, and Eight else long, and over that, a Pall of
Black Velvet of Eight bredths, and Eight yards long, and thereupon the Effigies
of the Duke in a Buff-coat, and over that complete Azure Armor with Guilt
Nails, a Cravat about his Neck; his Ducal Coronet and Cap turned up with Ermine
on his Head, Invested in his Ducal Robe of Crimson Velvet, about his Neck a
Collar of the Order and George, under the Head a Cushion of Crimson Velvet,
with Fringe and Tassels of Gold, his Sword guirt about him, and a great Crimson
Tassata-Scarff, fringed with Gold about his Waste, upon his Left Leg a Garter
of Blew Velvet, the Buckles and Letters of Gold, and a Guilt Truncheon in his
right hand.

About Five foot distant from the Bed, was a Rail covered with Black Velvet,
and close to the inside of the Rail, were placed on both sides, the Bannerols,
three Banners, and a Guydon, and at the Foot, the Standard, and Great Banner;
between these on the sides, were also placed Twelve Black Stands, with as many
Silver Candlesticks, with large White Wax Tapers in them.

At the Bed's Feet, was a little Table covered with a Carpet of Black Velvet,
and thereupon were placed the Coat of Arms, Sword, Target, Helm, and Crest,
Gantlets, and Spurs. Between the Standard and the great Banner, hung a Crystal
Branch with Twelve Sockets, and therein as many Tapers of Wax.

In this Room (the prospect of which, I have exhibited to your view in
Sculpture, in the Folio following) the Tapers were continually burning when it
was exposed to sight, which was every day (except Sunday) during the space of
about three weeks. During which time, Forty Gentlemen in short Mourning, all
which (except five) had been Officers, gave their attendance alternately,
Twenty upon a day; Four of which, waited in the First Room, Six in the Second
Room, and Ten. In this third Room where the Effigies lay in State, Five on one
side of the Rail of the Bed of State, and Five on the other, with their backs
close to the Wall, their Names and Offices were as follows.

1 Sir Thomas Prestwich Baronet. 2 Sir John Pawlet Knight. 3 Col. Richard
Wiltshire. 4 Col. Walter Slingsby. 5 Col. William Chamberlain. 6 Col. William
Hawley. 7 Col. Henry Crow. 8 Col. Cressy Dymmock. 9 Col. William Pretty. 10
Col. Degory Collins. 11 Col. Stephen White. 12 Col. Miles Man. 13 Lieut. Col.
Urian Leigh. 14 Major John Cogan. 15 Major Adam Roche. 16 Capt. Robert Ferrers.
17 Capt. Francis Cresset. 18 Capt. Thomas Rawson. 19 Capt. John Allen. 20 Capt.
Humphrey Roscarrock. 21 Capt. Samuel Acton. 22 Capt. George Bag. 23 Capt. Edwin
Babington. 24 Capt. Thomas Fisher. 25 Capt. Edward Andrew. 26 Capt. John
Russel. 27 Capt. Richard Barham. 28 Capt. Thomas Beck. 29 Capt. John Draycot.
30 Capt. Henry Mac Arty. 31 Capt. Thomas Heap. 32 Capt. John Bretton. 33 Lieut.
Edward Parry. 34 Lieut. John Hales. 35 Ensign Thomas Lamb. 36 Mr. Samuel
Scudamore. 37 Mr. William Perkinson. 38 Mr. Percival Yarrow. 39 Mr. Edmond
Wood. 40 Mr. John Bull.
Three days before the Solemnity of the Funeral, the Rooms aforesaid, were shut
up; and the Evening before, the Body which had lain there, in a private Room,
in a Coffin, covered with Black Velvet, with Guilt Nails and Hinges of the
same, was privately conveyed by Water to Westminster, accompanied by the Earls
of Bath and Craven, Sir James Smith, and others of his Kindred, and attended by
several of his Graces Domestics; where it was Interred by the Bishop of
Rochester, Dean of Westminster, in a Vault in the North Isle of King Henry the
Seventh's Chapel, made there by His Majesty's command for that purpose.

Upon the Coffin was fastened a Plate of Copper Guilt, and thereupon Engraven
Depositum Illustrissimi Principis GEORGII DVCIS ALBEMARLIAE Comitis
Torringtoniae, Baronis Monck de Potheridge, Beauchamp and Teyes, Carolo 2do
Regi Augustissimo a Sanctioribus Consiliis, nec non ab intimis Cubiculis,
omnium Regis Exercituum Ducis Supremi, Inclyti Ordinis Aureae Periscelidis
Equitis, etc. Obiit Westmonasterii Anno Aetatis 62. Die 3o Januarii Anno
reparatae salutis humanae M.DC.LXIX.

The Proceeding to the Funeral of his Grace GEORGE, late Duke of Albemarle,
etc. upon Saturday the 30th of April, An. 1670.
ABout Eleven of the Clock in the Morning, the Nobility, Gentry, and other
Persons who were to officiate at the Funeral, met at Sommerset-house in the
Strand; between which place, and the Abbey of Westminster, the Streets were
gravelled, and the Red and Blew Regiments of the Trained Bands of Middlesex,
commanded by the Earl of Craven, were placed on both sides, who kept the
passage free from the crowds of the People. The Officers of the said Regiments
being furnished with Cypress Scarffs, and their Drums covered with Black Bays,
adorned with Escucheons of the Dukes Arms. All things being in a readiness,
about Two of the Clock in the Afternoon, the Funeral then proceeded in this
form following,

First marched His Royal Highness, the Duke of York's Troop of Guards,
commanded by the Right Honorable Monsieur Blancfort, the Officers having
Mourning Scarffs of Cypress, and their Cornet, Trumpet-Banners; and
Kettle-Drums covered with the same.

Three Led Horses.

The Marshal Richard Llewellin.

The Kettle-Drums.

Four Trumpets.

Col. Rob. Werden Lieutenant. Sir John Godolphin Corner. Mons. Blancfort
Captain. Maj. Rich. Dutton Lieutenant. Capt. Nathaniel Layton Corporal. 1
Squadron. Capt. William Springal Corporal. 3 Squadron. Capt. George Winrame
Corporal. Cornet. 2 Squadron Capt. Ferdinand Stanhop Corporal. 4 Squadron. Geo.
Steward Quartermaster.

His Majesty's Troop of Guards marched next after them, commanded by His Grace
the Duke of Monmouth, the Officers in Mourning Scarffs, and the Cornet,
Trumpet-Banners, and Kettle-Drums covered as before.

Servants to His Grace the Duke of Monmouth, leading spare Horses.

Four Pages on Hors-back in Black, with White Feathers in their Hats.

Master of the Horse to the Duke of Monmouth.

The Kettle-Drums.

Four Trumpets.

The Duke of Monmouth, Captain.

Major General Randol Egerton. Cornet Will. Stanley. Sir Tho. Sands Lieutenant.

Major Richard Bings Corporal. 1 Squadron. Col. Francis Berkley Corporal.
Cornet. 3 Squadron. Major Samuel Wood Corporal. 2 Squadron. Henry Corbet
Corporal. 4 Squadron. James Proger Quartermaster.

In the next place marched His Majesty's Regiment of Foot Guards, commanded by
the Right Honorable Colonel John Russel, with their Muskets and Pikes in a
Funeral Posture; the several Ensigns furled and wrapped in Cypress, the
Officers having Mourning Scarffs of the same, and the Drums being covered with
Black Bays, adorned with Escucheons of the defunct.

Lieut. Colonel Edward Gray.

Captain John Downing.

Lieutenant Edmond Harris.

1. Division of Musquettiers.

Lieut. Robert Wiseman.

Lieut. John Crofts.

Lieut. Henry Tailor.

A prospect of the Chamber and Bed of State in which the Effigies of the Duke
of Albemarle lay in Somerset House.


Lieut. John Price.

Lieut. Thomas Hull.

Lieut. John Hanbury.

Lieut. Richard Basset.

Lieut. William Bodily.

Lieut. Richard Barber.

Lieut. William Morris.

Cap. Lieut. Francis Vincent.

Capt. Lieutenant James Read.

1. Division of Pikes.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

Lieut. Hump. Barrington.

Quartermaster Thomas Jones.

DDDDDDD

Agitant George Gamul.

E E E E E E Thomas Payton. Robert Bringfield. Anthony S. Leoger. Thomas
Howard. Richard Langley. George Traps.

E E E E E E E William Stockman. Basil Fielding. Charles Lloyd. Arthur Corbet.
Henry Sands. Herbert Throckmorton. Edmond Razeby.

E

John Churchill.

Major Will. Rolleston.

C C C C C Robert Walters. Arthur Broughton. Thomas Howard. William Cope.
Philip Howard.

C C C C C Sir Thomas Daniel. Sir John Talbot. Sir Jona: Atkins. Samuel Clark
Charles Wheeler.

Colonel John Russel.

A Led Horse.

And after them, next to the Proceeding the Regiment of Colestreams (commanded
by the Right Honorable William Earl of Craven (which took this place, by His
Majesty's Command, as having been the Generals own Regiment) the Officers
having Mourning Scarffs, their Ensigns furled and wrapped in Cypress, and their
Drums covered with Black Bays, furnished with Escucheons) marched in a Funeral
Posture as follows.

Lieut. George Lascels.

1. Division of Musquettiers.

S.mmmmmmS.

2.

Lieut. Robert Cooper.

3.

4.

Lieut. Robert Wych.

5.

6.

Lieut. Henry Hawley.

7.

8.

Lieut. Harry Hooker.

9.

10.

Lieut. Daniel Francis,

11.

12.

Sergeant.

13.

14.

Lieut. John Tongue.

15.

16.

Lieut. John Stringer.

Lieutenant Charles Waterhouse.

2. Drums.

1. Division of Pikes.

2.

3.

4.

5.

Lieutenant Daniel Court.

2. Drums.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

Lieutenant Edward Stewkley.

Drums.

Ensigns, viz. E E E E Thomas Troutbeck. Henry Cope. David Gross John Street.
9 10 11 12

E E E E Robert Kirkby. Nicholas Berty. Robert Wilkins. Alban Lovel. 5 6 7 8

E E E E Inglesby Daniel. John Perne. John Miller. Ralph Butcher. 1 2 3 4

Captains, viz. C C C C CL Robert Cook. Charles Berty beyond Sea. John Huitson.
Richard Kirkby. John Sanders. 6 7 8 9 10

C C C C C Robert Winter. Thomas Mansfield. John Peter. John Mutlow. John
Clarke. 1 2 3 4 5

Major John Miller.

William Earl of Craven, Colonel.

A Led Horse.

Then came the Proceeding, represented in Sculpture in the following Sheets,
beginning with the Conductors, and Poor Men in Gowns, viz.

long illustration of funeral procession Servant to the Officers of Arms.

Conductors Eight in number.

Poor men in Gowns in number Threescore and fourteen.

His Grace's Watermen 12.

Master of his Barge.

Four Drumms and a Fife.

The Standard.

Drum Major.

Three Trumpets.

The Segar Esquire Blewmantle Pursivant at Arms.

Sr: Stephen Fox Knight

Sr. Jeremie Smith Knight.

Richard Mason Esquire his Maties: Avernor.

The first mourning Horse caparizoned with black cloth led by a Groom.

Servants to Gentlemen, Esquire, Knights, Knights of the Bath, and Baronets.

The Guydon.

Three Trumpets.

Mr: Tho Holford Portcullis Pursivant at Arms.

Sr. John Griffith Knight.

Sr. Thomas Morgan Knight.

Collonell Henry Marckham.

The Second mourning Horse led by a Groom.

Servants to Barons younger sons, visc: younger sons, Knights privy Counselors,
Barons Eldest sons, Earls younger sons, viscounts Eldest sons, Barons, Bishop
Marquesses younger sons, Earls eldest sons, viscounts, Dukes younger sons,
Marquesses eldest sons, Earls, Marquesses, Dukes, and ye Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury

The Banner of Teyes.

Esquires.

Three Trumpets.

Mr: Fran: Sandford Rouge Dragon Pursivantat Arms.

Sr. Charles Littleton Knight.

Sr: Peter Killegrew Bt.

Major Halsall.

The Third mourning Horse led by a Groom.

Servants to his Grace the Defunct.

Other Gentlemen at Large.

Doctors of Physic Divines and Chaplains.

The Banner of Beauchampe.

Sr. Richard Everard Knight.

Mr. Roberts

Three Trumpets.

Mr. Henry Dethicke Rouge Croix Pursivant at Arms.

Sr. Edward Brett Knight.

Sr. Francis Vincent Bt:

Coll: Mouldsworth.

The fourth mourning Horse led by a Groom.

The 40. Officers which attended about the Effigies of the defunct at Somerset
House.

John Brown Esquire Clarke of the Parliament.

Joseph Williamson Esquire Clarke of the Council.

Knights.

Masters of the Chancerie.

The Banner of Monk, Plantagenet, Gray and Talbot.

Knights of the Bathe. Sr. John Maynard Knight. His Maties: Sergeant.

Three Trumpets.

Rob: Chaloner Esquire Lancaster Herald.

Sr. Walter Vane Knight.

Sr. Gilbert Talbot Knight.

Coll: Roger Whitley.

The fifth mourning Horse led by Simon Corbet yeoman of the stable, assisted by
a Groom.

Sr. Levline Jenkin Knight. Judge of the Almaralty.

Sr. Charles Harbord Knight. (...) General of his Maties: Revenues.

Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber.

Will: Ashbournham Esqr Cofferer to his Matie:

Sr. Edmond Windham Knight. Knight. Marshall.

Baronets.

Knights Privy Counselors.

Earls younger sons.

The Carpitt and Cushon carried by Francis Boweman Esquire one of his Maties:
Gentlemen Vshers. Q: W:

Great Officers to his Grace the Defunct.

Sr. Tho: Stringer Knight. Chamberlain.

Mr. Lock Steward.

Mr. Limbrey Treasurer.

Mr. Baynes Comptroller.

Barons.

Bishops.

Earls.

The Great Banner.

Four Trumpets.

Gervase Price Esquire Sergeant Trumpet.

John Wingfeild Esquire York Herald.

Sr. John Robinson Knight. and Bt.

Sr. James Smith Knight. His Grace's Lieut: Coll:

Sr. Thomas Player Knight.

The chief mourning Horse caparizoned with black velvet and led by Mr: Richard
Mead his Grace's Esquerie assisted by a Groom.

Sr: Thomas St: George Knight. Somerset Herald.

Thomas Lee Esquire Chester Herald.

Henry St: George Esquire Richmond Herald.

Elias Ashmole Esquire Windsor Herald.

William Dugdale Esquire Norroy King of Arms.

Sr. Edward Bysshe Knight. Clarenceaux King of Arms.

Sr. Edward Carteret Knight. one of his Maties: Gentlemen Vshers.

Names of the Bannerolls.
K. Monck and Champernon. L. Monck and Grant. M. Monck and Craherne. N. Monck
and Hill. O. Monck and Trenchard. Carried by
Hugh Stukeley Esqr. Robert Pollard Esqr. William Benton Esqr. William Hooper
Esqr. Charles Modyford Esqr.

Names of the Bannerolls.
E. Monck and Clarges. F. Monck and Smith. G. Monck and Arscot. H. Monck and
Plantagenet. I. Monck and Wood. Carried by
Walter Clarges Esqr. Sr: Thomas Higgons Knight. Peter Prideaux Esqr. John Towell
Esqr. Sr: Peter Colleton Knight.

Supporters of the Pall.
A. The Lo: Neuport. B. The Lo: Gerard. C. The Lo: Ashley. D. Mr: Treasurer of
his Maties: Household.


Mr: Neue.

Mr: Egerton.

The ten Lords, Assistants to the chief Mourner.

Sr. Edward Walker Knight. Garter. Principal King of Arms. Sr. John Ayton Knight.
Usher of the Black Rod. The Duke of Rich::mond supporter to the Chief mourner
The Duke of Albemarle Chief mourner The Duke of Ormond Lo: Steward-supporter to
ye. Chief mourner Sr. Francis Leake Bt. The Earl of Manchester Lord
Chamberlain. The Earl of Suffolk. The Earl of Bridgewater. The Earl of
Mulgraue. The Earl of Peterborrow. The Earl of St. Albans. The Earl of
Sandwich. The Earl of Bathe. The Earl of Carlisle. The Lord Arlington.
Bernard Grenvile Esquire Master of the Horse to the Defunct. The Horse of Honor
richly caparizon'd with crimson velvet, embroydered and embossed with Gold and
Silver.




Next after the Horse of Honor, or State, Her Majesty's Troop of Guards,
commanded by Sir Philip Howard Knight, (Brother to the Right Honorable the Earl
of Carlisle) closed the Rear of the Proceeding, which had this place by
particular order, as having been his Grace the Defuncts own Troop of Guards,
and marched in the Form following, viz.

Three Led Horses.

The Kettle Drum.

Four Trumpets.

Sir Philip Howard Knight, Captain.

Lieutenant Daniel Collingwood. Cornet Francis Watson. Lieutenant Henry Monck.
Sir Edward Fish Baronet, Corporal. 1 Squadron. Capt. Mark Robinson, Corporal. 3
Squadron. Edward Watson, Corporal. Cornet. 2 Squadron. George Collingwood,
Corporal. 4 Squadron. Will. Upcot, Quartermaster.

IN the Order aforesaid, the Solemnity proceeded to the West Door of
Westminster Abbey, where the Conductors and Poor-men in Gowns opened to the
Right and Left, and made way for the Proceeding to pass between them; so that
the first that entered the Abbey, were Servants to the Gentry and Nobility; who
also opening to the Right and Left, made a Guard betwixt the Chore and the West
Door of the Abbey; without which, the Effigies was taken out of the Chariot,
and placed upon a Beer, which being carried within the Abbey Door by Mr. Mason,
Colonel Markham, Major Halsall, Colonel Molsworth, Colonel Whitley, and Sir
Thomas Player Knight, (who assisted on the Left Hand of the Persons who bore
the Standard, Guydon, Three Banners, and Great Banner, in the Proceeding) with
the help of some that belonged to the Abbey (by reason of the weight of it) was
there received under a Canopy of Black Velvet, with a deep Silk-fringe, and
lined with Black Taffata; and thence carried to the Hearse, and placed therein.

The Supporters or Bearers of the Canopy, were Sir Stephen Fox Knight, Sir Charles
Littleton Knight, Sir Walter Vane Knight, Sir John Griffith Knight, Sir Edward Brett Knight,
and Sir John Robinson Knight and Baronet (the other Six Assistants in the
Proceeding, on the Right Hands of those that carried the aforesaid Standard,
Guydon, Three Banners, and Great Banner.)

At the entrance into the Abbey, the Dean and Prebends in their Copes; and the
Quire in their Surplices, attended and proceeded between the Great Banner, and
the Officers of Arms that carried the Trophies.

When they came to the Hearse, none were permitted to enter within the outward
Rail, but the Persons following.

First, Mr. Thomas Segar Blewmantle, Pursivant at Arms. Sir Jeremy Smith, with
the Standard. Mr. Thomas Holford Portcullis, Pursivant. Sir Thomas Morgan, with
the Guydon. Mr. Francis Sandford Rouge-Dragon, Pursivant. Sir Peter Killegrew,
with the Banner of Teyes. Mr. Henry Dethick Rouge-Croix, Pursivant. Sir Francis
Vincent, with the Banner of Beauchampe. Mr. Robert Chaloner Lancaster Herald.
Sir Gilbert Talbot, with the Banner of Monk, Plantagenet, Gray, and Talbot. Mr.
Bowman, with the Carpet and Cushion. The Defuncts, Four Officers with white
Staves. Mr. John Wingfield York, Herald. Sir James Smith, with the Great
Banner. Sir Thomas St. George Somerset Herald, bearing the Spurs. Mr. Thomas
Lee Chester Herald, with the Gantlets. Mr. Henry St. George Richmond Herald,
with the Helm and Crest. Mr. Elias Ashmole Windsor Herald, with the Target. Mr.
William Dugdale Norroy King of Arms, with the Sword. Sir Edward Bysshe
Clarenceaux, King of Arms, with the Coat of Arms. Sir Edward Carteret, His
Majesty's Gentleman Usher.
Then followed the Ten Bannerols bourn by Mr. Modyford. Mr. Bruton. Mr.
Stukley. Mr. Fowel. Sir Thomas Higgons. Mr. Hooper. Mr. Pollard. Sir Peter
Colleton. Mr. Prideaux. Mr. Clarges.


Sir Edward Walker, Principal King of Arms, and Sir John Ayton, Usher of the
Black Rod.

These were all placed within the outward Rail.

Then the Chief Mourner, the present Duke of Albemarle, entered the inward Rail,
and was placed at the Head, in a Great Chair of Black Velvet with Arms.

After him entered his Two Supporters, the Dukes of Richmond and Ormond, and
sat on each side of him, upon Stools covered with Black Velvet.

And after them his Ten Assistants, viz. The Lord Chamberlain, the Earls of
Suffolk, Bridgwater, Mulgrave, Peterborough, S. Albans, Sandwich, Bath, and
Carlisle, and the Lord Arlington, who sat on either side, on the like Stools.

The last that entered, were the Lords Newport, Gerard of Brandon, and Ashley,
and Sir Thomas Clifford, Treasurer of His Majesty's Household, the Four
Supporters of the Pall, who were seated at the Corners thereof on Stools
covered with Black Velvet, within the Hearse where the Effigies was placed.

Being all seated in the order aforesaid, The Dean of Westminster read the
Service appointed by the Lyturgy, and that being done, Doctor Ward, Bishop of
Salisbury, Preached the Funeral Sermon: After which, the Dean and some of the
Prebends (in their Copes) went up to the Altar, and there staid for the
Offering.

The Form of the Offerings,
First, Mr. Bowman went up to the Altar, and spread the Carpet, and laid the
Cushion at the Foot of the Altar. Which being done, Mr. Garter repaired to the
Chief Mourner, and attended His Grace to the Offering.

The Four Officers with their white Staves went first, then followed Mr.
Garter, and a Gentleman Usher; after them, the Chief Mourner between his Two
Supporters, his Train bourn up by Sir Francis Leak, followed by his Ten
Assistants, where he offered upon his Knee, and then returned in the same
manner.

Then Mr. Bowman rouled up the Carpet, and laid it under the Cushion; Mr.
Garter, and the Gentleman Usher did again conduct the Chief Mourner to the
Altar alone, His Train not bourn, where he did offer for Himself; and there
stood by the Dean, at the North end of the Altar, to receive the Achievements,
Mr. Garter attending him.

In the next place Mr. Clarenceaux preceded the Dukes of Richmond and Ormond,
and delivered them the Coat of Arms; who being come to the Altar, offered it,
and it was received by the Dean, who presented it to the Chief Mourner, and he
delivered it to Mr. Garter, who laid it upon the Altar; and then Mr.
Clarenceaux returned with them to their Seats.

In the same manner, Mr. Norroy brought up the Lord Chamberlain, and the Earl
of Suffolk, who in like form offered the Sword, carrying the Point upward.

Mr. Windsor, the Earls of Bridgwater and Mulgrave, who offered the Target in
like manner.

Mr. Richmond, the Earls of Peterborough and S. Albans, who offered the Helm
and Crest.

Mr. Chester, the Earls of Sandwich and Bathe, who offered the Gantlets.

Mr. Somerset, the Earl of Carlisle, and the Lord Arlington, who offered the
Spurs.

In the next place, the Great Banner half rouled up by Mr. York, was offered by
Sir James Smith in like manner.

Mr. Lancaster likewise with Sir Gilbert Talbot, who offered the Banner of
Monck, Plantagenet, Gray, and Talbot.

Mr. Rouge-Croix with Sir Francis Vincent, with the Banner of Beauchamp.

Mr. Rouge-Dragon with Sir Peter Killegrew, with the Banner of Teyes.

Mr. Portcullis with Sir Thomas Morgan, with the Guydon.

Mr. Blewmantle with Sir Jeremy Smith, with the Standard.

The Ten Bannerols were offered by Pairs, by those that carried them (beginning
with the two next to the Head of the Effigies) a Pursivant at Arms going before
every two of them.

The Trophies being thus offered, the Chief Mourner returned to his Chair,
attended by Mr. Garter and the Gentleman Usher.

Then Mr. Garter conveyed up to the Altar, the Two Supporters to the Chief
Mourner, who offered for themselves on their Knees, and then returned to their
Seats.

Mr. Clarenceaux attended the two first Assistants, who did also offer in like
manner for themselves, and so returned.

The two next did the like, attended by Mr. Norroy.

The two next attended by Mr. Windsor.

The two next attended by Mr. Richmond.

And the two next attended by Mr. Chester.

Then Mr. Somerset did go to the Lords, Newport and Gerard, Two Supporters of
the Pall, and attended them to the Offering in like manner.

And Mr. York attended the Lord Ashley, and Mr. Treasurer of the Household, the
other Two Supporters of the Pall.

These being all returned to their Seats, Mr. Garter standing on the uppermost
Step, going to the Altar, turned his Face toward the Hearse, and proclaimed the
Defuncts style as follows.

THus it has pleased Almighty God, to take out of this Transitory Life, unto
His Mercy, The Most High, Mighty, and Most Noble Prince GEORGE, late Duke of
Albemarle, Earl of Torrington, Baron Monck of Potheridge, Beauchamp, and Teyes.
Captain General of His Majesty's Forces, Gentleman of His Majesty's Bedchamber,
One of the Lords of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, and Knight of
the Most Noble Order of the Garter. This being Proclaimed, the Chamberlain,
Steward, Treasurer, and Comptroller to the Defunct, brake their white Staves at
the Head of the Effigies.

And then His Majesty's Sergeant-Trumpet giving a sign to the Trumpets, that
were placed over the Door going into the Quire, they immediately Sounded, and
the Volleys of Shot, both of Horse and Foot, were presently discharged.

A Description of the Hearse set up in the Abbey of Westminster.
IN the midst of the Cross of the Abbey (which is betwixt the Quire, and the
Steps going up to the Altar) was erected a Ducal-Herse; the prospect of which,
with the manner of the Effigies lying in State there, the Position of the Great
Banner, the Three lesser Banners, Guydon, Standard, and the Ten Bannerols, with
the several Trophies upon the Table at the Feet of the Effigies, I have
exhibited in the next folio.

The length of the Hearse was Fourteen Foot, the breadth Eleven Foot, and the
Rail Four Foot and a half high, the Hautepass, upon which the Table stood,
raising the Floor about Six Inches from the Pavement. The Four great Pillars
were Eight square, and near Twenty Foot high, and upon their Capitals were
placed the Crests and Supporters of the Duke. These Pillars had two Courses of
Rails near the tops, unto which, both the Valence and the Tester were fastened;
and unto this also, by several Costs of Timber, the Cupulo was fixed; the point
of which finished in a Ducal Coronet, Two Foot in Diameter, exalted Thirty Foot
from the Pavement. The whole Hearse was clothed on the outside with Black
Velvet, Garnished with several Compartments Embossed of the Dukes Arms, and
Embellished with Crests, Coronets, and Scrouls with his two Motto's, viz.
Fortiter, Fideliter, Foeliciter, And Cunctando Restituit.

It was double Valanced and Fringed, the Inner Valence and Tester being of
Black Taffata, adorned with Escucheons of the same, and a Majesty Escucheon
within the Tester. There were placed within the Corners of the Hearse, also Four
Stools of Black Velvet for the Supporters of the Pall, and it was Floored with
Black Cloth.

The Rail next to the Hearse, was Twenty three Foot long, Twenty Foot and a half
broad, and Three Foot and a half high: This Rail was covered with Black Cloth,
and Floored with Bays, and within it sat the Chief Mourner on a Chair with
Arms of Black Velvet, and his Two Supporters and Ten Assistants on Stools of
the same; and also to the inside thereof Sockets were fixed, to receive the
Staves of the Standard, Guydon, Three Banners, the Great Banner, and the Ten
Bannerols.

The outermost Rail was covered with Black Bays, being Thirty Foot long, Twenty
seven Foot and a half in breadth, and Three Foot high; within which several
Forms were placed, covered also with Bays, and upon them sat all the Carriers
of the Trophies, the Officers of Arms, the Defuncts Four Officers with White
Staves, and several other persons concerned.

There were Passages also of Four Foot wide, on the East and West side of the
Rails, and the Hearse; which were opened to let in the respective Persons, and
to give them passage to the Offering.

The End.
A Prospect of the Hearse in which the Effigies of the Duke of Albemarle lay in
State in the Abbey of Westminster.



