A Military SERMON, WHEREIN By the Word of God, the nature and disposition of
a Rebel is discovered, and the Kings true Soldier described and
characterized: Preached at SHREWSBURY, May 19. 1644. to His Majesty's Army
there under the Command of the High and most Illustrious Prince RVPERT. By Edw.
Symmons Chaplain to the Lifeguard of the Prince of WALES.

PROVE. 24. 19, 20, 21, 22. Fret not thy self, because of the evil man,
neither be thou envious at the wicked.

For there shall be no reward to the evil man, the candle of the wicked shall
be put out.

My son fear thou the Lord, and the King, and meddle not with them that are
given to change:

For their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them
both?

OXFORD, Printed by Henry Hall, in the Year 1644.

TO The Honorable Sir MICHAEL VVOOD-HOUSE Governor of Ludlow, and Colonel to
the Lifeguard of the Prince of WALES.
Noble Sir,
MY dependence on you, and your respects to me, did formerly move to some
public manifestation of my service to you, and had not the Press, like the
poole of Bethesda, been oppressed with multitudes, the world ere now had taken
notice of it; but this following Sermon had the advantage to step in before
that, which had lain there longer; and this I dedicate to your Name: as it was
with attention and favor heard, by many gallant Gentlemen and Soldiers, so I
hope by your self (who are both) it will be accepted, as agreeable to
godliness, and entertained as a demonstration of the inward affection which is
due from

Your Servant, E. S.

To the Readers.
COurteous Readers, in this following ^ermon, you will meet sometime with this
Title, The men of Westminster; I desire you would not conceive, that thereby is
intended the Parliament of England (as some are pleased to call them) but only
that powerful Faction there abiding, or thereunto relating, which does oppose
the Lords Anointed, subverting our Religion, peace, and Nation: for if (as
themselves teach) some may (notwithstanding their Oath of Allegiance, resist by
force of arms the person of their Sovereign Lord CHARLES as he is a man, and
yet honor him (in the mean while) as he is King: I hope that I a Minister of
God, may more lawfully by Gods Word oppose the vices of such, as they are men,
and yet reverence them if they be (as in their own account) Members of the
honorable Houses: nay, I do not speak against them as they are men, but
only as they are transgressors from the holy and righteous ways of God: it is
their evils that I oppose, not their persons: I am only grieved at the
hardness and perverseness of their spirits, and I desire with Jeremy, Chap.
9.1. that mine head were a fountain of water, and mine eyes springs, that I
might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people
occasioned by them: And good Readers (if you be true Christians, and right
borne Englishmen) I beseech you, let us all strive together with God by our
tears for the softening of these men's hearts (if it be possible.) Our Savior
wept for the sins and ensuing miseries of those that sought his ruin, we have
the lik^ object at this time, O let us discover in our selves the mind of
Christ, God expects it from all his Saints.

Farewell.
A Military SERMON.
PROVE. 17.11. An evil man seeks only Rebellion, therefore a cruel
Messenger shall be sent against him.


THe maine scope (as I apprehend) of this Military Sermon is; First, to
discover out of Gods Book the nature of Rebellion, and rebellious men.

Secondly, to encourage from the Lord the Kings loyal Subjects, and true
hearted Soldiers in their opposing such.

Now the first of these is the Doctrine of this Text, and the second is the use
of it.

A Rebel is an evil or wicked man; for such a one is he, (says the Text)
That seeks Rebellion: sure then Rebellion it self must needs be a wicked work,
or a work of wickedness, because it is that which in the judgment of Gods
spirit, wicked men only seek for, or thirst after: there is your Doctrine.

The use follows naturally, and it is this; If it be so, then it is the duty of
all good men to oppose Rebellion, and to endeavor the suppression of all
Rebellious men; yea, if extreme severity be exercised upon such, they have but
their due portion alloted them of the Lord: for says the Text, a cruel
Messenger shall be sent unto him.

Thus you see the Text does well suit the occasion, if my discourse shall but
as well sure the Text, and your attention (noble Gentlemen and Soldiers) my
discourse; I hope through, Gods blessing, our meeting will not be altogether
fruitless and unprofitable.

But for the better knowledge of the Rebels and their work: of your selves and
your own duty, I Will give you a more full description of both, and that from the
Text too; which to my apprehension does offer a double discovery; one of the
Kings enemies, and another of his friends or good Soldiers.

The enemy is discovered by three particulars, in the former part of the verse:
1. By his natural disposition; He is malus, an evil man. 2. By his active
di^igence, in the word, quaerit, seeks. 3. By his ungodly work, in the word
Rebellion: or tantum rebellionem, An evil man seeks only Rebellion.


The Kings true Soldier is described by three more particulars, in the latter
part of the verse: 1. By his O^fice, He is Ang^lus or Nuncius, a Messenger* 2.
By his Commission, in the word mirtetur* shall be sent. 3. By ^is Employment,
in the word Cruel, a cruel messenger; he is so called from the severity he
shall use, or from that sharp punishment which shall be inflicted by him:
therefore a cruel Messenger shall be sent against him: Part. 1.
of these in order, and first of the enemy.


malus, an evil man, An evil man seeks Rebellion, some read Rebellis tantum
quaerit malum, a Rebellious man seeks only mischief; so making a Rebel and
a wicked man to be all one, as they do mischief and Rebellion to be the same
thing; and indeed so they are, add but most to wicked, turn but malus into
p^ssimus, and they are Synonymaes, and may be predicated of each other, and
then the Doctrine is in these words; Doct.
A Rebel is a most wicked man, of a most malignant disposition.

I say a most wicked man, because Rebellion it self (as we shall show anon) is
the very height and top of all mischief* therefore that is arrived at that
pitch of wickedness, as to be a Rebel must needs be a most wicked man.

Now, I would have you know that by Rebellion, I mean that which is against the
King, and I define it to be, A resisting the Authority, and a violent opposing
the will and person of the lawful Governor; which being a sin for^idden in
the Commandment of the second Table, is more against the light of nature, then
Rebellion against God only.

Every wicked man is a Rebel against God, and sins against grace and piety,
yet being endued with humanity and moral honesty, such may happily live in
obedience to their Prince, and may fight for him, against those that do resist
him: But they that rebel against the King, sin not only against piety, but
even against nature it self, and grace does seldom overtake such men, they
are so highly wicked; so far, or so fully malignant.

Cajetan makes a difference between facinerosum and rebellem, a naughty man,
and a Rebel: a naughty man (says he) will admit of evil, and commit it too,
upon occasions of gain or pleasure, but a Rebel is he that studies mischief,
and seeks occasions to foment Rebellion.

And indeed the distinction is good, only give me leave to add this, I do
believe (for my part) that every wicked man who is a Rebel against God in
esse, is also a Rebel against the King in posse: he that is not converted to
God by grace, may in time prove a rebel unto his King: He that loves not the
King for conscience sake, in regard of the Oath or Command of God, is neither a
good man, nor a truly good subject; they that hold with the King for their
wealth sake, to keep that, or that serve him only for their pay* I make no
question, but if others could give them better security for their Estates, or
would give them better wages, they would make no matter to cast off their
present obedience: such men are but like the Cananites in the book of the
Judges, who when they could get ability and advantage to themselves, did shake
off the yoke of Israel, and took part with the enemies against their
Governors: I wish these present times had not spoken too loudly to this
purpose; surely as fear God and the King, so love God and the King go together.

But further I grant this, it is one thing facere malum, and another thing
quaerere malum; even a good man may unadvisedly or through weakness do evil,
but not purposely seek to do it: He may be an assister in, but not a contriver
of Rebellion, and such a one may be recovered out of the snare of Satan, (as
those are who are come from the Rebels unto us,) for why? Rebellion is but
adventitious unto such a one, whereas unto the other, it is natural, yea it is
his natural disposition to rebel, and of such a Rebel, the Text speaks: and
him I affirm to be a most wicked man* a man of a most malignant disposition,
which I prove thus.

This rebellious disposition or inclination is bred and borne with him, and so
it is rivetted into his very soul. David speaking of such, Psalm. 58.3, 4, etc.
says, They are refractory from he Womb, so soon as they are borne, they go
astray, and speak lies, (the true practice of all Rebels) the poison of their
lips is the poison of a serpent, (blasting the credit and reputation of their
betters,) they are like the deaf adder which stops her ear, and will not
hearken to the voice of charmers, charm they never so wisely, i. e. they will
not be persuaded by any good couns^ll to put off their mischievous disposition
of evil speaking and evil doing.

For indeed as it is in them ab initio, from their beginning, so it abides in
them always, Rebellis quaerit duntaxat malum, (says the Text) A rebellions
man seeks only evil, he minds nothing else, he is always inclining to the way
of Rebellion, as a stone is to its center, some translations read, tantum,
Rebellis, only a rebellious man minds this mischeife, which ties it as a
Property to him alone, he and none else studyes rebellion: nor will he by any
means be moved to cease so to do, for says Solomon in the words immediately
going before the text, an hundred stripes will not enter into a fool, he is so
far from being amended by corr^ctions that he still persists in his
rebellious way, and seeks to act mischeife, even till a cruel messenger be
sent unto him, not to give him more stripes, for they will do him no good, but
even to cut him off from having a being.

In the former Chapter Prove. 16.27, 28, 29. this rebellious man is well set
forth by his titles, and by his practices, these we shall note in the next
point but observe his titles now.

1. He is called there v. 27, nequam an ungodly man; and if we would know what
kind of ungodly man the spirit means, we shall see it from the Original, for
the Hebrew reads it vir Belial, a man without yoke, that will not live under
Government, which in plain English is a rebel:

2. He is called v. 28. vir perversitatum a man of perversities, a froward man,
a man of perverse lips, of a cross spirit, that studies only to thwart, and
cross, and vex, and grieive the spirit of others.

3. He is called there Susurro a whisperer of slanders* or a backbiter, that
breaks peace, and makes divisions among friends: Tremelius read^s it Susurro
disjungit ducem, a whisperer that makes a separation betwixt the Prince and his
people, so in the 9 verse of this Chapter, there is the same phrase again
iterans rem disjungit ducem, he that repeates a matter over and over, (as
backbiters use to do for want of other faults) seperates the Prince from his
people or them from him: this is another of his properties:

4. He is called there in the 29 verse. vir violentiae a violent man, or a man
of blood, these are the titles and conditions of a rebel, and experience tells
us they are true conditions: And who will not say, that these do speak a
Rebel to be a most wicked man, or a man of a most malignant disposition?

Reason.
The ground of this malignity of disposition we gather from our Saviors words
to some in whom the same was. Joh. 8.44. You are of your Father the Devil, and
his works you will do: now the Devil was the first rebel that ever was, and
the first seducer of others to rebellion, he did effect, as you may see in Genesis
3. only by belying and by slandering of his Sovereign: now as Iubal and
Tub^l-Cain were called the Fathers of them that followed their art and trade
which they first invented, so may the Devil be called the Father of all
Rebels: And he we know is styled (...), the wicked one (...), in a special
manner the most malignant one, and they in their measure are of a disposition
like him.

Nay Satan is more their Father then in that sense: he is (as I may say) their
natural Father, 2 Pet. 1.4.
and as the godly are said to be partakers of the godly nature, so Rebels may
be said to be partakers of the very Diabolical nature, his own wicked spirit
acts in them, and you may be sure, it acts his work* and in his method, and
therefore our Savior calls those very men in another place, serpents brood,
and generation of vipers: Mat. 12.34.
now a viper (as some write) does destroy its own damme, which gave it being,
and so did they their Savior, and so do all Rebels, (yea our Rebels)
endeavor the destruction of their own Nation that bred them, of their own
Sovereign that preserved them, as Nero ripped the Bowels of his own Mother that
bare him, so do these (patria matter) rip up the very bowels of their own
Country, that gave birth and breeding to them.

Johannes Aventinus tells us that Maximilian the Emperor was wont to call the
King of Spain R^x Hominum, a King of men, because his Subjects like m^n lived
in obedience, but the King of England he would call Rex Diabolorum, a King of
Devils, because the Su^jects of this Kingdom had diverse times rebelled against
their Sovereign, (though always to their own ruin,) as in King John, Henry
the third, Edward the second, and Richard the second's days: And I would to
God, that some in this Nation, did not now prove themselves worse Devils then
ever, but alas they do, for the Religion here professed now, is more opposite
to this rebellious way, then that which was practiced in those former days:
But in this, we may more fully behold the malignity and vicious disposition of
Rebellious spirits, they are not capable of gracious or evangelicall
instructions, never marvel if they who offered spite to the clear dictates
of the Gospel, do rebel against the King.

Therefore be not a Rebel, Trust not a Rebel: Use.


1. Be not a Rebel, walk not in the way with them, for so to do, will speak
you the Devils Child, and to have reached to the highest staire of villainy,
your Titles will be the same which Saint Peter gives to Elimas the Sorcerer.
Act. 13.10. Full of all Subtilty, Child of the Devil, Enemy of righteousness,
and perverter of the right ways of the Lord: you may remember for the Honor
of Rebellion, that the worst Title that the evil spirit could teach King Saul
in the heat of his wrath to call Jonathan by, was this, Thou Son of the
perverse and Rebellious Woman. 1 Samuel 20.30.

2. Trust not a Rebel, it is Solomon's advice, Prove. 26, 25. Though he speaks
fair, yet believe him not, for there be seven (that is a multitude of)
abominations in his heart: they that seek Rebellion (as appears by the
practice of some in our Nation,) do hold that Principle of the Jesuits, that
they may break their word, promise, or oath, so it be in ordine ad causam, to
promote their cause, and what man that is wise will credit such? He that hates
(says Solomon) dissembleth with his lips, and lays up deceit within him: so
did these men of Hope, when to get leave to sit as long as they pleased, they
promised the Reformation of Church and State, the payments of the Kings debts,
and to make him the most glorious Prince in Christendom: for how well they
have kept (or endeavored to keep) their word, let all men judge* They make
lies their refuge, and confide in them, and there is reason for it, they are of
their nearest kindred, even their own Brethren, Children with themselves of
the same Father: I could show you how all the foundation stones of their
rebellious building are nothing but Lies, and so are the pillowes that uphold
the same* cemented they are together, with a mortar of craft, malice, and
impudency, but experience has too sufficiently taught this to the whole
Nation: beside I should want time if I should now speak of it, only there is
one thing I Will desire you to note in all Rebels: It is their nature (being men
that like Ahab have sold themselves to work wickedness) to charge (as he did)
by their lies their own conditions and intentions upon others: thou art he
that troubles Israel (says he to Elias) when it was himself: so Corah and his
companions when they rebelled against Moses and Aron, did charge them for
taking too much upon them, when it was only themselves that did so: And Satan
when he tempted our first Parents to rebel, did charge most wickedly upon the
Lord his Sovereign, his own conditions of falsehood and envy. And so his Brood
amongst us, how directly have they trod in his steps: for (seducing the people
to rebel against their Liege Lord) they have most maliciously accused him of
falsehood (their own condition,) and of envy at the welfare and happiness of
them his Subjects; and that he intended to alter religion, to destroy the
Liberties of Parliament, and the properties of his people; yea and to bring in
forraigners to invade the Nation; while themselves (as woeful experience does
now teach us) have endeavored, and in some sort eff^cted all and every one of
the same things: wherefore from hence (I sa^) learn to be so wise as not to
trust a Rebel; and to this purpose, remember the example of our Savior, John
2.24. though they speak him fair, and made great professions of their good
will toward him, and of being his Disciples* yet he would not commit himself
unto them. For (says the Text) he knew well what was in them, they were some
of that Serpents brood I spoke of before.

And secondly remember too, how they (our Rebels I mean) will not believe the
King, off^ring undeserved mercy and pardon unto them, although he like that
Inhabitant of Heaven, Psalm. 15. has kept his word with them to his own loss,
do you therefore believe such unbelievers. But what should be the reason of
this their suspicion, (some will say,) why even this: they judge of the King by
themselves, they think he will deceive them, because they have already, and
still think to deceive him: what pains has been taken, and at this present
is, by those Counselors of Peace at Oxford, to work faith in these Infidells,
but to no purpose, it is true which the Psalmist says of such men, Let the
Charmers charm never so wisely they will not hear, for it is mischief only
which they seek after, and are resolved, yea have sworn, and taken a Covenant
to persevere in: A wicked man seeks only Rebellion.

2. Seeks: this word notes his active diligence: seeking is studying and
devising occasions and means to promote that which is aimed at, quaerit
tantum, he is diligent, for he minds nothing else, but this he minds always:
the Lesson or Doctrine is this. Rebellious men are exceeding industrious and
diligent in their way.

They are always plotting or acting somewhat to the furtherance. Mat. 2.1.
They devise iniquity in the night season, upon their beds, and in the day time
they practice what they have devised, because (says the Text) they have got
power (or the Militia) into their hands: nay sometime they are so great with
Egg to act that mischief which they have plotted in the Evening, against the
righteous man that lives quietly by them: that they will fetch him out of his
bed at midnight: the diligence of a Rebel is well expressed in that place
before named, Prove. 16.27, 28, 29.

1. Vir Belial, a Rebel or an ungodly man diggeth up evil, that is he takes
pains to undermine his brother, as men do by digging to undermine Cities: or
he diggs into men's lives to find faults, as men do into the earth to find
coals and mettalls; and when with the teeth of his malice he has dug up
some error, or perhaps made it, with the help of Counsel dug from Hell,
his lips are as a burning beam to show it unto all.

2. He sows strife, (says the Text) amongst men, namely in public, by his
perverseness and frowardness, and makes divisions among friends in private
by his whisperings: or (as was said before) between the Prince and his people.

3. He intic^th his neighbor into ill ways with himself, by his cunning
insinuations, or else by violence he does force them to help him in acting
mischief. Observe Solomon's words in the place, and you shall easily find this
to be the sense of them; and then say whether the Spirit of God does not most
notably describe the conditions of our Rebels: I hope none of you will gainsay
the Holy Ghost so much, as to doubt of those being such who have these
conditions: and indeed mark it always, your own reading and experience will
confirm this truth unto you, that a Rebel is never idle, but is either digging
of evil, that is, plotting it, or sowing of strife; that is, planting it;
making breaches, whispering lies, caluminiating the honest* enticing the
simple, threatening others, doing mischief one way or other to further his own
designs, not such a man to be found in the world again for activitie of
spirit, as a Rebel.

Reason.
And the ground of this their activity is, that abundance of malice which is in
them; now malice is like quicksilver always in motion, and extreme hot, nor
is there any grace in them to cool it is fervor, whereas in the best men there
is some Corruption to cool the edge of zeal: again, guilty men (such as
Rebels be) are naked men, and such are always deligent to get clothing: but
they seek it only from webs of their own weaving, scelere velandum esse
scelus, is their opinion, one villainy must hide another: and then too, they are
(like men of the plague) desirous to infect others, to involve them in their
own ^ulphs, their fathers own children they be to an hair, like him they would
feign bring all men (if they could) into the same condemnation with themselves.

The Apostle Peter notes the diligence of the devil that Arch-Rebell, in these
words of his: 1 Pet. 5. 1 Pet. 4.15.
he goes about like a roaring lion, continually seeking whom he may devour,
and in another place by his concatenation of busybodies, with murderers and
evil doers, he does well inform us, that murderers and evil doers, such as
the devil and all Rebels be, are also busybodies: indeed they have nothing
but their busy diligence, to supply their lack of honesty, and to support
their wicked cause. Satan for his diligence and activitie in evil, is called
in the Gospel Beelzebub, a Fly, or the God of Flies who (you know know are
mighty impudent and busy creatures, beat them away from to place never so often
they will come again: so will he, and so will they, he is the great Fly, and
they (the Rebels I mean) are his Flies, always seeking out sore places, and
making them worse, nor are they ever weary of ill doing.

Therefore let no man think the better of the Kings enemies, or of their cause,
Use.
for their activitie and diligence in it: will you think the better of the
devil for his diligence, or of murderers, and evil doers, because also they
are busy bodies? sure you have no reason: but strive you in all to be as
diligent in good, as they are in evil: be as unmovable in well doing, as they
are in ill doing, as Christ our Savior was, who went up and down doing good,
as Satan does in doing mischief, was as careful to save, as he is to destroy,
to gather together the dispersed, as he and they are to divide and scatter
abroad.

And since the Holy Ghost does so clearly note the pains and diligence of
rebellious men, do but you in your secret thoughts consider how well the Kings
enemies (the men of Westminster I mean) have approved themselves to be fully
such by their caraiages.

First consider how painful and diligent they were at first, in all places of
the Kingdom, to get themselves chosen to be Members: then how cunning they
were to get leave to sit so long as they listed: then how politic they were to
drive from the House all that were not of their own faction: then how subtle
they were to get the strength and Militia of the Kingdom into their own hands:
then how impudent they were in working suspicious thoughts in peoples hearts,
against their loving and religious Sovereign: and then how industrious they
were to get the vulgar engaged with themselves in their rebellious way: what
digging, what sowing, what whispering, what enticing, and what violent ways
did, and still do they use to perpetuate this Rebellion? But above all devices
and tricks, one (to my apprehension) is the most remarkable: when they had
seized upon the Kings Revenues and his Subsidies (granted to another end,) and
had borrowed much money upon the pretended sale of Irish Lands, and had
collected a great deal more upon preaence to relieve the poor Protestants of
that Kingdom; after these, and many other purse-milking stratagems, (before
they came to downright plunder, and to leavie by way of Excise, and to weekly
or monthly taxations, they did set up for advantage, a certain counterfeit
puppet styled Public Faith, who like a wise-woman (whom they call a witch)
did extremely cozen and cheat the vulgar: for upon her bare word, promising
repaiment, (and with interest too) out of the Estates of the Nobility and
Gentry with the King, (which were already become of the same tenure with
Irish lands, and nearer home,) they (the common people I mean) brought in
their plate and money with extreme greediness, whereby they have so deeply
engaged themselves in the Rebellion with these Craftmasters, that these
wisemen can and do now urge it upon them, as the strongest argument of all, to
keep them to themselves; All is gone (say they) and you will be beggars, and
never have penny of your money again, unless you hold out unto the last: and
thus have they dug down many men's estates, and dived all the money out of
many purses, and made thousands of people as desperate as themselves.

Nay alas they have dug down the walls of many bodies, and been occasions
of the slaughter of many thousand men; they have dug down the walls of many
of their consciences, (who are still living) by their execrable oaths and
accursed covenants; nay more then this, they have in a manner dug up the
most reformed Church in the woorld, by their profaneness and Atheism; and
the most flourishing Commonwealth in Christendom, by their cruelties and
combustions.

They have dug and searched into all the practices of Hell and Rome, for
policies, into the conspiracies and conditions of Catiline, Sylla, and Sejanus,
they have looked into all the actions of Nero and Herod, into the Schools of
Machiavel and the Jesuits, for tricks and devises to further their designs: I
durst undertake to evidence somewhat of all these in their doings. Yea so
diligent and industrious have they been, that they have acted Satan's part, in
rebelling themselves, and seducing others: Cains part in slaying and murdering
their brethren; Chams part in mocking their Father, their common Father: they
have acted Achitophels part in devising destruction unto their Sovereign:
Absalom and Sheba's part, in lifting up the hand against him, Doegs part in
slandering and murdering the Priests of God: they have acted Ieroboams part in
their endeavors to rent the Kingdom from the house of David, in their
defiling the worship and service of God, and in their setting up to be Priests
the lowest and basest of the people: they have acted Rabshakehs part in railing
against the Lords Anointed, in the hearing of his Subjects, even on purpose to
stir them up to rebel against him: and Judas his part in betraying their
Master, at least in betraying that trust which he reposed in them. Well
(friends) I say but this, do you consider seriously of these things, and then
judge in your secret thoughts, whether the Kings enemies, those men of
Westminster, be not exceeding diligent and industrious Rebels. And so I come to
the third thing in their description;

An evil man seeks Rebellion; for Rebellion, some read jurgia, quarrels,
some read contradictiones, or contentiones, indeed all these tend unto
rebellion; some read mischief or evil, for evils and mischiefs only are
proper to procreate and uphold rebellion; and therefore you may observe in
story, that rebellious men have always heretofore (as well as now) allowed of
all evils, Sects, and heresies, have pulled up the pales of all Laws, have
cried up Liberty, and permitted all kind of vill^ny and wickedness, as means
most suitable to further rebellion: the lesson shall be this, Rebellion is a
work of mischief^e 3 Doct.


Nay it is mischief it self, wickedness in the abstract, the highest
wickedness, I have called it Loyal Subjects belief.
elsewhere, and not untruly, the sink of all villainy and the puddle of all
sin, it is the breach of all Laws, and relations both toward God and man,
pride, profaneness, perjury, envy, wrath malice, theft, murder, cruelty,
rapine, spoil, oppression, irreliligion, and unnaturallnesse, are all
concentred in Rebellion; yea, all sins by all names that sins can be named, and
by all means that sins can be committed do follow rebellion, and are to be
found among that disordered and disobedient sort of people: I wish that
experience did not teach that Rebellion were the ruin of Re^igion, Church and
Commonwealth, of states, families, and men; it is contrary to God in every
notion, He is the God of grace, peace, and order, but Rebellion is
diametrically opposite to all these, it resists grace, it murders peace, and
destroies order; I wish (if it were Gods will) there were need for me to prove
all these unto you; but alas! alas! your own eyes and ears are my witnesses
in this thing, and shall serve for proofs of this Doctrine.

And it must of necessity be so, that rebellion is a work of mischief, Reason.
for it is the work only of mischievous and evil men, yea of such as have
climed up to the very top of wickedness, and (says our Savior) can a man
expect grapes of thorns, and siggs of thistles, any thing but extreme evil
from persons extremely wicked, tantum malus quaerit rebellionem, only such men
are plotters of Rebellion. (says the Text,) no good man will willingly have so
much as a finger in it.

No, you will say, why? Object.
we are told that all the good men be on their side, whom you call the Rebels,
and the best Preachers, whose Doctrines and lives have been most unblameable,
yea our selves know many honest and good men who are engaged in that way: and
we are told also, that none but Papists, swearers, drunkards, and unclean
livers are on the Kings sid^, and we see (God help) many of this sort with our
own eyes; wherefore either those you account Rebels are not such, or else
your Doctrine is not true.

To this I Answer.

1. Those I call Rebels are truly such, Answ.
for rebellion (as was said before) is a resisting the Authority, and a violent
opposing the will and person of the lawful Governor; and none can deny, but
these do resist the Authority, and violently oppose the will and person of the
King, which is the lawful Governor, therefore they are truly called and
counted Rebels.

2. I answer concerning those wicked on this side, we will not deny but we have
of them too many, and as they are our shame, I wish also they were more our
sorrow; the Lord give them all hearts and grace to amend their conditions, that
they may cease at length to discredit a religious King, and a righteous Cause.

3. For those known good men who are engaged on the Enemies side, I Answer,
(according to my former distinction) facere malum is one thing, and quaerere
malum is another; good men through deception may be assisters in, but they are
not the contrivers of this black Rebellion.

4. For those eminent Preachers whose diligence in their callings, and
commendable lives, have so bewitched people, as to think well of this
rebellious way for their sakes, because they walk in it, I answer; I Will not
deny their good gifts, but this I Will say, that gifts and grace do not always
bed together, Satan has more abilities and gifts then any man: Nor do I deny
their restraining graces, but do confess that many of their lives (like those
of the Pharisees in the Gospel, that loved the praise of men) were outwardly
very commendable before this Rebellion did begin: But you must know that Satan's
trick has alwai^^ been (when he has endeavored, or done most mischief to
the Church of God) to appear in the shape of an Angel of light; to work by
the persons of such well reputed men; He that could make use of Peter's tongue
to tempt our Savior, (when Christ bad that great Apostle, get thee behind me
Satan,) no doubt but he can and will, and does make use of the tongues and
examples of these men* to deceive the common people: Samuel from the Lord
says, that Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, that is* it is exceeding
apt to entice and bewitch people to it self, by those specious and religious
shows which the fomenters of it shall make unto the World.

Or perhaps because people did too much adore the abilities of those men, would
hear the word only (for their sakes) when they preached it; and would look
upon their examples more for their imitation, then upon the word it self for
their direction: God as a punishment on such people, has suffered those whom
they so admired, to be the instruments to lead them into those of misery and
error, that others might learn by their harms afterward, to love men for the
words sake, and to trust more unto that then unto them.

But (in short) I would have you all consider but two things out of Scripture,
which must be the rule to judge both men and their ways by.

1. Consider that grace and peace, or truth and peace, go always together in
holy Writ, and what God has joined together there, is always joined in every
truly honest heart; therefore if you see men that do not know, or will not own
the way of peace to walk therein, you may well conclude, that they are surely
out of the paths of truth.

2. Consider what S. James says of sinful and heavenly wisdom; Iam. 3.15,
16. etc.
the former he says is earthly, sensual, divellish, and the fruits of it are
envy, strife, confusion, and every evil work: but the other, that which is
from above, is pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy
and good fruits, without partiality and hypocrisy: yea, the fruit of it is
righteousness and peace; and hereupon do you but judge in your own consciences
whether the course which those admired Ministers take does savor more of that
earthly and diabolical, or of this divine and heavenly wisdom.

And last of all remember, that it is some comfort to men who have indiscreetly
thrust themselves into a mierie way, to have many companions in the same, that
so part of the blame and shame might be on them, which else would lie wholly on
their own heads: you have heard the Fable of the Fox, who having lost his own
tail, persuaded other Foxes to cut off their tails too: fair p^etences
indeed he used, but his true end was that his own deformity might be less
noted: suppose those Ministers to be as that Fox, and your selves may make the
Application, and this shall serve to answer that objection.

Let the use of the point therefore be to work an hatred in you of rebellion by
any means, do not countenance the devils work, Use.
whatever wrongs or injuries are offered to you by either side: walk not in the
way with these evil men; malum pati malum non est, malum facere malum est,
it is no sin to suffer, but to rebel is the highest evil, and will be found
to, be malum sibi in the end, the ruin of the Rebel: indeed some read this
Text thus, Rebellis quaerit malum suum, a Rebel seeks his own destruction; for
when a man is once in, he can scarce return, or leave off, till he be
destroyed, as the present example of their Brethren of Scotland does
sufficiently declare: they began to set foot in t^is sinful way some three or
four years ago, and to all honest men's thinking, (upon their pardon, and the
pacification, and the receipt of so much money) they might have been qui^t,
according to their oath and duty, and stirred no more to the molestation of
their gracious and merciful King; but we see they are returned to their former
vomit: Rebellion, as was said before, is called witchcraft, and another reason
(beside that already alleged) is because if a man be once entangled in its
charms, he can hardly get free or loose again: it is no small mercy of God to
those men that are come out from them, who were once of them: O let such offer
unto God immortal praises.

And thus have you seen from the former part of the verse, the enemy
discovered: Part 2.
I come now to describe the Kings true Soldier, nay the Text also describes
him, by his Office, by his Commission, and by his employment.

1. By his Office, he is Nuncius, a Messenger, or Angelus, so some read it, and
an Angel is a Messenger of God* and so is he, being an executioner of Justice
to punish evil; and that shall be the lesson, Doct.
The Executioners of Justice are the Messengers of God.

God is King of all the world, and as by his providence and mercy he preserves
the innocent, so by his Angels both good and bad he does inflict punishment
upon the wicked; the Devils are his bad Angels to execute his Justice upon the
damned, and so perhaps shall the Rebels themselves be, to lay his vengeance
upon some of you, who are wicked and ungodly men: for though you be on the
right side, yet God may suffer your persons to fall by the hands of those men
for your own sins; he usually sets one wicked man to punish another. But the
good Angels also are executioners of Gods justice at some times, it was a good
Angel that smote the Host of Sennacherib, and so was that which smote Herod
with worms, Act. 12. so in like sort good men are sometimes employed as
instruments of justice to punish the wicked; the Prince or Magistrate is the
Angel or Minister of God, and carries the sword for the punishment of evil
doers, and so are all they who being employed by him, do neither abuse
themselves nor their Authority, of which number are all honest martial men,
sent by the King, Gods Vicegerent; David and his men being authorized by Saul
against the Philistines, were said to fight Gods battles.

I must be brief (for the time runs,) wherefore let the use of this
consideration be, Use.
to persuade you all, who are men of war, to walk worthy the honor which God
has put upon you; you are his Messengers to execute his will, I beseech you
remember that he is an holy God; and holiness becomes all his servants: you will
think we Ministers, who are Gods Messengers in another kind, should much
dishonor him our Master, if we should not live holy lives, but should drink,
and swear, and commit evil; why be pleased to remember, that your selves are
Messengers to the same Master, and holiness is comely in the camp, and is
required thereto, as well as in the Church: read at your leisure in Deuteronomy. 23.
from Verse. 9. to the 15. Nay believe it, (Gentlemen and Soldiers) your
practice of vice and sin will both dishonor God, and your selves, in that
service wherein you are employed; the maine Argument which the Enemies have to
keep the people in rebellion in, is, their Declarations to them of the wicked
and deboist lives of the Cavaliers: O say they, do you think such wretched
swearers, such vicious livers, as the Cavaliers be, are of Gods sending? will
they maintain Christian Religion, that show so little of it in their carriages?
thus they argue: Indeed I know they vent many of their own fiction, and also
that they enlarge the faults of some upon all, wherein they deal most unjustly
with us, and should we but deal so with them, they would (as well they might)
exclaim much upon us. Because one of them was lately taken in the act, and
hanged for the sin of Buggerie, here in this Town, if we Preachers should
hereupon tell you from the Pulpits, that all these blessed Reformers, (for so
they are called by their adorers) are even such men, and guilty of that horrid
sin, I believe (for my part) we should much abuse them in that particular; and
yet thus diverse of their Ministers are pleased to deal with the Kings Friends:
the Lord in his good time rebuke them for it.

But alas* (gallant Gentlemen and Christian people) you all know that there are
too great, and too many occasions given by some amongst us to our enemies to
report evil of us: I beseech you therefore in the fear of God, as many of
you are better borne and bred then those are who do accuse you, and as all of
you are employed in a more righteous cause then they, by your holy God, and by
your religious King, so that you would all endeavor to be more holy in your
carriages then they be, to walk worthy your imploiment: and you that be
Commanders, (I beg of you, that you would more strictly punish sin in those
that are under you, according to those Military Orders set forth by His sacred
Majesty's your religious Master.

The profession of a Soldier, as it is honorable, so it may be holy if you
please; we read of holy men of that profession: David was a man of war, and
did (as you do) fight the Battles of the Lord, and he was an holy man; that
great sin which did so blemish his reputation, was committed by him afterward,
when he had left off to follow the Camp: the Centurion in the Gospel was a man
of your profession, and our Savior himself gives this testimony of him, that
he had not found his like (for goodness) in all Israel: and so that Captain
Acts 10. was one that feared God with all his household, and whose prayers and
alms ascended daily into Gods presence. Abraham himself the Father of the
faithful, was a brave Soldier; he with the number of 318. assaulted five
Kings with their Armies, vanquished them, and took the spoil: you may read the
story in the 14. Chapter of Genesis, where you may also see, who were the
first men whom the Scripture notes, did run away in the day of battle, and hid
themselves, I do not say in Saw-pits, but the Text says, in Slime-pits, they
were men full of guilt and sin, even the Princes of Sodom, and Gentlemen of
Gomorrah.

Nay to speak all that can be said in one word, for the honor and comfort of a
Soldier; God himself is called a man of war, Exodus 15 3. The Lord is a man
of War, and JEHOVAH is his Name.

I tell you (Gentlemen) there is not to an honest eye in these sad and dismal
days, a more gallant sight, then a valiant and religious Soldier; Religion
causes courage in a good cause, and gives an high luster to it, especially in
men of birth and place: what true English heart is not warmed with joy to see
the living flames of ancient valor conjoined with generous minds in Gentile
blood? but if thereto be also annexed Religion, I dare say, to a truly pious
loyal eye the Sun it self is not more glorious.

Gentlemen, your enemies call you Cavaliers, a name, as they take it, of great
reproach (else you may be sure they would not call you by it) will you give me
leave in brief, to give you your own Character; or at least the Character of
such a man as every of you ought to be, and as we your friends and servants in
Christ desire to conceive of you: why listen to it, it is this:

A complete Cavalier is a Child of Honor, a Gentleman well borne and bred;
that loves his King for conscience sake, of a clearer countenance and bolder
look then other men, because of a more loyal heart: He dares neither oppose
his Princes will, nor yet disgrace his righteous cause, by his carriage or
expressions: He is furnished with the qualities of Piety, Prudence, Justice,
Liberality, Goodness, Honesty; He is amiable in his behavior, courageous in
his undertakings, discreet and gallant in all his executions: he is thoroughly
sensible of the least wrong that is offered to his Sovereign, and is a
professed enemy to all Rebels: the aims of his sword are only to dissever
the malignity of those forces that have conspired the ruin of Monarchy and
Innocence: he fears no evil thing to come upon himself, but contemns all
dangers that look toward him: he dares accept of deaths challenge to meet it
in the field, and yet can embrace it as a special friend when it comes into
his chamber, where he is always making provision for its better entertainment:
in a word, he is the only Reserve of English Gentility and ancient valor, and
has rather chose to bury himself in the Tomb of Honor, then to see the
Nobility of his Nation vassalaged, the Dignity of his Country captivated by
any base domesticke enemy, or by any foreign fore-conquered foe. This is a
complete Cavalier, and if any of you be not according to this Character,
believe me you are not right, nor the men you ought to be: And so much
(Gentlemen) for the first particular in your description.

I come to the second, and that is your Commission in the word sent: shall be
sent: namely by him who has power from God to send, and that is only the King,
or Supreme Magistrate all the Commissions which God grants to Soldiers, are
signed by the Kings hand, who is (as Moses was) the mouth of God unto his
Subjects, in things of this nature, and such a Commission so signed, does
constitute a lawful Soldier: the Lesson is this: A right Commission makes a
lawful Soldier.

Yea, 5 Doct.
a right Commission makes the War it self lawful to the Soldier, although
it were undertaken by the Prince upon unjust grounds: for the Subjects duty is,
to mind his own call rather then the Cause, for though in matters of Religion,
we disclaim and abhor the Doctrine of blind obedience, yet in matters of
State, and order, we profess allowance of it; quae supra nos, nihil ad nos,
things above us, belong not to us: if we pry into the reason of Princes
undertakings, we may prove our selves to be the Busybodies, whom (as we noted
before) the Apostle yoakes with murderers, and evil doers: And I think these
times do sufficiently declare the due concatention of these conditions* But as
I was saying, though the Justice of the Kings Cause, 1 Pet. 4.15.
(which is as clear as the Sun to all, unless to those that are given up to
blindness, and to believe lies:) were not so manifest and apparent, nay were
it an unjust cause on the Kings part, yet were it not so to those Soldiers
that are authorized by him; for according to the point, a right Commission
makes a right Soldier: and that cannot be given by any, nor derived from any,
but the King.

This truth does more stownd the Rebels, and more puzzell them, then any one
that I know; and therefore to persuade their followers that themselves can give
a right Commission, they are feign to deny the King to be the Supreme
Magistrate, clean contrary to the testimony of Scripture, 1 Pet. 2.13, (where
the King is called the Supreme) and like him who chose himself Pope, they are
so bold as to say; the Supreme Authority is seated in themselves, which is such
a transcendent fancy, that all the Traitors in the world (that I read of) durst
never vent it, till these sat: But being driven to so great a straight, that
they must of necessity either yield their war to be unlawful; for want of a
right Commission; or else thus exalt themselves above him that is called God,
this second course being the more Antichristian and furthest from the practice
of self-denial, they have made choi^e of: But let them fancy what they please;
indeed, and in truth, were they never so honest men for life and conversation,
(and were the Cavaliers never so vile, or so abominable,) yet the war on
their side is utterly unlawful, for want of a right Commission, they are not
sent, or authorized hereunto by the King, they are therefore no other then
rank murderers of all those they kill and destroy, and all the blood shed by
them, is no other then innocent blood: As God says of rebellious Edom: (who
without any authority, or command from God, did join with the Caldeans,
against the people of Israel, unto whom (as being Subjects) they ought to have
lived in obedience) Joel 3.19. that they had shed innocent blood in the Land:
Though Isreal's blood was guilty blood, in respect of the Lord, against whom
they had sinned, and in respect of the Caldeans too, whom God employed as his
instruments to punish them; yet in respect of the Edomites, that had no
Commission to go about any such business, it was innocent blood, and as
shedders of innocent blood they are threatened to be punished: Edom shall become
as a desolate Wilderness, for that very thing, says that Text.

This may serve to stir up you, who are rightly authorized to be courageous,
in the Execution of your charge: all the encouragement which the Rebels your
Enemies have against you, and against the King, is from the evil lives of some
of you, (who are the Kings Soldiers:) but you have to animate you, against
them in their way, not only their ill lives, but also their ill Cause, and
their lack of a lawful Warrant; And most especially of all, you have the
Justice of your own Cause, the lawfullnesse of your own call, and to these I
may add the goodness of your King.

1. Your Cause is to defend him, whom God has exalted, to keep the King in
the Throne wherein God has set him, against those that would remove him from
it; it is to maintain Religion, the Laws and Dignity of your Nation, and to
suppress Rebellion that Child of Hell, that Parent and Nurse of all Mischief.

2. Your Call, it is lawful from the Prince himself, the Supreme Magistrate
under God in his Dominion, who alone (as Austine contra Faustum speaks) has
power to wage War, and to authorize them that are Agents in the same: whereas
those whom you do oppose, as their cause lacks honesty, so do they themselves
lack a Warrant to maintain it; and having no Call they cannot (upon any good
ground) look for Gods blessing.

3. The goodness of your King; A Prince of that untainted life, of that
religious disposition, that it is the greatest vexation the Rebels have, that
they cannot fasten guilt upon him: but only because themselves have belied
him; and here Solomon is so much their friend, as to speak a reason for them,
Prove. 26.28. A lying tongue hates him that is afflicted by it:

Nay let me add for your encouragement as you are Christians: your King is a
man that lives by Faith; He does often acknowledge in his pious expressions, what
ever yet has been done for him (by yours or others hands,) to be a fruit of
divine favor; and from what he has tasted, he is still confident according to
Gods promise of divine assistance: I may speak of him, (as Ambrose of S.
Austine,) with a little variation of the words, impossible est Principem
tantae fidei ac pietatis perire. it is impossible but a Prince of such faith and
piety should at last prevail over all his enemies.

And so I come to the last particular of all, in your description, and that is
your employment; to inflict sharp punishment upon rebellious Crudelis or
(...), a Messenger without bewells, so called from the severity he shall use
against the Enemy; He shall be inexorable, and not abate one jot of the
punishment that he is commanded to inflict:

By this Cruel Messenger some Interpreters understand; Satan, or some other
instrument of wrath, who without all compassion shall undoubtedly in the end
plague rebellious men: some hereby understand the conscience of a Rebel: which
like a Cruel Messenger, shall meet him at every turn, and scourge and lash
him, (and oh that this Messenger were but once awakened, and set upon our
Rebels, that their Consciences did but storm them!) some interpret the words
thus, He that rebels against a loving and kind Governor, shall fall into the
hands of one that is severe, who like a cruel Messenger of God, shall
thoroughly pay him for his disobedience; or some will have it thus, the same
Prince that formerly used him with humanity and like a Lamb, shall put on the
disposition of a Lion, and deal with him according to his deserts: we read in
Scripture of the wrath of a Lamb, or of the Lamb Christ Jesus himself who
shall turn a Lion, and say, those mine enemies that would not I should reign
over them, bring them and slay them before me: Patientia laesa fit furor,
Patience abused turns into wrath: But interpret or read the words how we will,
the sense is this, Rebellious men shall be grievously punished, a sharp
punishment remains for the workers of this Iniquity, or to the seekers of
Rebellion. The Lesson shall be in these words. Severe punishment is the
assured portion of Rebellious men. I could evidence and affirm this truth many
ways, as,

1. By the exemplarie punishment of Rebels in all ages; I could tell you how
the earth swallowed up Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, (who rebelled against Moses
and Aron) together with their Wives, Children, and Substance; a typical Lesson
(no doubt) it was to teach all after Ages that utter extirpation is the due
portion allotted of God unto such men.

I could tell you how an halter catched Achitophell, and a tree Absalom; how
Shebae's head was severed from his body, and how Bigtan and Teresh suffered
death for having an ill purpose against the King, and how that punishment of
theirs is recorded in Scripture, as ordained and allowed of God; I could tell
you also of Jeroboam, and all the succeeding Kings of Israel, that begun and
continued the revolt from the house of David, how there was not one good man of
all the number; and how they and the people that adhered to them, by heresy,
idolatry, profaneness, and villainy, grew worse and worse (as being always
attended with Gods curse for their Rebellion,) till they were carried away God
knows whither, no man can tell what became of them to this day: I could also
tell you out of your own Chronicles the fearful and dismal ends of those
(together with their families) who have opposed their Sovereign in former
ages, but the time will not permit.

2. I could assure the downfall of the Rebels, as they are men delighting in
War, from Psalm. 68.30. Rebuke the company of the speare-men, the multitude of
the Bulls, with the Calves of the people, till every one submit himself with
pieces of Silver, scatter thou the people that delight in war: It is a rule
in Divinity that a prophetical prayer is of the nature of a prophecy: Rebuke
thou O Lord, is as much, as the Lord will rebuke; and scatter O Lord, is as
much, as the Lord will scatter: now by the speare-men, in that verse, you may
understand those degenerate Gentlemen that have lifted up the hand against
their Sovereign, or have consulted in this Rebellion: by the multitude of
Bulls, you may understand the rich fat Citizens, who by their wealth and money
have administered strength to this Rebellion: and by Calves of the people, you
may understand those Country folk, that came bleating up to London, (from the
adjoining Counties) with their Petitions against the present established
Government; all these, or all such as these, shall be rebuked by the Lord (as
the Psalmist teaches) and made to submit themselves with pieces of silver,
they shall be glad to offer money, for the ransom of their lives, even because
they are a people that delight in war, and they that will not do so, shall be
scattered, and blown away, as dust is before the wind.

3. I could prove that an heavy woe is belonging to these Enemies of the King,
as they are spoilers and treacherous persons, from that place Easy. 33.1. Woe
unto thee that spoiledst when thou were not spoiled: and to thee that did
deal trecherously, when they did not deal treacherously with thee, when thou
shall cease to spoil thou shall be spoiled, and when thou shall cease to deal
treacherously, others shall deal treacherously with thee: This is verbum
Domini the word of the Lord, and manet in aeternum, it is an eternal truth; in
all ages it has been made good, and so for ever shall be, upon all those,
unto whomsoever it is appliable.

4. I could pormise their assured punishment, as they are bloody and deceitful
men, from Psalm. 5.6. where it is said, that God shall destroy them that speak
leasing, the Lords abhorres the bloody and deceitful man, and Psalm. 55.23.
it is concluded hhat bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their
days: And I think none can deny that the Kings Enemies whom you are to
oppose are such persons: they have practiced nothing hitherto but deceit and
lies, under the cloak of Piety; and they breath forth nothing but war and
blood, Kill, Slay, and Destroy, has been their language a long time, and the
way of peace they will not own.

But I Will take these men only in the notion of Rebels, to evidence their
assured ruin; for in that respect they are the people of Gods curse, the Lord
himself does so call them Esaias 34 5. My sword (says he) shall be bathed in
heaven, behold it shall come down upon Idumea, upon the people of my Curse to
judgment. The Idume^ns were the Edomites or childen of Esau, they are called
the people of Gods curse, for they were Rebels against the people of Israel,
Genesis 27.29.37.
unto whom in Jacob the superiority over them was given, and by David seized
upon: and we may doubtless conclude that all such Rebels are in the very same
condition, 1 Chro. 18.13.
the people of Gods curse as well as they.

Now what conditioned Rebels these Edomites were, we shall more fully see in
the 35 of Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 35.6, 7, 8, 9, etc,
where also God vows their destruction.

As I live (says the Lord God) I will prepare thee unto blood, and blood shall
pursue thee: since thou have not hated blood, even vengeance shall pursue thee:
thus will I make Mount S^ir most desolate, and cut off from it him that passes
out, and him that returns: And I will fill his Mountains with his slain
men, in thy hills and in thy valleys, and in all thy rivers shall they fall,
that are slain with the sword, I will make thee perpetual disolations, And
thy Cities shall not return, and ye shall know that I am the Lord, because
thou have said these two Nations and th^se two Countri^s (namely of Israel and
Judah) shall be mine, and we will possess them -- Therefore as I live says
the Lord God, I well even do according to thine anger, and according to thine
envy which thou have used out of thine hatred against them; and I will make my
self known amongst them when I have judged thee, etc.

In all which words of the Prophet, beside the certainty of Edoms ruin
evidenced by the oath of God twice over, as I live, observe these their
conditions:

1. They did not hate blood, they delighted to make themselves instruments of
wrath when they had no call thereto, God did at sundry times punish the
Israelites by all their neighbor Nations, by the Egyptians, Moabites,
Midianites, Philistims, and the rest, but never by the Edomites, these were
always volunteers in wars aginst Israel, never employed by the Lord in that
business, for they were brethren to the Israelites, (being the children of
Esau Jacobs brother) and they were to live in obedience to them by Gods
ordination disposing the superiority to Jacob and his seed, and it is not Gods
Custom to set Brethren at odds, one against another, or Subjects against their
Sovereigns; the God of nature and order, is no breaker of natures bonds, or of
his own Laws: that is Satan's work rather the father of divisions, so that the
Edomites were Rebels, unnatural and bloody Rebels, they did not hate blood.

2. They were also sacrilegious and covetous rebels, they were the Edomites
that cried out against the Temple, (as some do now against Churches) down with
it down with it even to the ground, and they were these, that swallowed up in
their expectation the estates of Israel and Judah, (after that manner as the men
of Westminster with their Abettors, do the Inheritances of the Lords and
Gentlemen that are with his Majesty) they said, these two Nations shall be
ours: which is a sin mightily provokeing God to wrath and jealousy, the fire
of my jealousy (says, he Ezekiel 3.5.) is against the Idumeans, because they
have (in their own thoughts) appointed my land (for the land bestowed by my
providence upon such men) unto their own possession, as a prey unto
themselves, with the joy of their hearts and with despightfull minds.

3. Observe that God (in punishing wicked Rebels,) does observe the law of
retaliation (as it is lawful for the King (Gods Vicegerent) to do in cases of
like nature:) because they were men of blood, therefore they shall meet with
blood, because thou have not hated blood (says the Lord) even blood shall
pursue thee, and again, I will even do to thee, according to thine anger, and
envy unto them, as if he had said, I will enable them, whom thou did hate and
envy, and whose Lands and revenues thou did covet, to deal so with thee, as
thou in the dispightfulnesse of thine heart did purpose and resolve to deal
with them.

And indeed you may observe (by the way,) that though God does not usually
employ his own people as instruments of wrath to punish, but rather of mercy
to comfort, yet he employed Israel in special to punish Edom: see Ezekiel. 25.12,
14. Because Edom has dealt against the house of Judah, (unbidden) and has
taken vengeance, (for some conceived wrongs,) and has greatly offended, and
revenged himself upon them, (whereas being their brethren and superious, they
should rather (if wronged by them) have referred the same to God:) therefore
(says the Lord) I will stretch out my hand against Edom. And I will lay my
vengeance upon Edom by the hand of my people Israel, and they shall do in Edom,
according to mine anger, and according to my fury, and they shall know my
vengeance, says the Lord God: and the reasons of this are,

1. Because it is according to the course of ordinary Providence, to punish
Rebellious Subjects, by their own Princes, against whom they do rebel.

2. Because it is according to ordinary Justice, that they who injuriously
encroach upon other men's rights, should forfeit their own, (as a punishment
for their injustice) to these very persons; qui invadunt aliena merentur
perdere sua, and therefore it is said by Obediah, that the house of Jacob shall
be a fire, and the House of Joseph a flame, and the House of Esau for Stubble,
and they shall kindle in them, and devour them, yea they shall possess their
possessions, even the mount of Esau, and Saviors shall come out of mount Sion
to judge the mount of Esau. The application of these things I leave to your
selves.

4. There is one thing more that I would have you observe from that place
before quoted, Ezekiel. 35. the last words, where God tells Edom, that he will
make himself known amongst Israel, by his judgments upon him: I will make my
self known among them when I have judged thee: for indeed God was not known
or acknowledged before, as he ought to have been among them: the Israelites
were grown a most deboish'd, profane, impudent, and ungodly people (the major
part of them,) which made the Lord give them up to be punished by the
Chaldeans: but by his giving into his Isreal's hands, the rebellious, bloody,
treacherous Edomites, (who had no call nor cause to war upon them, or to
join with the Chaldeans against them;) the Lord did mean so to gain upon
their hearts and spirits, that they should learn thereby to know him truly,
and for after times to serve him (better then ever they had done before) in
humility and holiness.

And truly (friends) I have an hope that when the great and mighty God shall
have subdued under your power these Edomites our Enemies, who are so full of
spite, and so thirsty after blood, and shall have brought on their heads, what
themselves did purpose against others; you will all gain more knowledge of
God, and serve, fear, honor and obey him in holiness, and righteousness,
more then ever you yet did in all your lives, the Lord sanctify the observance
of his judgments so unto you that you may. And thus have you seen the
certainty, and in part the severity of the Judgment which shall be executed
upon Rebels evidenced.

Now if you demand the Reason why the God of mercy and bowels should be so
severe. Reason.


I answer, it is no such severity in God, to beat men with their own rods, to
do to them according as they determined to do to others, beside it is but equity
and justice to proportionate punishment in weight and measure, according to the
height or weight of sin: But there is no such sin as Rebellion, this is ingens
and supremum scelus, the most huge and highest sin; and therefore does merit
the sharpest and surest punishment: Rebellion is a sin that strikes at Gods
own self, at the face of Majesty: there is no such express Image of God in
the world, as a King is; every Christian is the Image of Christ as man, every
Minister of the Gospel is (or ought to be) the Image of Christ as Mediator,
but a King is the Image of Christ as God, and to rebel against a King is to
strike at the face of Christ as God; which was more then they that crucified
him durst dare to do, 1 Cor. 2.8.
for had they known (says the great Apostle) they would not have crucified
the Lord of Glory: therefore no marvel if a cruel messenger be sent against
a Rebel, if severe and sharp punishment be the proper portion of such men.

Perhaps now you expect that by way of use, I should stir you up to be cruel:
Use.
But (noble Gentlemen and Soldiers:) If I should do so, I should forget my
self to be a Minister of the Prince of mercy, and to be a Subject of a most
merciful King, whose meek and gentle Spirit; as we all honor and admire, so
should we strive to imitate. And I bless God for it, I could never yet speak
that language of Kill, Slay, and Destroy, which the Ministers of the Rebels
side are so skillful in; I durst never excite men to fight up to the back in
blood; the spirit of the Gospel is no bloody spirit; we (says the Apostle,
speaking of himself, and all true Ministers) have the mind of Christ, which
endeavored the salvation, not destruction of men; wherefore I beseech you give
me leave (as the Minister of Jesus Christ, for your souls good,) to propound a
few such particulars to your consideration and remembrance, as shall tend both
to your present honor, and to your everlasting peace.

I am confident (through the strength and goodness of God) that these
rebellious enemies of the King, whom you oppose, (notwithstanding their height
of pride, and their study to be auke, cross, perverse, and peevish, and to
vex the spirit of a mild, and gracious King, not withstanding their multitude
of Arms and men, and their diligence in their way) shall ere long, (if your
sinful and unsuitable carriages do not hinder,) be brought to beg, their lives
at your hands; and at that time I pray remember.

1. That though it be true Gallantry, and nobleness of spirit, to be fierce
and contagious in the Battle, yet it is no true valor to set your foot too
hard upon the neck of a fallen foe, that beggs your mercy; the generous Lion
scorns to exercise his fury upon an enemy that is prostrate before him: I would
have the Kings men do nothing but what is Kingly, let Rebels practice
baseness, it best becomes them: Beside the Scripture says, that mercy
pleases God; and in that, we are bidden to be like him, who in the midst of
judgment remembers mercy: Be ye merciful as your heavenly Father is
merciful, for (as in another place) there shall be judgment merciless to
them that show no mercy: as men do to others, so shall it be done to them.

2. Remember to distinguish between quaerentes and facientes malum, the
plotters and contrivers of, or the leaders in this Rebellion, and they that by
seduction only are drawn into it; between your sturdy Rebels and those that
by a kind of inforcement are made to take their parts: the Text speaks only of
the former, that severitie is to be used against them, which if it be, men may
call it cruelty if they please, but it is justice rather, and the prevention of
mischief and cruelty, for as such have been means already to undo and murder
many by leading them into paths of death, so if they should continue they would
destroy more.

3. Remember I pray to show respect to Women, Children, and aged persons, to
the first in regard of the weakness of their Sex; to the second sort, in
regard of the minority of their years, and to the latter sort, in regard of
their gray hairs: it is said of the barbarous Chaldeans, 2 Chronicles. 36.17. That
they had no compassion on the young Children, on the Maiden, or on the old man,
on him that stooped for age, indeed though God did deliver the nation into
their hands to punish, yet he looked they should have shown some pity on
such as these, and because they did not, he threatened to punish them; Esai.
47.6. O Daughter of Chaldea, I was wrath with Israel, and I gave them into thy
hand, and thou did show them no mercy, but upon the ancient thou did lay
very heavily the yoke, therefore (v. 9.) these two things shall come upon thee,
in one day, loss of Children and widdow-hood.

4. Remember for the honor of your King and Cause, and for your own inward
peace and outward credit sake, that you neither do, nor (so much as in you
lies) suffer to be done, in cool blood, to the most impious Rebels, any thing
that savours of immodestie, barbarousnesse, or inhumanitie. To uncloath men and
women of their garments, and to expose their nakedness to open view, as the
enemies did in Ireland, is most immodest, and offensive to God and all good
men: to be an hour or two in hacking and torturing a woeful wretch, or in
taking away that miserable life which might be concluded in a moment; or to
wreak ones fury upon a dead carkas, is a most barbarous, cowardly thing, and
odious to God, though offered to an Edomite, as appears by that his threat unto
the Moabites, for their burning the bones of the King of Edom to lime, Amos
2.1. so to use reviling speeches, and cursed execrations, against them that are
ready to die, or are in going out of the world, full of wounds and pains, is
most inhumane: nay it is plainly diabolical to insult over men in misery, be
they never so vile, never such wretched enemies.

The ancient Romans (the bravest Soldiers in the world) were careful to
abstain from all kind of harsh words in such cases, (as kill him, hang him,
knock him down, rogue, villain, or the like:) as also from all kind of
barbarousnesse and inhumanitie in their executions, for they said they
acknowledged their enemies to be men, not Tigers: Metius Suffetius was drawn in
pieces with four horses for his Treason, from which (as a spectacle of great
horror) the people turned their eyes. The story says, as it was the first,
so it was the last punishment in this kind of rigor that was exercised amongst
them; for nulli gentium minores plaeuisse poenas (says Titus Livius of them,)
no Nation so careful to preserve the reputation of humanity as they: Be you
also careful (noble Gentlemen and Soldiers) to abstein from all such unworthy
conditions: object not, that the enemies deal so shamefully with our men, when
they get them into their power, for I Will assure you, baseness does better
become them, and their cause, then ever it will become you.

5. Take heed you do not do any thing against the enemies out of your own
private hatred: remember that you are the Kings men, and your enemies are the
Kings enemies, and them you are to oppose as such, and as the enemies of your
Country: even in battle it self, you must strike and shoot as at the common
foe, let God direct the bullet or arrow as it pleases him, as he did that
which being shot at a venture slew Ahab, and then it is God, and not man that
kills: for to level at any known men, or to pursue any out of particular
malice, may be found murder in Gods account at the great day. The Lord
threatens to execute great vengeance upon the Philistines with furious rebukes,
because (says the Text) thou did take vengeance upon thine enemies with a
despightfull heart, for the old hatred, and private grudge that was betwixt
you. Ezekiel. 25.15, 16.
Though God imploys men as his instruments to punish the public enemies of
Church and State, yet never to revenge themselves: he never gave any man a
Commission to do this, he would have us all to refer such wrongs to him.

6. Remember what ever you do, you do it with a public spirit, and do it
valiantly, and in that manner as may no whit discredit the Kings cause, or
blemish your own reputation, nor occasion grief to your spirits afterward: and
to this end remember the graciousnesse of the Kings spirit and disposition, how
he has hitherto looked upon the vilest of them all with an eye of pity: and
look you to your Commission (which you have from His Majesty,) which (let the
enemies bawle never so,) is far more mild then they deserve it should be: and
remember too, that though they have by their actions renounced the Doctrine of
Jesus Christ, and offered despite to the patient, obedient, and peaceable
spirit of the Gospel, and have forgotten you to be their brethren, of the same
nation, and of the same Religion too, which themselves professed four years
ago, and do in their Turkish charity, call you nothing but Dogs, Popish Dogs:
yet be not you like them, but yield them still to be your Brethren, though
rebellious and degenerate, and approve your selves toward them to be
Christians.

And these be the Mementoes which as Gods Minister I do here propound unto you,
yea which I do in the name of God charge upon you.

But perhaps some of you will say, if we should follow this Counsel, Object.
how shall we make your Text good, and approve our selves cruel messengers?

I answer, Answ.
that the Text is rather a Declaration then a precept, it does not command you
to be cruel, but does declare that a Rebel shall meet with cruelty, i.e.
with sure and sharp punishment, and when such a one does meet with such a
portion, who ever be the inflicter of it, we are taught by the Text to
conclude, that it is sent him of God: and indeed do what we can, there are
wicked men enough in an Army, who will extend their fury even to cruelty,
which when we have observed, we may see Gods hand therein against the Rebels:
though I confess this too, that sometime God has (in their heat of blood)
infused into good and holy men a certain spirit, which has appeared as a
cruel spirit; for example, such was that which showed it self in David, when
the City Rabbah of the Ammonites was taken: He put the people under Sawes and
Harrowes of iron, and axes of iron, and made them pass through the
Brick-kilne. Now I say when by the effects we see such a spirit in any, we are
to note the hand of God therein.

But here let me advise you of one necessary thing from the Text, A cruel
messenger shall be sent against him, scil. against the rebellious man: your
severitie therefore must be only against such, and not against any of the
Kings loyal and good subjects, that bed you, and board you, and give you
house-roome for your selves and horses: it is the custom of too many (but I
affirm they are no true Gentlemen, no true Cavaliers,) when they have had free
quarter in a place, and perhaps have devoured up all the provision in the
house, then to requite their Landlord with eobbing and plundering him of his
household commodities, or else threaten so to do, unless he will give them money
to forbear: O these carriages do speak such men to be sent rather to make the
King enemies, then to rid him of his enemies: but, Gentlemen and Soldiers, if
you acknowledge your selves the Kings Messengers, remember your employment
according to your Commission, is to punish rebels, and not to abuse good
Subjects. And in your actions against the Rebels, I can, from the Text, excite
you to be courageous: for they being such as they be, the people of Gods curse,
and you having the Kings Commission, and fighting in defense of his sacred
Person, Crown and dignity against them; what ever blood of theirs you shed in
battle, is not innocent blood, but as guilty blood as ever was shed by
Christians in a just war since the beginning of Christianity: for concerning
the heads of this Rebellion, the men of Westminster, or the faction there, who
to vex their religious King, have bestowed their best care to lose Ireland, to
give away Scotland, and to destroy England: these men, I say, together with
their bloud-thirstie Chaplains, by whose venomous tongues they belch out so
much blasphemy, treason, and cruelty, against God, the King, and the Kings
people: and by whose witcherie and specious pretenses, they have conjured so
many of the poor vulgar into their desperate and destructive circles: if ever
any combination of men upon earth, since the Scribes and Pharisees of Christ's
time did sin the sin against the Holy Ghost, I fear these are they: for they
do knowingly resist the doctrine of Gods Word and Spirit, and studiously oppose
the light of their own consciences and former professions. How often have they
charged it upon His sacred Majesty to intend that mischief which themselves
were in practice of, and in plotting to perform? How have they hood-winked the
poor Commonaltie of England, with suspicions of the Kings calling in
Forraigners to invade the Land, and of aiming to destroy the Privileges of
Parliament, and Liberty of the Subject, till themselves have effected the very
same things?

What peevish constructions have they made of all His Majesty's most honest and
candid expressions? How have they studied most irreligiously to thwart him in
all his pious and peaceable desires? all this does plainly speak to every
discerning eye, that their labors are, against their own consciences, to
grieve the Holy Ghost in the bosom of Gods Anointed.

Nay let every man judge of their spirits, and of the nature of their sin by
two things in particular.

1. By their forcing their late Oath and Covenant upon people; whereas
themselves did most highly condemn and oppose that new Oath made by the
Convocation some five years ago, to be taken by the Clergy, as most ungodly,
unreasonable, and illegal; affirming that the proceedings in the urging
thereof were too extremely violent, and the penalty annexed thereto upon the
refusal thereof was too cruel: and many arguments (specially those called the
London Quaeres) were framed and countenanced by them against the same:
themselves have now point blank against those their own Arguments enforced an
Oath far more ungodly, more unreasonable, and more illegal, with more
extremity of violence, and with heavier penalties, upon more people, all in
general, more ignorant, whereby they have endangered millions of souls, and
deposed many faithful Ministers, and others, from their places, means, and
maintenance, because they dare not offend God and their own consciences in
taking of it.

2. By that common Answer of theirs, which has been so often given by so many
of them; when they have been moved to restrain Anabaptists, Heretics, and
vicious persons (whereof there be such swarms among them) namely, that these
serve to advantage the Cause, to promote the great design in hand (scil. to
depose the King, and murder all his friends) therefore they must be borne
withal for the season.

From these, and many other such particulars, it may be concluded, that your
Enemies are the Enemies not only of peace, but also of Gods truth and Spirit;
and as you have God, and a righteous Cause on your side, so have you their own
Consciences against themselves, and the prayers of sincere-hearted men pleading
for you: wherefore be you confident and courageous, more are for you, then
against you, be holy, be valiant: Yea be holy, that you may be valiant; nay be
holy, and you shall be valiant, the Spirit of Holiness is the Spirit of
fortitude, and the Author of good success: Remember that precept, Deuteronomy. 23.9.
When the Host goes forth against the enemies, then keep thee from every wicked
thing: Nay let me assure you, you cannot gall your enemies, or prejudice them
more, then by being upright and holy; for they (I mean the seekers of
Rebellion) are such imbittered enemies against the truth of grace, (what ever
they pretend) that they gnash their very teeth at those whom they cannot
vitiate with their rebellion, or darken with their lies and slanders. Yea
friends, let me assure you that holiness in you will quite disarme and
unweapon them, whereas your sins do set an edge both upon their tongues and
swords; your holiness shall take away the edge of both, or else turn the same
upon themselves: wherefore I say and say again, and I do beseech you withal,
for the good of your souls, and for the Honor of your King, whom you love and
reverence (gallant Gentlemen and Christian Soldiers) be holy, be valiant; and
be you sure, though you do but your duty in opposing these men of blood (who
will have nothing but war, war,) yet you shall not lose your reward: God will
see them paid that are employed in his work, you may observe in Ezekiel. 29.18.19.
That God takes order for Nebuchadnezzar and his Army, That they should be paid
for the service they had done against Tyrus.

But perhaps some of you will say, how shall we do in the mean time? To answer
this, I must turn my speech to other persons.

You Gentlemen of the Country, Townsmen, and others who are not Soldiers, and
do not assist personally in this righteous way, be it known unto you, that you
are bound in duty and conscience* to afford the liberal and willing aid of
your purses: for is it just that these your Countrymen should (like Zebulon and
Nephthali, Judge. 4.) jeopard their lives unto death in the high places of the
field, while you in the mean time, like the men of Reuben, abide in your
sheepfolds, hearing the bleatings of your flocks; or be striving among your
selves who shall afford the least assistance to the subduing these enemies of
your King? I confess you have been loyal, and exemplarie to others in many
things; I beseech you all to persevere, and remember that all you have lies at
the stake, and he deserves to lose all, that is not willing to part with some
to preserve the rest; nay (Sirs) let men think as they please of themselves, I
believe he is no true Subject, nor has such an heart as he should have, that
desires any thing more then a bare being, till his Sovereign be again settled
in the throne of his Kingdom.

Wherefore I beg of you all (whom God has blessed above others with wealth and
substance) approve your selves right, and like those Governors of Israel, that
offered themselves willingly among the people; that we (as the Prophetess
there did) may rejoice in you, and bless God for you: Mine heart (says she)
is toward the Governors of Israel, that offered themselves willingly among
the people, bless ye the Lord: For be assured that otherwise the curse of
Meroz will be your portion, Curse ye Meroz (says the Angel of the Lord) curse
ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof, because they came not to help the Lord
(the Captain of the Lord, the Anointed of the Lord) against the mighty, or
against his ungodly enemies, that did so mightily increase, and so mightily
exalt themselves.

And you (good people all) of what rank or condition, sex or degree, soever
you be: be careful (I pray) to afford the assistance of your prayers, that the
spirit of the Lord may come upon that Princely General whom God has sent for
your protection into these parts, P. Rupert.
as it did upon Sampson when the Philistimes were upon him: And let me tell
you, where ever others are pleased to lay the fault of our no better
proceedings in these parts hitherto: I (who have been an observer of passages)
do profess unto you, that I can lay it on nothing so much as on your want of
prayer: we had at first a most honorable, valiant, and loyal hearted
General: whose personal care, diligence and courage, envy it self was not
able to blemish, L. Capell. L. Byron
but he was not fortunate in these parts: we had after him a person of like
nobleness, against whom the very faction at Westminster (when time was) could
object nothing but honesty, and the Kings affection toward him: whose known
wisdom and valor has been successful also in other places; but not so
happy as yet in these parts; though attended too, with the concurrence of many
valiant soldiers, and experienced men: And I do verily believe, the maine
cause of all this is, your neglect of prayer; we have days appointed by His
Sacred Majesty to fast and pray in, but how poorly are they observed, nay how
highly are they profaned, here is nothing among many that I see, but swearing
and drinking, and despising of piety, and thus have you weakened the hands of
the valiant.

O but I beseech you offer not the like injury to this Man of men, to this
mirror of Europe, this Honor of Christendom for Ch^valrie and valor, so
fully beautified with all the qualities of a most accomplished Generalll, and
made more glorious yet, by the spaule and daubings of the treacherous and
foule-mouthed Rebels, (which alone is sufficient to speak him excellent, to
all that know not him, but them:) O do not I beseech you tie the hands of this
illustrious Sampson with the cords of your sins; do not blast the greenness
of this Royal branch, with your profaneness and neglect of duty, do not weaken
him by trusting in him; let your confidence be only in God, that he may work
by him, but follow always with your prayers, that good success may also
attend him here, as it has done in other places; And let us daily bless the
God of Heaven for him, and for his Princely Brother, the two great Instruments
of our supportation, P. Mauric^
in these days of our calamity; let us observe the Almighties doing, how he
in bl^ssing and honoring them has at length regarded the low and afflicted
estate of their Royal Mother, and has thereby graciously answered our prayers
for her, but it is in such a way, that our enemies are ready even to gnash their
teeths at the Majesty of Heaven for it, (as may appear by their rating and
chiding of God for the same in some of their prayers:) well (friends) I say but
this; take ye heed we be not means by our ungodlie courses to darken those
whom God has honored; leave swearing, drinking, Sabbath-breaking, and
profanation of the Fast days, lest thereby we obstruct the concurrence of
divine aid, unto their Princely undertakings for us.

And now last of all, to the Governor, Major, and Officers of this Town, I
would speak a word: Sirs, you are fortifying your Town, and have spent much
money about it, to little purpose hitherto, your Rampires have fallen down,
and your labor has been in vain: and wot you what is the cause of all? why
even the uncontrouled sins within it; such cursing and such swearing, even by
women and children, as well as by men, did I never hear, as in this place,
sure these oaths and curses be the bullets that have battered down your
Fortifications; O that you would for your own safety and for the honor of
the King, and for the blessing of God upon his righteous Cause, take some order
to reform these abuses, quantum in vobis est, beside you might save some Money
by it, your works would stand the better; yea if you would take the course
which I shall prescribe, you would spare your selves a great deal of trouble in
another kind, and some charges too; it is this.

You are full of suspicions here in the Town, (I perceive) that you have
treacherous persons among you, such as are better affected to the Enemies, then
to the King: and many have bin imprisoned upon jealousies and fears, and
nothing that I see yet can be proved against them, insomuch that perhaps they
may prove honester men then some of those that have molested them. Now one true
way (as I take it) to find out the Kings Enemies amongst you is this, appoint
Officers in every street (let the Churchwardens and Constables assist
therein,) to inflict and leavie (according to Statute) a pecuniarie mulct upon
every Townsman, for every oath that is sworn either by himself, or by any
that is under his charge, and also upon every Alehouse-keeper, who shall
suffer any in his house to sit drinking on the Lords day, or on the Fast day,
while they should be at Church; and this Money thus leavied, I would have
employed to buy food and victuals for the Prisoners of the Rebels party, (some
of whom we have in the Town already, and many more I do not doubt by the help
of God but we shall have shortly:) so shall you save the charge which you are
at for them; and also thereby easily learn who are the most affected to them,
and to their side; for without question they that afford them most money in
this kind, most relief, that feast their bodies best, may be yielded their
best friends, and the Kings greater Enemies: This is all I had to say, now the
Lord give you all a right understanding in all things. Amen.

FINIS.

