A SATYR AGAINST MARRIAGE: Directed to that Inconsiderable Animal, called
HUSBAND.
Husband! thou Dull unpittied Miscreant,
Wedded to Noise, to Misery, and Want;
Sold an Eternal Vassal for thy Life,
Obliged to Cherish, and to Heat a Wife:
Drudge on till Fifty; at thy Own Expense
Breath out thy Life in one Impertinence;
Repeat thy loathed Embraces every Night
Prompted to Act, by Duty (not Delight:)
Christen thy froward Bantling every Year,
And carefully thy Spurious Issue Rear:
Go once a Week to see the Brat at Nurse,
And let the Young Impostor drein thy Purse:
Hedg-Sparrow-like, what Cuckoo's have begot
Do thou maintain, Incorrigible Sott.
Oh! I could curse the Pimp that could do less,
He Is beneath Pity, and beyond Redress:
Pox on him! let him go: what can I say?
Anathema's on him are Thrown away;
The wretch is married, and has known the worst,
And now his Blessing is, he cannot be Cursed.
Married! O Hell and Furies! Name it not,
Hence, hence you Holy Cheats; a Plot, a Plot.
Marriage is but a Licensed way to Sin,
A Nooze to catch Religious Wood-cocks in:
Or the Nickname of some Malicious Friend,
Begot in Hell to Prosecute Mankind.
It Is the Destroyer of Our Peace and Health,
Mispender of our precious Time and Wealth;
The Enemy to Wit, Valor, Mirth, all
That we can Virtuous, Good, or Pleasant call.
By Day it is nothing but an endless Noise;
By Night the Echo of Forgotten Joys:
Abroad the Sport and Wonder of the Crowd,
At Home the hourly breach of what we vowed:
In it is Opium to our Lustful Rage,
Which sleeps a while, and wakes again in Age.
It heaps on all Men much (but useless) Care,
Forthwith more Trouble, they less Happy are;
It checks Youth, shortens life, and taints the mind,
Our Senses paul's, and strikes our Reason blind.
Ye Gods! that Man by his own Slavish Law,
Should on himself such Inconvenience draw:
If we would Wiser Natures Laws Obey.
Those chalk him out a far more pleasant way,
She bids freely Look, Like, and Enjoy.
Therefore when lusty Youth and Wine conspire
To Flame the Blood unto a Generous Fire;
We must not think the Gallant will Endure
The Durient Raging of his Calenture:
Nor always in his single Pleasures Burn,
Though Natures Handmaid sometime serves the turn:
No, he must have a sprightly youthful Wench,
In equal floods of Love, his flame to quench;
One that will hold him in her Clasping Arm,
And in that Circle all his Spirits Charm;
That with New Motion, and unpracticed Art,
Can raise his Soul, and then ensnare his Heart.
Hence springs the Noble, Fortunate, and Great,
Always Begot in Passion, and in Seat:
But the Dull Offspring of the Marriage Bed,
What is it? but a Humane shape in Lead:
A Sloathful Lump Ingender'd of all Ills,
Begot like D -- against the Parents Wills.
If it be Cukoldiz'd, it is Doubly Spoiled,
The Mothers Fear's Entailed upon the Child.
Thus whether Illegitimate, or Not,
Cowards and Fools in Wedlock are Begot:
Let no Enobled Soul himself Debase,
By Lawful Ways to Dasterdize his Race;
But if he must Pay Natures Debt in Kind,
To check the growing Danger, let him find
Some willing Female out; What though she be
The very Scum and Dregs of Infamy:
Though she be Linsey-Woolsey, Baud and Whore,
Close-stool to Venus, Natures Common-shore,
Impudence, Folly, Brandy, and Disease,
The Sundays Crack for Suburb-Prentices;
What then? she is better then a Wife by half,
And if you are still Unmarry'd, thou art safe.
with whores thou can but venture, what is lost
May be Redeemed again with Care and Cost;
But a Damned Wife, Inevitable Fate,
Destroys, Soul, Body, Credit, and Estates.
FINIS.

