A SATYR AGAINST MARRIAGE.

O Demens! Ita servus homo est?

Juve. Sat. 6. LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1700.

A SATYR AGAINST MARRIAGE.
O Friend, Continue in your Rural Air,
Nor Tempt our sultry Town, nor sullen Fair;
Live happy in a Quiet Single Life,
Hunt Foxes, Wolves, but shun the Marriage Strife:
Trust me, no Game so Dangerous as a Wife.
The VVretched Lover in all Forms I Will Show,
In all the Scenes of Folly and of Woe,
From the Land-Blockhead to the Empty Beau.
I Will show you First the Lover and his Fair,
I Will show them next a Miserable Pair;
Conjured to one, a Double Helpless thing,
By the strange Circle of a Wedding Ring.
O shun that Circle, shun the dangerous ground,
Keep far, far off, and make a Distant round;
Scarce keep in sight, else e're you are aware,
You sink in Quicksands and in Poisonous Air,
Plunged first in Love, then Marriage -- then Despair.
And now Young Man, for yet thy Years are Green,
Consider what shall be from what has been.
To the first Stage of Manhood just arrived,
For now some Eighteen Summers you have Lived,
Now is the Time to Powder and Perfume,
And Court Young Players in the Tyring Room,
To Sigh, to Languish, Bite your Lips, and Tell
Some little Flirt she acted Charming well.
Thus does each Airy Fop his Courtship make,
Till Cloe's lost for some new Charmers sake;
This new One all on sudden he admires,
Yes, He adores her all in Flames and Fires,
Says he is her Slave, and will her victim bleed,
And if this Fustian with the Nymph succeed,
He grows e're long a very Slave indeed.
He who might rove the Universe around,
Is to the Arms of a Weak Woman Bound.
Like Sun-dry'd Reeds he Blazes and he burns,
And the Advice of all acquaintance Scorns;
Nor Tutor, Friend, nor Father can restrain
The Fiery Youth, while Love Usurps the Reign;
Like the Rash Phaethon, he firms his Aims,
Resolved to Drive, though through Destructive Flames.
Fancy's, while yet no Down o'reshade's his Face,
Fancy's, he is Fit to propagate his Race.
Fancy's, Love's Tide, which now so strongly Flows,
No Ebb, no Change, no intermission knows.
He Courts, Presents, and Seranades the Maid,
And sends his Verses either Bought or made.
Walks near her door with rueful downcast Mien,
The Ass, the Lover, but no Man, is seen;
His Friends avoids, and Loathes all Manly kind,
For Love, the Worst Greensickness of the Mind.
O Love! O Cheat! O Couz'ner in thy Play,
Too Dear a Prize for thy false Joys we pay,
For Woman, for a Toy --
We give our Hands, our Hearts, our very selves away.
The Nymph now Gained, who was so hardly sought,
Their Parents never can to Terms be brought,
The Boy worth Nothing beds a Bride worth Naught.
Such was the Match when the Famed A -- was bound
To Painted G --
He Charmed the Mall, the Ring, and all around
Both Theaters, the Fair from him received their Wound
No sparkling Ball, no Beauish Ground was free,
But He was there, and was the Mighty He.
Now Searjeants Dog him at Each Turn, and meet
The Spark, who forced to bruise his tender Feet,
Uucoach'd evades them over the stubborn Street.
From Compter escaped, he flies, and meets at home,
Poor Spouse and ragged Brats in an exalted Room;
But Married, the poor Slave must be content,
He sees his Doom and does in vain repent.
Next comes the Fluttring-Fop with Dance and Song,
And humms some Tune, to pass the Mall along.
With airy Measures his gay Progress makes,
And gently Coupees at each step he takes.
Then out he draws his fancied Watch, and shows
Time to a Minute to Companion Beaus,
This draws out his, That his, and each compares,
To try, if Time be pointed right in theirs.
Vain Fops! Who squander Time, our dearest prize,
Only in taking Notice how it flies.
The Spark his Cane swings next with charming Grace,
Viewing with careless Mein each beauteous Face,
And thinks himself the Charmer of the Place.
Now with a Haughty, sidelong Air he Walks,
At once takes Snuff, and laughs aloud and Talks.
With Fops like these Women are soon Alarmed,
By Pride, superior to their own disarmed,
The languish, sigh, and are with Folly Charmed.
With Female Fools much talk and little Wit,
Are the sure Darts that never fail to hit.
Let him go on to spring his Female Game,
False Fires Reflected shall give real Flame.
Some Nymph, who much shall reputation boast,
Which still she has, it is not known it is lost,
To catch our Fop, pretends to nicest Rules,
Fooled first her self, fit to make others Fools,
Sets up for Fortune, Beauty, Wit and Youth,
Blazed by her Creatures for a certain Truth.
The Subtle, Close, Infectious, nimble Tales,
Buzzed to some Friend who with the Fop prevails,
Set him agog, and all on Fire he flies,
Woo's, Fawns, and Cringes, Swears ten Thousand Lies,
He Loves, and he must Gain, or strait he dies.
All in a Hurry is the Fop betrayed,
Nooz'd in Spring-Garden in a Masquerade,
No Man the Bridegroom, and the Bride no Maid.
Strait spacious Lodgings for his Mate he takes,
And she secures the Jointure which he makes;
Her boasted Fortune, and her vast Estate,
Prove all a Bubble, a mere Female Cheat.
Hence Feuds and Strife get Birth; e're long they part,
And she, well practiced in the Female Art,
Sends him, (no matter who is) a Chopping Brat,
Who, when he dye's shall vaunt with his Estate,
Spend what his Grandsues hoarded under ground.
Laugh Hymen, Laugh, and Grin ye Satyrs round.
How like you Frank, the Blessed Scene in View,
Will any after this but Madmen Woo?
But Gray M -- shall with his Crutch have place,
Though Wrinkles Seventy Years have Plowed his Face,
Of Silver Hairs the Scandal and Disgrace.
He Shaves, he Powders, he Perfumes in vain,
No Art can bring his Youth, his Strength again;
In vain his Awkward apish Trick he Tryes,
His hollow Cheeks, and Wrinkles baffle all Diguise.
Strange! that such Age, such right to folly claim,
Strange! that when Seventy Years have made him tame,
He should hold Cards, who cannot play the Game.
But Marriage, like a Plague, Infection spreads,
And Horns will often sprout on Silver Heads.
Marriage is like the Rabble rout in Sweets,
Where each Inquires the News of each he Meets,
Those who are out thrust in the Press amain,
Those who are in strive to get out again.
Fixed, like Small Pox, is the Malignant knot,
Or Young, or Old, few dye without the spot.
But here comes one beyond the Fool in years.
A Fool, who much a Greater Fool appears;
One whom the Plague already had in wind,
And left broad Blotches of P -- s Rage behind.
The Widdower -- who did the Seas explore,
Was tossed by Wind and Waves, half wrecked before,
Ventures again, and leaves the happy shore
Strange that he should experience thus abuse,
For he that Marries twice has no excuse.
Why, when their Sisters did one Head deface,
Should a new Hydra's Head supply the place?
Thus Criminals, who 'scape the Law, perplexed,
Rob when this Session ends, are hanged the next.
Suppose, my friend, Fair Cloris was your Bride,
And you all ravished lying by her side;
Cloris! whom you so highly have admired,
Whose dazzling Beauty your desires have fired.
Whose single Glance your Reason could Control,
And every Motion shake your wondering Soul.
Imagine now your Cloris you had gained,
And one Week past since you the Bliss obtained.
Draw wide the Morning Curtains, and Expose
The lovely Cheeks, the Lilly and the Rose,
You and your Wife permit me to behold,
Your Wife! -- O frightful! grown already Old?
Where are those swelling Breasts, that charming Air?
Sure, I mistake! this cannot be the Fair.
No Paint adorns that Face, that Face is grown
So Just, the homely Color is its own.
How far unlike that sparkling thing she lies;
Her Lips discolored, and unbeam'd her Eyes.
Now Frank, Reflect, Man, who was born to Rule,
Sinks into Marriage, and comes up a Fool.
None was e're yet so happy in a Bride,
But often did wish the fatal knot untied.
How is the Sense of Lordly Man displayed?
We make them Idols, worship them when made,
Disdaining Wit, and scorning Merit too,
But love the fool, where they themselves may view;
Where, by reflection, they the sight may gain
Of something very Proud, and very vain.
Think on the bawling Brats, the Plagues of Life,
Think on them grown to Years of filial strife,
Think, think -- weigh Marriage well --
Weigh but Light woman Just -- up mounts in Air the Wife.
Reflect, Consider what the word contains,
Contagion, Noise, and Fury in it reigns.
A Wife! confusion, scarce the D -- d fare worse,
Than he that is wedded to the Female Curse.
With Pride as Great as Lucifer Endu'd,
And as famed Messalina monstrous Lewd.
To endless Charges she allures her Spouse,
And to say truth, she too keeps open House;
The Husband's Guests, and only his in show,
Here Is too in secret; e're they part shall Grow.
Her Children flock the Careful Husband round,
And Sires for all may in the Room be found.
The Cuckold fondly strokes the little Brood,
And thinks them all his own pure Flesh and Blood,
Brags of his Feats, and of the dear Delight,
The Leering Mother Smiles, the Fathers Laugh outright.
How like you Frank, the blessed Scene in View?
Will any after this but Madmen Woo?
Try some old Cits Gay Wife and find it true.
In Chaste Cheapside, not distant very far
From a known Tavern with a Noisy Bar.
Inquire the Famed C -- and you shall find
A Keeping Lady wondrous fair and kind.
A G -- s Wife too not far thence is known
To give away more Jewels than her own.
But if her Spouse, that poor Compliant thing.
Whom honest Cuckoldom, to view must bring,
That Fiend that is raised within the Nuptial Ring;
Within his breast, worse than the pointed Steel,
The stinging Pangs of Jealousy shall feel;
Horror, Despair, and Rage, and Madness roll,
And fire his Blood, and Poison all his Soul.
With threats his Wife he charges with her Crime,
And swears he knows the very place and Time.
His Friends, grown here is, reproachfully Exclaim,
Cry to the Husband -- Barbarous! O for Shame,
He Storms, and cries out -- Cuckold -- that is my Name.
All Join against the Husband, none abuse
The poor Good Wife, though Infamous as Stews,
And may such fate attend all those that Noose.
Backed by her Friends, who will her Fame maintain,
And clear with Blood her false imagined stain,
She Rails, and calls him, Scoundrel, sorry Slave,
A Beggar, Wretch, till she her Fortunes Gave;
Her Ample Fortune, Tenements and Lands,
Made his that Fatal Hour that Joined their Hands.
And now (...) she turns, and Weeps, and then she Cries
Is it for this Ungrateful Man --
On my Unspotted Fame you fix such racking Lies?
The Ninny melts, his boiling heart falls down,
And his Horns sink within his Fronting Crown.
Her Pettish Peevish Humors he must please,
And Act the Fool a Hundred Thousand ways;
Her Slave by Night, her very Ape by days.
Thus the poor Dog with Bell, turns, shifts, go's round,
That whom he leads may safely tread the Ground.
Yet the poor Curr must often for all his Care,
Strokes undeserved and Furious Lashes Bear.
So must the Husband, paid for all his Pains,
Meet proud Insults, while she, the Tyrant Reigns,
And holds him like a Fettered Dog in Chains.
O Hymen, boast no more thou giv'st us Joy
It Is thou that do all Human Peace destroy;
Where e're thou come all Pleasures fly the Ground,
And Killing Cares whirl a perpetual Round,
While no dear Interval of Rest is found.
The smothered Fire, now burning, all alarms,
And the divided Household stand to Arms.
But O, the Power of the Gayety and Pride!
The greater part march to the Female side.
The House is in an Uproar, Thunder roars,
And shakes the Chamber-Roofs, and jarring doors.
They part -- she leaves him struggling in the Nett,
He cannot her Alimony fixed forget.
But he must soon remember, and must pay
Debts she contracted in her Female sway,
For Presents, to her Lovers given away.
What must this VVretched Husband do? what force,
What Art can e're pervail for a Divorce?
When one, if we may Credit busy Fame,
Of Goodly Aspect, Great in Bulk, and Name;
Practiced all Means, yet hardly gained his Cause,
To prove himself the very thing he was.
Strange Female Power! -- even Logic ye confound,
And Man can scarce, for what he is, be found.
Remember Frank, (and let us forget the Strife
The Noise, the Plague and Nonsense of a Wife)
The true Delights of a blessed single Life.
Your Days and Nights your own, you may Assign
What time you please to Friends, and Moderate Wine.
You happy Rural Sports you may renew,
But never Come where Woman is in view.
Woman! far more inconstant than the Wind,
Woman! by Nature to all Ill Inclined,
The sure destroyer of a peaceful Mind:
False as the Sea, and as a Bubble Light,
Our Sex's Plague by Day, our Curse by Night.
Then Friend, with greatest Diligence take Care,
Once Caught, there is no Redemption from the Snare.
We find a Cure for other Ills of Life,
But who can be Relieved that has a Wife?
Mind not the Praising Husbands of the Town,
Who, like the Fox in the Old Fable known,
VVarn all to Lop their Tails, when they have lost their own.
FINIS.
A Law against Cuckoldom, or the Trial of Adultery. Price 6 d,


