A COMPLETE HISTORY OF The LIVES and REIGNS OF MARY Queen of SCOTLAND, And of
Her Son and Successor, JAMES The Sixth, KING of SCOTLAND; And ( After Queen
Elizabeth) King of GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE, and IRELAND, The First, ( Of ever
Blessed Memory:)

Reconciling several Opinions, In Testimony of Her, and Confuting others, in
Vindication of Him, against two scandalous Authors; 1. The Court and Character
of King James, 2. The History of Great Britain.


Herein is expressed, The particular Affairs of Church and State: The
Reformation of the One, The Policies and Passages of the Other. The frequent
Disturbances of Both,
By Wars, Conspiracies, Tumults, and Treasons, with the contemporary actions of
Neighbor Nations, in reference to this whole Island. Faithfully performed,

By WILLIAM SANDERSON, Esquire

London, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, Richard Tomlins, and George Sawbridge,
and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard, at Py-Corner, and on Lud-Gate-Hill.
MDCLVI.

THE PROEME TO THE First Part.
TO be in print without a Preface is not the Mode now; and though it intends to
let in the Reader, as the Porch to a Palace, yet it seems to be built up after
the Book. For u^ually it discovers the weakness of the Work, by an ingenuous
Confession of more faults than some other man may find out, and so craves
favor.

I prefix this really before I write more of the matter; And therefore to
pretend excuse for what shall follow amiss, might seem a presumptuous sin, as
if I meant to offend: Not, but that Offenses will come, and may be found out
hereafter, more properly then to be summed up in the end of all, and added to
the Escapes of the Press, and so to plead the General Pardon.

Our Design is History; commonly divided into 3. Kinds.

1. Memorials, A naked Narrative without contexrure of Things and Actions.

2. Antiquity, The Shipwreck of History, somewhat saved from the Deluge of
Destruction, and so subject to question, as that excellent History of the
World, done by Sir Walter Raleigh, with exact diligence; which yet indures the
examination of his Errors, by One, who in truth took much pains to worst it
the more (that Master-peice) by the Epitomy, which (besides the injury to the
Work it self) becomes unprofitable to the Readers expectation. With these two
kinds we mean not to meddle.

3. But with Perfect History, being in truth that which comprehends a
Chronocled Time, representing the life of a Prince, with the Narrative of
actions relative; therefore with little favor of different opinions, may be
accounted the most complete for Estimation, Profit and Use in the magnitude of
Affairs, Men and Matter.

And of this nature, Our Histories of England are said to be defective in the
Main; And for that of Scotland, too too partial as done by different affections
and interest in matters Ecclesiastical and Civil. Therefore it has been
accounted worthy the labor, to mold them both into one Body joined to these
times from their first conjunction in Union of the Roses, to the uniting of the
Kingdoms.

The latter has been in some sort set out (single) to our hand by a Compendium
of the 5. King James's, immediately succeeding each other, and lately done by
William Drummond.

After whom we intend to take up the Remain; Beginning where he leaves, with
the birth of Mary instantly succeeding the Death of her Father James the fifth
with the contemporary actions of neighbor Princes. And so to her Son and
Successor James the sixth; and (after the death of Queen Elizabeth) of Great
Britain, France and Ireland the first, and last King complete, in right of
issue descended from Margaret, eldest Daughter unto Henry the seventh of
England, and James the fourth of Scotland, with Reunion in that ancient Title
of Britain.

But in brief; Henry 7.
The first Union of Marriage begat a present Peace, James 4.
between Henry the seventh of England, and James the fourth of Scotland. And at
that instant, Scotland brought forth a Prodigious Monster of Man; under the
waste like other men, the Members both, for use and comeliness were two; and
standing it was indifferent to which of the two Bulks the Legs belonged. This
Bifrons had different passions and diverse wills; chiding each other, and
quarreling; until by over-wrangling, they unwillingly agreed, and was cherished
by the King, taught languages, and lived eighteen years. A Monstrous Omen to
the Union.

This James was young and active, for twenty five years of his Reign, having
occasion to cope with two Henry's, the Seventh and Eighth of England, Father
and Son successively. The first took his Entry here by Arms, and Establishment
by marriage. Yet the times proved to him, like strong Tides, full of Swellings,
but well managed by the wisdom of an able Pylot, through all storms; being of
himself the most sufficient Sovereign of any his Predecessors. Between Him and
James the fourth, there had been distempers, ever espousing the French
Quarrels. And therefore their times produced sundry great mutations,
treacherous, false and deceiving, the events belying the Beginnings. Princes
mostly inconsiderate, before they imbarque, whether their Wars be just or
necessary, and may serve Examples of great men's frailty.

After the death of Henry the seventh, succeeded his Son Henry the eight, young
and wealthy, whose actions had more of Gallantry than Honor, though he meddled
with the mixed Affairs for ballancing the Western Monarchy amongst the
Pretenders, Germany, Spain and France, with the change of Religion to reformed.
And so soon as engaged against Louis of France, James interposed, as to divert
him. Enters upon Ireland, invades the English Borders, and after comes to handy
blows in Northumberland. The English six and twenty thousann, the Scots many
more; and at Flowden Field 1513. a wondrous slaughter on both sides, and James
in the Fight was lost, as in a Fog, for ever; though he acted so well his
affected Popularity, that his loss became more disconsolate to his People, than
any his Predecessors.

His Son succeeds, James 5.
a cradle King, seventeen Months old, under Tutelage of his Mother, who
implores Henry her Brother, for compassion upon a Widow-Sister, and an
Orphan-Nephew, not to wage War, but to defend them. He answers like himself,
With the mild he was meek, and with the froward he could fight. But she too
weak for her wild Subjects, marries with the Earl of Angus, and being disdained
for matching so meanly, the Duke of Albany, of Scots race (begotten in Exile)
is sent for out of France to govern them at home. The success may soon be
imagined; for the Scots heretofore had killed James the first, covenanted with
James the second, overthrown James the third, and (some say) mislaied James the
fourth, and now hardly submit to a Stranger.

The Queen and Angus fly to England, and here she is brought to Bed of
Margaret, Grandmother to King James the sixth. Conspiracies increase in
Scotland, fomented from Henry the eighth, till horrid Rapines, wearied each
party into a Peace at home, and England also.

And thus freed from War for a time, the Governor Duke executes Justice upon
such whose former fewds had made but suspicious, and so he wearied with doing
evil, returns into France to settle their Solemn League.

He gone Henry the eight sends home the Queen and Angus, and having this while
composed his French Quarrels, with a Defensitive Amity against all. Tourney
rendered to the French, and Overtures of a Match between the Dolphin and Henry's
Sister, and not a word for the poor Scots, that had lost their King in the
French Dispute, only interceding for a Cessation of Arms with the English, and
so accepted for Henry's convenience of Princely Interview with Louis.

The while supporting Angus and his Faction, their own Civil Dissentions
sufficient to busy themselves, and to keep matters in much disorder; the
policy of England and France both to weaken the Scots power for eithers prey,
which being suspected by Albany, now in France, and the violent Fewds beginning
fresh at home, after five years absence, he gets loose of the English Ships,
that lay wait in his way, and Lands in Scotland.

The Governor come, he sets things strait again, which by his absence were
made awry; forces Angus into France, many suffer besides; others more factious
fly into England, and pretend the Dukes sudden return, was to engage that
Nation against Henry, who in rage sends to the Governor to be gone to his
French Friends, or to expect blows; and was answered as peremptorily, That in
case of War, he knew better to defend than the other to fight.

King Henry in fury sets fines on some Scots here, and after banishes all, and
presently pursues with invasions upon their Nation by Sea and Land. And over to
England comes the Emperor, instigating the King to fall out with France; the
like Empirick Balm the French apply to cure the wounds of the Scots
Commonwealth; which prevailed so far, that both Armies meet, but the Scots
would not fight; the English fire all before them, and the Governor not
affected with the Scots falsehood returns back to France for ever.

Angus gets home again, countenanced by Henry, assumes the person of the King
(now thirteen years old) concludes a lasting Peace with England, and proposes a
Marriage between the young King, and the Princess Mary; which Henry in heart
desired, until he heard of the French King Prisoner at Pavia, by the Emperor,
so the match was put off, upon pretense for the Emperors consent her nearest
Kinsman.

The Queen displeased with her Husbands Supremacy over her Self and Son; and
both agreed to dislike each others Bed (for it was fatal to her, as to her
Brother Henry to love change in (...)

And forthwith followed Divisions of Religion in Scotland also, with Disputes
and Arguments for Toleration, excellently urged in ^avour of the Reformed; but
the Catholic Clergy prevailed; and the Inquisition erected to force the other
with Fire and Faggot.

^

The first that suffered in suspicion of those attempts, were the Hameltons, of
Kin to the Crown; which wrought factions to such height as that King Henry
takes heart, begins by Incursions, where the English were soundly beaten. And
then in Revenge Howard, styled the Old Earl of Norfolk, is sent with formidable
Forces, 40000. to 30000. (if the sums are not mistaken) either party so
numerous, as to eat up all and starve themselves, But upon some distrust of
success, the Earl retreats. The Scots pursue this advantage. And the next
Spring mutiny among themselves, and at Salloway Moss the English gave them a
mighty defeat; which so astonished King James, that with wondrous regret he
forced death, over hastily to seize him; at the instant, when his Queen was
delivered of a Daughter, the only issue remaining to succeed him in his Throne.

And with he begins our History, The Life and Death of his Daughter Mary Queen
of Scotland, taking up the Remain of Henry the eighth, who lived not long
after, leaving his three children succeeding Sovereigns, yet thought him not
worthy memory by any Monument.

Edward the sixth, whose short reign and youth, supported by a wise Council,
held up what was left him by Succession.

Until the Sovereignty fell to his Sister, with alteration of all and hazard
of all, she being imbarqued in body and business to a Strangers Supremacy: but
not lasting long time,

Was left to a Virgin, to recover desperate dangers, Ecclesiashick and Civil,
with various Designs, Impressions and Operations upon her Neighbor States;
imbroyled with her jealousies to infamy of destruction in the blood of Q. Mary
of Scotland, her nearest kinswoman and pretended Competitor in the Crown,
until at last in Gods due time the Sovereignty fell to a Foreiner.

King James, with reunion of the ancient Title of Britain, Elizabeth indeed
succeeded in the Inheritance begotten by H. 8. upon Ann Bullen; after his
divorce from Katharine his Brothers widow, by whom he had Q. Mary, and that
marriage dispensed with by the Pope. Hence did arise a question;

Whether the Divorce was legal, or Elizabeth legitimate? when Adam was created,
Eve was taken out of him, and made Woman, a fit Instrument for prolification
and Society. And both married in Paradise, God the Father being the Priest, and
the Angels Witnesses; for which cause, A man shall leave Father and Mother and
cleave to his Wife. They begat Sons and Daughters, which were Brothers and
Sisters, and married one the other without contradiction, until the Flood,
nay, after the Flood, until Moses writ. And these Marriages were not against
the Moral Law written in their hearts (which being much obliterated in the
faculties of the Soul by reason of Adams transgression, when Moses writ the Law
of Nature (or Law of Reason) it was therefore twice written in Tables of Stone,
that by reading those Precepts (which were much defaced within) man might
repair, in some measure, those Laws almost blotted out by sin. And so by
reading get them into his Understanding, Will and Memory, Man's Knowledge
coming most naturally by Sense. Moses did not only write this Moral Law in
Stone, but gave many positive Laws for the Pedagogie of the Jews until Christ,
as the Ceremonial and Judicial. The Judicial Laws, amongst other things did
forbid Marriages in cases of blood and affinity, and these continued until
Christ's time, and no longer, unless there were a Moral Equity in them, which
Morality is only inter Ascendentes and descendentes, where there is a kind of
Paternity and Fi^^ation, for Filius non portabit iniquitatem Patris; and for
that sin Jacob cursed Reuben, for ascending his Fathers bed. This ground being
truly laid, it was conceived, there is no Law of God in force, but that which
is between Ascendents and Descendents. It is true, every Church has made Laws
to bind people in their Churches; but it was insisted upon only in this, That
the Moral Law does not forbid, and the Ceremonial and Judicial Laws are now
abrogated. In Sir Giles Allingtons case (not long since) who married his
Sisters Daughter, there was a sin against the Moral Law, and so they were
divorced. But it was said in that case, that if the Aunt had married the
Nephew, it had been a greater sin, because the Au^t being in loco Parent is to
the Nephew, he by such marriage being Husband to the Aunt, became by that
Relation Superior to his Parent, which did aggravate the offense. So then that
which is to be insisted upon is the law Moral, which is the constant and
permanent will of God, both in the Church Triumphant and Militant. So that Adam
could never marry any, if he had lived until this time, being the common Parent
of Mankind in the Old World, and Noah in the New.

And thus much concerning the Divorce, and Elizabeth's Title.

But to conclude, it comes to be our Task to enter upon this work of Mother and
Son, and to enliven their Memories with their ^ives and Actions, not singly
neither, but contemporary too, with such Affairs of State, as intermixes with
others of Europe. As also the State Militant of the Scots Kirk in Persecution,
Motion, and at Peace, in relation to the Arks, upon the Water, in the
Wilderness, and in the Temple. The Materials of All need no Ornament, but
adjustment. Bona fama, propria possessio Defunctorum.

And if ever to any of old, styles and additions were allowed, properly and
truly they may challenge, Piae Memoriae,
Bonae Memoriae,
Felices Memoriae, as due to them.


I dare not appropriate to my self abilit^ in these as to a Compile. I rather
wish it complete in another, endeavoring only to set down such particular
Actions Memorative, as may hereafter enlighten abler pens to consummate. Those
Collections hereby commended to posterity for that purpose; To raise a better
Structure out of this imperfect Rubish.

Index of the first Part to the entrance of King JAMES to the Crown of England.
THe Introduction of K. James 5. and his Wife, and of their Daughter Queen
Mary, their story in brief to the Birth of King James 6. from page 1. to 8.
A.
Acts concerning Episcopacy 110 Ambassadors privilege discussed 74 abused 97
Ambassadors about Marriage with Denmark 137 Ambassadors sent by the King to
foreign Princes concerning succession to the Crown of England 219 Angus and
other fugitives in England, their insolence 105 dies bewitched 135 Queen Ann's
design to seize the Prince 183 Army of the English and Scots slain 13 Armies of
the Queen against the Lords 38 Armstrong a prisoner in England set free by
force of Arms with a trick 191 difference hereupon 192 Archbishop of St:
Andrews dies, and is abused by the Ministry 160 Earl of Arran's plot 27 dies,
his character and issue 84 Earl of Arran his power in state 105 Earl of Arundel
arreigned 154 Six Articles of the Church 36 Ministers assemble at pleasure 26
Assembly petition and are answered 158 Assembly make work 194 Blake his mutiny
and story 196 the Assembly assist him 199 dangerous tumult 202 Qu: Elizabeth
interposes, her Letter to the King 204 Lord Aubigny in favor with King James
93 displeases Queen Elizabeth. ib.
B.
BAbington's treason 114 Basilicon Do^on, the occasion of it in public 223
Beaton Cardinal murdered 11 Beza and Calvin at Geneva 16 Bishops restored 104
Bishoprics, the state thereof in Scotland 224 Blake his mutiny and story 196
turned out of all 213 Blunt sent into Ireland 242 Borders of Scotland how
bounded 44 Borderers confer and quarrel 83 Borderers in feud 137 Bothwel flies
into France 35 advanced in favor of the Queen 42 visited of the Queen 44 is
divorced 47 marries the Queen 49 desires the single combat, and flies with the
Queen 50 flies into Denmark 59 Bothwel accused of Witchcraft 159 is committed,
and escapes 160 Bothwel's treason to seize the King 164 Bothwel's attempts at
Faulkland defeated 167 Bothwel steals into Scotland and surprises the King 171
inforces Articles 172 Bothwel arms, and is defeated 177 Bothwel and Popish
Lords rebel 180 are defeated 181 Bothwel flies, and dies at Naples 182
Burleigh's Speech to the Scots Ambassadors 94 Lord Borough Ambassador to the
King 170
C.
CAles Voyage 210 Articles at Calice 19 Calvin and Beza their Discipline at
Geneva 16 that Confession 44 Catholic Lords of Scotland dismayed, plot, rebel
145, 146 their designs 147 Cecil's Letter to Knox 22 Cecil writes to King
James, and his Answer 258 Chancellor of Scotland dies, his character 184
Chatelet executed 39 Colvil Ambassador to England complains of Zouch 177 Of
single Combats and Duels 53 C^mmissioners treat about (...) Scots Queen 63 and
again 78 Commissioners meet to treat of Peace with France and Spain, dispute
about Precedence 143 Conspiratours executed 104 Coin over-valued 91 Crag a
Minister, his Life and Death 132
D.
LOrd Darley returns out of banishment 34 marries the Queen 37 is debarred
bearing of Royal Arms 40 turns Protestant 41 is discontented 43 and murdered
46 his character 47 Davison's Letter to the Ministers 251 Designs in England
for Queen Mary 103 Discipline framed 25 and subscribed 26 Duke of Tuscany
fore-warns King James of Poison 231
E.
Edinburgh Castle besi^^ed and won 80 Queen Elizabeth expostulates the
Rebellion of Scots Lords, moderates the Scots differences 76 Qu: Elicabeth aids
Navar 156 and the Dutch ib. raises her Custom 157 Queen Elizabeth strikes Essex
221 Queen Elizabeth dies 261 Lady Elizabeth born 194 Christened 199 English
confederate with Scots reformed, and how 22 English expedition to Portugal 154
English take Cales 210 Acts concerning Episcopacy 110 Essex his expedition into
France 162 his Voyage to the Azores 215 Essex and Cecil's intelligence with
King James 2^4 Essex his Treason 233
F.
FActions and Feuds 168 The first Fast general of the Kirks 40 Foreign Titles
their precedence at home disputed 21 French aid the Scots 13 quarter the Arms
of England ^9 King of France killed at a Tilting 20 King Francis of France dies
25 French break the League with England 25 French King relieved by Queen
Elizabeth, turns Papist 169 France has aid of England against Spain 220 Fr^^^h
Ambassador and Cecil discourse about the Kings succesion 258
G.
OF Geneva, their Government, Church and State 15 the promulgation of that
Discipline 18 Geneva besieged 225 Earl Gowry created 95 surpri^es the King at
Ruthen 96 his Imprisonment, Arreignment and Execution 100 Gowry's conspiracy
^^^ Lord Gray's design to kill (...), he is banished.
H.
HAcket's horrible Tenets, Disciples, Blasphemy, Execution 162, 163 Prince
Henry born 176 his Baptism 179 Huntley rescues Colonel Semple 141 writes to
Parma, and the King of Spain 146 rebels 147 committed and adjudged guilty 149,
150 Huntley and Murray quarrel 159 Huntley cause of Murray's death 165, 166
I.
KIng James born 42 baptized 45 King James and his Mother in faction and feud
80 is crowned 90 his appearance in Parliament, his Speech 92 King James
surprised 96 makes a Feast, and the Kirk makes a Fast 98 frees himself 98
Proclamation against Jesuits 148 Jesuits, their Seminaries, confirmed by the
Pope 164 Interests of Fa^^ions discussed 68 I^ish Rebels 161, 209 Don Juan de
Austria his design against England blasted 87
K.
KIng's design to meet his Bride in Norway, disposes his Government 150 marries
the Queen and goes into Denmark 152 his Queen arrives in Scot^and and is
crowned 153 Kirk have what they desire, manner of their Excommunication 45
ungrateful, prescribe behavior to the Church of England 46 styled Precisians
84 Kirk stirs the State being troubled 166 Kirkmen in Scotland mutiny 137, 138
John Knox Minister the prime Incondiary of Reformation 12 his Travels and
Faction, accused of Treason 15 arrives in Scotland and begins Troubles 20
insolency toward Morton, and con^ers with the Queen 31 his Breves to his
Brethren, he is questioned 33 his insolency 34 preaches against Government 38
L.
Ancient League between the Scots and French 12 Holy League 106 Holy Leaguers
155 League offensive and defensive between England and Scotland 112 Lenox and
Darly return from banishment 34 Lenox elected Regent 69 is slain 77 his old
Countess dies, her Descent and Issve 87 Lewis Isle reduced in the North, and
the effect 256 Lords take Arms and are defeated, fly into England and get aid,
and submit 39 banished, and return 42 Lords conspire, declare, seize the King
at Sterlin, and treat 107 Love-trick of a Woman 168
M.
MArriage proposed between England and Scotland 10 Marriage of King James with
a Sister of Denmark propounded 107 Ambassadors about that Marriage 137 Earl of
Mar Regent 77 dies 78 Northern Martyrs 9 Queen Mary sent into France 14 returns
out of France 25 Queen Mary affects the Lord Darly 34 and proposes to marry him
36 she answers the six Articles of the Kirk and marries Darly 37 takes Arms
against the Lord, 38 is brought to bed of King James 42 Summary of the Lord
Darley's murder, and of the Queens hasty Marriage 48 Queen Mary resigns the
Government to her Son King James 52 is defeated, flies into England, and writes
to Queen Elizabeth 62 Queen Mary imprisoned, her Commissioners treat in England
63 Queen Mary designed to die 86 writes to Queen Elizabeth 95 Queen Mary's story
returned to 113 Queen Mary comes to her Trial 115 the manner thereof ib. her
Sentence of Death 116 the sequel 117 King James perplexed sends to Queen
Elizabeth Letters, Ambassadors who reason with her 118, 120 false Tales,
Scotland in disorder, the Kirk refuses to pray for Queen Mary ib. Mandate for
her Execution, the manner thereof 121 her Epitaph 126 Queen Elizabeth's Letter
to King James 126 Davison sentenced about Qu* Mary's Death, his Apology to
Walsingham 127 Walsingham's Letters to the King and the Lord Thirlstan 128 the
Kings Deportment on his Mothers Death 134 is caressed by Queen Elizabeth 134
Designs of several Nations to revenge her Death 135 Massacre of Protestants
(...) France 83 Mass opposed 26 Melvil a Disciplinarian his railings 82 a fiery
spirit 85 his evil manners 100 Insolency against the Mass 32 Maxwel arms
against Johnstone 106 rebels, and is taken Prisoner 138 Messam the Minister
has a Bastard 29 his penance 42 Ministers assemble at pleasure 26 allowed
maintenance by Modificators 27 vote themselves exempt (...) justice 28
Ministers denounced Rebels fly into England 102 Ordinance of Parliament
against them, and for what reasons 102 their impudent Reply sharply answered
103 Ministers and their insolence 109 cause of good Acts ib. Ministers in
tumult 174 Blake a Minister his mutiny and story 196 Welsh a Minister his
preaching 202 Ministers refuse to give God thanks for the Kings Deliverance,
and are silenced ib. Earl Morton Regent 78 basely betrays the Earl of
Northumberland 80 besieges Edinburgh 80 his Coin 82 Misgoverns, the Lords
conspire against him 88 offers to resign 89 Morton deposed, plots revenge 90
imprisons the Chancellor 92 is charged with murdering the Lord Darly, is
executed, his Character 95 Mowbray's intent to kill the King 257 Mu^^ay made
Protector 59 takes Arms 60 posts to Queen Elizabeth 67 is slain 68 Murray slain
166 the cause, lamented ib. Murder of the Guises; and Henry 3. of France 153
N.
NArration of the Spanish Navy 141 number of the Ships, Men, and Ammunition 142
defeated by Fireships 145 Queen Elizabeth's message thereof 141 Rumors of the
Spanish Navy in 88. 140 the Kings Speech thereupon, the Chancellours opinion,
Bothwel on the contrary, Colonel Semple's false Designs ib. is rescued by
Huntley, who is banished the Court 141 Netherlands called to account 209 (...)
of Norfolk committed, his story 68 arreigned and executed 78 Norris sent over
to Ireland 209 Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland fly into Scotland 68
betrayed by Morton, and executed 80 Earl of Northumberland pistols himself 114
Northumberland writes to King James, and his Answer 259
O.
ORmston executed about the murder of the Lord Darly 84
P.
THe Kirks justice against Papists 30 Papists Plots 169 Papists banished ^^8
Papists Plots, devising (...) Titles of Pretende^^ to the Crown of England 188
Parliament surprised 77 Parliament Royal 91 Parliament wherein the Kings
Supremacy is con^irmed, and diverse Laws against (...) enacted 104 Duke of Parma
dies 170 Paulet Lord Treasurer dies, his childrens children (...) 76 Antonio de
Perez 86 Perez his character 189 Popish Lords return from banishment 194
Presbyters fly into England, and why 104 their equivocation ib. Proceedings
against Popish Lords by the Ministers 173 Propositions for Queen Mary and Queen
Elizabeth 67
R.
RAndolph Ambassador 91 abuses his privilege 94 dies 161 Rebels defeated 29
Rebels submit, and are committed 149 Reformed rebel 20 covenant and call in
Aid French and English 21 covenant to expel the French 24 Articles of their
Faith, France their Presbytery 24 Reformation in the University 213 Religion.
The Scots how Christians 8 Remonstrance of the Assembly against Papists, and
the remedy 178, 179 Ri^t com^itt^d by the Lords 27 Rizzio the French Secretary
39 Bishop of Rosse Ambassador for the Scots Queen examined 73 is rel^^ed
imprisonment 83 his Death and character 208
S.
SIiege of Ost^nd 252 Earl of Shrewsbury dies 161 Spanish Forces land in
Ireland and are defeated 254 Squire impoysons the Queens Saddle 221
T.
TItles foreign their precedence at home dispu^ed 211 Treaty at Cambray 19 at
^denburgh 24
U.
UNiversity reformed 213
W.
WAde sent into Spain returns unheard 103 Walsingham dies, his character 160
War in Scotland and France by the English 10 assist several Factions 21 Welsh a
Minister his preaching 202 Witches. See Bothwel. Witches discovered 2^3 Wotton
sent Ambassad^^ to Scotland 206 Wotton plots with the c^^spiring Lords, and
posts home 107
Z.
LOrd Zouch Ambassador from England ^^ment^ the send against the King 176
Narrative Passages of the first Part and stories, to be read single by
themselves.
(...) (...) (...) of Geneva 15 Queen Mary's Marriage with the Lord Darly 36
(...) (...) and story 42 Darly the Queens Husband murdered 48 Narrative of
Darly's murder, etc. 52 Digression, of Combats and (...) 53 Queen Mary's
escape out of Prison in Scotland, her Encounter with her Rebels, she is
discomfited and flies into England 60 Digression, of Ambassadors privilege 74
Massacre of Protestants in France 83 Episcopacy in Scotland continued ^^
Bab^ngton's Treason ^14 Queen of Scots her Trial in England 115 sentenced and
(...) of Execution 121 Secretary Walsingham's Letter concerning the Execution
of the Queen of Scots ^^8 The Spanish N^vies Design against England in the year
1588. 141 King James 6. sends Commissioners first, and goes over himself to
fetch his Queen from Denmark Concernments of France with the murder of Henry
3. 155 Hacket's horrible Tenets, arreigned and executed 162 Ministers mad work
194 Digression how far, foreign Titles precede in England 211 Digression
concerning the power of Witches and Witchcraft 214 Earl Gowry's conspiracy
against King James 225 Earl of Essex his Treason against Queen Elizabeth 233
Irish affairs under Lord Blunt Deputy of Ireland 242 English Commissioners in
France dispute Precedence 243
These particular Passages of the Second Part may be read by themselves apart.
INtroduction to the Second Part page 2 Of Knights Batchelors 271 Of the Order
of the Garter, and Saint George his story 273 Of Earls, and their Dignities 274
Of Barons, and their Dignities 275 Knights of the Bath their Creation 276
Digression, concerning Imperial Rule, and Interest of Christian Princes 277 Of
War and Conquest, of Success, their Consequences 281 Sir Walter Raleighs
Treason 282 Of Presbyterians Doctrines 289 Conference at Hampton Court 293
Translation of the Bible and singing Psalms 308 Catechizing commended 310 Of
Parliaments, their beginnings 312 King James first Speech in Parliament 319 The
Powder Treason 323 The Oath of Supremacy, and K. James his Apology to Foreign
Princes 329 Of Jesuits how to suppress them 331 Libel against the Lord Treasuer
Salisbury, and His answer 334 King James Speech and answer to the Arguments
concerning the Union 338 Sprots Conspiracy with Gowry, his arraignment and
Execution 342 Lord Balmerino his treacherous Design 348 King James his second
Speech in Parliament 353 Duke of Gelders his Descent and Death 361 Prince of
Wales, their Dignity 362 Of Chelsey College 365 Of Masks and Comedies 366
Suttons Hospital founded 367 Of Vorstius and Arminius, their Books and
Doctrines 370 Prince Henry's Sickness and Death 377 Treasurer Lord Salisbury
his Life and Death 381 (...) (...) James 391 Earl of Northampton's Life and
Death 393 Of Duels and Combats 394 Of Plantations in America 400 Of Bar^nes
Knights creation 402 King James wants discussed how to be relieved 404 Earl of
Somerset and his Countess arreigned 414 His Letter to K. James 420 The case of
Commendams 424 Difference between the Chancery and Common Pleas, and their
Dignities 431 King James his Speech in Starchamber 439 Sir Thomas Lake and his
wives story 446 King James journey into Scotland 450 George Villiers a
favorite his story 455 Sir Walter Ralegh's Guiana Voyage and Execution 459 A
monstrous Murder in Cornwall 463 Barnevelt's Treason and Execution 466 Of
Synodes and Councils, Synod of Dort 467 (...) (...) of Bohemia 478 Sir Henry
Wootton's Embassy into Germany 485 Marriages with foreign Princes unfortunate
to England 487 Earl Marshalls of England their Dignities 505 Of Libells and
Pasquils 526 Of Knights Templers 527 Preachers ordered their matter and manner
531 King of Spain's Letter to O^vares, and his Answer conc^rning the Princes
Match 539 Prince Charles journey into Spain his Treatments and return 542
Spanish Ambassador accuses the Duke of Buckingham of Treason 562 Prince Charles
Marriage with France treated and affected 566 Treasurer Cranfield put out of
Office 573 Of Apprentices of London, they are no bondmen, discussed 574
Cruelty of Amboyna 576 Famous Siege of Breda 579
The INDEX to the second Part.
A.
QU Ann sent for out of Scotland, her Design to seize the Prince, p. 272 Her
Death and Character, 774 Ambassador French and Spanish quarrel 320 Weston and
Conway Ambassadors into Germany 482 Lord Haies Ambassador into France 428
Lord Rosse Ambassy into Spain 429 Spanish Ambassador accuses the Duke of
Buckingham of Treason, the story 562 Assembly of the Scots Kirk in spite of the
King 321, and 475 Aid-money 363 Arminius and Vorstius their Heresies and story
370 Adamites Heresies 375 Abbot Archbishops Arguments against the Nullity of
Essex, and his Countess answered 391 Kills his Keeper 530 Arreignment of the
Earl of Somerset and Countess for impoysoning of Overbury 414 Arreigning of
Peers discussed 414 Lady Arabella marries Seymer 423 Marquess D' Ancre
murdered in France 549 Abbot Archbishop his Letters concerning the King of
Bohemia 481 Earl Arundel Lord Marshal their Dignities 505 Of Apprentices of
London no Bondmen 574 Cruelty of the Dutch at Amboyna 576
B.
BArons created 271 their Dignities 275 Beaton Archbishop dies in France 271
Batchelour Knights manner of Creation 276 Bible new translated 308 Balmerino
Secretary of Scotland his Treason and story, pardoned, he and his posterity
ungrateful 348 Bishops of Scotland enlarge their power 350 Baronet Knights
created and discussed 402 Benevolence and means of the Kings supplies discussed
407 Sir Francis Bacon made Lord Chancellor 437 his submission in Parliament
and supplication 501 his Character 503 his Encomium of King James 594 Barnevelt
in Holland his Treason and execution 465 Blazing Star their effects discussed
471 King and Queen of Bohemia defeated and fly into Holland 485 Breda that
famous Siege 579 and lost 589 Briante, Botevile and Beauvoir their several
Duels and Combats 582 Bolton's contemplation on King James 594
C.
KIng and Queen crowned 275 Cor^nation-oath 276 Conference at Hampton Court to
settle the Discipline of the Church 282 Catechizing commanded 310 Commotion of
Commoners 312 Charles Prince created Duke of York 322 High Commission Court 352
356 Chelsey College founded, and why 365 Contribution money 367 Car a Favorite
and his Countess their story 376 arreigned for impoysoning Overbury 414 the
case pleaded 416 condemned, reprieved and pardoned 419 his Letter to the King
420 The case of Commendams, the Kings right to them pleaded, and passages
thereupon 424 Lord Chancellor and Lord Cook difference, the cause and case 431
the Kings Letters to the Chancellor, his sickness and death 432 Common Pleas
Court what 434 Chancery Court and power 435 Chancellor Sir Francis Bacon
succeeds 437 Church of Scotlands proceedings 475 Cranfield Lord Treasurer 495
questioned in Parliament, and put out 572 Calumnies answered 535 Combats at
Breda 582
D.
DIgression, designs for Imperial rule in Christendo^ 27^ King of Denmark his
first arrival to visit the Queen his Sister 333 second arrival 413 E. Dorset
Lord Treasurer dies 342 Of Duels 394 Dort Synod 467 Lord Digby Ambassador to
the Empire 495 returns accounts to the Parliament 509 sent into Spain to treat
in the Match 524 ordered by Letters how to proceed 536 created Earl of Bristol
539 is to forbear the Espousals 555 takes leave of Spain 556 and is come home
to the Parliament 563 Designs at the Siege of Breda 584
E.
QUeen Elizabeth not willing to publish her Successor 261 Earls created 274
their Dignities 275 Excommunicatiou absurd in Scotland 368 Earl of Essex, and
his Countess, and Overbury, their story intermixed 385 their Divorce and manner
386 (...) Earls created for money 463 The Emperor in Arms concerning the
Kingdom of Bohemia 480 Egglesham his scurrilous Pamphlet 592
F.
Favorite Car his story 376 Villiers a Favorite his story 455
G.
SAint George's Feast and his story, Order of the Garter 273 Gowry's day of
Conspiracy solemnized, the memorial 312
H.
KIng Henry 8. turns Protestant, makes war with Scotland, defeats them Proeme
Henry 4. of France murdered 362 Prince Henry created Prince of Wales, their
Dignities 362 his sickness and death 377 Hospital of Sutton founded 367 Honors
illegally adopted in Scotland 369 Heresies of Vorstius and Arminius their story
370 Of Adamites 375 Lord Haies Ambassador into France, and character 428 Earl
Huntley of Scotland his story 444 Titles of Honor to English women 458 Sir
Edward Hawley a stout Templer 524 Marquess Hamilton's sudden death 590
I.
KIng James 5. dies, his character 3 King James 6. his parents 1 Introduction,
Queen Elizabeth's sickness and death 265 King James 6. settles his affairs in
Scotland 265 pro^aimed King of England 268 sets out from Scotland 269 his
interest with other Princes 280 Letters of Reprieve for three ready to be
executed 287 his Speech in Star Chamber 439 Journey into Scotland and passages
there 45^ his Letters to the ^ssembly at Perth 475 his Speech to the Parliament
493 and again to the Lords 497 retires discontent to Newmarket 509 writes to
the Speaker 510 his message to the Parliament 512 his Answer to their Petition
513 writes to Secretary Calvert 520 and to the Speaker 521 fights and treats
538 his Speech in Parliament 557 and again 560 answers their Petition against
Papists 564 his sickness, disease, and dies 591 vindicated 592 his character
and royal memory 594 and Epitaph 599
K.
KNights Batchelors made and their Dignities 270 Knights Templers 527 Knights
Baronets created and discussed 402 Knights of the Bath their manner and
creation 276 Kings elective and successive their different kinds 480 Lord
Kensington his birth and breeding 429 Embassage into France about the Marriage
566 quarrels with Count Soisons 569
L.
LEpton's speedy post to York from London and back again six several days
together 333 Sir Thomas Lake and his Lady their story 446 of Labells and
Pasquils 526 answered by Treasurer Salisbury 381
M.
EArl Montgomery the first Favorite 365 careless of the Kings sickness 592
Masks and Plays discussed 366 Queen Mary of Scotland her Corpse re-interred at
Westminster 376 Moneys the King wants and ways of supply 404 restrains his
bounty 406 Money of Benevolence 407 Merch. Traders make fe^ds 313 Cross
Marriages of Spain, France and Sav^y 417 congratulated by Embassies 428 Murder
monstrous in Cornwall 463 Murder of D'Ancre in France 449 Murder of Henry 4.
of France 362 Marriages with foreign Princes unfortunate to England 487 Match
with Spain, the Princes journey and story 524 Marriage of the Palsgrave with
the Princess Elizabeth 377 married 380 Marriage of the Prince with France
treated 566 Marquess Buckingham created, and the Dignity of a Marquess 489
Montague made Lord Treasurer his Descent and Issue 490 Mansel Sir Robert his
Expedition and Voyage against the Pi^rats of Algier 491 Michel and Mompesson
censured in the Parliament 500 Earl Marshal of England their dignity 505
Massacre at Virginia 528 Count Mansfield comes to Holland, raises Forces in
England for the Netherlands 587
N.
EArl of Northumberland and other Lords censured as guilty of the Powder
Treason 334 Earl of Northampton dies, his concernments 393
O.
OAth of Allegiance 315 and Supremacy 316 the Popes Bull against it, the Kings
Apology to all Princes thereof 329 Earl of Orkney committed 352 his Execution
398 Sir Thomas Overbury his story 383 impoysoned 393 discovered 414 Oglevey a
Jesuit his story 398 Earl of Oxford his descent 483 he and Essex carries
Soldiers into Germany 483 join Forces with the Princes against the Emperor,
they are beaten and fly 485 he is committed in England and the occasion 523
Prince of Orange dies 588 Earl of Oxford's Enterprise at the Siege of Breda 588
P.
A Notable Present 270 Presbyterians, Reclamations against them and their
Doctrines 289 Proclamations against Jesuits 306 to conformity of Religion and
Discipline 321 against new buildings in London 3^1 another against buildings
360 to dissolve the Parliament 522 Prophecy of these times 311 Parliaments and
their beginning 312 the Kings Speech in the first Meeting 319 second Session
323 third Speech 352 dissolved 362 Parliament called again 488 Prorogued 507
their Declaration to recove^ the Palatinate 508 petition the King 511 their
thanks and Petition 521 and are dissol^ed 52^ another Parliament 555 petition
against Papists 564 their Designs of W^r for the Palatinate 579 Pastimes
harmless allowed, and recreations after Sermons 458 Powder Treason 323 Post
nati confirmed 340 Papists persecuted by Pens 364 Prince Palatine a Su^tor to
the Princess Elizabeth 377 married 380 elected King of Bohemia, the occasions
discussed, story and war 478 Proscriptions against him 482 raises an Army,
defeated and flies into Holland 485 Pirates of Algier, expedition against them
441 Lords petition against Titles of foreign Honors 496 against grievances 497
Preaching how ordered 531 Papist and Puritan discussed 5^3 Prince Charles his
journey to Spain 542 arrives there 543 complements with the King 544 enters in
triumph to Madrid 545 visits the Queen 546 her presents to the Prince 547 he
answers the Popes Letters 548 takes leave to return 551 Presents given and
received 552 his journey toward the Sea, and parting with the King 553 the
Pillar at parting 554 in danger to be drowned, the storm described 554 lands in
England 555
Q.
QUeen Mother of France flies from them 450 Queen Ann sent for out of Scotland,
and her designs to seize the Prince 272 she dies, her character 474
R.
Ralegh Sir Walter, his birth, breeding, preferment and treason 281 released
imprisonment 459 his Guiana Voyage and Execution 469 Sir Harry Rich his birth
and breeding discussed 429 made Baron Kensington, Ambassador into France about
the Marriage 566 quarrels with Soisons 565 Revolt of the Earls in Scotland 368
Rainbowe lunary 378 Duke of Richmond dies suddenly 557
S.
SUccess and consequence of events 281 Psalms new translated 309 Star Chamber,
original and ending 334 the Kings Speech there 439 Earl of Salisbury his answer
to a Libell 334 dies, his story 381 his Offices how disposed 383 Sprot
confederate in Gowry's conspiracy, his Examination and Execution 342 Sanquire a
Scots Baron hanged for murder of Turner 380 Earl of Somerset his story 376 his
Letter to the King 420 Earl of Suffolk Treasurer sentenced in Star Chamber 437
Spalato Bishop comes into England, revolts again, and dies 449 Earl of
Shrewsbury dies. 459 Synod of Dort 468 Of Synodes, Diet and Councils, their
initiations 468 Spinola his Forces in Flanders 483 besieges Breda 579
T.
TReasurer Mountague 490 Treasurer Suffolk 437
U.
UNion of both Nations intended 320 argued, and the Kings answer 338 Vorstius
and Arminius their Heresies and story 370 Villiers a favorite his story 455
Master of the Horse and Marquess 489 Earl and Duke 547 goes with the Prince
into Spain 542 quarrels with Olivares 551 returns to the Ships 552 his
Declaration to the Parliament 559
W.
WAr, the consequence 281 Whitgift Archbishop dies 307 Waldenses vindicated
376 Sir Henry Wootton his Embassies to the Emperor and Princes in Germany 485
Dr. Williams Dean of Westminster and Bishop of Lincoln and Lord Keeper 504 his
character 507
Y.
SIr Henry Yelverton Prisoner and why 499 his Letters to the Duke of Buckingham
500
THE PROEME TO THE Seeond Part.
WE now enter on the second part, the Accession of a Crown rightly descended to
King James by Succession from the Union of Marriage, long since to this
reunion of Kingdoms now, as a period (in show) of all Trepidation and Motions
in him, and his Posterity, but the eye of all-seeing Wisdom, has with his
powerful hand of Providence dissipated those designs and aims of perpetuity,
and has not left any one of his, in present possession of any part of his
inheritance. And though the prevailing Party minds no other Justification than
Success; yet some men more busy than useful take upon them by deformed
writings and Pasquilles, to conclude this Fabric from such Foundation as they
please to contribute their Counterfeit Materials, with their Prophecies,
Policies, Directories, Narratives, and such like stuff, the general blauch upon
former Sovereigns. Each one professing Truth to countenance their affectiions
and Passions, which alter too, with the subsequence of Time and State. And
thereby comes to be published sundry Rapsodies, Petit-Pamphlets, and Papers.
But yet if you deny their Tenants, you are forthwith to be taken for a State
Heretic. Non servata unitas, nisi in credendo omnia. (...)

For though there may be granted great Antipathy, between the former, and this
State in Civil Policy, yet no such matter from thence, for our disobedience
now; What ever may be pretended by Others, I conceive the People no meet Judge
or Arbitrator. For my part (I am witness to my self) as that no contradiction
shall supplant in me the Reverence I ow to Authority Neither shall any
Adve^saries by Calumny embase my Opinion and high Esteem of K. I^^es his just
Merits and Royal Memory. The Indisposition of these later times, having pierced
with Accusations, very many Men of excellent Virtues. Mala dicta ingenere,
concinnatis calumniis.

They leave all reve^end compassion t^ward^ ev^^s, or religious indignation
toward faults; turn all into a Satyr, search and rip up wounds, with smiling
impudence, and strain their counterfeit zeal to the public, with untruths
abominable. Et magnis Mendacii Credulitas.

Welcome whisperings are quickly heard, where potent malice is Promoter. They
tragitally aggravate infirmities and slips, unworthily upbraiding adverse
Fortunes; and that their belief herein, must necessarily be the more perfect,
which is most degrees removed from the last Actors, and so becomes, Postumi
erroris filii:
Non tam in odium boni,
Quam amorem Mali
Proclives sumus, As one says.


These Kingdoms in King James time, grown aged in happinesse^ that as men used
to say of the spiced air of the Sabaeans, Summus quidem Odor, sed voluptas,
Minor. The very excess seemed to abate the pleasure: Or as the hot sent of Musk
to some Savors seem to stink.

Repetions of our Blessings then, did not so much affect our Nations as dull
them. Peace made us wanton; Plenty (...), M^^ies secure; Our Benefits then
became our Weapons to rebel against his fame now; The whole Land being sowred
by the Peoples Sins, too much felicity introd^^ed Luxury, and Correllaries of
Vices* Pride, Ambition, Contempt of things Divine and ^umane.

This Nation in short time sick of a surfeit of Health; afterward broke with
two much wealth; and now it comes to amendment. Riot begins to grow thirsty,
made so, to go plain, Gluttons, to fast; Wantonness, starved into Soberness.

But -- we may already be afraid of Relapse; Bedrid Exorbitancies, fowl^r for
purging.

Need is there none to number up the Graces and Blessings by this King in
competition with Her, his Predecessor. It may be, Her virtues then are now
become Torches in the dark, which appear greatest afar off, as His Vices (made
so by some writers) do near at hand.

I shall endeavor to recover the truth of his time, least slanderous Tongues,
run mad with railing, they presuming to be got out of distan^^ of time, and
reach of Confutation^ So that Majesty which dies not may yet be discouloured.

As in particular, a Writer indeed a few years since, holds forth, (he says)
The History of Great Britain, but speaks not a word of Scotland or Ireland,
and so this Vindication serves the turn to answer All.

But to give this Man therein his due, we may find truth and falsehood, finely
put together (if it be his own) for it is my hap to meet with Post-nati; both
these Books, born from the dead, and were Abor^^ves; but like Bear-whelps,
licked over by laborious Penmen.

The one a Manuscript of Sir A. W. which with some regret of what he had
maliciously writ, intended to the fire, and dyed Repentant, though since stolen
to the Press out of a Ladies Closet.

This Other, designed an Epistle for honorable Patronage, who disdained the
owning. And so comes out bare Collections of Old. I knew of them, and their
Parent Presbyter, put together by the Poet; And shaped out by the Doctor, and
Wilsons Name, set to the Sale.

My aim is in these times of Distraction, to present to the p^blique the former
fruits of Peace and Plenty, planted by Providence, and ripened to Maturity, by
Divine Influence, throughout His Days. If any failings, so much searched for,
and to be found at last, are then to be attributed to his age, not Him. In
declention of years not many Princes end in much splendour, when vigor fails,
so does their fortune.

For my self, having lived long time in Court, and employed (till my gray
hairs) more in Businesses than Books; far unworthy, I humbly confess, to have
any hand to the Helm, ye I cabin'd near the Steerage, and so might the more
readily Run the compass of the Ships-Way. And truly I traversed aboard too,
though not in Counsel with Masters or Mates; observing also the Heights and
Declinations of the Sun and Stars, the better able to evidence their Actions
and Influence upon our World.

Add herein to be read in few hours, what have been reaped in many years,
These undeniable Truths, which I have seen and heard.

Will. Sanderson.

The LIVES and DEATHS of MARIE Queen of SCOTLAND, And of Her Son and Successor
JAMES The Sixth of that name, King of SCOTLAND, And of Great BRITAIN, FRANCE and
IRELAND the First.
Introduction.
KINGS are Gods upon Earth; God himself has said so; Of King James parents to
his Birth.
Intituling Them to this Dignity, with power over their People: But they shall
die like Men; Humbling their Souls for a blessed End; Lest their Greatness
here, should make them careless of their Glory hereafter; Death being the
entrance into eternal life.

And so much honor is done to Them, that the Old Testament affords four Books
of the Kings; two of which are particular Chronicles of their Persons and
Actions, with many other memorable passages of Kings, mentioned promiscuously
both in the Old and New Testament; besides those Books not extant, of their
wonderful works, to which much is referred by Holy-writ.

And it has been held sacred, with most Nations, not to leave their Sovereigns
long buried in the Graves of Oblivion. And if so of most KINGS, why not of
these so well deserving, Mary the Mother, and JAMES Her Son and Successor^

They came into the World when all was on fire, not peace in any part. All
Europe in a Militia. The East had much to do for Defense against the Turk; The
West in Offense one with the other; The North at variance with their
neighbors; The South had influence upon them all. A Massy body of War, in
several Postures, and each Army of sundry Brigades; Only Himself never had an
Enemy.

I desire to bring together much of the main into little, and in due place to
observe, out of all, what particular Interest became this King; The measure of
whose Glory may be taken by its Profundity, which only in him held out long
and even.

Let us be mindful of their Descent. She was sole Daughter and Heir to James
Stuart, Their descent.
the fifth of that Name, and the 108. King of SCOTLAND; begotten upon Mary his
Queen, of that Illustrious Family of the Dukes of Lorain; Married to him at
Saint Andrews, July 1538.

About the time, H. 8. turns Lutheran,
when Henry 8. of England became Lutheran, whom the Pope Excommunicates and
interdicts His Dominions, and with more than malice moves the Emperor and
French King to be His Enemies. To palliate such potency, He procures an
Interview with them at Nice, a Maritime Town in the Confines of Provence; And
being returned, desires Conference with the King of Scotland at New Castle: And
makes war with Scotland,
But in time of preparation, the English fall fowl with the Scotch Borderers.
Both parties arm, with equal number, about 30000. James himself in person; The
Duke of Norfolk for the English, meet upon the Confines. The young and daring
King, with the advantage of his own ground, and near home, puts the Old Duke to
advise, and retreat. And the next year, heightened the Scotch with an Army of
10000, to affront the English Borders; who hastily raise considerable Forces,
and ready for the onset, the Scotch Lords, envious against the choice of their
General Oliver Saintclair, And defeats them.
though a man not deserving Malice, an excellent Commander; yet they refuse to
fight, basely suffering themselves to be Prisoners, not only to the power of
the Sword, but also to the wanton insolences of Boys and Women, who haltring
them by hundreds, drove them home into England.

Ill News has wings, which flew to the King at Falkland; whose youthful
spirit disdaining to outlive the infamy of his People, with monstrous regret
on his perfidious Army, He willingly forced his own neglect of the necessities
of natural support, Sustenance and Sleep, until the weakness of his limbs, not
able to bear the burden of his body, K. of Scots dies, And his Daughter Mary
born.
He cast himself on his Bed; When tidings came of his Queen brought to bed of a
Daughter and Heir (His two Sons Infants dying some years before) at which he
sighed out these his last words. It will end as it began; the Crown came by a
Woman, and by a Daugher it will return; King Henry will make it His, by Arms or
Marriage: and turning aside from his Servants, sunk down into the deluge of
Death, 13. December 1542. being 33. years of age, and the 32. of His Reign.

His Daughter Christened Mary five days after, sole Heir of His Kingdom and
Misfortunes, which She inherited to Her death. His body was solemnly and
sumptuously intombed in the Abbey Church of Holy-Rood-house. His Burial,
Nor rested he after death: For Henry the eighth, though his Uncle, continued
the advantages of this Defeat, and some years after razed the Church and Tomb
equal with the Earth. Whose Body was afterward, by the pious duty of his
Grandson, James the sixth, removed to another Vault, embalmed again, and
enshrined in a costly Monument, with Ensigns and Arms, the Dignities of his
Crown and Kingdom.

This Kings Person was well made up, And Character.
with advantage of an Excellent mind, of a middle stature, with abilities equal
to any; The first that pursued his Enemies, and the last that left the Chase;
discreetly liberal, sparing, only for spending upon necessary disbursments;
well affected to Letters, wherein he adventured in some verses of Poesy.

If we examine his Umbrages, as we make our prospect upon a Picture of lights
and shadows; Take him in the Circle of Himself, He was of worthy fame. What he
was forced to do in justice upon Offenders, the Dowglasses by pursuit, and
others by Execution, must be wisely referred to the then consequences of State;
which of late to him lay under the disease of two professions of Religion,
Romish and Reformed, the latter increasing to the distemper of Him and his
Successors.

His Daughter now left Heir to the Crown at eight days old, Q. Mary's entrance
into he^ Crown, and Troubles,
(Age or Sex not debarring Hereditary Right, to rule over their People) which
occasioned Her whole Life and Reign, most sad and troublesome to so excellent a
Lady. To shadow out unto us, that Eternity is not on Earth; That Kings and
Princes, seeming the best substance of Elements, and if possible incorruptible,
as being the fairest Seals of Natures impression, yet these yield to the
triumph of Death; not calmly neither, but by death dis-seasoned, in several
conditions of their life, as well in Youth, as after Age; and so it fell out
upon this Queen.

For, By Factions of Hamilton and Lenox.
being thus young, Hamilton and Lenox, cheef Heads of two Factions, distracted
all; the one depending on Henry the Eighth of England, whose only Son Prince
Edward was afterward affianced to Queen Mary; And Lenox supported by the
French King, Henry the Second, an utter Enemy to this Match. These began the
fewds, which fell by Parties into a mischievous civil War. And in respect her
Person was aimed at by each of them, to make advantage; No sooner was Edward
come to the Crown of England, but that Queen Mother, wise and prudent, sent Her
at Six years old to the French King, and to the Duke of Guise, for their
Breeding.

And with Her (to rid him for the present out of the way) went James Hamilton,
Earl of Arran Her Guide.
Earl of Arran, whom the French gained, and afterward created Duke of
Chaste'auleroy (He was the Grand-child-son of James the Second King of Scotland
by His Daughter) Upon their return, he was Tutor and Governor of the Kingdom,
and her Heir designed in her Minority. Of Him much is spoken hereafter: But as
He was plain, and well meaning, vexed with other men's policies, so of himself
he acted little; and yet, to his power, he defended this Queen, through all Her
future Calamity; But dyed some years before She suffered, leaving Her then, not
in despair of deliverance.

The Documents of France, Her breeding in Fran.
met with such an incomparable genuity, and excellent understanding in this
Princess (a Person complete also for beauty) that She became the most admired;
which moved the French King, And there married the Dolphin.
to marry Her to Francis the Dolphin, Anno 1558. Being both the undoubted Heirs
to the Crown of England, after the death of Mary then Queen of England
(presently following) and Elizabeth her Sister.

And therefore these new married couple, took upon them to quarter the Arms of
England, And as heirs to England quarter the Arms.
which in truth by Law they might not do: None may bear the Coat of a Family,
not being both a certain Heir of the same. Nor was it in truth the right of
others, who did the like, as Courtney Marquess of Exeter, and the Duchess of
Suffolk, Niece to Henry the Eighth, by His younger Sister; and yet were
allowed, though of further Descent; and therein (it is true) the less jealousy,
Which offended Qu. Elizabeth.
but to Her that was so near, the cheef cause of Queen Elizabeth's perpetual
hatred, and fear, that She might prove too hasty an Usurper of these Kingdoms,
and it was the ground of all the miseries that accompanied Her to the untimely
grave.

For Queen Elizabeth now come to this Crown (well knowing Her own power and
interest with those of the Reformed Religion here at home, and in Scotland)
opposed it. Which was construed then, that She might as well question Mary's
Intere^^ of Succession.

In this interim, The French King and Dolphin die
the French King Henry, and Francis His Son, depart this life, and the Queen of
Scots left unhappy in his los^. Being become a Queen Dowager in France, where
Factions inincreased, too hot for Her to abide there.

Her Uncle Guise (Her Curator) managing the most part, The Queen returns to
Scotland.
in which he sacrificed himself. Queen Mary therefore, having a desire to
return home, knew She had been too bold with Queen Elizabeth, to get much
favor; yet she begged leave from Her of safe conduct into Scotland; which was
refused, disputing former unkindnesses; whilst in a mist She got by the
English Ships, that lay in Her way, and landed in Scotland, 1561. Where She
found Her State might^ly distempered, under Protection of the Bastard James,
and M^rraies Government.

To recover which, She used Her Subjects with all courtesy, and changed not
those of the Reformed Religion, which was mightily increased by Her absence,
and brought in by tumult of the wild Presbytery.

And first, Requests a Peace with England.
She warily requested a certain form of Peace and amity with England; and to
make it the more certain, She proposed by way of Counsel to Queen Elizabeth (if
She should have no Issue) to be declared next Heir to Succession.

This advice, with the former bold bearing of the Title and Arms, caused more
than suspicion, That otherwise She meant by violence to take the Crown, having
claimed it, through too hasty ambition.

And indeed it was a great means to dissever their friendships. Which o^^ends
Queen Elizabeth.
For always unto established Governments, Successors are soon suspected; The
People most usually, upon dislike of present things, look up after the rising
Sun, and forsake the setting. Nor is it customary with Successors designed, to
keep their own hopes, and other men's lewd desires, within the compass of
justice and truth; and thereby also to cut off the likelihood of future
security, by hanging before their own eyes their winding sheet, and to
solemnize their own funeral Feast alive, and see the same.

Hereby it was evident Queen Mary prepared to stand upon Her Guard, well waying
the watchful eye of Queen Elizabeth upon all Her Actions.

The Queen of Scots was young and handsome, Q. Mary's designs to marry.
and in respect of Succession, thought upon nothing more than to settle Her
self again by Alliance and Marriage; which Queen Elizabeth meant to propose, to
divert Her Choice in France, mostly aimed at: and therefore by pretense of
great policy to both, She offered Husbands to Her of the English blood, And Qu.
E. propos^^ Husbands.
which the other had most reason to refuse, and to strengthen her self by the
amity of the French. Preferring that as most certain from whence her Birth
proceeded, rather than to trust too much to the English, or to the policy of
Queen Elizabeth, who was likely to govern the design as She pleased, to Her own
advantage.

And therefore She accepted several overtures of Marriage with others. And first
with Archduke Charles, Son to Ferdinand the Emperor; Emperors Son
but Queen Elizabeth soon threatened Her out of that match, and in plain terms
commended Robert Dudley a new fallen Widower (of his own making, for this
design and other great conveniences) to mary Her. And in England Earl of
Leicester.
But that was retorted with much scorn by Her Kindred in France the Guises, as
unequal and unworthy, they being then in Treaty for Her with the Emperors Son,
And in France.
and others of France, the Prince of Conde, and the Duke of Ferrara; and so was
Queen Elizabeth's design narrowly examined by them, and suggested, that this
proposed marriage was but to color Her own resolves to mary Dudley Her self;
which gave the more suspicion, Dudley preferred.
he being suddenly made Masterof Her Horse, created Baron Denbigh, and the next
day E. of Leicester; and for the more credit, his Brother was made Baron Lisle,
and Earl of Warwick.

But Leicester by Proxy made Court to Queen Mary, Leicester a Suter to the Q.
of Scots.
and (in time) Commissioners were appointed, from either Kingdoms, to treat
thereof at Barwick: Though indeed, he had some false hopes, from the common
bruit, to mary Q. Eliz. and therefore privately authorized his confident
Commissioner, the Earl of Bedford, to hinder the Treaty, and to further the Q.
of Scots marriage with Henry Darly Son to the Earl of Lenox, Q. Mar^ in love
with Lord Darly.
who were both of them called home by their Queen, after their twenty years
banishment here in England; And no sooner She saw Darly, but presently designs
Her self to him. From which Marriage proceeded Her disquiet, and future
unhappiness.

This Darly was highly descended; Darly's descent,
his Father, Matthew Stuart, Earl of Lenox, born of the Royal stock of the
Stuarts, was allwaies acknowledged next Heir to the Queen of Scots in Her
infancy. And this his Son, a person of incomparable mixtures of mind and body,
And Character.
might well excuse the Queens choice, and her disjointed Councils, concerning
her Husband.

And when she found it came to light, she desired Q. Elizabeth's consent; but
Murray, most ambitious, and unwilling to leave his power and interest in the
sway of Government, (together with Hamilton) sought, under hand, all
indefatigable ways and means in England, to prevent it; though Queen Elizabeth
had no need to be taught designs and devices, if possible, to divide this
intended Match. Which, indeed, caused Queen Mary the sooner to hasten; and
having knighted Darly, and created him Lord Armanoch, His Preferments, And
marriage with the Queen.
Earl Rosse, and Duke of Rothsay, at the five Months end, of her beginning,
She took him, her King and Husband, 1565.

And now Murray began his Rants, applying all his Wit and Cunning (of either he
had sufficient) to his own private discontent and ambition; and under the
goodly pretense of Religion, had raked together such a rabble of the mad-headed
Ministry, countenanced also by the Duke Castle-herault, that the whole Kingdom
feared the disquiet.

The Queen of England, might well (as she did) take compassion hereat; Scotland
in disquiet.
two young couples, her kindred, and Successors, having much to do to qualify
the twenty years custom of a turbulent people, not to have a King, till now;
and willing indeed, to have none at all. For Hamilton, and Murray; presuming of
favor from England, take arms, but were so hotly persued by the King, that
they fled into England, and were there covertly protected, but might have been
more openly, by the same rule that some English fugitives had been received in
Scotland, as Taxley, Standen, and Welsh, besides Oneal out of Ireland.

All this was disputed by Ambassie from England, of one Tanworth a Courtier, to
whom the Queen of Scots did not vouchsafe her presence, her refusing to call
her Husband King.

Thus stood the State of the Affairs in Scotland, whilst the Queen conceived
with Child, and, as if blessed in the peace of this Issue (what she could never
enjoy in her life) she afterward brought forth, K. James born, 1566.
her only Son, James the sixth (a Peacemaker to all Our World) in June 1566.

But because the Religion (as they call it) is much concerned in all the
troubles of that Kingdom, Digression. The Scots Religion and State affairs
intermixed.
as a defensive faction, taken up at all times to manage other Designs and
Interests; Give me leave to tell you their Story (intermixing the affairs of
State, and other concernments of their contemporaries.)

Wherein you shall find their pretended sanction from a Rule of Conscience, to
be an Instrumental of State; from a pretense of Knowledge, to be a very
practice of Ambition.

Nor will it (I hope) repent the Reader, the tedious Story: for though Truth
appears in Ordine Doctrinae, yet never more fully, than when we search the
Original Veins thereof, by the Increase, Depravations, and Decaies, in Ordine
Temporum.

And so we proceed to the History of their Church and State, and the
Contemporary Actions, intervening with England and France, and other Neighbor
Nations.

The Life and Death of MARY Queen of SCOTLAND. Anno 1542.

KIng James the fifth dying of discontent, Q. (...) comes to the ^^own.
more than disease, the 13. of December 1542. in the 33. year of his age, and
32. of his reign, left his Crown to an only Daughter Mary, at six days old; as
she did afterward, to her Son, born a King: (Fatal sufferings to a people, to
be Subjects to young Sovereigns) And this Succession was put into a Will patcht
up by the Cardinal David Beaton, and clapped into the Kings hand to sign. The
Government of the Kingdom for the present was entrusted unto the Queen Mother,
a wise and virtuous Princess of the House of Lorain; And though she might, as
yet, be ignorant of the Actions of State, in this short time of her experience
in Scotland, but 4. years; yet the Nobles, dissenting factions, agreed, the
rather herein to accept of her; Each party presuming to work their ends the
better, out of her Ignorance.

The people were religiously divided in Opinions, Romish and Reformed Religions.
Romish and Reformed, which had put the late King upon extremity of Justice
against the Separatists, as they then were styled, indeed Dissenting among
themselves, but afterward, Congregating and Covenanting, gave them other
Names. But in their several Professions, sundry persons suffered Imprisonment,
Life, or loss of all.

The Scots derive their Christanity from the disciples of S. John (their
Patronage of St. Andrew) and the propagation thereof (not from Rome, Scots, how
Christians.
I dare say) no^ indeed, they will have it from their own Plantations in
Germany; where, increasing Christianity, the persecution of Domitian drove them
home, again, into Scotland. And so they utterly refuse to have any thing to do
with Rome, by means of Victor, that held that See, as others will have it.

But they confess, From Palladius.
That Celestine Bishop of Rome, sent learned Palladius to convince the Heresy
of Pelagius, (a welchman born, and bred up in the Monastery of Banghor) then
overspreading that Nation. And after his good success therein, brought in (say
they) Prelate Bishops, having had (by their favor) Priests and Moncks long
before, and thereafter all kind of Romish Orders. Nay, Boniface the eighth,
making use of the complaint of the Sco^ish Clergy against King Edward of
England, cruelly afflicting them, and also of the resignation of the people to
the Sea of Rome, The Pope thereby claims right to that Crown, writes to Edward,
and malapertly Bids him not meddle with his Vassalls and Subjects.

But after too much lording of the Romish Cl^rgy, and the great Schism at Rome,
Pope against Pope (three at one time) Some men began openly to discover them to
the world. As Wickliff in England, John Hus, and Jerome in Bohemia; the Scots
will have of theirs too, Schism at Rome creats Excep^ions to P^pacy, By
Wickliff, John Hus, Ier. of Prag. and some Scots.
James Resby and Paul Craw (who indeed were but their Pupils) that quarreled
with their Archbishop of Saint Andrews, and so began their fray.

So that the Scots reckon themselves happy, without Bishops, till Palladius;
from him to Malcolm; from him to Patrick Graham, their first Archbishop; who
came in with that title, to the dislike of all the Bishops. The inferior
Clergy could not brook the strict authority of him, and so by them, and the
Cour^iers too boot, First Bishops in Scotland.
Graham lost that Title.

And one Blacater traces his Steps, and procures himself Archbishop also; then
followed Beaton, Archbishops, and Cardinals.
and he brought in the Cardinals Cap, and all these in opposition each of
other, which gave occasion to sundry men to publish these discontents, together
with some Corruptions of the Church, not unlikely to make a rent. And
therefore, the Pope sent unto James the fourth, a Sword, Popes presents.
and Title, Protector of the Faith, and not long after (his gifts were cheap)
unto Henry the eighth of England a Sword, and Title, Defender of the Faith.

I find the Scots had some Martyrs who begun their Reformation with private
opinions. Scotis^ Martyrs.
Resby suffered anno 1422. Paul Craw 1431. In 1494. about 30. persons, men and
women, called Lollards, from one Lollard a Schismatic indeed, (not as the
Friar discanteth, Quasi Lolium in area Domini.) And these put their Articles
(34) in writing. The first Protestation that we read of amongst them, being in
the year 1527. then suffered Patrick Hamilton, of the Ancient Family, and so
forwards many more.

The Northern Martyrs had repute of constancy in sufferings beyond others; Of
Northern Martyrs.
Which gives occasion to discuss the reason, for it was observed, That the
people of this Isle exceed in zeal of profession, and are called in Italian,
Pichia Pelli, or Knock-breasts, Hypocrites. So are they naturally better
qualified with courage in extremities of sufferings, and therefore accounted
most valiant; in respect of the Climate, the Heart furnished with plenty of
Blood to sustain sudden defects, is not so soon apprehensive of Death, as where
the Storehouse of blood is less; every hazard there, raises fear, paleness
and trembling; Angli bello intrepidi, nec mortis sensu deterrentur, witness the
bold and cheerful sufferings of the condemned.

Answerable to our Bodies are our Laws, suitable to the Inhabitants of this
Soil; Not being, since William the Conqueror, compelled (in Criminal Trials)
to confession by Torture, as in the Civil Law of other Nations, whose Innocence
would rather yield to be guilty, than to endure lingering pain.

Insulani plerunque fure^, Death not prevailing to dete^ men from common
offenses; Anno 1543.
what constancy then, shall that Man have, who is martyred for matters of
Religion, and health of his Soul? Britannis, quibus nihil interest humine
sublimive putrescant, non valet. Purpuratis Gallis, Italis, aut Hispanis ista
minitare. And therefore Pope Clement the eighth impaired his Cause, by burning
Mr. Marsh at Rome, in Campo divi sancta ^iore, whose constancy made him a
Martyr, and many carried away his ashes as Relics, and that Pope resolved
therefore, That none of the English Nation should from that time be confirmed
with fire.

The Enemies of true Religion have not gained to themselves by that cruelty:
Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae. The Romans were tender, in case of Religion,
to condemn to death; Cato was not of opinion with those that would have
sentenced the Bacchanals, he alleging, That Religion was apt to deceive men
into a show of Divinity, and therefore to be wary in punishing the Professors,
lest the common people should suspect something was done thereby derogating
from the Majesty of God.

Tantum Relligio potuit suadere Malorum. And so the occasion of some Martyrs
amongst the Scots increased numbers, their Ashes being the best Compost to
manure the Church.

And now return home, Scots Prisoners promise a Marriage;
out of England, those Persons of Honor, Prisoners to Henry 8. at the last
fatal Battle, with whom he deals so cunningly, that by his Noble Usage, and
some Bribes to boot, he returns them his Pensioners, especially, their utmost
endeavor or a Match with Prince Edward and their Queen, young Couples, He
five, She but one year, old. And with this conceit the King might conquer
Scotland by marriage, to save him expense of money and men, by the Sword. But
the French King Henry, the French interpose.
not liking this lincking, began quarrels with the English, embarging their
Ships and Merchants goods; the like with them in England; So that some Forces
were from hence speedily sent over, which besieged Landersey, but the French
King in person with a mighty Army, made the English to rise for to meet them:
In the mean time the Town was relieved, and the King, having done his Work,
returned in the dark.

The Scots Prisoners kept their word, 1544.
and prevailed so far at home, that their first Parliament concluded the Match,
and confirmed it by an Instrument under Seals, and ratified by Oaths; and that
their young Queen should be sent to her Husband; but these Scots soon biased
by the French practices, break faith and refuse. Incense the English to Arms.
This Indignity set Henry on fire for revenge, who transports an Army into
Scotland in 200. Vessels, under command of Viscount Lisle, Admiral for the Sea,
and the Earl of Hartford for the Soldiers, And land with Fire and Sword,
and Land at the Fryth, marching in three Battalia's toward Lies: And were
encountered with skirmishes by six thousand Horse, who soon retreated, leaving
Lies to be consumed with fire. And being (besides this Success) too powerful
to be opposed, marched forwards toward Edinburgh, and were humbly besought by
the Provost and Burgesses to spare their Cities ruin, and be pleased with the
Soldiers free quarter, and Bag and Baggage at parting. No, this was not
sufficient to appease the Enemies fury, who being therefore somewhat opposed,
entered by force with fierce assault, took part of the Town, which they
ransacked, and consumed with fire Holy-rood-House and the Palace.

The Ships returned with large Spoils, and return;
and the Army marched on, coasting the Country homewards, ransacked above
thirty Towns in their way, with no more loss than forty men.

Having thus punished them for perjury, King Henry designed as much, and the
like in France.
or more, to the French, with two Armies, the one under Command of the Duke of
Norfolk, who besieged the strong Town Maittrel, but were beaten up with loss
and little honor. The other had better success, by the Duke of Suffolk, for
embodying both of them, encamped about Bulloign, with power enough to be
masters. And therefore, for the glory of the gallant King, Take Bulloign.
Himself comes over, and after a Months Battery, takes, first, the Upper, and
then the Base Town, by Articles, to depart with Bag and Baggage; the whole
number of Souls 4444. and King Henry Man's the Town, and so comes home again.

And it was time so to do; The Scots enter Engl.
for the Scots always aiming at such opportunities, fell into the Marches of
England, rifling and burning all the Towns they came to, from whence the
English were fled, till they met with the Earl of Hartford, who was sent with
twelve thousand men, and doing as the other had done before, ruined all,
without opposition of any. And thus, but by turns, King Henry intending to be
more cruel with Revenge, to that end makes peace with France, but dies two
years after.

Which Gave the Scots, Scots imbroiled in troubles a home.
some time of breathing from abroad, never free from quarrels at home; the
State increasing in Faction, the old Council keep up their Inquisition after
Heretics, as they termed the Reformers; and for Example fell upon one
Wischard, whose outward zeal and affection to their Cause, gave him courage to
confirm it by Fire and Faggot; And for whose death, Cardinal Beato^ murdered.
the Cardinal David Beaton (lately come to enjoy his Kinsmans CAP) was
barbarously murdered in his Castle of Saint Andrews, by Norman Lisle, James
Melvin, and others, and were justified in that barbarous act, by John Rough,
preaching it for sound doctrine, Anno 1546.
who had got into their gang one John Knox, the most notorious Ringleader,
afterward, of all disorder in their Reformation; which now began to quarrel
with the Crown also, Io. Knox the Reformers Ringleader.
and all Regal Government: For presently surprising the Castle, He was, by the
Crowd, vocated (as they call it) to be a Preaching Minister, whose Pride
enduring no Rival, First Minister.
soon turned out Rough that brought him in. But Knox finding no firm footing in
Scotland, fled into England two years after.

And now began the tumult within, Tumult.
and without the Castle; the Town taking parts, Monsieur d' Osel sent into
France for a great Army, and as soon as sent for, was wafted over in 24.
Galleys, 1547.
anno 1547. beginning Siege and Battery to the Castle, which was quickly
rendered, and the Prisoners and Spoil thereof returned back with the Army into
France; The English were coming to oppose the French, H^n. 8. dies.
but Henry 8. of England dying, gave occasion to the French to return Victors.

The ancient League of Scots and French was decreed in the time of Achaius the
first Monarch of Scotland (Offensive and Defensive) with Charles le Grand of
France; Ancient League with France.
viz. Let this League endure for ever; Let the Enemies of the One be so to the
Other; If the Saxon or English invade France, the Scots shall send aid, as the
Numbers shall be desired, and at the French Charge; If the English invade the
Scots, the French are to send competent assistance, and at the French Charge.

So that we may now say, Never was League more faithfully observed, or longer
continued, even till the Union of King James the sixth with England; which
begat that saying, He that will Either win, with the Other must begin.

But forthwith to balance these Broils, English Army to balance differences,
comes an Army from England, of ten thousand Foot, and five hundred Horse, by
Land and Shipping; which King Edward of England, lately come to the Crown, and
at ten years of age, sent under the Conduct of his Uncle the Duke of Somerset
his Protector. Not without some resolve, Sent by K. Edward.
in these civil dissentions, to vie Mastery for the pursuit or pretense of
Marriage. And the third of September entering into the cold quarter, brought them
to the Scots Borders, but with so much Civility, as to send Summons to the Duke
of Castle-herault, who bore the best sway, as the honestest Man amongst them.

He puts the Scots in mind, The Letter of Summons pres^nted to the Scottish Army.
That the blood of Neighbors, Kindred, and Christians, are too precious to be
vainly spilt; That he comes to prevent it, and if he be put to it, to use his
force: It refers only to a firm Peace, not for the present, but perpetual, if
the Union of sacred bands of Marriage may confirm it, which we desire now, as
ye have promised heretofore, the advantages so equal, that the even gain pleads
alike for both. Anno 1547.
Princes of fitting years, of Compositions, Mind and Body alike; in Powers
matchless by any; One Island, Speech and Manners. To balance these with hopes,
or likelihood from Foreign, it were more safe to examine by Examples of Others,
than to make trial by themselves. For his part, presuming to meet with many of
his Mind amongst them, he would endeavor to moderate such Articles formerly
prescribed, as might render the young Queen more content, viz. To remain (for
some years of her Infancy) at home; to be bred up with her own people, and with
her own choice and Council of her Peers to consent to a Husband. In the mean
time not to be tempted with a Foreign Match of the French, or any other, nor to
be bred beyond Seas. And with this Conclusion, he will depart home, with
recompense for any hurt done already.

The Scots were a mighty Army for Men, Which they neglect.
and ne^r hand for all Ammunition. They say themselves above thirty thousand
after their Mutiny, wherein thy lost eight hundred; and thus priding up, upon
this offer of the English, neglected to read these Letters in Council, Lest,
indeed, the equitable conditions should raise a Mutiny in the Multitude, who
were most for this Match, until the French faction pretended that the English
came to force their Queen away.

Upon this, The Armies meet.
the Scots advance along the Shore, and from an English Galley one Cannon shot
took away at one blow five and twenty Scots, which routed the Next Archers; And
Somerset set forward his Horse Troops that his Foot might gain the Hill, who
were soon forced back; but as to recover their Courage, their Harquebuse horse
fall on, with help of their Artillery, and showers of Arrows, that the Scots
gave ground to be out of the reach of the Cannon, whilst the English cry out,
they fly, they fly, which fear, and not force, increased to a total flight; and
their rancks quite disordered, The Scots are discom^ited, and slain 14000. l.
gave the Battle to the English, with loss of Fourteen thousand Scots, the
Lords Lohemore, and Fleming, with almost all their Chiefs fell by the Sword.
Taken Prisoners fifteen hundred, and amongst them Earl Huntley, Lord
Chancelour, with the Lords Hester, Hobs, and Hamilton, and many others at
Musleburgh, Septem. 10. 1547.

The English Master five miles about, fortify Keth and Amor, two adjacent
Islands, 1548.
take the Castles of Fas and Humes, raised some Fortifications at Londere and
Resburgh, and so return.

The Scots thus worsted, 10000. French come to their aid.
send to implore aid from France, who send over ten thousand, amongst whom, say
the German Authors, came over three thousand Almans, High Dutch, under Command
of the Count Reingrave; but in general under Government of Monsieur de Osse, a
man of some successful Renown; and after landing, join with eight thousand
Scots near Hadington, and beleaguer it, being lately fortified by the English;
where, assembling Council in May, they advise to send over the young Queen into
France, the immediate cause of those troubles; And to fortify themselves,
against furture assaults, or pretenses of the English, they consult it best, to
betroth her to the Dolphine of France: And for the present, the English being
overburdened with the Expense and continual war, never to have hopes of an end,
make fair offers of a Truce for ten years, in likelihood, therefore, that one
of the Princes might die, which would expiate for the former promises and
conditions of Contract. But this advise, overruled by the French Faction, and
Romish Clergy, with the offer of four thousand French Crowns yearly Revenue to
the Duke Castle-herault, it was resolved to fight it out, The Queen at six
years of age sent into France.
and send away the Queen, who was transported over, round about Scotland by the
West Sea, and arrives upon Bretaign in France, and so to Paris; escaping the
English Fleet that watched for her about Calice; She being now but six years of
age, accompanied with James her base Brother, Io. Arskin, and Will. Leviston.

The Siege of Hadington continues, Hadington siege.
and as bravely defended, when comes to their succor thirteen hundred Horse,
armed Capa-pe, to assist to the Besieged, under command of Sir Robert Bows,
and Sir Thomas Palmer, but in the way, were all cut of by Ambuscade. But the
Earl of Shrews^ury following with an Army of sixteen thousand, amongst whom
were four thousand Germans (equal friends for like pay) raised the siege, most
French, who retreated very honorably, and left the Town for the Earl to enter,
who relieves it, and returns to Berwick.

Monsieur de Osse marches to Humes and Fas Castle, French Command.
Places taken by the English the year before, surprises the Sentinels, and
takes the Castles. But Humes was taken by this Device. Order had been given, by
the Governor, for the County to come in with provision, by such a day, whereof
de Osse makes use; loads his own Soldiers like Countrymen, who were let in by
a Portal, cast down their provision, and secretly armed, fall upon the Guard,
let in more company, and so surprise the Castle.

In August after, English Forces recruit.
comes the Earl of Rutland with three thousand Germans, and other Forces of the
Marches, knowing the great difficulty for Hadington to hold out, the County so
extremly forraged of all Provisions for contribution, without a standing Army
to protect them; Dismantling the Places of Strength, draws out all the Men and
Ammunition, fires the Town, and returns to Berwick, not meeting any one to
oppose him: And this was the last expedition from King Edward; Anno 1548.
though the French remained with most of their bands, and some Galleys; and so
was poor Scotland massacred by two stranger Armies, as a prey to both Nations.
But now began to have a breathing, being free from Strangers till the 2 year of
Q. Elizab^th.

During this time of trouble, Io. Knox his travelings and course of Life;
John Knox, having been imprisoned by the State for tumults and disorder in
behalf of Reformation, escapes, and was now got into England, preaching at
Berwick, then to New Castle, then to London, and so to the South of England,
until Queen Mary's days of Martyrs: But afterward, too hot for him to hold
out, he passes over to Geneva, from thence unto Franckford; which very
unwillingly he did, being counseled thereto, much against his mind, by John
Calvin, a Frenchman of Aquitain, and bred a Civilian, who indeed could not
brook such another Spirit as was his own, to meddle in that Government.

At Franckford he was accused of Treason against the Emperor, at Franckford
accused of Treason,
and Queen Mary of England, whom in his Treatise of Admonition to England, he
called, the One, little inferior to Nero, the Other, and flies back to France,
and so to Scotl. 1555.
more cruel than Jezabel, for which he was forced to fly back to Geneva, but
could settle no where, and so returned to Deep in France, and thereafter into
Scotland, in anno 1555. and again, after some weeks, from thence he fled back
to Geneva; Nor there could he have footing, and back again to Geneva, and then
again to France. 1557.
but returns to Deep, in anno 1557. From thence he conveys sundry Letters to
his factious Lords, Lairds, and La^cks, tells them of true honor, to stick by
the Kirk and his Counsel; for that cause are they called Princes of the People,
not by descent of Birth and Progeny, but by their duty, to vindicate the
oppressed Kirk.

Hereupon, his Letters, and other missives, so prevailed, that the faction came
into a Common Band, and by Letters to his Faction in Scotland, they come into
Covenant, 1558. Presbytery first set up at Dundee.
1558. and then Knox comes home, when Q. Mary of England dies, and Q. Elizabeth
succeeds.

And thus lincked, began their Geneva Congregation, into the face of Kirk;
Elders appointed, and called the Privy Kirk; and at Dundee, it was first
erected, by the scatte^ed notions of Knox picked up at Geneva; which profession
there, has since spread into many the Reformed Churches of Christendom.

I shall take the boldness, to digress into that Story; In Anno 1124.
Digression. Of Geneva, and their first Presbytery Church.
The Bishop of Geneva was the Prince of it, and the Territory thereof, and
contending with Aymo a lay Earl, de Imperio Civitatis, the Emperor Frederick
the first, gave leave to the Bishop, Ut ille solus Genevae principatum
obtineret Regali jure. Yet some contentions followed, Francis^us Bonivard.
betwix^ the Bishops, the Earls, and the Dukes of Savoy; and therefore the
Citizens, for Defense of themselves, Simler^^ de Rep. Helv.
entered League with the Helvetians, Berne, and Frebergh (the Neighbor free
Cities) and so were powerful to show their Teeth, Anno 1558.
against both factions, and occasion was soon offered to bite.

For by the preaching of Farellus (sometime Scholar unto Stupulensis and
Viretus) they began to dislike their Bishops Person, Farellus their Founder.
and his Popery; Beginning to reform, as other the said Neighbor Cities had
done. Bod. de Rep. p. 353.
Novandae Religionis studium, ac Reipub. commutandae oblatam occasionem
arripuerunt. And yet they would have been content with Him and his Episcopacy,
but not with His Popery.

The Bishop in possession, and having (as Calvin after confesses) Ius gladii,
Calv. to Sa*dol. p. 172.
and alias civilis Iurisdictionis parts, Farellus then exclaims against that
Civil Authority in Bishops, as unlawful.

From which Doctrine, it was no marvel if the Citizens took upon them, that the
Sovereignty of the City was in Themselves, and so the Bishop, and his crew, gat
away.

Quo ejecto, Bod. de Rep. p. 353.
Genevates, Monarchiam, in popularem statum comutarunt.

And by such advise as pleased them, they ordain a new Form of popular
Government, jura Magistratus.

The Bishop joined with the Duke of Savoy, quarrels his right, assault the
City, anno 1536. and were beaten back, and the City, Calv. comes to Geneva, and
fabrics a Discipline.
ever since, rule themselves: For Calvin was now come to them, a Frenchman, and
may be called their Founder, the wisest man that ever the French Church could
boast off; A Civilian bred, and got his Divinity, not by learning it, but by
teaching others. And this was their first Principle in Divinity, to cast off
their Rulers at Pleasure. The Gospel, to wrest the Sword.

Thus altered the Sovereignty, and thereafter the Government of the Church;
Some of their own say, it was mirabiliter. Indeed, much like the other; as The
One was thrust out, so the Other was abolished; Bez. in vita Calvin. Calv. de
nec. ref. eco. p. 64.
Dealing therein, as men do with rotten houses; overthrow all the whole frame
of Ecclesiastical building at once, into a rude heap; out of which, they may
the better make choice, and take of that old stuff, as they please to build a
new, and yet in that way they are as inconstant. But hereupon they advise of a
Church Government, They advise of a Church Discipline.
respective to some Neighbor Cities; and in this hurly burley, they confess,
they could fall upon no better, and yet they soon change this Model.

A principal Stickler therein, was this John Calvin, He began Ecclesiam
componere anno 1536. It being before (as himself says) tanquam dissoluta
Scopa, Bez. in vita Calvin.
and makes them swear to his Discipline, paucis capitibus comprehensum,, which
lasted not nine Months wonder, Capit. to Farel. Ep. Call. 6.
and he, and his Comrades, bold Farellus and eloquent Viretus banished, and
why? Tyranni esse voluerunt; In liberam Civitate^, voluerunt novum pontificatum
revocare.

In their absence, the City disagrees (Farell^s and Viretus being better
provided) Calvin lying at the Lurch, sometimes at Tigurum, Cap. to Fareli
Epist. Calv. 6.
Basil, Strasburgh, returns again 1541. and with much cunning devises, as there
was a Civil Sena^e, so he would have an Ecclesiastical Assembly of twelve
simple Citizens, and (observe his modesty) but six Ministers; The odds made it
more colorable for Calvin, in Number, but not in Value (Union in a prepared
Conspiracy, prevailing more than Number) for himself cunningly commands all, to
the great regret of the Comminalty, whom at his pleasure, and with his power,
in the Consistory, he suspended from the Communion, which is indeed the very
Scepter of their pretended Sion.

The City displeased with their Con^istory, Beza de vita Calv.
advise with their Neighbor Cities on that point, and therein Calvin in
outward show the most busy, and therefore is admitted to pen their missive
Letters, but underhand directs his own Letters to their Minister Bullenger,
Call. ^^ Bullenger.
and others; presuming that their Ministers would confer with them; and
therefore thus he prepares them, with lamentable Complaints against the
(Geneve) Senates blindness, unhospitable to Strangers, abusive to Farell^s,
Defenders of Heretics, and Devils incarnate. Implores consideration upon
himself, and his Associat^, being impugned by the wicked, for bringing them,
from under the yoke of sin, to see the Sun of Righteousness. Ascribes much to
their Ministers, the ver^ ^upport of Gods Church, N^nc (says he) extremus
actus agitur, nisi istinct afferatur remedium. And unless the Devil be now
unsaddled by them, habenas ei laxatum iri, he would get the Bit in his Teeth,
and run riot at pleasure. And for his own part he meant not to stay by it, but
run away too; Nec morositate nostra ^iet, ut loco potius cedamus quam sententia.

And for what can a Man imagine all these good words? why, truly he tells Mr.
Bullinger, Brevis summa est, that your Noble Senate would say, that his
Discipline is Consentanea verbo Dei. By no means, they would not; but they were
content to say, it did accedere ad praescriptum verbi Dei; and withal returned
back with their Letters a Form of their Government, but not to prescribe any of
it to them, for that their own at Geneva might be more convenient.

Hereupon 1537. Calvin foreknowing the effect of their Letters, hastens the
City to resolve, who, with much ado, assemble, and put their own discipline to
the Vote, which came to this upshot (as Calvin says himself) In illa promisc^a
calluvie Suffragiis fuimus superiores; Call. (...) Bullenger Ep. 207.
for when stomach strives with wit, the match is unequal.

And let these his own Words be recorded (in perpetuam rei memoriam) by how
many reverend Fathers, and famous Persons, with what Wisdom and Deliberation
this Form of pretended holy Discipline was revived and entertained, if a
disordered multitude by most voices, laid this platform, for all posterity to
imitate.

Major voice, Bod. de Rep. ^. 2. Calv. 6.
helped him well, upon which advantage he would practice: And therefore crowds
in fifty French, his Countrymen, at a clap, free Denizons; who had Ius
Iubendae legis, and his Inter est was (no doubt more) to force in Ministers.

For when the Magistrates would have but preferred a Genevian born to be one,
Calvin storms at him; Trollietus (says he) quidnam? quod natione sit
Genevensis (no other cause) nisi quod Simiae amant suos Catulos. Call. (...)
Vire^^^ Epist. 586.
And indeed the Emperor Charles V. intending wars upon France, gave good
leisure and leave to the Reformers to increase, the Pope to be displeased,
which occasioned Calvin to compile his Book De necesitate reformandae Ecclesiae.

And so have we, from whence It came, whither It would, who devised It, when,
and how, and where, planted in Geneva Anno 1554. and Calvin continued there to
his death, 1561. aged 52. years.

And yet to spread it abroad (for all Calvin's wit) he was glad, it seems to get
it into favor with the assistance of Reverend Beza, The promu^gation thereof.
being alike bred up with the profession of several Reformers, who (together)
gave value to the progress of this beginning; and truly of a good Man, grew
much in admiration of Calvin's wit, which induced him thereto, and became at
length very bold (in his Prescriptions to some in England) to intermeddle here,
and in Scotland, for the like Reformation; witness his Epistles to Lawson and
Knox; Beza to G^irdal Ep. 8.
His discourse of three kind of Bishops, of God, of Man, and of the Devil, to
the exceeding censure of him.

In France it had no repute, being termed Thalmud Sabaudiacum.

To England it came, upon occasion of some Malcontents, in reference to
Geneva; for in Queen Mary's Martyring time, those being fled to Franckford,
they were afresh assaulted with the Orders of Geneve; and Knox and Whittington
collect the particulars of Edward the sixth's Common Prayer Book, and send it
to Calvin, who very censoriously is pleased to say Multas video fuisse
tolerabiles ineptias.

However, Franckford inclined to the English, and choose Dr. Horn their
Superintendent: at which Calvin storms; and by great entertainments of other
English, as Whittington, Gilby, Goodman, and others, invited their Persons to
Geneve, and so stole their hearts to his humonr also. Anno 1559.
And they thereafter spread it in England the second year of Queen Elizabeth.
About which time, Knox came also and carried it into Scotland. And this is the
true story of the Geneve discipline briefly and impartially put together.

This year a Treaty was held at Cambray, Treaty at Cambray.
by Delegates of England, France, and Spain, for settling the various
differences of State; but especially between England and France, for restoring
Calice, which had been lost to them by Queen Mary, but by no means would be
rendered back. Yet at last a Truce was concluded upon these Articles.

Neither Prince shall invade each Other, Articles of Calice.
nor assist Eithers Enemies. The Ships of either Nation shall give Caution at
their se^ting out to Sea, not to molest each Other. Free Commerce and Trading
to be increased. The French Fortification at Armoth in Scotland, to be
demolished. Eight years the French shall enjoy Calice, with the Appurtenances,
and sixteen Pieces of Ordinance, and presently after shall restore it to Queen
Elizabeth. Eight sufficient Merchants (not French Subjects) shall be bound in
500000 Crowns for performance hereof, and the Right of the Town to remain in
the Queen. And if any Attempt or Innovation, be by any English, during that
time, against the French, or the Queen of Scots, then the other shall be free.
And on the contrary, If any prejudice shall be attempted or done by the French
King, the Queen of Scots, or the Dolphine, against England, then Calice shall
be instantly from thenceforth rendered to Q. Elizabeth.

A Peace at the same time and place was concluded between the Queen of England,
and Francis and Mary King and Queen of Scotland, and certain A^RTICLES of
Agreements were referred to Commissioners to regulate abuses of each Borderers.

And accordingly this Peace was proclaimed in England and France, The French
King aims at England.
but soon broken; for the French King aiming at England, for his Son and the
Queen of Scots, would not withdraw his French Garrisons out of Scotland, as was
agreed, but privily sent over fresh Supplies, and openly challenges Interest in
England for his Son and Daughter-in-law; and in all writings used this Title,
Quarter the Arms of England.
Francis and Mary King and Queen of Scotland, England, and Ireland; Bearing and
quartering the Arms of England, and upon their Heralds Coats.

Of which Throgmorton the English Ambassador Lieger, complained without
redress. Levied forces openly and sent them to Scotland to border all places of
England; And being an utter Enemy to the Protestaints, was under hand abetted
by the Pope, the Emperor, and Spain, holding Her an Heretic and
Illegitimate. But those his Designs were soon cut off by an untimely accident
upon him; for tilting at the Nuptials of his Daughter with Spain, and his
Sister with Savoy, and being run in at the eye with a Lance, the Bur sticking
in his brains, he died immediately.

Some hopes Queen Elizabeth had now of lessening her fears, K. of France killed
at a Tilting.
and therefore to strike in with his Son and Successor, She kept his Fathers
Obsequies with magnificent solemnity in Paul's Church; And sent Howard the Lord
Effinghams Son, to Condole the Kings Death, and to Congratulate the new
Successor, with desire to continue Friendship and League, as with his Father.
But the Guisians Party that now were like to govern all, counseled the young
K. to increase the quarrel, and not to leave off the Arms of England.

Throgmorton was told, That they might as well bear those of England, as Queen
Elizabeth did theirs of France. It was so questioned at Cambray, but Doctor
Wootton, answered, That twelve Kings of England on a Row had born them, with so
much authority, that no Treaty ever disputed.

But at last France finding the Queens jealousy to kindle into flame, Q.
Elizabeth of^ended.
they forbore, with this bravado, That indeed it was undone upon better
consideration; no addition of Terms or Titles could give Honor, but rather
Diminution, to the Most Christian King of Fr^nce; and that former Kings
challenging and prosecuting their undoubted rights to Naples and Millan in
Italy, yet used them not additional to France.

We return again to our Scots. Knox came to his Party, being arrived out of
France, May 1559. hastens to Saint Iohnstons, Knox arrives in Scotland.
preaching them into practice. And first they choose an Orator, the Lord of
Caldor, with Petitions and Supplications to the Queen Regent of their Demands;
for having before got leave to read the Bible, now they desire to convene in
Prayer, to interpret the Scripture, to baptize their own, to receive in both
kinds, and (ever at the end of all) to have the Priests Reformed.

To all these, She gave a reasonable answer, but not so satisfactory as they
required.

They protest in Parliament to stand to their Tenants, and If Distraction or
Destruction follow, the blood they bring home to the score of bad Government.
For which, they were summoned to appear at Serlin; and they, to strengthen
themselves against any force, congregate all their parties from Dundee,
Montross, Saint Iohnston, Marches in tumult to Sterling, called the
Congregation, and Rebel.
Angus, and Mernes; and so came forward toward the Queen at Sterlin; whom she
caused in prudence (with fair promises) to be stayed; and now they call
themselves the Congregation, and keeping still in a body, the necessity of
State enforced her to put them to the Horn; Inhibiting all upon pain of
Rebellion not to side with them. Whereupon they fall to action, Robbing and
Plundering the Gray and Blackfriars, a building of wondrous cost and
greatness, which in three days they wholly destroyed. Ro^^ and demolish the
Fry^ries.


But the French Forces, and other power of the Kingdom, soon made them to yield
the Town upon Treaty, which was secured by the French, until several
Congregations had inveigled some of the Discontented Nobles, and siding with
them, send a Trumpet to redemand the Town; which being denied, by force take
it; Destroy Scone take Sterlin and Edinburgh.
And with Knox (their chief) destroyed Scone, took Sterlin, and so marched to
Edinburgh: from whence the Queen was fled to Dunbar, and there in the Name of
Francis and Mary King and Queen of Scotland, and are proclai^ed Tray^ors.
Dolphin and Dolphiness of Viennois (now in France) and lately married, commands
them to separate and depart home; upon pain of Treason.

This begat a consent to treat at Preston, to little purpose there, but was
somewhat pieced afterward at Edinburgh; Then they make a New Covenant at
Sterlin, Covenant anew, and call in aid,
resolve to call assistance of the Neighbor Princes, and send into England to
Q. Elizabeth, newly come to the Crown. of England;


The Queen Regent (a most modest and virtuous Matron) was as busy; and the
other bring in the French.
and accordingly came over 1000. French in August, the rest in September; and
so each party prepare for War.

The Congregators had got to their side these Noblemen, the Duke of
Castle-herault, Lords of the Congregation Traitors,
the Earls of Arran, Arguile, Glencarn, and Montieth; the Lords Ruthen,
Uchiltry, Boyd, and diverse other Lords and Lairds; The Queen proclaims them
Traitors; They reply with a Declaration against it. who publish Decl^rations,
She thereupon by Lion her Herald, denounces Treason against them all.

Upon which they convene, to depose the Qu. Regent^
draw up Articles against her Government, and to depose her from Regency; and
for Her and the French to depart Edinburgh in 24. hours, and the next day storm
it, but with loss, and fled.

The Earl of Bothwell, having much interest in the State, sends for more forces
to the Duke of Guise in France, French Forces Shipwrack^.
who governed all there, and sent them some, which suffered Shipwreck upon the
Coast of Holland.

Robert Mel^in, in behalf of the Congregators, returns from Q. Elizabeth, with
Articles to be answered; which afterward came to a Contract.

And having got England, The Kirk ^led Pro^estan^^:
in a different Policy, to friend their Cause, they wisely decline their Title
of Congregators, and call* themselves Protestants, as in England, from whom now
they have great Support (rather to balance with the French, Support from
England.
than bowlster their proceedings) but it was long first, being often ^olicited
by humble Letters from the Protestant Lords, and particularly, to apologize for
a pestilent Pamphlet written by Knox against the Government of Women, which he
also excused in several long-winded Letters to Queen Eliz. her self, Knox his
pestilent Pa^phlet.
and to Sir W. Caecil Secretary of State.

To whom Caecil replies in brief.

Mr. Knox, Mr. Knox, Caecils Letter to Knox.

Non est Masculus neque faemina; Omnes enim (ut ait Paulus) unum sumus in
Christo Jesus; Benedictus vir qui confidit in domino, et erit Dominus fiducia
ejus. I need to wish you no more prudence, than Gods grace; whereof God send
you plenty.

Oxford July 28. 1559. W. CAECIL.


But their Messenger was Secretary William Maitland of Lidington, and others,
who in a doleful tone complains, that since Queen Mary's marriage in France, the
Scots Government was quite altered, with favor to the French, who flock
thither for preferment, and trust of Offices of Honor, and Places of Strength,
their Coin corrupted, and so in time to Master all, and make them French.

Caecil, Caecils considera^^ion.
Lord Burghley, a wise and subtle Statesman, deals with Sir Henry Peircey
(afterward Earl of Northumberland) so far their Neighbor, to pick out of the
Congregators, what they aimed at; for they were then budding into a profession,
which the wisest of the World knew not what to make of: And, that if they
succeed by this assistance, upon what conditions they would piece with England,
and so to find their temper, being supposed State Revolters.

They, Scots dissemble.
with eyes heaved up to Heaven, answer, For no other Aim or Intention, but the
glory of Jesus Christ; and the sincere word of God, truly preached, against all
Abominations, and Superstitions; to restrain the Fury of Persecution; and
conserve their Liberty; The mutual Love of both Kingdoms, was the Sum of all
their desires, to which end they vow their Lives and Faith.

It was but slowly considered; upon these grounds, That the Scots were poor,
bare of Money and Munition, unfaithful to themselves, and not to be trusted
abroad, but warily to go to work with them, They were advised to stand upon
their Guard, and not enter rashly into Arms.

But when the English found the French so forward, as to be on foot with
Warlike forces, under command of Marquess ^ Albeuf, Uncle to the Queen of
Scots, levied by the Reingrave in Germany, with Ammunition and Ordinance, ready
to be ^hipped, It appeared to be rather for Conquest than Countenance, and so
was it time for the English to strike in for a share, if not to prevent such
Neighborhood, upon that Rule, Let the French be thy Friend, but not thy
Neighbor, and indeed were afraid of an invasion, as was threatened, upon
several Pretenses.

And first the English Counselors wisely considered, not to provoke, nor to
give bad Examples for Princes, to lend Protection to rebellious Subjects (For
so all Potentates esteemed the Scots against their Sovereign.) And on the other
side, it might be accounted little Piety, to forsake a Protestant Party, for so
the Religion would have them. But concluded it reasonable to be in Arms, and to
expect occasions; It being always the English foresight to prevent invasion
at home. Gain assistance from Englan.
On the sudden it was hastened to send forces to Scotland, upon pretense
however to assist Religion, and so drive out the French from thence ere they
should take firm footing there.

This Result might be grounded on former Examples; by the English neglect, lost
Ambleteul, and the Fortifications near Bologn, taken suddenly; which
necessitated the loss of Bologn it self, presently after. And the same
carelessness rendered Calice to the French. Upon which score, lest Berwick and
the Borders should be surprised, forces are sent by Land thither, and by Sea
into Edinburgh Fryth, with a Fleet that suddenly set upon the French Ships
riding near the Shore, and their Garrisons in the Isle of Inchketh.

The Duke of Norfolk comes to Berwick with forces assisted with Commissioners
(Sir William Caecil Secretary, and Doctor Wootton a Civilian.) And who must
come to kiss their hands, but the Prior of St. Andrews, James, the Bastard Son
of James the fifth, the Lord Ruthen and others, Commissioned from Hamilton Duke
of Castle-herault, and the Confederates, and there enter league with England.
Contract amity with the Religion.


In May 1560. For preservation of the Kingdom of Scotland against the French,
during their Marriage with the French King, and a year after: and for expelling
the French, provided that they preserve obedience to the Queen of Scotland.

The Governors of that State, Who had imped their Wings with Eagles Feathers*
liked no game now, but what was raked out of the ashes of Monarchy, making head
against Sovereignty. And to make it the better, called in to their aid the
English Forces, inviting their ancient Enemy the English, against the French;
and by that means, turned her own Sword, into her own bowels, to the funeral
of her own Liberty; and so it was no wonder, Scotland at that tiuse, to pass
under Foreign Servitude. Evermore crying Liberty, which they most avoided as
they came nearer to the End, and Event.

And hereupon an English Army of 10000. Anno 1560.
was sent, under Command of the Lord Gray, and were received by the Duke,
Arguile, Ruthen, and Others; the Queen Regent, with her faction, took security
in the Castle of Edinburgh; The French enclosed within the Town, English Army
10000. under Lord Gray.
issued out upon the Besiegers, and put them to flight.

But rallying again, forced the French into the Town, and stormed it with great
loss.

And now the Ministers make the fourth and last Covenant, To expulse the French
out of the Kingdom, Presbyters 4. Covenant. Q Regent dys. Peace on all Parts.
when in June 1560. the Queen Regent dies, and forthwith came Commissioners,
Randan with a Bishop, Deputies from the King and Queen in France; Treaty at
Edinburgh.
Sir William Caecil, and Doctor Whitton from England, treat and conclude a
Peace at Edinburgh in July, That the English and French should depart the
Kingdom, 24. to Govern.
and 24. elect shall govern, whereof the King and Queen in France shall
nominate seven, and the States five, as one Council; and six of those to be of
the Quorum. And Deputies of the Congregation to be sent into France by Petition
to the King and Queen for granting privileges concerning the Reformed
Ministers, and their Religion.

Which Treaty Queen Elizabeth endeavored evermore hereafter to press Queen Mary
to ratify, which she always refused, or excused.

And thus being rid of two devowring Armies, some hopes remained to recover
that poor Nation into reasonable quiet.

But the Strangets gone, Ministers make work.
the Ministers pulpit their Design, prescribing certain Diocesses to several
Men. We shall use their Names hereafter. Knox to Edinburgh, Goodman to Saint
Andrews, Heriot to Aberdeen. Row to Saint Iohnstons, Meossen to Iedbrough,
Christoson to Dundee, Forgeson to Dumfermling. Lindsey to Lies.


Afterward they had their Super-Intendents. Super-Intendents.
Spotswood for Lothian, Woram for Fife, Willock for Glasco, Canswell for
Arguile and the Isles, Dun for Angus and Mearors.
And then the next Parliament, Crave Liberty of Conscience
they supplicate for Liberty of Conscience, with Invectives against Papistry,
but not Episcopacy as yet. And presented 25. Articles of the Confession of
their Faith ratified by the three Estates, called Lords of the Articles, viz.
eight Lords, eight Churchmen, eight Commons; 25. Articles of faith.
these are first to consider Articles and Heads, and then to present them to
the Parliament to pass, and are called in the Latin, Authors Apolecti.

And two Acts were published against the Mass, the Popes Supremacy and
Jurisdiction, which were sent to the King and Queen in France for ratification,
but by them refused; however Knox, Winram, Spotswood, Willock, Douglas, and
Row, devised a Policy of Church Government, Frame a Discipline.
which they called Discipline; And fearing the future, they send Commissioners
into England, to supplicate Queen Elizabeth's assistance and support, against
fresh Forces out of France; when in December 1560. Francis King of France and
Scotland dies, King Francis dies.
and therefore to his Queen Widow, was sent the Lord James, afterward E. of
Murray, as her Counsel.

In this Interim, Orders in the Ministry.
the Ministers bethink of some Orderly Form in the Kirk; The Manner of electing
Super-Intendents was, to summon the Churches about Edinburgh, by public Edict;
John Knox presented John Spotswood, Super-Intendent of Lothian, whom the
multitude accepted, and promise obedience, as to their Pastor.

He by questions, professes and answers, That he accepts of this office without
any respect of worldly Commodity, Riches or Glory; but since these days of
pluralties, they leave out this Article without answering, concluding to be
subject and obedient to the late Discipline of their Kirk.

And thus he becomes a Minister of the Multitudes making, which, with the
blessing of some one of them, he is dismissed.

At this time comes over an Ambassador from France to restore Bishops and
Churchmen; Ambassador from France to break the League with England.
He was answered Negative, and so departed. And presently after they fall to
pulling down Abbeys and Monuments of the Church.

And now begins Jealousies, Jealousi^* between England and Scotland.
between the two Queens of England and Scotland; For the Scots had sent into
England for the Queens ratification of the Treaty at Edinburgh, which she
signed; but the Queen of Scotland in France refused it, with excuse, until she
comes home, and consult with her Council; which the other took ill: Although
she had endeavored with reasonable Arguments to satisfy her Ambassador
Throgmorton therein.

But the Widow Queen arrived in Scotland out of France in August 1561. Queen
Mary comes home.
in most tempestuous weather; Triste et lugubre Caelum: And no sooner come, but
has Mass in her Chapel; and breeding disquiet, Anno 1561.
she proclaims it death to oppose it; against which the Earl of Arran protests
by Proclamation, and Knox by preaching; with whom, the Queen vouchsafes
conference, concerning the Mass, which she wisely sought to maintain, and
rebuked him for his insolent Book against Government by Women; and Knox gave it
for his opinion of Her, That she had a proud mind, a crafty Wit, and indurate
heart.

And the sooner to put Her to it, Mass opposed.
the Provost and Bailiffs upon their Election at Edinburgh, customarily
proclaim the general Ordinances, and Orders of the Town; In which they inserted
against the Mass, and for which they were punished, and proclamation for
freedom of Papists.

The Ministers oppose, and in private Conventicles, dispute Obedience to
Sovereigns in that case, and conclude to be absolved; whereat the Council were
offended, and Knox and Row urge it the more, and resolve to put the question
(forsooth) to the Church of Geneva, which Knox undertakes to manage.

The Queen being thus busied, Q. Eliz. sends to ratify the peace at Edinburgh.
to quiet her own discontents, Queen Elizabeth sends Sir Peter Mewtes to
require the Ratification of the Peace at Edinburgh (as upon all Scottish
distractions she evermore urged) who was answered as heretofore, that She would
advise.

The General Assembly of the Kirk was now, Ministers assemble at pleasure,
wherein the Ministers could not be ruled with any reason, but rashly offered
their Book of Discipline; which the Lords, (even of their own Congregation)
wisely thought fit, not so suddenly to prescribe, till the affairs of the
Estate were settled, and the Ministers as madly would have it now, drawing
(with all their ^unning) the Gentry, to their side, and to assemble without the
Lords; so that it was visible to wisemen, Excessit medicina modum, or rather,
excessit medicina malum.

It was now conceived opportune, and therefore questioned.
for the Queen, and the peace of all, that this assembling, at the Will of the
Ministry, should be questioned, and if possible to make them void, unless by
public allowance of the Prince; for under color of rectifying some disorders
in the Ministry, or other petty occasions, they took opportunity by this
means, to convene, and so to plot and vent all their devices against
Government; and this being expressly conceived dangerous, and mutinous (as they
managed the matter) it was stopped.

Then they propose the ratification of their Discipline Book, Their Discipline
Orders subscribed.
subsigned with hands enough of their Nobles, when it was devised; they durst
then do no other, for fear of the Multitude; which the Queen refused;
protesting mer^ily she was well assured, The Lords that subscribed, never meant
to submit, being t^^ severe for their wild tempers to obey, who under Writ, as
children are baptized, fide Parentum.

Then they supplicate for maintenance, being as yet, only at the Will of the
people.

To begin their work, a reasonable pittance was sufficient contribution, which
afterward, they inordinately sought means to increase. Maintenance allowed
them.


And therefore for the present to please them, the Council Ordered, That the
Bishops should have two parts of their Livings, and the other two parts should
be gathered by appointment, for uses of the Ministers, and the common affairs
of State: The Queen being served, the Ministry should have the Remainder.
Which Knox interpreted in his Pulpit, to be Two parts to the Devil,
The third between God and the Devil,
And the fourth for his Dam.


And by compute of their own Lords of the Congregation, a hundred Marks a year,
very small. A Scotch Mark is 13. d. ob Sterling. 22. ^. in gold;
was then sufficient for a single Minister, viz. five Old Pieces, and three
hundred Marks to the highest, with Wife and Children, (the Super-Intendents
excepted.) The Lords fearing the Pride of the Ministers, appointed Modificators
(as they styled themselves) left they should be over wanton, Modificators.
which truly with this pittance could not be much feared. But indeed, for what
they had (as the Queen observed) they never prayed for any blessing upon Her,
to which Knox replied, That she had no more interest in that Revenue, than the
Soldiers had to divide Christ's Garments; Nay, she not so good title as they:
for they parted not them until Christ was crucified, But she shares whilst
Christ is preaching. These words were accounted insolent, which he boasted of,
That thus Truth will triumph.

At this time a Riot was committed by the Marquess D' Albuef, Lords commit Riot,
the Earl Bothwell, and some others, upon the House of one Ramsey for his
Daughter-in-law, Allisson Grage, in malice against the Earl of Arran who bore
affection to her. The Ministers were great Sticklers herein, evermore siding in
all quarrels, as might make for themselves, and supplicate the Queen for
public Justice; She execused her Uncle D' Albuef, being a Stranger to the
Customs of the Country, but she would order his obedience and civility for the
future.

This not sufficient, the Duke and Hamilton (fomented by Knox) take Arms
against Bothwell; (...) take ^^ms.
to appease them, the Queen sent Murray (lately made an Earl) and Huntley, to
command Peace. But Bothwell having private conference with Knox, gained unto
them the E. of Arran. Not many days after Arran discovers to Knox, and others
(but falsely) that Bothwell should conspire to take the Queen, and deliver her
to him, and that Murray, and Lething^n the Secretary, Ar^^^ Plot.
should be murdered, and so he and Bothwell to govern all, which he resolved
to discover to the Queen, and did; Anno 1562.
immediately tetyring to his Father, the Duke of Castle-Herault, at Kennel;
who, it seems, suspected his false Design, and restrained him. But he, getting
loose, meets his Brother the Earl of Murray, who brought him to the Queen at
Faulkland. Upon his Accusation Hamilton and Bothwell were secured, not without
some appearance, that Arrans tale was disjointed, and therefore he was
thereupon cunningly advised by Knox to pretend a little whimsey of distraction
in the brain, to color their Knavery. However, the Queen commits them all to
Saint Andrews Castle, and takes from the Duke his Command of the Castle
Dunbarton.

She returns to Edinburgh, where, according to the season, some Court pastimes
were exercised by the Queen her self, against which Knox openly preached, and
which begat a conference with him, the Lord James, Morton, and Lethington being
present; accusing him to have irreverently and dishonestly spoken of her
Majesty, endeavoring to draw the peoples affections from their duty, much
besides his Text, but upon his better behavior, there might be hope of the
Queens Grace and Pardon, which was, as yet, deferred.

But she no sooner progressed to the North, Ministers assemble,
her absence giving occasion (as at all such times) for the Ministers to
assemble, and evermore to whisper some dangerous designs against them, on
purpose the better to linck themselves in power for any plot; and to busy
themselves in all State Affairs, which now began to be in difference amongst
the Lords, especially Huntleys party against Murrays power, and the family of
the Gourdons; and, which gave occasion to Knox, and his Party, to preach fears
and jealousies, and to stand upon their Guard, doubting, very much, to be
questioned for those, and other, his offenses; They assemble at Air, where to
secure himself, and to make his particular Crimes past, to be justified by them
all, They enter a new and strange kind of Covenant, Vote themselves exempt from
Justice.
That whosoever shall molest, trouble, or hurt any of their Members, the fact
shall be reputed heinous against the whole body of them all. And this was made
an Act, and confirmed with Subscriptions, Sept. 1562. Amongst whom, in this
rabble; they had got to side with them, such unruly Lords, as were like to make
notable use of this their Doctrine, as Glencarn, Boyd, Uchiltry, and others.

Then travels Knox to Neisdall and Galloway, keeps correspondency with
Bothwell, who had lately broke Prison; writes to the Duke to beware of Huntley,
bruiting abroad that the Queen was surprised, Murray and all his Friends slain;
in this his journey he challenges the Abbot of Cosranel to dispute, opposes his
preaching, and puts Hay into his Pulpit.

In this progress of the Queens, The Queen opposed.
the Castle of Innerness was maintained against her entrance by Gourdons
Command, which by force was fain to be rendered, and his Kinsman, the Captain,
hanged, and diverse other Confederates: whereupon Earl Huntley takes Arms and
threatens Murray, Lethington, and Pittarro, to the hazard of the Queens person,
who calls to her aid all the Counties to Aberdeen, summons the Castle of
Finlator, which was denied her, and the Castle of Ashdown also, by Huntley.
Gourdon seizes a Guard of sixty men, slew some, and disarmed all; for which
fact, and Huntley also refusing to come in, they were proclaimed Rebels, who
raise a thousand men, the Queen as many, Rebels defeated.
and to her aid comes the Duke, the Earls of Arguile, Murray, and Glencarn,
and, near Aberdeen, Huntley was beaten, his two Sons slain, and himself, a
Corpulent Man, with the heat in Summer time, died without any wound, and was
carried to Aberdeen, that night; which fulfilled his Wifes prophecy (affected
to Witchcraft) that he should be in the Town that night without any hurt.

Gourdon was presently executed, who in fear, but more hope of life, revealed
the Treason of his Father and Family, as also of the E. of Sutherland.

In those times the French were much imbroyled with Civil Dissension at home,
which gave occasion that the Intelligence, and outward Friendship of both Queen
of England and Scotland increased, and Lethington was sent express to England
first, and then to the Guisians in France, concerning the Scots affairs, and
the Queens Marriage, of which now began much talk, with the Infant of Spain, or
with the Emperors Brother, or with the Duke d' Neveurs, but the most guessed
aright, which after happened, with the Lord Darly son to the Earl of Lenox.

The Court came to Winter at Edinburgh, where the season commonly admits more
plenty of Diet and Entertainments, and so had been usually observed at
Christmas time, but now no more such Idolatrous mirth and profaneness, the
Ministers rail against it, which had like to have brought much mischief, but
that their business was somewhat interrupted by the slip of of a Chip of their
own Block; for Panl Messans, Super-Intendent and married, Mess^ns a
Super-intendent has a Bastard
was questioned for getting Barn upon his Maid Bessy; he boldly denied her
accusation, and much cunning there was, to hide this Sin from the general
slander of the Ministry, Especially by the Papists Priests, whose Brotherhoods
had been often canvased by the Congregation, for such Crimes. And at the
instant, when the opinion of his Sanctity, and some juggling helps of his
Brethren to boot, inclined the Judges to clear him, notwithstanding ears and
eyes of several Witnesses, afforded more than suspicion of his guilt, then on
the sudden, comes home the Wenches Brother from Far, being heretofore entrusted
by Messans with Bribes and Tokens for them both, Anno 1563.
with such other particulars as at last condemned him; who in the end confessed
all, though he was Knox great Companion, and Ringleader into much mischief.

At this merry Christmas, Chatteler executed.
one Chattelet, a French Gentleman, having had the honor to dance with the
Queen, the usual grace of all Princes at such Balls, by which occasion he
imboldened himself so far into disorder, that she caused him to be questioned,
arraigned, and executed; Indeed he had placed himself so suspicious for
Mischief, or Treason, as he acknowledged his guilt, and died penitent; and
desirous (in an humble intention) to satisfy any jealousy of dishonor to the
Queen, he said at this time of his suffering, that he was no otherways guilty,
but, pour estre, trouve in lieu trop suspect. The Ministers commented at
pleasure on these his last words, trouve in lieu trop suspect.

In Easter following the Mass was more public, by permission of the Bishop of
Saint Andrews, The Ki^ks justice upon Papists.
and the Abbot of Quitholm, which had been forbidden under pain of Death, yet
underhand permitted, but diverse persons, Priests, were apprehended by the
Kirkmen who take upon them to prosecute, examine, condemn and execute without
authority of the Queen or Council, They pretending, That the Spirit of God did
to their consciences justify their actions.

And to the Court comes Knox, bold and busy, preaching it into a further
practice, who was willed by the Queen to preach Jesus Christ, and him
crucified, and peace to the People; to leave the affairs of State, and
proceedings of Laws to her Execution.

He answered, That the Sword was trusted to Princes, whilst they execute true
Judgment; If otherwise, those that fear God may perform that duty, and
justify it. He had his Text for it, Samuel slew Agag, whom Saul saved; Elias
spared not Jezabel, nor Baals Priests, in the presence of the King Achab;
Phi^eas was no Magistrate, yet struck Zimri and Cosbi to the Death.

There was an Election of Super-Intendency at Dunfres, and the Bishop of
Caithness stood for it, which the Queen opposed, against whom she had good
reason to except, having been false to her private Items concerning the
Ministry, and underhand revealed all to Knox, who had gotten interest with him
his great Confident; and therefore the Queen advised Knox to be just in their
choice of good men (for the Bishop was now cut out a chip of their Block.) But
he is to be chosen upon this Score, That the free Spirit electing, they cannot
err; And so being confident to carry it by his power, left the voting to the
Commissioners.

His back being turned, they take Robert Punt; for now was Knox progressing his
Itinerate Circuit, to Glasco, his visitation, and to get assistance of voices
against those of the Mass, who were summoned to Assemble, in May following, at
Edinburgh; where the Bishops, Priors, and Parsons appeared, and to please the
People, Papists committed.
diverse Papists were committed, the first that ever suffered imprisonment for
their Religion by public Authority. Which yet was ill construed by the
Kirk-men, as done, say they, by deceit, to avoid further quarrelling in
Parliament, which began two days after; And the Queen, attended with a train
of Ladies, gave fresh matter of anger to the Kirk, for their fine clothes, and
were not quiet till they presented Articles for Reformation therein; Knox
insolency to Murray.
and hereof being told by Earl Murray, as disturbers of greater consequences;
Knox in a rage discharges Murray, by writing, from meddling with the Kirk (in
which business he had been very observant) or with his affairs (as he styled
his Popedom) Telling him, of his mean estate, when Knox took him up at London;
and by his means, thus set up, beyond his merit, or man's imagination: but now;
he leaves him loose to his own wit, and doubts not but to his destruction.

And thus he durst do to the Queens Brother, the prime man at the Stern of the
State.

In this Parliament Acts and Ordinances were made, Parliament not piyant to the
Kirk.
against Adultery and Witchcraft, (which at that time abounded, even with the
great ones) for restitution of Glebes, Reparation of the Churches; and yet all
these could not content Knox, for he pulpits nothing but State Affairs; is
displeased with all, And tells them, Knox.
that although their Parliament ends, without due confirmation of the Kirks
desires, their establishment was by the best of Parliaments, without King or
Queen; and they scorn to steal away from their former stoutness, which has
thus far prospered; bids them be assured, that if the Queens affection in
Marriage (which he knew of as well as the best of them all) should fall upon an
Infidel (all Papists being so) they must expect plag^es to follow, and the
Kirks curse to boot.

Of this, The Queen talks with Knox,
he and Arskin, Super-intendent of Angus, were questioned by the Queen in
private; She tells them in tears, which broke into brevity, How low her
Princely Nature descended in often conferences with sundry of them; advising
them to moderation, whilst she could Counsel for their quiet establishment. And
thus restraining her self in punishing their disorders, both against her
Person, her Power, and her dearest Uncles (for you spare none) you take the
more Liberty to heighten your offenses beyond pardon.

Knox answers, His answer.
That his patience in suffering abominations, was more agreeable to be disputed
than his pardon was to be pleaded, and if his tongue took liberty in his
preaching place, she must take it as she pleased; for in the Pulpit, he was not
Master of himse^^, and yet had no Superior but God, to speak plain, not to
flatter any flesh upon the face of the Earth.

Qu. Does my Marriage concern the Pulpit?

Kn. Yes, more than your Counselors, who are so wedded to your affections,
that none but we dare tell them their duty; and as my birth makes me a Subject,
so my Gifts give me freedom of equality with your Peers, and it becomes me not
to be less content with your public actions; Your Marriage concerns us all.

Arskin was more moderate, and much moved at the Queens excess of Tears; Which
rather burst out in despite so to be despised.

But Knox told her, He could better sustain her Tears, than the trouble of his
Cause, or to betray the Commonwealth.

Herewith, she bid him be gone, but durst not question him, his faction was so
great. Yet not over fearful to be less than her self, she set the committed
Papists at Liberty; at which Knox was angry, using his grace at Meat, To be
delivered from Idolatry, and to have Peace but for a season, and why (said
some) not always?

He answered, That he prayed in Faith, and his Conscience conceiving, during
the Mass, peace could not be, therefore in Faith he wished it might not be.

To Sterlin the Court came, Insolency at the Altar Mass.
her houshold-Mass never, till now, questioned; A zealous Brother, Patrick
Cranston, past up to the Altar, and forced away what was thereon in presence of
the Priest ready for their sacrifice; for which violation Cranston, and
another, his Companion, Armstrong, were committed; which intrenching upon their
late Covenant, concerned their whole Body. The News was carried to Knox, in all
extremities his counsel was called for, and therefore, Pope-like, he sends his
Breves.

JOHN KNOX
To all the Brethren, etc. Knox his Breves to his Brethren.

And thus subscribed, Wheresoever two or three are gathered together in my
Name, there am I in the midst.

He remembers the Brethren of the dangerous bypast times, which their
Assemblies withstood, but being not frequent, the adversary took advantage,
that their bloods are to be shed in the persons of these committed, for only
opposing the rascal Multitude that repaird to that Id^l, with their devilish
Ceremonies, and conjuring accursed Water; this preparation upon these two, and
some others, is as a door opened for cr^elty against us all; for prevention he
commands a meeting public at Edinburgh, without fear of any power, or failing
at the day assigned.


This Letter dispersed by Copies, came also to Air, and so to the Queen and
Council, at Sterlin, and sentenced as Treason; the Nobility were speedily sent
unto for their Authority of Condemnation in December.

In the mean time Murray returns from the North, questioned by the Council.
confers with Lethington and L. Heris, advises Knox to submit for pardon, which
he boldly refused, having sent for Spency Advocate of Dundee, and others, to
assist him. But was brought to the Queen and Council in the evening; whom the
Brethren followed in Multitudes, flocking and forcing, even to the Cabinet
Chamber; where assembled the Duke, Arguile, Murray, Glencarn, Ruthen, and a
full Council; and then the Queen came in presence. Lethington produces the
Breves, which he acknowledges, and reads them. Being asked, whether he were
sorry so much had past from his pen, he answered, Before I repent, teach me my
Offense; If the vocating of the Queens liege people be a Crime, We must then
distinguish between lawful and unlawful Assembling; what Convention has been
without my vocating? He was answered, That heretofore it might admit favorable
construction, but now the Q. presence in the Kingdom, and more peaceable
Authority, it becomes no private person to assume that boldness. Knox replied,
The time that was, to me is now; though the Devil has got a vizard, he came in
as himself, a Tyrant; and was it then more lawful? But now he practiceth under
the Cloak of justice, what he could not do by strength; And if my Convention
was without the Q. command, so has all that God has blessed, since the
beginning of this action. The Q. finding the pulse of the major party of the
Lords, consented to spare further censure, upon his better behavior, and so he
was returned.

The General Assembly began in December, General Assembly.
and the Petitions which the Ministers of Churches presented, were neglected,
to which they concluded, Goodman.
if the Q. will not, we must. Christ. Goodman an Englishman of their gang,
demanded of the Secretary, What title either the Queen had to the thirds, or
the Papists to two parts? He was answered, Ne sit peregrinus curiosus in aliena
republica. But he replied, I am so, in the policy of Scotland, but free born in
the universal Church of God, and the care thereof, as equal mine, as any yours.
Knox craved the Opinion, and sentence of the Assembly, for his behavior
formerly and present; to which some said, It was not for them to justify rash
Judgments of men, who speak their own pleasure, not the public profit. Nothing
intervend, but the Ministers continual railing, until the next general Assembly
in June 1564. whereto, the Lords adjoined; but withdrew into the Inner
Council-house, and required to confer there with the Super-Intendents, and
chief Ministers; answer was returned, That as they were members of the Church,
Anno 1564.
so they ought to propose in public, and be assisted by the whole body;
inferring some foul play, to draw the Ministers singly to the faction of the
Court. Which the Lords in answer endeavored to clear, assuring, that no
conclusion should be of this discourse, without consent of the Assembly.

And so they were permitted a choice number, among whom we may be assured Knox
was not wanting, and to watch the Scribes pen.

The Lords began to remonstrate the grace of the Queen for liberty in Religion,
though not of her own profession, which should deserve good Offices from that
Church, to maintain her advancement, and to procure obedience of her people,
with their unanimous and uniform Prayer for her Majesty, especially Mr. Knox to
be moderate in obedience to her person and State; for others by the evil
example may imitate the like liberty, albeit not perhaps with the same
discretion and foresight.

Knox answered, Knox his Insolent answer.
The Queens grace is not the grace of God; Idolatry is maintained by her own
person, and for her Sins the Land must lament. So was Juda and Jerusalem for
Manasses; and though not all the people, some followed, and some consented, by
act and deed, by suffering and permission, as the Q. and you Lords.

They told him of his prayer, which was, To illuminate her heart, if thy good
pleasure so be, with condition: he answered, We must ask according to his will,
thy will be done, and so the Master of the Prophets and Apostles taught him to
pray.

They said it gave a doubt in the people of her conversion. No, said Knox, In
her obstinate Rebellion, not to hear true preaching, but will use the Mass; and
Peter prayed, That if it were possible, the thoughts of Simon Magus may be
forgiven him, and the same doubt touches me of the Queen.

After long disputation of the duty of subjects in general, which Knox
disallowed in each particular, Lethington desired the Lords to decide these
questions, and whether the Q. should have Mass? but Knox opposed sentence, but
in the Assembly, yet they fell to voting and dissented, without concluding.

In July the Q. in progress, Lenox and Darly from England.
there past many letters of kindness between the two Queens, with costly
presents and tokens.

In October the E. of Lenox returns from England, and for his sake, the sooner
to restor him to his lands, after 22. years exile, a Parliament is called at
Edinburgh, in December. and then arrives his Son Henry Stuart, Lord Darly, out of
England, and E. Bothwell out of France, against whom Murray complains,
concerning the Conspiracy, (alleged by the Earl of Arran,) and for breaking
Prison.

The Q. taking great affection to Darly, The Q. affection to Da^ly.
she posts away Lethington to Queen Elizabeth, that she meant to mary him, the
rather, he being of Kin to both Queens; for his Mother was their Cousin German
(and of the same name Stuart by his Father.)

King James the fifth having lost his two Sons, declared his Resolution for the
Earl of Lenox to be his Heir; His de^cent.
but the Kings death, and his Daughter born, prevented that Design.

Then comes the Earl out of France, with intention to mary that Kings Widow,
and that failing, he mary's Margarite Douglas, and his Son mary's the Kings
daughter Mary, and so the effect of the Kings desire continues the Crown in the
Name and Family.

Q. Eliz. Q^. Eliz not displeased with the Match.
not pleased to suffer such Contracts with Subjects, prejudicial to the Crown,
(seeing her great affection) pretends to declare her Heir to the Crown of
England, if she might advise her Marriage, and commands Lenox, and Darly, to
return to England, but underhand well satisfied, she promoted the Marriage, as
good security to the succession of the Crown of England, he being second heir
to the Q. of Scots; Nor cared Q. Eliz. to have her meanly married, who she
thought (of her self) was too proud.

The Court affairs hindered not the business of the Church, The Ki^k enemy to
Mass.
who receive several Letters from the brethren of the West, to them at
Edinburgh, Dundee, Fife, and Angus, to mind them of the Mass, which stuck in
their stomachs, till it were vomitted out of the Kingdom. They feared the
Papists Pasche, and so made supplication to the Q. by the Super-intendent of
Lothian, for effecting their desires; which the Secretary received, and
procured the Q. letters to several Bishops, of St. Andrews, Aberdeen, and other
places, to forbear Mass.

The Communion was administered in Edinburgh, Apr. 1565. and near Easter the
Bailiffs imprisoned a Priest, Punish a Mass Priest.
one Carvet, after Mass, and others with him, revesting him with his Robes, and
so, Priest-like, mounted him on the Market Cross, with his Chalice bound to his
hand, and his body to the Cross, for 2 hours, whilst the Boys sweetened him
with rotten Easter Eggs.

The next day he and his Companions were accused and convinced by Assize, and
sparing his life, he was again tied to the Cross, for 3 hours, the hangman
beside him, to keep off the Malignity of the people, and after imprisoned, whom
the Q. shortly after released, and well rewarded him, and his Assistants Low
and Kennedy, Bothwell called to account, flies into France.
with livings. In May convened at Edinburgh, the E. Murray, with his
Confidents, to keep the Law-day against Bothwell, who durst not appear, but
fled into Frace, not without suspicion of favor and maintenance of the Q.
though she was innocent. This convention (of color concerning Bothwell) being,
Murray, Arguile, Glencarn, Morton, and others, Lords and Barons, sat upon
business of the Church, for enlarging some Articles, to be ready for the next
general Assembly.

The Queen as far as Sterlin, Anno 1565.
soon had knowledge of the Assembly, and jealous of all Conventions without her
presence, commanded their appearance before her, with the Super-Intendents, The
Queen propo^es her Marriage with Darly,
and others. This served her turn another way, to give presence to her
investing the Lord Darly with titles of Honor before Marriage; and procured
them to sign the Ratification of the Contract, though Murray refused, and
excused, until the whole, or principal, Nobility should be present.

At this instant, arrives at St^rlin, Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, Ambassador
from England, being teturned with ^ethington; who declared, that his Queen was
highly displeased with this precipitate Marriage, and the meaness of the Man,
and desired that the Earl of Lenox, and his Son Darly, might be dismissed back
to England. To this the Queen gave fair words, and would satisfy her Sister by
Embassy of her own.

And so was the Marriage propounded in Council, and granted by all, with Murrays
consent, upon these terms, to establish Religion, and abolish Mass, but in that
particular to be further discussed at Saint Iohnstons.

And forthwith was Darly created Earl of Ross, who is created E. (...).
and withal the Queen called for the Super-Intendents, pleasing them with some
Court-Holy-water, but referred the business of Religion to a public Dispute
for Peace to the Kingdom. This was not satisfactory to them, but they advise
upon six Articles for the next Assembly; And then they presented them to the
Queen at Saint Iohnstons by Commissioners from the Church National at
Edinburgh, Six Articles of the Church National.
as they now style themselves.

First, For abolishing all manner of Popery, universally to be suppressed, not
only in each Subject, but also in the Qu^ens own Person.

Secondly, Provision of Maintenance for the Ministry, and dissposing of Livings.

Thirdly, For Trial of Sufficiency of Super-Intendents, and Ministers.

Fourthly, For all lands of Popish Foundation to be restored for maintenance of
the poor, and Scholars preferment.

Fifthly, Against all horrid Crimes, Ecclesiastic and Temporal, be appointed
two Judges.

Sixthly, For ease and support of poor H^^sbandmen, etc.

The Queen receives these Articles, but refers answer, till she comes to
Edinburgh in eight days: which displeased the Assembly, who therefore have
private meetings, and elect eight persons, to see the Brethren well armed, and
after a longer time of attendance, get answer in Writing.

To the first, Her answer.
The Queen is not persuaded to Presbytery, and believes no impiety in the Mass,
and so not to be pressed against Her Conscience, nor will she forsake hers; and
having no assured consideration to countervail the same, she may not loose
thereby, her Allies of France, (the married Ally of this Realm) and other her
Confederates; That seeing they plead for Freedom of Conscience, she lists not
to be bound up; That for the Establishment thereof in the body of the Realm,
she refers to the consent of Parliament, and in the mean time assures, that for
Religion, on her part, none shall be disturbed.

Secondly, She thinks it unreasonable to be defrauded of so great a part of the
Crowns Patrimony, as to put the Patronage of Benefices, out of her own hands,
and want Support; but allows consideration of her own Necessity, and the
Ministers Support.

The rest in effect, she refers to Parliament.

By the way from Saint Iohnst^n, to show her inclination to the Kirk, being to
Witness the Christening of the Lord Levinstons child, She gave her presence to
the Protestant Sermon, which she never did before.

And yet had she notice of some Conspiracy of the Kirk, upon which, diverse were
committed at Edinburgh.

And being minded to mary, The Marriage hastened.
she prorogues the Parliament till September, and summons by Letters, such
Lords and Gentlemen, that were near, with Arms and Forces for fifteen days to
attend her person at Edinburgh the 23. of July, and proclamation also for
Freeholders in like manner; Ross made D. of Rothsay.
then Ross was made Duke of Ro^hsay; and the same day, the Banes and Marriage
was concluded.

Murray, both privately and publicly was advised to attend, but refusing, an
Herald is sent, and after eight and forty hours, he was denounced Rebel, and
put to the Horn, and Arguile also.

And now begins Parties to stir, Athole against Arguile, Lindsey against
Rothess; the Lord Gourdon, after three years imprisonment in Dunbar, was
released and restored, to be a Bar in the North to balance with Murray.

In the evening the Marriage was proclaimed, The Marriage in July 1565.
By name Henry and Mary King and Queen of Scotland, and solemnized the next
Morning, 27. July 1565.

Not without Divine providence, for the more certain conjunction of both
Kingdoms in their right of Descension from Margarite (the eldest Daughter to
Henry 7. of England) who had but two children, James the fifth, by James the
fourth, and Margarite Douglas, by Earl Angus, her second Husband. This James
the fifth, had but one Child, Mary, sole Heir to the Crown; Margarite Douglas
brought up with her Uncle Henry 8. married Stuart Earl of Lennox, who was
banished into England, by them came Henry Lord Darly, and Charles, father to
Arabella. So that the whole right of Q. Margarite (all other issue of H. 8.
failing) was united in these.

The Earl Rothess, the Lord Grange, and Pilcar, with others of Fife, were put
to the Horn, for not appearing, and immediately the Drums beat, The K. and Q.
take Arms,
for men of War, to take pay for the King and Queen, which alteration begat
several fears.

The Lords disperse to Arguile, so do the Lords.
and send Elphinston into England for support, who brought ten thousand pound
Sterling. And in August the Lords meet at Air; Hamilton, Arguile, Murray,
Glencarn, Rothess, Boyd, Uchiltry, and Others, conclude to be in force the 24.
of August; which the King prevented, by hasty proclamation of their rebellion,
and commanding all men to appear at Lithgow the same day.

Upon the ninth of August (being Sunday) the King comes to the High Kirk at
Edinburgh, Knox sermon against the Government.
and hears Knox preach, who speaks against Government of wicked Princes, and
for the sins of the people God gives them Boys and Women; Justly punishing
Ahab for not ordering the Harlot Jezabell.

Immediately Knox was summoned before the Council, and silenced for twenty
days; and Cragg to supply his place.

The 25. of August the King and Queen journied to Glasgow, Both Armies match in
sight.
and the next day the Lords met at Paisley, with a thousand Horse, and march to
Hamilton, keeping the passes in sight of the King and Queen, and so to
Edinburgh, entering the Town, notwithstanding the Canon-shot of the Castle; and
immediately beat their Drum, and offered pay, for Defense of God (as they
called it) but to Men or Arms came to their Support; and that was strange, for
all the chief Lords were there, the Duke, Murray, Arguile, Glencarn, Rothess,
Boyd, Uchiltry, and other Barons. They write expostulatory Letters to the King
and Queen, without answer, who martch with five thousand men; Lenox had the
Van, Morton the Battle, and the King and Queen the Rere, and come immediately
toward Edinburgh. In the mean time the Castle makes six shot of Canon, and the
next day the Lords depart to Hamilton.

The King and Queen pass to Sterlin, and command all to return to Glasgow,
where remaining four days (the Lords being gone to Dunfres) they return again
to Sterlin, their Army increasing both Horse and Foot, and so to Fife, where
the Lords subscribe, to defend the King and Queen against the English and
Rebels, The Lords proclaimed Rebels.
and so come to Saint Andrews, where the King summons the Lords by Name to
appear within six days, which they refusing, are put to the Horn; and being
come to Edinburgh, they proclaim, The design of the Lords, under pretense of
Religion, to suppress the present Government, or to appoint Counsel of their
own.

In October the Super-Intendent of Lothian, with the whole Ministry under his
Charge, meet at Edinburgh, present a supplication to their Majesty's, by their
Super-Intendents, Spotswood and Lindsay, for payment of their Stipends, which
is promised to be paid.

The Lords removed to Carlisle, the King and Queen march from Edinburgh the 8.
of October toward Dunfres, mustering 18000. men, and marching up and down,
return to Edinburgh.

The most of these Lords being of the Religion, Fly into England,
and called The Lords of the Congregation, fled into England to the Earl of
Bedford, Lieutenant of Berwick; from thence Murray posts to London, but leaves
the Lords at Newcastle. He was much mistaken, for the Queen, with great suit
ere she affords him audience, demanding, how he, being a Rebel to her Sister,
dares thus boldly take protection in her Realm, denies to support him, or any
his Confederate Companions. However, after Murrays departure, and get aid,
she sent them aid, and writ in their favor to the Queen.

Upon this Rebellion, diverse of the Kirk party, fled also, as engaged therein,
and those remaining were in some fear. John Knox, stiling them absent, the best
and goodlyest part of all the Nobility, chief Members of the Government,
always praying for them in public, and reviling those that appeared for the
King, even in the presence of all the Council.

In November all those Lords in Rebellion were summoned against the fourth of
February, for Treason, and not appearing, the Queen publicly declared her
Defense, and Maintenance of the Catholics, and sundry Lords, and others, went
openly to Mass.

At last the banished Lords humbled themselves for the King and Queens favor.
but submit
The Duke and his Friends at Newcastle in England, by mediation of the Abbot of
Kilcunning, had pardon upon condition to depart into France, which he did.

The 25. December. the Commissioners of the Churches for the general Assembly
convene in Edinburgh, General Assembly.
and conclude, That notwithstanding the Acts of Parliament and Proclamations,
the Mass and Papistry was maintained, and new Collectors being put in,
forbidding allowances to the Ministry, in great want. In these they resolved
to have relief.

The Catholics for themselves supplicate also, for public use of their
Religion, which was granted, and they offered the dispute, being backed by the
King and his Faction, all Papists, together with the power of Rizio an Italian
favorite, under title of the French Secretary; Rizio the French Secretary.
and yet these Lords now at Court were divided, Morton, Mar, and Lethington,
against Huntley and Bothwell.

And again the General Assembly meet at Edinburgh, and order a public Fast
throughout all the reformed Churches; The first Public fast in Scotland.
the manner devised by Knox, and printed, which is the first method of that
kind that we read of in Scotland. So thereupon followed the effects,
Supplication to the Queen for Regulation of the means ordained for Support of
the Ministry. Spotswood, Row, and Lindsey present their case. And the Queen
answered, that the fault was in their own Officer and Controller, Pittarrow,
who meddled with the thirds; and so the Ministers and Assembly departed to their
Residencies.

In January arrives (through England) Monsieur Rambullet, Rambullet Ambassador
of France.
Ambassador from France, with 40. horse his Train, who brought to the King the
Order of Saint Michael, (the Scots call it the Cockle-shell) and at this
Ceremony of investing, the Heralds were in some disorder to devise Arms for
the Kings bearing; The Arms of Scotland were not allowed; seeing the Parliament
denied him the Crown Matrimonial, he could have no other, but as Earl and Duke,
How the King should quarter his Coat arms
the Queen bidding them allow him no more than his Due. Her love becomes cold,
for she began to set her Name before His, and not long after to leave him out
of all writings. And because of some necessary use of his Signet alone, It was
advised out of his hand, and trusted to Rizio.

And now at Edinburgh, the Court busy about the Attainder of some of the
banished Lords, not submitting, which by reason of dissenting parties was
stayed, and more particular occasioned by the Murder of Rizio. This Italian
(or Piedmontoise) a Musician by Profession, but by his Wit and cunning got to
be Secretary to the Queen for French, as Mettallan was of State; who for envy
to him, and love to Murray (Rizio's Enemy) plotted revenge with Morton, and
Lord Herris, to be rid of Rizio, by any way: but Morton refused. Then he
insinuates with Rizio, and tells him, that the Office of Chancelour being in
Morton, a man unlearned in Letters, or Laws, was only protected by the Queens
favor; which if by his means withdrawn, his Office might be soon surrendered to
Rizio, and he made capable thereof, by being free Denizon, and naturalized.

Hereupon Mortons Castle of Tantallon was summoned into the Kings hand, who
enters as heir to his Grandfather the Earl of Angus. Rizio is designed Earl,
and money offered for Melvin Castle; with the like increase of Favor, neglects
his duty to the King, and draws on his own Death, now concluded by George
Douglas an active man, the Lord Lindsey, Lord Ruthen, and the Earl of Lennox
the Kings Father. Rizio suspects, and keeps Guard of 50. Halberds. Then they
adjoin the E. Morton, hardly drawn thereto, until his right to the Earldom of
Augus was restored, and further capitulates by Articles, That Religion should
be re-established, as before the Queen returned out of France; The banished
Lords to be restored; And the fact to be owned by the King, who signed hereto.

Lenox posts into England to the Lords, and brings them nearer the Borders. The
Confederates, and Morton, with strength and secrecy, seizes the keys of the
Palace, leaves some forces in the Inner Court below, to surprise such Lords as
were not of the plot, and stays in the presence. The King, with Ruthen and
five more, went up the back-stairs to the Queen at Supper, waited on by the
Countess Arguile, Rizio, and some Servants; She was amazed to see them armed;
Ruthen fastens upon Rizio, tells him a meaner place became him; who ran to the
Queen, and clasping her, the King gently takes the Queen in his Arms, and
says, He is resolved to punish the Villain for his abuse to the Country, and
so delivers him to Ruthen, who carries him down to Morton. Bothwell and Huntley
raise the Court, but are beaten back by the Guard, and forced to fly. Metallan,
who though chief in this design, supped with Athole to keep him in, and himself
from mistrust, but his Servants were in the fray, which scuffling below was
suspected above, as a Rescue for Rizio, and so they suddenly stabbed him with
Daggers. The South^aiers had warned him of the Bastard, which he interpreted to
be Murray; but it was George Douglas who was a bastard.

These Murderers at the first had proposed to hang him, and had Halters for
that purpose, but in have they stabbed him with 53. wounds. Bothwell and
Huntley came in to the Close, but soon had their arrand to begone or to taste
the same sauce. Rizio had ambitiously managed the most affairs with pride,
beyond the equipage of the King, and was designed this Parliament to be
Chancelour, which made those Lords in envy to be his Enemies, and forced the
King, and his Father to sign to his Death. Rizio had advice of this by the
French Priest Dannet, but his fate was unavoidable, which the Queen some time
resented with tears, threatening revenge, which to avoid they fly to England,
where Ruthen dies. The Noise hereof in the Town, caused the Provost to ring the
Common Bell (or sonner le Tocsen, as the French speak) assembling 500. and come
up to the Court, but the King told them, all was well.

The King, The K. turns Protestant.
to strengthen himself after this Action, inclined to the Religion, and
subscribed to a Proclamation, that all Bishops, Abbats, and other Papists,
should avoid the Town, which they did; and commands the Provost, and those of
Lies and Conogate, to be in arms, with advice also to other Lords to hasten to
him with force. And now comes Murray, and other banished Lords being sent for
(as the Covenant against Rizio was subscribed) convoyed by Hume with 1000.
horse; The Earls Cathness, Banish^ Lords sent for.
Athole, Sutherland, with all the Bishops being departed the Town; In comes the
other new faction of Lords, and in Council advise the Queen to be satisfied
with Rizio's death, and take it as good service; the Queen dissembling her
passion, got the remove of all the men in Arms out of the Court; and so with
some domestiques in the night drew the easy King to fly with her to Dunbar,
sending for all the Lords to attend in five days.

The Religion, by these factions ever-more get advantage, which otherwise this
Parliament now sitting might have lessned, being most Papists, for a dozen
wooden Altars, were prepared, to be set up in St. Giles Church.

The Queen, now assisted with Bothwell, Huntley, and others, with Proclamation
before them, march with a thousand back to Edinburgh, from whence the united
Lords (but divided in opinions) depart and disperse, and Knox we easily believe
was not left behind. And much troubled were he and his, that the King by his
Proclamation, now excused himself from the Murder of Rizio, who offended all
men (their own words) the fact being done for his Honor, if he had wisdom to
see it, and so lost his Credit and Friends by his Inconstancy: and tr^ly it was
rumoured, and some writ so, that Knox had a hand in it.

Diverse Lords were put to the Horn, their Lands escheated, and many of them
executed, but Arguile and Murray received into favor, and both factions
somewhat pieced and reconciled. The King and his Father neglected, K.
negl^cted, Bothwel advanced.
and Bothwell preferred very highly.

The Ministers Supplicate for their Stipends, complaining very humbly (not
usual) of the Officers and Collectors, and for redress, desire Mandatory
Letters for Restitution, and to stop it in the Queens Exchequer till farther
Order. In all she promised very gracious relief.

The 19. of June 1566. the Queen at Edinburgh was delivered of a Son, The Queen
brought to bed of a Son.
with exceeding joy, and great happiness to all the Kingdom, and the several
assemblies followed, assisted by Murray and Arguile, wherein Paul Messans
formerly excommunicate about his Bastard, Me^^ans penance.
as aforesaid, and now returned out of England, was to be received into the
Church again.

Knox invited him home, and presuming of his free pardon, and forgiveness, sent
his Apostolic Letters to accompany him to the Assembly, and tells them in the
words of St. Paul (concerning the excommunicate incestuous person*) It is
sufficient that he was rebuked of many etc. For this cause I write, that I
might know your obedience in all things; Anno 1566.
and to whom you forgive, I forgive also etc. But notwithstanding this
Apostolic Command, his Repentance is prescribed, much like a Penance;
Presenting himself in Sackcloth, bare of Bonnet, and bare of Shoon for an hour,
at the Entry of Saint Giles Church in Edinburgh, at seven hours in the Morn,
till Prayers, psalm and Text, and then upon the Stool all Sermon: and so for
three several Church-daies, and confesses his Repentance. And in this manner
also in Iedwart and Dundee; which after all performed, and received a
Repentant, He complaining of this rigor and shame, without taking leave of
any, retires back again into England.

The Bishop of Galloway, the Earl of Huntleys Brother, being called to Council,
could not brook his former title of Super-Intendent, as he was styled, and
thereof formerly well pleased, but must be called Bishop of Galloway.

In August, one Harris, that had been of the Queens Chapel, but lately of the
reformed Religion, and got into E. Ruthens service, having acted in the Murder
of Rizio, was thereof convict, hanged and quartered.

The King condemned of all, The K. discontented letters intercep^ed.
and neglected of the Queen, wrote to the Pope, and to Spain, complaining of
the Queens ill Government of the Catholics, which she intercepted, and
resented to his ruin. For Bothwel to bring on his Design aimed to be Principal,
and to effect his Greatness, thought good to procure Morton to be called home
(but not to Court) where he might look on, and not be seen, free from fear and
danger, and though a Kins-man to the King, yet his Power was lessened to
nothing.

Most writers complain of these times, and some of them, like Noah's blessed
Sons, overspread with the Mantle of silence the nakedness of these unnatural
actions, of such, as we ought to ow duty and piety unto, pitying the Errors of
Princes. Their excellent endowments of Nature and Morality, not to be exampled,
and yet Shipwrackt in mis-governing. I cannot search into all the Causes, which
drew on these lamentable events, Secret Lothings in Wedlock, which who knows,
but the Actors; dislike, hatred, freedom, revenge; seconded with false shows of
Reason, and Color of Law and Justice, what will it not do? Her Husband had
dragged Rizio from her affection, and favor, to death. He was not crowned, but
made public by Her Proclamation, not acknowledged by Parliament, and in law
but a Private Man, and her Subject, and so liable to judgment.

But his powerful kindred and Friends, prevent that attempt. Secret Justice is
Justice; formalities are for common Causes; and the Princes power may dispense
with forms in case of necessity or convenience, and so he became an object of
wicked men's malice.

And now had Knox procured, Knox procures Geneve Confession.
though heretofore he cunningly refused, as fearing prevention or false play,
when now not overlooked, he to his purpose got the Churches of Geneva, Bern,
and Basil, with others, reformed in Germany and France, to send to the Kirk of
Scotland the sum of their several Confessions of faith, he alleging the
dissonant opinions of Scotland; which occasioned an Assembly of Knox and his
Confidents, who having a confused irregulation, without any positive Articles,
concluded as the most cunning way to assent to all without exceptions, and so
returned answer; as if in Spirit to jump in faith and discipline, who never
could agree amongst themselves in either.

At this time (the Kirks says so) Bothwell was wounded in chase of the Thieves
at Liddisdale, Bothwel visited by the Q.
whom the Queen visited, and thereof in grief, took sickness in extremity; but
say they by binding Cords about her shacle bones, knees and great Toes (a
pretty cure for our Mountebanks, It seems an od fit of the Mother) she revived,
prayed in English, and commends the cause of the Catholics to Murray and
Bothwell, whom she assigned Regents.

The King posts from Sterling to the Queen at Iedburgh, where he found Her
somewhat convalesced (says the Churchmen) but scarce would speak to him; who
immediately returns to Sterlin, where the Prince was, and so to his Father at
Glasgow.

She being recovered, took pleasure to visit Bothwell, who was brought in a
Litter to her, and cured; and afterward she progressed to the Borders near
Barwick, which she viewed within half a Mile, the Governor discharging the
Ordnance for her honor, Sheprogresses to the Borders at Berwick.
and offered her his lawful Service, visiting her in excellent Equipage.

The Borderers are the Inhabitants of both Nations; Men of War, Borders, how
bounded.
Subtle, Nimble, Experienced, Adventurous in arms; comprehended by the East,
Middle, and West, but bounded and limited, as the Success of War gives
distance, near or farther off. Continual fewd between either for three hundred
years. Aut Bellum inter eos populos, aut belli praeparatio, aut Infida pax
fuit. A Custom there is amongst all, never to believe a complaint against any,
unless one of his own Contrymen will witness it also, according to that of
Cambden, Nulla nisi Scotus in Scotum; Nullus nisi Anglus in Anglum testis
admittitur. which seldom happens, and so they sight it out.

And these were Receivers of Fugitives of both Nations, as their Crimes or
Ne^essities required protection or pardon; Indifferent Subjects to either
Nation, or rather acknowledging no Sovereign. Over these people either Kingdom
had their three several Governors to rule them by force.

The Baptism of the Prince was solemni^'d at Sterlin by the B. of S. Andrews*
Prince baptized James.
at five a clock afternoon, December. 17. 1566. after the manner of the
Protestant Churches, and christened James, the Witnesses were the Earl of
Bedford, then Governor of Berwick, for the Queen of England; the Count de
Briance for Charles the French King, and an Ambassador for Philbert Duke of
Savoy. The Queen of Englands Present a Font of pure Gold, valued three thousand
Crowns, though she grieved in heart to hear her Rival prevent her in the honor
of a Mother. The King belike, knowing the English Ambassadors Charge not to
salute him King, was not present at these Solemnities, nor required, but kept
his Chamber; His Father sends to him to repair to Glasgow, which he did,
without adieu to any, and not a Mile on his way, but he felt pa^gs in his
Stomach, and at Glasgow blistered bluish; which the Physicians suspecting,
with their Antidotes, and his Fresh Youth, he recovered.

The Earl of Bedford had in Commission to compound the differences Domestique
of the Court, between King and Queen; and for them to forbear the bearing the
Arms of England quartered with Scotland, and to ratify the old Treaty at
Edinburgh. The last she refused, as in some particulars derogate from the right
of her Issue to the Crown of England.

The Queen in this Christening Triumph, The Kirk have all they desire
congratulates all Suitors, the Kirk put in, and had what they desired;
Subscription to their Maintenance, out of the thirds of Benefices, and
presented by the Bishop of Galloway to the Assembly, when having got their
ends, their Stomachs were yet squemish, for the Collections (which granted but
of Grace) themselves to gather, pretending, That it was their part to preach to
the People, and to expect from them maintenance necessary, as of duty the
Pastor to pray, might crave of his flock to pay, and farther for them to have
no care; and also, seeing the Tithes were only for the Ministry, they
required the Protestants should keep them in their own hands, and be so
accountable unto them, and not to permit the Papists to meddle therein. So at
one blow they meant to acquit the Papists of their Portion. It was observed,
how soon those Men stand upon terms, and by creeping into the people, begin now
to give Law to their Benefactors.

And now also, Manner of excommunicating.
they thunder Excommunications for trivial Offenses, deny the Communion to whom
they or the Godly party are displeased withal; And though an Offender,
repentant, and done his Penance, yet he must stay from the Sacrament, till the
Minister says, that he is penitent enough, that is, when he thinks fit, as he
likes the party; If not, they are all, Father, Mother and Daughter, called into
Disciplinarian Consistory, a place of Criminal Infamy. And although the Lay had
place therein to judge, yet the Kirk did all, and more than ever any Bishops
Spiritual Jurisdiction; and the Magistrates Power and Office was only to effect
the Forms of the others censure, and be their Executioners. And of all, they
had procured the Queens consent at Sterlin: Nay more, they obtained for every
Borough, a douation of Altarage, Annalls, and Obites, which always heretofore
were due to the Papists, but now to be disposed for maintenance of the
Ministry, without stickling at these Abominations. Ungrateful.
And how ingratefully they acknowledged the Queens bounty, they divulging, that
she intending revenge against the King, stroke in with the Kirk, lest they
might disquiet her designs and affection to Bothwell; who also for the favors
and countenance that he received in England, was much their friend.

And thus heightened, Prescribe good behavior in England.
they take upon them to write to the Bishops and Pastors of England, who
profess with us (say they) the truth of Jesus Christ.

Taking knowledge that diverse Brethren, the most learned (no doubt) in England,
are deprived Ec^lesiastical function, for not using S^perstitious and
Idolatrous Vestments; urging the Apostolic Argument, To do, as to be done
unto, insisting much upon the tenderness of scrupulous Consciences, and that
the Brethren, that use not those Rags, neglect not you that do, and so
conclude, not to rend Christ's Garments for trifles.

But they have sithence learned other language, and practice worser usage,
blood and death, who follow not therein all things of their discipline.

The Bishops reformed were as busy on their parts, not to be presbytered in
their own Jurisdictions; and procure to be obeyed in all such cases, as before,
in the time of Popery were used in the Consistory, and therefore to discharge
the Commissioners; for it was now conceived the best policy in the Queen, not
to deny either of them, especially where they might cross and quarrel
themselves.

The King reasonable well recovered of his drench, was visited by the Queen at
Glasgow, and brought him and his Father to Edinburgh, lodging him near the
Court, in a convenience from noise, and proper for his health; where she often
visited him; The King murdered.
and lay in bed with him; but returning to her Palace, the 9th. of February in
the 21th. year of his age, 1566. the King was, say some, strangled in his Bed,
at Midnight, and one Servant that watched with him, the House blown up with
Gunpowder, his body was found the next morning in a Garden, without the Town
Wall, and without any mark of fire. Bothwell, with some others, by warrant,
caused the body to be viewed by the Chirurgions, at the Q. command, and buried
in the Abbey.

This end had Henry Stuart, H's Character
18. Months a King. He was a Prince of high extract by Father and Mother. His
Character sans-parel; comely, tall, ingenious and liberal; fitted for all
Excellencies of mind and body, if time had lent him experience. He had a quick
wit, and writ well, and because he was a King, Covert-barn, and meddled the
less, he had the more leisure to hunt and hawk, and ride great Horses, and
therein the Mastery. His vices were thereafter; Greatness and Ease made him
feed high, and those brought him to Incontinency, though the Queen was
beautiful and young enough for a Princess. Such neglects of his, by the Designs
of others, hastened his ruin, who took boldness thereby to work their own
ends, without the least Guilt of the Queen.

This is the report of some, The (...) report of the Kings death.
yet others give as a Story. For the Ministers in hate to the Queen (who truly
it appears did much for them in the case of Policy, and their immerits) tells
us that by Bothwels direction, Sir James and Gilbert Balfores, Chalmers,
Spency, Sebastian, John de Bourdeaux, and Joseph brother to Rizio, Domestiques
of the Queen, and Strangers of all Nations, were the men that were Actors in
the Murder; Bothwell being in hope to succeed him, in case the Divorce from
his Wife should come timely from the Pope, Bothwel divorced,
which his have could not stay for; and easy enough it was to infuse this into
honest Lenox, who supplicates the Queen for trial of Bothwell by Assize, before
the Earl of Caithness President, the Earl Cassiles, and other Peers, fourteen
in all; who cleared Bothwel, and this was dispatched for satisfaction of the
Commissioners of the Christened Prince, and their Sovereigns. But Bothwell
follows the Queen in her visit of the Prince at Sterlin, from whence he carries
her to Dunbar, and for which violence he gets a general pardon, and so includes
that of the King, if it should farther burst out.

There was no let to the Queens affection but Bothwels Wife, and married to the
Queen.
from whom he was soon divorced, and both content; for She made the first hasty
second marriage with the Earl of Sunderland, and he, after the banes publicly
asked by Crage the Minister, was married to the Q. May 15. 1567. (Mala nubunt
Mense Maio) by the Bishop of Orkenay.

And truly compare all those which have writ of this Queen, several Authors,
Anno 1567.
and in several Languages (for all are partial) we may yet pick out truth,
concerning her Husbands, and her hasty marriages, in their proper stories.

That Morton, Summary of the la^e Murders, and their Acc^ssaries.
and Murray, and many others besides, plotted the Murder of the late King,
upon Malice, Ambition, and Revenge; Each of them by several Interests. But
Bothwell got the best Bone, and they their Bones. Indeed they also herein
murdered the honor of their Mistress, for she seemed a Property, whirled
about with every wind, which they sailed by. Buchanan Books.
Buchanan speaks much of this matter in a worser way, and pays the Queen to
the Purpose in his History; as also in his Pamphlet, The Detection; Both which
were condemned in Parliament; and of them both he repented, Wishing that his
blood might expiate those his Falsities and Impieties.

Udal has more of it in her excuse, Udall.
and if not partial, take him, who afterward writ to K. James. Or if you
please, take our relation who write the nearest of truth than can be gathered,
and thus it was.

Sir Roger Aston an Englishman (and preferred in Court by the Earl of Dunbar)
lodging in the Kings Chamber that night of his Murder; Sir Roger A^^o^s repo^t
of the Kings Murder.
Both of them smelt the fire of a Match, which caused them hastily to leap out
of their Beds, and out at a window into the Garden; the King had his Sword in
his hand, and suspecting Treason, as also hazard of the young Prince, hastily
commanded Aston to speed thither and prevent his danger, whilst himself single
was seized upon by diverse, and wounded to death, and so left in the Garden; and
to color it, the House was blown up with Gunpowder, but the Kings body not
scorched by any fire, was viewed, and found to be slain by such, as so ordered
the secrecy, as not in those days to be divulged. And this Tale was told by
Aston himself, since he came into England with K. James.

But that I may unfold the Mystery of these late Murders, and how the Queen
was involved into future suspicion, by her hasty Marriages, I shall open Murrays
subtilty to be the chief Author and Actor in all.

The slaughter of Rizio (not long ago) gave security, A brief Narration of the
late Murders* and the Queens hasty Marriages, and the cause*.
in that time of distraction at Court, for Murray boldly to appear before the
Commissioners, upon his Indictment of Rebellion, the very next day after the
Tumult, and so no Accusation came against him, the Murder being hastened for
that purpose, The Queen therefore (through the Kings intercession) receives
him; her self in such Distraction, conceived it the safest way to depend on his
Brotherly (base) Counsel. The King very sensible of his own Accessory in
Rizio's death, and deluded by the Cunning contrivance of Morton and Murray, His
youth and easiness of belief giving way, Now repents of that rashness, implores
the Queens clemency, and ingenuously reveals to her the Villainy of them all,
with resolution to be revenged. And seeing the Bastards power and interest in
Affairs of State, equal, if not before, His, advises with others to remove him
farther off; Murray has intelligence of all, and, under shadow of outward
duty, thought of nothing more than to ruin him. Of which he acquaints Morton by
Message into England, who was conveyed thither upon Rizio's murder.

Some difference between the King and Queen gave the advantage; for by their
former villainy; they animate him to strain upon the Rights of Sovereignty, to
his face, which covertly they opposed to the Queen, and always after he had
done a miss, to leave him in the lurch.

And finding the good nature of the King likely to comply into affection with
the Queen, and to be reconciled together. To prevent them Murray draws in
Bothwel to the Confederacy with these murderers, who though fled, acted in all
Councils. And so Bothwel must be reconciled to Murray, and brought into grace
with the Queen.

Contracting under hands and seals, and bound with Oaths, That the King being
laid aside, he advanced, the Queen distrusted by the Peers, and so the rule of
Regency in Murray.

Upon this Conspiracy, the Bastard conveys himself slyly out of the way, but
twelve hours before the King was murdered; and in hurray of affairs returns to
Court, and altogether they advise (nay compel) or threaten the Poor Queen to
mary Bothwell, who they present, as nobly born, bold and faithful to the State,
against all assaults of the English, to prevent the Tumults of the time, and
hazard to all. If not, they would purchase their own security, by any
otherways, how prejudicial soever to her safety, which at last, she was forced
to consent unto.

And this Relation was confirmed under the hands of the Earls of Huntley and
Arguile, and sent to Q. Eliz. as an undeniable Truth, dated December. 1567. which
I have seen.

Hereupon the Confederates to acquit Bothwell of the Murder, consent to the
general apprehending all such as were suspected; and Bothwel in particular
accused by the Earl of Lenox the late Kings Father; The Q^^aries Bothwel.
his Case is pleaded by Morton, and he cleared by Sentence of the Judges. And
now Bothwell fitted with honor to a capacity of Marriage, the Confederates
gaining many Lords to their design, set their hands to an Instrument for that
purpose, and altogether implore the Queen to mary Bothwell, which being done,
and their turns served; Then they increase a violent suspicion, and vent it
abroad of the Queens guilt and consent with Bothwell, and so conspire her
deposing, and his destruction.

Murray most suspected for the great Villainy which followed, entreats for leave
to travel into France, as weary of these Disquiets, and to color his knavery
commits his whole Estate in trust to the Queen and Bothwell. No sooner gone,
but all the Confederates take Arms, publishing, That Bothwell, now Duke of
Orkney, intended to surprise the Prince, and captivate the Queen, The Lords
take Arms.
who get forces and proclaim them Rebels, and march to Seaton, and thereabout.
The Armies face each other of equal strength. The French Ambassador. mediates
for Peace, but to no purpose, and so retires into Edinburgh. The Lords, to add
Justice to their Cause, which seemed hor^id against their Comfortless and
distressed Queen, satisfy the people, that were racked into fears and
jealousies how to distinguish these distempers in State. They caused therefore
their Ensigns with this device. The late King wounded and dead, the Prince
James kneeling by, his hands heaved up toward Heaven, with part of the Psalm;
Judge and revenge my Cause O Lord.

Then out comes Bothwel, and, to avoid the blood of many, offers his own in
combat against any. James Murray the younger Brother, accepts the Challenge,
but he is refused as not equal in honor. The elder Brother, William Lord of
Tyllyburn and then Lord Lindsey, desired the Combat. To whom Morton sends the
warlike Sword of Earl Archibald (commonly called Bell the Cat) and a Buckler;
with these he presents himself between the Armies; and Bothwel Bothwel is
denied the Combat,
there before. But the Queen forbad them.

In fine, the Lords increasing numbers, being near home, Edinburgh and the
Hamiltons failing the Queens forces, Bothwel takes time to fly (being
underhand advised by Morton, his pretended back-friend) which he did least if
taken Prisoner, flie^, and the Q taken.
he might be to unravel all these Treacheries. And now absent, it would
increase belief of his and the Queens guilt, in the late Murder of the King.
He gone, and ^he worsted in fight, and without any defense, renders her self
into Edinburgh Castle for thatnight; and the next day she is carried Prisoner
to a Castle in the Isle of Lochlevin, under the strickt custody of Murrays
Mother, the Harlot of James 5. insulting over the poor imprisoned; boasting her
self the lawful Wife of James 5. and her Son to be his lawful Offspring.

Both^ell under hand sends to Balfore, Governor of the Castle for a Silver
Cabinet of the Q. which was delivered to the Messenger, but discovered to the
Lords, who surprised it, and so the secret Letters opened all their actions.

In this hurray of affairs, the Ministers never idle, break down the Abbeys,
and all the figures of painting and sculpture in the rich Chapel of Holy-rood.

At last comes the Hamiltons, with forces in sight of Edinburgh, to recover
all, assisted with Arguile, the Earls of Huntley, Caithness, Rothess, Crawford,
and 15. Lords, besides others of Ge^try.

The other Lords move the general Assembly of Mini^ters now (as always in
uprores) convened in June, to write to the Enemy. And besides those Letters,
who more busy to accompany them, and go on the Errand but the Ministry, that
mean^ nothing less than peace. Knox, Douglas, Roe, and Crage, making such
demands for themselves, and more maintenance for the Ministry, That the Cure
would be far worser than the Disease.

These Peacemaking Ambassadors, Treat a peace
but more military minded, return with their message, bad enough to be bid
welcome, which they also heighten for their own purpose and join altogether in
8. Articles.

That the former Parliament, 24. of August 1560. and all the Acts for Religion
should be made good, and defended as lawful.

That the thirds of Tyths, and larger proportion of Benefices for the Ministers.

For reception of youths into Schools and Universities by probate to be
reformed.

Crimes against God to be punished.

The Murder of the King to be prosecuted.

The Prince protected.

The Covenant promoted, Popery suppressed by arms, if need were.

That all successive Kings and Princes at Coronation to be sworn to the
Religion.

Queen Elizabeth detesting these unbridled insolences of Subjects (whom she
termed, Q. Eliz expostulates these proceedings by Amba^^y.
Perfidious, Ungrateful, Cruel Rebels) sends Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to
expostulate with the Confederates, to restore the Queen from imprisonment, and
preserve the Prince into England.

They all assemble (Rebels seldom consent in unanimity) but resolve Not to
admit Ambassadors of England, nor Le Croc. and Ville du Roy out of France, to
see the Queen. Lethington the cunning Secretary, and his faction; advise for
her restoring; he Murder of the King to be answered; the Prince provided for;
Bothwel divorced and Religion published.

Others would banish her perpetually into England or France, and those Princes
to undertake her Renunciation of Regency to her Son, and certain Lords.

Others are for her Trial, Condemnation and perpetual custody, and to set up
her Son.

The last, and most villains, would have her deprived of Princely Authority,
life and all; and this Kno^ and other Ministe^s thundered out in Pulpits.

Throgmorton disputes her Cause, See Mar^ins History.
alleging what the Word of God, and all National Laws do decree, concerning
the sacred power of Sovereigns, and earthly duty of Subjects. They reply with
Buchanans damnable doctrine, de Iu^e regni apud Scot^s, Buchanans Books.
Murray and he, Contrivers of that Tractate (contrary to the whole Histories of
Scotland) to create and depose their Princes. They excuse their non-admission
of the English Ambassadors address to Her, with the denying of the French, who
seemed to be satisfied; And in conclusion, frame a Declaration in writing,
without subscription of any, which they exhibit to Throgmorton in answer of
all.

In effect, To no other intent they shut her up, but to sequester her from
Bothwels person, whom they pretend she dotes upon, to their r^in, and so whilst
she cools toward him, her anger may abate from them; with which result and no
more, he takes leave, and returns home to England.

They work upon her restraint and miserable Imprisonment; first, Q Mary
compelled to resign to her Son.
in fair way to resign her Regency; and to incline her, they loosen her to a
little freedom, the better to show her the means to escape away; but increasing
threats if she refuse, to arraign her for Incontinency, Murder and Tyranny.

At last they compel her to set her hand unto three Instruments.

To resign her Crown and Royal Dignity to her Son, scarce 13. months old.

Murray to be called home to be Vicegerent, and if he refuse, then

To these Rectors, James Duke of Castle-herault, Gilespich Earl of Arguile,
Matthew Earl of Lennox, John Earl of Athole, James Earl Morton, Alexander Earl
of Glencarn, and John Earl of Mar.

And this she did, as extorted in Prison, which were published and proclaimed the
19. of July 1567. and 5 days after the Prince crowned at Sterlin, at thirteen
Months and eight days old. The Royal, ^ow much soever infant (being due to
him at his Birth) is furrogated into the Throne of his deceased Ancestors, and
Morton and Hume take Oath for the King; Solemnities and Paction, by stipulation
and Coronation, do but show him to the people, not make the Sovereign; and so
by these pledges of their faith, knit affections together; for the Ceremonies
of his Coronation, due from his birth, though prorogued for a while, did not
derogate from his Right, and Regal Authority. And Knox knocked out the Sermon.
Murray is sent for, and returns out of France, and August 20. accepts the
Regency.

And because very lately, we mentioned Bothwells challenge for combat. In this
void time and place we shall say something concerning Combats.

It was usual in all parts of Christendo^e, Digres^ion. of Combats and single
Duel^.
where differences could no otherwise be decided, the party was allowed his
purgation, By Oath, or otherwise per dquam can^entem, ferrum ign^um; or duellum
vulgar.

The Northern Saxons and Normans brought it amongst us; and so continued whilst
we were barbarous, but afterward condemned often by the Sea of Rome.

Richard 1. gave leave for Tournaments (for it had been done by license,
extrajudicial) and so we had of them between Counties and Towns, It a quod pax
terr^^ nostr a non infringetur.

As also, Vir is militaribus Com. Lincoln.

And afterward Redman, and his three Friends, Hastiludere, cum Halberton, and
tribus sociis suis, Civit. Carliol. And it followed, to be very Ordinary, and
too much frequent, till the Pope forbad it through all Christendom.

Detestabiles nundinas, vel ferias, quas vulgo Torniamenta vocant etc. unde
mortes hominum, et pericula animarum, s^pe convenient.

The single Combat was also by legal process in Cases Criminal, in appeals of
Treason, out of the Court Marshal, as between Essex and Montford in Henry 2.
time. Audley and Chatterton, Rich. 2.

For Murder or Robbery, it is, out of the Kings Bench, as you may read it,
Modus faciendi Duellum.

It has been granted in Cases Civil out of the Marshalls Court about different
bearing of Arms, as between Scroop and Citsil; or otherwise, for Title of Land,
as in Paramo^rs Case.

But the more justifiable has been used by sundry offers singly for saving
bloodshed of many.

Three of Our Kings severally challenged that trial against the French King.

And by Charles of Arragon, and Peter de Terracone for the Isle of Sicile; and
that was allowed of by Pope Martin and his College of Cardinals.

But it was grown too Common, and so afterward forbidden by Canon, between the
Duke of Burgandy, and Duke of Gloucester. Being detestabile genus pugnae, omni
divine et ^^mano jure damnatum, et fidelibus interdictum, etc. Et qu^modo
existimare quisquam potest rectum Iudicium ex Duello, In quo Inimicus
veritatis, Diabolus dominatur?

The Regal Prerogative have sometime restrained that liberty in Martial
Exercises, or private quarrels, and punished nonConformists.

Edward I. Public fecit proclamari and inhiberi ne quis (under loss of Lands
and Goods) either torneare, bordeare, aut Iustas facere, aventur as facere,
etc. sine licentia Regali speciali.

Nay, none to wear weapons, but the Kings Officers, and some few excepted.

But more often to forbid single Combat, or to determine it, or take it up.

Mawbray and Hereford, both banished.

And when Aneste and Chatterton were ready to fight, Eandem querelam in Manum
suam Rex recepit.

That of Fitzthomas, being challenged by Sir William de Vessy, to have defamed
the King by Words mentioned in a Schedule. Willielmus audita tenore Schedulae,
dementitus est predicto Iohannem, dicendo. Mentitus est tanquam falsus, and
pr^ditor, and denegavit omnia sibi imposita, and tradidit vadium in Manum
Iusticiarii quo illud admisit. Et predict Johannes advocavit omnia, and
de^entitus est simul dicto Willielmum.

This was done in Ireland, before the Kings Deputy there, but was adjorned into
England before the King, and there adjudged void. Quia non sit citatus in Regno
isto placitare in Curia Regis etc. Duellum co^ce^ere in pla^is de quibus
cognitio ad curiam Regis non pertinet, contra legem and consuetudinem Regni.
Igitur concordatum est quod processus totalitur adnulletur.

Sundry punishments, in several Cases without license.

The Earl of Surrey fined a thousand Marks, pro quadam transgresione, in
insultu facto, in Alanam de la Zouch.

Inquisitio facta est, de omnibus tenementis and catallis To. Garvois, quia
Insultum fecit and percussit Edwardum (filium Willielmi) or Williamson.

Cromwell was challenged by Seagrave to fight in France; Subjecting thereby
(^aith the Record) this Kingdom to that, was stopped in the way and tried at the
Kings bench. Et super hoc dominus Rex valens habere avisamentum Comitum Baronum
Magnatum and aliorum de Concilio, etc.

Qui omnes enim dicunt, quod hujusmodi factum meretur poenam amission is vitae.

He was committed to the Tower, and long time unpardoned, His Second was fined
two hundred Marks.

Droomlenrig and Hempsfield, ancient Noblemen of Scotland upon Suspicion of
Treason had leave to Combat at Holy-rood-house, armed like ancient Palladines
fought it out, till the King in presence parted them. James 5.

We read of one in the time of Queen Elizabeth 1571. between Simon Low, and
John Ryme, Plaintiffs, against Thoma^ Paramour Defendant.

It was by Writ of Right for some Lands in the Isle of Tenet, in Com. Canc. and
in issue at the Common Pleas.

Paramour had his Champion, one George Thorn, who came to the Bar, flung his
Gantlet into the Court, to approve the right of Paramour by single Combat,
against any.

One Henry Nayler, a Fencer, takes it up, to answer for the other Defendents.

And in Tuttle Fields, by Westminster, the place appointed; A Tent for the Lord
Chief Justice Dyer of the Common Pleas; and other the Barons of that Court.

The Tilt 60. foot square, railed in with Scaffolds round about for Spectators.

Two Pavillions East and West, from one issues out Thorn apparelled in red
Sandals, upon his black Armor, bare legged, bare head, and bare arms to the
Elbo, brought by the hand of Sir Jerome Bows, who bore a red Baston of an ell
long, tipped with horn, his Yeoman with an Ox-hide Target, and the Gantlet bore
before them upon a Swords point. To oppose him enters the other, conducted by
Sir Henry Cheyney, and both Combatants take Oath, to come fasting. But ready to
encounter, the Demandant was missing, and so by default, the Chief Justice
resites the Writ and former passages of challenge, and gives Judgment for the
Tenant, and leaves the Demandant, and his Pledges, de prosequendo in
impercordia Reginae, ^id. Dyer 30.

Some preparations there were of late in King James time, intended between two
Scotch men, the Lord Ree, and David Ramsey, in point of Treason; but I know of
no other policy, preventing the Trial, than the doubtful effects to decide the
question, by this way to find out truth.

But because the matter has been long laid aside, the manner thereof will not
be amiss to preserve to Memory. The Ceremony was wont to be thus, when it was
in Authority and use in the Earl Marshal or High-Constables Court.

The Appellant exhibits his Bill in the High Court, Constable, or Marshal, and
failing of his proofs, offers force of his own body, upon the Defendant.

And the Constable (as Vicar General in Arms, (so says my Author) under the
King, has power to join issue in Battle, and within forty days after to
appoint time and place. The Constable assigns them arms, being a Gantlet and
short Sword, and Long Sword and Dagger; They bring able pledges for appearance
at the day, and for good behavior to each other till then.

The King names the Field, sixty foot long, and forty foot broad, firm ground,
and even listed about, by Order of the Marshall with Rails, with two Doors,
East and West, seven foot high, and kept by the Sergeant at arms.

At the day, the King sits on a Throne mounted, with two seats on each hand for
the Constable and Marshall, at the foot of the Ascent; who demand the Pledges,
to render themselves to the King, or the Appellant and Defendant, to come in
and make Oath.

The Appellant comes on horseback to the East door, whom the Constable brings
in, and demands his name, and why thus armed; He answers I am A. B. Apellant,
and demand Entry, to make proof of my intent against C. D. and to acquit my
Pledges. The Constable takes off his Bever, and proclames him to be the Man,
opens the door and bids him enter, with his Arms, Victuals, necessary
Attendants, and Council, presents him to the King, and sets him on a Seat till
the Defendants coming, and request being made, his Pledges are discharged.

Then the King commands the Constable, who commands the Marshal, and he the
Lieutenant, and he the Marshal of the Heralds of the South (if it be this side
Trent, being the Marches of King Clarencieux) or otherwise if it be Northward,
then the Heralds of Norris King of Heralds there) to call the Defendant thus.
O yes, C. D. Defendant, Come to your Action, acquit your pledges in the
presence of the King, Constable and Marshal, to defend your self against A. B.
before three of the Clock after Noon* He enters at the West door in like
manner. Their Appearance presently Registered in the Records of the Constables
Court, with the order, time, horses, arms and attendants and their manner.

Two Knights are assigned Observant to either Adversary, that they take no
charm or spel, or other evil arts, till their Oath be taken, which the King
commands the Constable to receive, and what other Protestations their Council
shall advise; If not,

The Register says; you A. B. Appellant; do you know this to be your Bill of
Complaint exhibited in Court before the Constable, Swear to the Truth thereof
in all points, and that you intend to prove the Contents thereof upon C. D. so
aid you God, and your Patron Saint; and then proclaims, Thou A. B. thy Bill is
such in all points, continue thy intent to prove it this day, so God help thee
and hallowing.

The Defendant C. D. in like manner, etc.

Then the Appellant takes his second Oath, That he comes appointed with Arms,
as was assigned without knife, or other sharp weapon, no stone or herb of
virtue, charm or spell, of power or belief to be assisted, but only by God, and
his own Body, and merits of his Cause. So God him help, etc.

The Defendant swears the like.

The Constable bids them both to take each other by the right hand, without
violence, gently, and laying the left hand on the Book, He says, I charge your
A. B. that you use all advantages to force the Defendant to render himself into
your hands, or to demand a Parley, or with your own hands to kill him, before
you part out of the lists, by the light of the Sun, and age of the day
assigned, by your Faith, and so God help you.

The like by the Defendant.

Then O Yes.

The Herald pronounces; In the Kings name, That no person approach within four
foot of the List, keep silence, give no sign by Countenance, or otherwise, to
advantage either, upon pain of life and member, and loss of Chattel. The King
of Arms and Heralds, are assigned to Minister unto them, to eat or drink of
what they brought with them, asking leave of each other. Within the Lists, are
admitted a Knight, two Esquires of the Constables Train, and the Lieutenant;
also a Knight, and two Esquires of the Marshals, being all in Armor, with
Lances unbarbed to part the Combatants at his Majesty's pleasure, and these
lying flat on the Ground at each side of the List, only the Constables
Lieutenant and the Marshals standing.

At the instant of the Kings Direction, the Constable shall say,

Let them go, Let them go; The Appellant advancing upon the Defendant, the
Constable stands ready at the Kings pleasure, whilst they fight, viz. to stop,
take breath, or otherwise, neither of them engaged in advantage. They may not
whisper; In case of Tr^as^n the convict shall be disarmed by command of the
Constable, one corner of the List to be broken down, his body dragged at a
horse-tail to the block of Execution, to be beheaded or hanged on the Gallows;
the Marshall to see Execution.

But in cases of particular interests, he shall not be dragged, but shall be
thrown over the lists, and lose the penalty of the Lands or honor in question.

The vanquished forfeits his Horse and Arms, and all which he brought into the
Field with him, unto the Constable, as his Fee.

The Lists, Rails, Seats, etc. to the Marshal.

If the Combat be withdrawn by Command, or perswa^ion of the King, and both
content (else not) they shall be led out together by the Constable, and
proclamation made thereof, with equal honor to them both.

I have read of such a duel Combat, before the King of France, between Robert
le Blanch, and Le^^^ le Force, in a case of Treason; Blan^h the Appellant
grapples le Force, and casts him down; sets his left foot upon the others
stomach, holding up his right hand, with his sword by the Hilt, his left hand
within a foot of the point, and therewith presently he meant to ^tab him: but
to add more strength, his right foot was somewhat raised from the ground; when
instantly the King cried, Hold, hold, casting his Truncheon, to part them.
Wherea^ le Force, nimbly leapt up, without hurt.

The King, being willing to preserve le Forces life, ^ot with any good
affection (for he supposed him guilty) but for the future examination of
Con^^deracy; Yet he adjudged him ^anquished, which the Defendant ^tterly
denied, and craved Judgment of the Con^table and Marshal, who had a pre^^y way
to save the Kings honor, and yet to do Justice.

Their sentence therefore was, that le Force should be prostrate to the fatal
stroke as before, and the Apellant; with all his former advantage and form of
postures, and so they did. When le Fo^^e with nimble strength li^ted up Blanch
his right foot, which (...) him down, skipt up (...), and stabbed the other to
the Heart.

And forthwith k^eeled to the King, told him, That (...) the Assistance of his
Patron Saint, the merit of (...) event of the legal Tr^al, which he in Hono^r
would not ref^se* Yet for more satisfaction to his Majesty, he produced six
sufficient witnesses attending in the Field, whom he preserved upon all events,
and who cleared him.

However, the King quarrelled with the Constab^e and Mar^^all for declining his
Sentence, being Supreme; which they humbly denied. The King being a Party in
case of Treason or Felony, cannot be judge, in Lands and Honor he may. This
di^tinction in those times of Treason, was taken for Reason.

But though these Combatings are rarely now in Example, yet have we taken up
Private Duells, the more frequent, sometimes for Right, but in^o^^erably too
often, for Honor, as we term it.

Certainly, to use the Sword in a private (...) party, must be a tempting of
God, and an (...) Trial, though we read two of them in Scripture, The challenge
of Goliath, which David undertook, The inveterate quarrel of Ioab and Abner in
the Interests of their several Masters, David and ^^hbosheth, perfor^ed by
twelve on either p^^t, singly; the Challengers had the worst.

It was commonly imitated by some Gallant in the Head of an Army in France and
Holland, or by Parties; but the wise William of Nassa^, at the siege and loss
of Breda, after Briote was so slain, forbid it any more to be done during his
life.

In how ill condition is that righteous cause which must be concluded by the
Sharp, Force and Fencing? for Saint Bernard says, That he that conquers
Mortaliter pec^at, he that is slain aeternaliter perit.

The difference of the evil is, the Challenger has in it more provocation. It
has been held lawful for a man slandered by an unjust Accuser, to vindicate
himself by his own Sword; But, It destroys Justice, and Robs God of his
Revenge.

Ordinary and Common Challenges (upon what ground soever, being willingly
refused, and yet by the Adversary therefore proclaimed base and cowardice) may
diminish the offense of acceptance, but concludes him deeply guilty by Gods
Laws; The Plea of Conscience ought to suppress the Fancy of any Fighter.

The result is thus, To answer the Challenge, let a Man provide to be daily
armed, and if he be set upon, God and his Cause willdefend his Life and Honor.
To make a bargain of bloodshed is damnable, and the intention (though both
escape) is murder. The Council of Trent, excommunicated all persons
whatsoever, none exempt; with loss of Lands, and Christian burial.

But Bothwell (who causes this Digression) being rid of the Combat, flies, and
was pursued to shipboard, but got to sea turned Pyrate about Orknay. Morton at
his own charge set out several Ships to take him, Grange was Admiral, and
almost surprised him, yet he escaped in a light Pinace (over a crag of the Sea)
which grazed on the Sands, but the pursuers stuck fast, and were saved by their
Cock-boat; and Bothwell got into Denmark, was there suspected, examined and
imprisoned.

Earl Murray, having with much seeming unwillingness, in August, accepted the
Protector-ship, which he long thirsted after, Summons a Parliament in December;
In which the Resignation, Coronation, Regency, and the Queens Imprisonment,
were confirmed; And forthwith (accompanied with the Conspirators) repairs to
the Imprisoned Queen at Loch-leven, Mortons Castle; She besought him with tears
to protect the young King, to govern with a good conscience, and to spare her
Life and Reputation.

Then to color his Villainy, he executes diverse for being present at the Late
Kings murder. But they protested at the Gallows, that Murray himself, and
Morton, were the Authors, cleared the Queen, and so did Bothwel Prisoner then
in Denmark, and so to his dying day, That she was not privy nor consenting. And
fourteen years after, when Morton was executed therefore, he confessed, That he
moved that the Queen might be made a Party therein, but Bothwel refused.

And thus, the Government not so secure, but factions increased, envy to the
Regent, hatred to Religion, and duty to the Queen, now Bothwell was gone;
Metallan and Tylliburn, the Hamiltons, Arguile, and Huntley, join together. And
Beaton Archbishop of Glosgow, now Lieger for the Queen in France, with much
secrecy, gave them hopes of Men and Money.

Her cruel Imprisonment forces her escape, The Q. scapes out of prison.
by means of George Dowglass, brother to the Governor of the Castle, being often
times trusted with the Keys to let in and out the Queens women. And in the
disguise of one of them, she got out, and he, and Tylliburn rowed her over the
Lake, and with a dozen horse men, convayed her that night to Hiddery, the next
day increasing to five hundred horse, with the Lord Seaton and Hamiltons, they
came to Hamilton Castle; and because this Design was her last which she acted
in Scotland, we have searched out the truth, from several Relators as follows.

The Regent Protector now at Glasgow, All parties arm.
and pleasing the people with seeming Justice to settle them, was now himself
to seek for Protection. Some advised him to Sterlin, where the King was, but
Douglas opposed, protesting to do, as Boyd had done, who was gone to the Queen,
with intention (as he persuaded them) to act Husha's part; for he returned a
message to Murray, To do them, better service with Her. Morton and Simple
advised the same, to stay at Glasgow; for safety consisted in sceleri^y, the
Queens liberty would soon gain the People, and the more remote, the more
affectionate to her; Their own strength was the Townsmen, and as Enemies to
Hamilton the Surer their faith to them; Cunningham and Simples, potent
Neighbors; Lennox and the Kings party many; and the Earl of Mars forces not
far off, to whom Messengers are posted round about. The Lord Hume came with six
hundred Horse, and so conceived themselves four thousand strong, sufficient to
dare the Enemy.

The Queen was gotten head of six thousand, Murray 4000. the Qu. 6000.
and con^iding in this advantage of number, she purposed to withdraw her person
for safety, into Dunbarton Castle, and so to manage the war with expedition or
lingering, at pleasure.

M^rray guessing at their aim, drew out into Glasgow-moor, supposing the Enemy
that way, but seeing them on the Southside of the River Clide, crossed the
Bridge and Foords, and got there before them, who being prevented, marched the
way of Rothrington which leads to Dunbarton, but the Regent more wary, galloped
his Horsemen, and mounted Langside-hill, and his foot hasten after. Two
advantages made for Murray, Arguiles sickness, a sudden Apoplexy; the Army
halting, he chose the ground. The other was, the Queens too hardy confidence in
her own number, which seemed less than they were, ever marching over Hills and
Dales without perfect view. These retired to another Hill oppos^te to Langside,
drew up in Order, Arguile was her Lieutenant, and led the Rear, and with him,
the Earls Cassiles, Eglinton and Rothesse, the Lords Seaton, Sommervail,
Yeston, Borthick, Sanwhere, Boyd, and Ross. The Va^ committed to Claud Hamilton
of Pasley, Son to the Duke, and Sir James Hamilton; indeed, consisting most of
Hamiltons; James Stuart commanded the Musketeers, 300 men. The Lord Harris the
Horse, most of them Borderers and Servants.

The Regent devides in two Battalia's. The Van by Morton, with whom were the
Lords Hume and Simple. Himself the Rear, and with him, Mar, Glenc^rn, Monteith,
the Lords Ruthen, Uchiltry, and Kinkart, the Sons of Lennox, and the Citizens
of Glasgow; the Horse commanded by William Douglas, Alexander Hume, and Ioh.
Corinchell.

Upon encounter these Horse retire, both encounter.
and fell back to their Foot, indeed the other over-powred them, but these were
driven back by a flight of Arrows, that gawled the Horse.

The two Vans join Battle; The Regents shot secretly placed in Yards, Gardens
and Orchards of the Village Langside, near the Lane, where they shot at
pleasure upon Arguiles, who being freed from this hazard, were fresh assaulted
by Mortons Pikes and Spears; and other long weapons, which being broken, they
join pell mell within Swords length, and nearer, with daggers, stones and fists.

In midst of fight the Regents High-landers fled first, out of the Rancks of
his own Companies, or out of the Wings, as other^ say, the Lord Lindsey at
hand, cried, Let them gang, I Will supply their place, and ^^epping forward,
charged Arguile afresh, whose weapons broken before, and overcharged with new
impression, The Queen disco^^ited.
turned backs, and fled disorderly. The Regent seeing the victo^y, followed the
chase, wherein more suffered than in the fight. The High-landers, as yet taking
heart, made good their first faults, and slew without mercy, and had done more,
but that the Regent sent horse to save the Enemy. Many were taken of Note,
Seatons, R^sses, Hamiltons, the Sheriffs of Air and Lithburn with others. On
the Victors side were slain* says my Author, but one (of Note he means) and
for his Epitaph only, we shall name him unfortunate; yet he was called John
Ballony of Preston, Mortons man; and not many hurt.

The poor Queen stood a mile off upon a Hill, T^^ Q^. flies (...) ^^nger.
saw all lost, and then fled, with the Lord Harris and his Horse, toward
England.

Some say the Contention between John Stuart, and Arthur Hamilton, two Captains
of the Queens Musketeers, strove for precedence, and she adjudged it to Stuart,
for his Name, and once of her Guard; Hamilton took it ill, but nobly challenged
the other to the Career, who followed as hastily, and were both seconded as
inconsiderately, by the rashness of another Hamilton of Pasley, the Just
occasion of the Loss of all.

The Regent convenes the Estates, which the Queens faction opposed, not willing
that he should fix himself with greater Friendship, whilst yet their future
hopes depended, and therefore caused a rumor of some fresh assistance out of
France, for the Queen, under conduct of Mortige of L^xemburgh; and in a
readiness he was, but stayed to assist the French King in his Civil Wars.
Arguile therefore comes to Glasgow with 600. horse, and conferred with
Hamiltons, but to no effect. Huntley also with 1000. men, was hindered by
Ruthen* and returned. Yet these procured letters from the Queen of England, to
forbear convening, till she were acquainted with their proceedings, and
justness of their cause* why they took arms against the Queen her Cousin, of
whose wrongs she is sensible, and expects a speedy account. However the
Convention continues, and diverse are punished. 5000. Horse and 1000. Musketeers
are levied for suppressing the incursions of the Nedisdale, Annandale, and
Galloway men, seize certain Houses and Holds of several late Lords in Arms;
some oppose, but many are made soon to submit.

The Queen in miserable distress, She lands in England, and writes to Qu.
Elizabeth.
sends away Beaton unto Queen Elizabeth, with that same Ring, an ezcellent
Ada^ant, (a token of Friendship) received from her before, to tell her, that
she intends to come in person, and crave her aid, which was promised; And so by
Sea in a small Barge, she follows Beaton, and lands at Werkington with 16.
men, and 4. Watermen, in Cumberland 17. May 1568. writes to Queen Elizabeth,
the State of her Affairs in Scotland, most pitifully expressed.

You are not ignorant (most Excellent Sister) how some of my Subjects advanced
by me to the height of honor, conspired to oppress and imprison me and my
Husband, and yet by your intercession I received them into F^vour, ^hen they
were by force of Arms driven to (...)

^

Queen Elizabeth could not but commisserate her case, but was jealous of her
Person, and Cause; she was told of her eloq^^nt tongue to move credence, and
her condition considerable with the Ca^^^lique Princes, to draw Parties to
protect her, to quicken the Guises, her Cosins, to her former Clame to this
Crown, and the Innovation of others. And so to settle her advantages under
Protection, whilst she may provide, to convay her self beyond Seas, at her own
pleasure. And many more, likely fears, not u^^eigned, caused Queen Elizabeth
for more safety of the Kingdom, to detain her Prisoner ^o Bolton Ca^^le, in
Tuition of the Lord Scroop* and Sir Ralph Sadler.

M^rray thus at liberty holds a Parliament, attains many of the Queens ^^^ends,
Commissioners treat about the Scottish Queen.
notwithstanding Queen Elizabeth's displeasure, who requires him to come, or
send Commissioners to reason with her the misusage of their Queen, otherwise
she threatens to restore and protect her. Anno 1568.
Murray obeys, and not knowing who to trust, comes himself on the errand to
Berwick, with Morton, Bishop Adams, Lindsey, Liddington, and others his
Confidents. And to boot also, comes that Monster of Ingratitude, Buchanan (my
Author styles him so) the greatest Creature of Murray. Queen Elizabeth sends
Howard, the fourth Duke of Norfolk, created Barons by Edward the 4. 1461. and
by Richard the third, Dukes of Norfolk, 1483. the Earl of Sussex, and Sir
Richard Sadler; And ^or the imprisoned Queen, comes Lesley Bishop of Ross,
Levinston, Boyd, and Others.

Lethington, first advised with them, the danger of calling to question so
great a Princess of Crimes, before English men their Enemies, and how France
would resent it; at which they were all mute. And the Queen of Scots
Commissioners (to whom the first place was yielded) before they took Oath,
protested, that although their Queen was content her innocence should be
showed, yet being a free Princess, she did not acknowledge her self Subject
unto any. The English urged likewise, That they did not admit that protestation
in prejudice of that right which the Kings of England, always claimed as
Superior of the Kingdom of Scotland. Queen Mary's Commissioners declare by
writing, how Morton, Mar, and others had levied Arms, misused their Queen, and
extorting her Resignation in Prison, that Murray had usurped the Regency, and
enforced her to fly for succor into England. Murray, and the Commissioners for
the King Infant answer, and relate the manner of the late Kings murder by
Bothwel, for which the Noblemen called him in question, whom the Queen
protected; that she voluntarily resigned, and the Parliament had confirmed it;
and all this was evidenced by Letters. Her Commissio^ers reply, and deny all,
telling the Truth of these Stories (in such particular as is before herein
declared) and therefore crave aid of England, to assist Her.

The English Commissioners require better proofs than by Letters, for
Lethington had counterfeited her hand, and was suspected might do ^o by these.

Murray refuses other proofs than such Letters as he showed, with much modest
regret (forsooth) To be put to it to accuse his Sister at all, unless the Queen
of England would undertake, to protect the King, and to relinquish the Queen.
But the English told them all, though there appeared not, as yet, sufficient
for the present to be dilated upon, yet Murray is required to leave some of his
Company here, to answer Exceptions which their Queens Ambassadors should
propose hereafter, and so they departed. Much pleasing to the Duke of Norfolk,
so to break off, having always favored Q. Mary's Cause, and from this time
had a Mind to mary her.

But Murray to make things more safe, po^^s to the Queen of England, and to her
produces Articles and other (...), and (...) Book, called the D^tection, which
had (...) credit with her, Regent po^ts to Q^. E^iz.
though ^illing she was that reproach ^ight l^dge upon the Queen of Scots.
Indeed many Engli^h Lords inclined to (...) her (...), at which Queen Eli^^beth
swore, She (...) not (...) so long as Norfol^ lives, of whom henc^forward she
was j^alous. Duke Hamilton was returned out of Fr^^ce, whither he had fled, and
besought that Murray might relinquish the Re^^^^^ to him, being (as he (...))
his due, as next heir to the Crown, (...) the Queen found his pulse beat too
hig^, and least he should proceed in that Claim, she commanded him not to
depart without her License.

The Regent and his Company having leave to depart in Fe^^^^, Reg^^nt (...).
the Duke Hamilton made means to follow, and being Lieutenant for his Queen,
and got home, sends forth his Proclamations, and shewe^ his Authority, which
none obeys; For Murray was coming to nip the Bird in the Head, and comes to
Glasgo^ with an Army, to whom Ha^^^ton (...); and prefixes a day for Hamilton
(with pledges) to subs^ribe to his power at Edenb^rgh, and there likewise he
(...) it off, till his Queen sends her consent. Hereupon he and Herris are
committed. (...) and Huntley were the next to be reduced; Both of them had been
bu^ie in the Regents absence, but were now suppre^^e^, and so all (...) to
Perth, to hold a Convention of ^tates.

Thither came two Packets from both Queens. Elizabeth made three Propositions.

1. That the Kings Mother might be restored to her (...) and (...). 2. That her
Name might be joined with her Sons, in all writs, and the Government continue
in the R^g^^^. 3. And if none of these, then that (...), with all (...) and
hon^^^, without pre^^di^^ (...) the King.
This last was accepted, the other rejected.

^

^

These Queens had several Designs in their Demands, Elizabeth was wi^^^ng to be
rid of the other, rather than she should mary with Norfolk; for she feared her
great Friends here, and beyond Seas.

And Mary was therefore more earnest to satisfy the Duke, who meant not to
adventure the Treaty upon uncertainties; And Murray for these respects kept
Bothwels title in being; for from England he was assured by his Friends there,
that Norfolks plot, and Queen Mary's, was so cunningly conveyed, that no wit
nor power was able to countermine. Yet he remained steadfast, and sent one of
his Domestiques to Queen Elizabeth, with Queen Mary's Petition, and their
answer; but She not satisfied with such an Ordinary Messenger, the Abbat
Pitcarn was sent Express, from the Convention at Sterlin, held only for that
purpose.

About the same time of his last arrival at London, the Duke of Norfolk was
committed to the Tower, The Duke of Norfolk committed, and his story which
Murray plotted.
October 11. and the Conspiracy discovered, which was thus.

Murray, with much cunning, before his late departure out of England, proposed
some hopes to Norfolk of marriage with the Queen of Scots, and secretly induced
a belief of her present restoring, and spread these Rumors to prejudice her,
and to increase jealousies, with many other suspicious, which surrounded Queen
Elizabeth, Of Rebellions at home, and Plots abroad by the Papists. And as many
more Tales that Q. Elizabeth, and Murray, had compacted against the young King.
To wipe off these, an Apology was printed in Queen Elizabeth's defense. In
truth, she was much perplexed with fears, out of Emulation of the other. Yet
with some compassion for her Imprisonment; and in both these distempers, there
wanted not Instruments to rub the wound. Mary often solicited Queen Elizabeth
with humble, yet Princely, Letters, with such compassionate Eloquence, that
though the Queen had a Wolf by the Ears, yet with tears, had often resolution to
return her Home, and dealt with Murray by Messengers herein, but he was settled
in malice, and would not incline.

Then was rumoured the Marriage of the Duke of Norfolk with Queen Mary, as
advantageous to both Realms and security of the Kings person, who must be
brought also into England, and so under Queen Elizabeth's power, and she so to
be secured of fears. And that for finishing so good a work, the Dukes Daughter
should be contracted to the King. And these Designs, many the chiefest Earls in
England had contrived. Murray himself at his being here, intimated no less to
the Duke, for that, She having married her self to a Boy, then to a rash young
Man, and last to a Mad-brain, might now recover her honor to wed him, a Man of
discretion. Nay more, secretly, by Melvin, offered to the Queen of Scots, his
Service to effect it. And the Secretary Throgmorton, with the chiefest Lords,
Arundel, Northumberland, Westmerland, Sussex, Pembroke and Southampton, and
Leicester also (his Rival) were all of the Plot, and he broke it very seriously
to Norfolk.

Upon which the Duke, not faint-hearted, courted the Queen by Letters, and all
consenting, Articles were propounded.

1. For security of Queen Elizabeth's person and issue. 2. To Covenant a League
between both Kingdoms. 3. To establish Protestant Religion. 4. To receive into
favor, with pardon, all the Scots. 5. To Revoke her assignation of the Kingdom
of England, and to mary Norfolk.
They promise to procure Queen Elizabeth's consent, and the other to be
restored, to all which she, in Prison, easily yielded, and who could blame her
in the case she was? But ere they had so done, Queen Elizabeth had suspicion,
and therefore it was more than time to break it themselves, so from one to the
other it was neglected, till Leicester did it.

She asked the Duke thereof, and charged him to decline it, least he hoped
headless, and it was good warning, sufficient to him to look ere he leap't, and
so he stole away in time of Progress back to London.

Caecil wisely took care of the State, and learned so much of the Matter, that
the Duke began to fear; restless in any place, withdrew to Norfolk, where some
Commotion was purposely set on foot, and he suspected. To prevent the worst, he
returns back toward the Court, but at Saint Albans was taken to guard, and
secured, for by this time Treacherous Murray had out of Scotland discovered
what he knew, and upon which the Duke was sent to the Tower, Bishop Ross, and
others committed, and Pembroke examined, not well remembering what he had said,
or should say: for he could not read a word. Northumberland and Westmerland
take Arms, but fearing greater opposition fled into the North.

But ere all this was known in Scotland, Secretary Metallan increased faction
for Queen Mary, and sided with Hume, and Grange Captain of Edinburgh Castle;
and before it was ripe, he is sent for to Sterlin, accompanied with the Earl
Athole, to intercede if need were; and need there was, for he is accused as
Accessory to the late Kings murder, and committed close Prisoner. Sir James
Balfore in the same Condition, were both of them sentenced by the Convention of
States (for by them Murray did all his work as in cases of Treason) but with
much ado, Balfore had pardon, and Metallan reprived to Edinburgh Castle; and
Murray posted up and down to reduce the Norfolk faction, and the Queens, who
were increased; and returns to the Life Trial of Metallan at Edinburgh, Anno
1569.
where finding his Party too strong, being of Hamilton, Huntley, Arguile, and
others, he warily adjourned the arraignment; for, though by this time News came
of the Dukes Commitment in England, yet his Faction increased very powerful,
and his Plot went on in Scotland.

The Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, The Earls of Northumb. and
Westmerland fly to Scod.
in favor of the Queen of Scots, and right Rebels to Religion, with 6000.
Foot, and 2000. Horse, mastered Durham, burnt the Bible, and Service Books,
heard Mass in Darnton, and took Bernard Castle, but being pursued by the Earl
of Warwick with twelve thousand men, and Sussex with another army of seven
thousand, they were forced to fly into Scotland in December, and lurked among
the Borderes and Robbers, until Morton betrayed Northumberland to the Regent,
who sent him prisoner to Lochleven, being an Enemy to all sides but the Queen
of Scots.

This service Queen Elizabeth took well, and gave audience to Pitcarn his
Ambassador, to whom she promised, to desist the restoring of Queen Mary, and
assured all friendship to the Regent when he should crave her aid. The effect
was soon published in Scotland, to the fear, and lessening of Mary's party, and
they not able to Master his Power, took the bold way of base treachery, be one
James Hamilton (whose life Murray had saved) and he undertakes to kill him. His
opportunity he takes at Lithgow in secret, where he placed himself in a House
as the Regent passed by, shot him with an Harquebuss out at a Window, the
bullet passed through his Body, and killed the Horse under George Dowglass 21.
January 1569. Murray the Regent slain.
He dyed that night. Hamilton had his horse ready, and escaped beyond Seas,
where he dyed not long after.

Murray was base Son to King James the fifth, and took up Religion for the gain
of the Spoil of Papists. He was a Man full of Ambition, injurious, and
ungrateful to the Queen, and likely not to have spared her Son, when time had
wrought him power to effect it.

He was much assisted in his Regency by Mortons perpetual concurrency, and may
be coupled as Parmenio and Alexander; Nihil Murray absque Morton, Multa Morton
absque Murray.

It comes to be the question, whether for Interest or Friendship Morton was so
fixed; certainly Murray aimed at all, the Queen in durance, and his labor so to
continue her, or rather to have her in his Custody, and so to have ordered her
and her Son, for his own purpose.

To balance him, the Queens faction were, Hamiltons, Arguile, Athole, Huntley,
and almost all the petty Princes (as the Scots call themselves) Earls of
Crawfoord, Rothess, Eglinton, Cassiles, the Lords Harris, Maxwells, Iohnston,
Seaton, Boyd, Gray, Mettallan the Secretary and Politicquer, and Grange the
active Captain of the Castle of Edinburgh, and most of the strong Castles and
Forts; the French did assist them, and Spain favored them, and so did all
Catholics. In England the faction of Norfolk, and Papists, and all
Malcontents, or Treacheries took up Queen Mary's cause to mutiny. She had her
Rents in France duly paid, and her Jewels, and much underhand support to
countenance her Am^assadours abroad, and private Emissaries, and a working
brain for her own ends. All the English banished Lords, Dacres, Westmerland,
and all the Popish at home.

The other party, which we call the Kings (but indeed they were of all sides
partial to their own Iuterests, Pride and Ambition, and took up factions
accordingly) were Morton, Mar, Lenox, Glencarn, Lindsey, and Glams, Simple,
Methvain, Ruthen; no Castles but Sterlin and Tantallon, and the Commons, and
from England Queen Elizabeth knew well how to feed them on all sides with a bit
and a bob; for in this time she had sent three several Armies against the
Borderers under that color, which most horridly burnt all in their way, with
incredible mischief to that miserable Nation.

The Murder of Murray was looked upon as more public than to be acted by one,
and a Resolution of his Friends to question it by force or Justice. In the mean
time the Estates appoint a day, and this put off was counseled by Metallan,
who was got out of Prison in this hurrey of affairs, and suspected the Plotter
of Murrays death.

The Lords meet and stand upon their guard; but agree in nothing for the common
safety; the Queens Party elect three Lieutenants, Arran, Arguile, and Huntley,
and appoint a Parliament in August after.

In this while Queen Elizabeth sends Sir William Drury with three hundred
Horse, and a thousand foot into Scotland, to pursue her Rebels as was
pretended, but sided with Morton, and did some mischief to the Queens Faction,
and so returned Home.

The 13. of I^ly in a Convention at Sterlin, Lenox the Kings Grandfather is
chosen Regent, Lenox chosen Regent, be^t^^s himself.
and Hamilton refused, Queen Elizabeth, declining her direction in that
Election, but well pleased, since she had his wife in her hands. He marches
with Forces of 5000. men to Linlithgow, and prevents the Lords Meeting of their
Parliament in Augnst after, and so with increase of men makes up eight
thousand, Ranges the Country, and spoils his Adversaries, with Marshal law
hangs them up by Scores, and returns to Sterlin.

The King of Spain, Anno 1570.
not with much affection to the Cause, but for his own interest, and malice to
Queen Elizabeth, secretly sends money and ammunition to Huntley in the North.
The Duke of Castle-herault and Arguile send Seaton to Duke D' Alva in Flanders
for aid, and to restore the Captive Queen; He promised fair; but did nothing,
having much to do for his Master against Holland.

Nay the Pope fell to work with his Bulls, excommunicates Queen Elizabeth, and
absolves her Subjects, and some fears of a Rebellion in Norfolk, to deliver the
Duke, exceedingly beloved and pit^yed. And therefore upon his humble petition
and penitency, abjuring the Marriage, was released the Tower, and restrained
only to his own House, but with a Keeper, Sir Henry Nevel, whether in favor,
or to beget in him more Guilt; for Henry the Eight's Statute of Treason to mary
the Blood Royal without leave, was repealed by Queen Elizabeth, and his
Misdemeanors were not yet come up to Felony.

But she, in much trouble, and fear of Foreign Forces, and Domestique
Insurrections, daily put in practice in Darby-shire, Sent Caecil and Mildmay
with 16. Articles to Queen Mary at Chatsworth in Darby-shire, not unreasonable,
unless those concerning the Scots interest with France, of ancient League and
Security; which therefore she wittily argued, as not in her power without their
consent. For her Dowry was from thence; the Scots Guard of Gens D' arms in
France of one hundred Horse, and 124. Archers; the interest of some Clergy in
pension; and immunities from their Scots Merchants and Students in France; All
which (except the English would recompense) she could not remove their Amity;
and some Castles also required, in Scotland, which she could not render, and so
these Overtures were quite declined.

The Scots Incendiaries at home, fearing that Queen Elizabeth's good
Inclination, or other Foreign assistance, should release their imprisoned Queen,
and so revenge would follow; Morton, with others from Scotland, are sent to
prevent it, and present a tedious insolent memorial, the gall of the pen came
from Knox and his Kirkmen, with authorities of ipse dixit Calvin, too hateful
for president to others, in justification of themselves, and against Royalty,
which the Queen read and disdained as a Libel. Yet she ordered Commissioners to
treat with Queen Mary's Commissioners and them, concerning her Release, but
they excused themselves by a frivolous restraint of their Authority therein.
But certainly, They that came empowered to deprive, had powers to restore; And
indeed what needed Authority from others at home, when wicked facts had made
all equals. Facinus quos inquinat aequat; and so all return home.

Herein, nothing to the poor captivated Queens Release; her Friends in Scotland
worsted in all their actions of Arms or Treaties; strong places surprised; and
many executed for being but suspected of her Party; Archbishop Hamilton
(Brother to the Duke Castle-herault) hanged as privy to the late Kings Murder,
without any Arraignment or Trial; and she here deprived of all her Friends and
Domestiques but ten persons.

She then bethinks her self of the last remedy; sends secretly to the Duke of
Norfolk, renues her affection, and conjures his Assistance; with other Letters
to the Pope and King of Spain, by Higford the Dukes Secretary, a fiery Fellow
(even such another Creature as might be a President afterward unto Cuff
Secretary to his unfortunate Master the Earl of Essex,) who, besides his
Errand, insinuates to the Duke, fair hopes of Confederacy and assistance from
all the Catholic Princes, and the Pope also. And with this Plot of
impossibilities (not without suspicion of Treachery to his Master, for before
these letters were burnt, he secretly stole the Minutes of all their private
missions, and lodged them purposely where they soon came to light) The poor
Duke (easy enough to be cosened, but not into the villainy of Treason) detested
and disliked his Motions. And yet afterward, but for meddling with money in
behalf of that Queen, to be sent to her Friends, (which was misconstrued
perhaps in the worst sense) for Support of Enemies against Queen Elizabeth, he
fell into this mischief and Treason, which Higford confessed, and discovered
all the former Matters to boot.

The Duke not dreaming what was acknowledged, denied all at his Examination,
and so was again committed to the Tower, and presently after him, the Earls
Arundel and Southampton, the Lords Lumley and Cobham, with others his Friends,
but these escaped with life, and in hope of pardon, told all they knew, and more
than truth. And thus was he betrayed, not knowing whom to trust, where he
lodged till he lost his head, the next year after.

Bishop Ross Queen Mary's Lieger Ambassador of long time ago, Bishop Ross
Ambassador examined.
and so now here, A witty and well-experienced Man he was in his Craft, and up
to the ears in all Designs and Plots for her Relief and Advantage, through his
Letters intercepted, and all their confessions produced, was sent for and
examined; the most guilty Crimes of them all, either the Contriver, or deeply
Acce^^ary; some he confessed; those which concerned others, he constantly
concealed, and cunningly answered unto all. There being sufficient evidence to
make him guilty, he stood upon his Privilege, which he wittily defended; and
(...) yet were qualified from any punishment.

The Tribunes of the People in Rome, were free from question in their Annual
Office.

Particular Mischief, submits to the convenience of the Public.

Leges de Jure Gentium inductum est ut eorum Corpora salva sint, propter
necessitatem Legationis, ac^ne confundant jura comercii inter Principes.

Let us come to latter Customs of our own kind.

Henry 2. Restrained the Popes Legate, until he swore not to act in prejudicium
Regis vel Regni.

Henry the third did so likewise to another of the Popes Legates.

Another fled of himself, timens pelli sui.

Edw. 1. Complained to the Pope, and had satisfaction, ere his Legate was
released.

Henry 8. Restrained the Ambassador of Charles 5. one Lewis de Prat, for but
falsely traducing Cardinal Wolsey to his Master.

Charles the ninth of France did so to Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, for
Counselling the Prince of Conde, against the King.

In Spain, was Doctor Man, Ambassador from England, imprisoned for using his
own Religion, and yet Gusman de Sylva, at that instant here in England had Mass
with freedom. But then the Inquisition mastered that State 1567.

We restrained Don Guerman de Aspes in London for Libelling this State to the
Duke D'Alva, 1568.

The French Ambassador Alpin, and Maluset were so used also.

The Venetian Ambassador at Madrid protected an Offender that came into his
House (the usual Sanctuary) who by force was taken out from thence, and that
State justified that Action, condemning the Ambassadors Servants that opposed;
Some to death, and some to the Galleys, but were only all banished. The King of
Spain sends the whole Process to Venice, and by His Ambassador Lieger there,
one Mendoza* declares publicly to all the World, That in case his Minis^ers
should so offend, He remits them to punishment where they resi^e.

And another Mendoza for abusing our Ministers of Sta^e here, was first
restrained, and after banished, 1586.

See Another hereafter in this Kings Reign, the Marquess Inojosa, for
scand^lizing the Prince, and Duke of Buckingham, 1624.

And our Bookmen say, that a Foreign King, though admitted here by safe Conduct
(for without License he cannot come) may be impleaded for Debt or Trespass, and
condemned for Treason; for i^ is a general Law of Nations* That in what place
an offense is committed, according to the Law of that place, they shall be
judged, without regard of any Privilege. For a King out of his proper Kingdom
has (...) merum Imperium, but only retains Honoris Titulos and Dignitatis; and
per omnia distringitur etiam quoad personam.

And the same assuredly is of their Ambassadors, N^ occasio daretur
delinquendi: He has protection of His person; Like as a Sanctuary will save a
Man's life from Manslaughter, but not when Manslaughter is committed within the
Sanctuary, for then he does wilfully wave the benefit. Indeed their Persons
(as their Masters) are sacred from violation of private men, but not from
punishment of offenses against the public State.

See Cook 7. part. etc.

Here are Presidents; but it has been more nicely disputed, let others
conclude.

This year gave end of days to that ancient Noble Lord William Pawlet, Pawlet
Lord Treasurer, his childrens children 103.
Marquess of Winchester, and Lord Treasurer of England twenty years, having
lived 97. years, whilst he saw the Children of his Childrens Children, to the
number of one hundred and three persons.

^

^

(...) bishop in spite of Adamson a Minister, preaching against that Order,
which he divided in three sorts, 1. The Lords Bishop (to wit Christ) and such
was every Pastor. 2. My Lord Bishop, such who sit and vote in Parliament,
exercising Jurisdiction over his Brethren. 3. The third sort was my Lords
Bishop, one whom some Lord in Co^^^substitutes hi^ Receiver, without means or
Power Episcopal, whom he called a Tulchan Bishop, because the Tulchan which is
a Calves skin stuffed with straw, is set up to make the Cow give down her Milk*
Mr. Knox (he preached more and pronounced Anathema dant^, anathema accipienti.

Whilst the Estates were busy at Parliament, Parliament surprised.
far off from Edinburgh, and thereby secure, an attempt was made upon them,
There was one George Bell in Edinburgh, Ensign to a Foot Company, born in
Sterlin, well acquainted with each Corner there, and each Lords Lodgings,
possibly to be surprised in their careless watch; He marches from Edinburgh
with two hundred Horse, and three hundred foot, Earl Huntley, and others, their
Leaders thither, and undiscovered, till they had planted the Market place, and
set Guards in the Lanes, entered the Lords Lodgings, and surprise them
Prisoners, the Regent, Glencarn, and others. Morton only defends himself with
his Servants, and the Enemy in have, set the House on fire, some of his Men
slain he yielded to Balclough, who had married his Niece Margaret Douglas. The
Soldiers, careless, fall to plunder the Houses, whilst Mar and his men in the
Castle, force the Market place, but in vain. Then he sends sixteen pieces of
Brass, called Founds to his own new House a building, and so not reguarded for
plundering, got up to the upper Rooms, and shot out at the Windows into the
very street, when the Enemy was thickest; who thus amazed, fled without order,
and Mar pursues them, with such other, that crept out of their Hidings, and
make a sufficient number to be again Masters of their own, both Prisoners and
Spoil, Morton and Glencarn, seizing their Keepers* the Regent was taken by
David Spency, who to save him at (...) from the Soldier, Lenox (...) R^gent
slain. S^pt. 6 1571.
lost his own life, and His also. So both sides were vanguished, and both
victorious in a few hours, Of such advantage is diligence and expedition, and
mischievous is negligenc^ and security. Multum in utramque partem fortuna
potest, as Caesar says.

The Kings Grandfather Lenox thus dead, and presently buried, Man elected
Reg^n, Sep^
there were three listed for Election, Arguile, Mar and Morton, the first but
lately reconciled to the Kings part, the last was best beloved, but Mar had the
charge of the Kings person, and so carried the vote to be Regent, Sept. 1571.
Much he could not do in his small time of Government, he convend the Country,
and sat down against Edinburgh, but wanting Artillery, returns to Li^th, parts
the Kingdom ^^to quarters, and sends for their Divisions by turns; Anno 1572.
Those in Edinburgh issue o^t, and set fire on Dalkieth with Spoil and Pillage,
return, but were so close beset, that wanting victual, they p^ocure the
Ambassadors from France and England to mediate the reconcileme^t.

And for a Prea^ble to future peace, the Ambass^^ours obtain a Truce in July,
beginning the first of August 1572. until January following. The Conditions
were, that Edinburgh should be free, for all the Kings Subjects; which was to
say, that the Enemy, could keep it no longer. And before the end of this Truce,
Mar takes leave of this life, in a desperate Feavour at Sterlin, October 1572.
and without dispute Morton was elected to succeed him.

And now let us to return to England, where in November 1572. appeared a
blazing star, always portending ill fate to great persons, It was placed
Northwards in the Constellation of Cassiopeia, making a Geometrical figure
(with three chief fixed Stars) lozing-wise, called Rombus. It appeared bigger
than Jupiter, and less than Venus. It never changed place, but carried about by
motion of the Heavens, as other fixed Stars, and so continued six months. The
Sphere far above the Moon, where no other Comet was ever seen, or indeed
Natural can appear, so strange to Astronomers, as since the Creation was never
the like, and had only reference to Caelestial, or rather super-C^lestial
consideration.

And therefore forthwith followed in January that Thomas Howard Duke of
Norfolk, Duke of N^rfolk arraig^^d
was arraigned in Westminster Hall, before Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, High
Steward, and 25. Earls and Barons. His Commission being read, Garter King of
Arms delivers to him the White Rod, which he receives and delivers to a
Sergeant at Arms, standing by, and holds it up all the time. The Duke was
brought in between two Knights, and the Ax held besides him, by the
Executioner, with the edge from the Duke (but after sentence it was immediately
turned to him.) His Trial lasted till night; and all the matters before
remembered were urged against him, together with his own Letters, as also those
of the Queen of Scots and Bishop Rosses, besides evidence by Witnesses, whereof
he was condemned, as in Case of High Treason, and after 4 months delay, he was
executed upon the Tower Hill, where he acknowledged and confessed all.

Abo^t ten days after, Commissioners expostul^te criminally with the Q. of
Scot^.
Commissioners were sent to the Q. of Scots, to expostulate criminally with her.

1. For usurping the Title and Arms of England, and had not released them, as
was agreed in the Treaty of Edinburgh. 2. For the practice of Marriage with the
Duke of Norfolk. 3. As also all the beforementioned Contrivements, particularly
urged.
To all she wisely answered, and to the most of them N^gative.

A League being concluded, between England (...) France, the Ambassador moved
for favor to the Queen, who was answered, that she deserved none; for that she
had secret confederacy with the King of Spain, by the Lord Sea^on, which being
discovered and true, the French were silent.

The Estates of Scotland, took some time to present their Desires to Queen
Elizabeth, how fit Morton was for the Regency; which ^he took well, though she
knew they intended the power upon him, for so she had the honor, to say, She
made him* and with who^^, in truth, she always kept the most narrow
correspondency, trusting to his Judgment and diligence, to do much for the
King, with whom he always sided.

The King was committed to the custody of Alexander Erskin (for Erskin the then
Earl of Mar was under age, whose peculiar right it was to challenge that trust)
and Buchanan designed his Tutor, a man of some fame by the Scale of learning,
whom Time and Ambition wrought afterward a dangerous Incendiary to the King
and State.

From this Parliament now sitting, were the Papists utterly excluded, and laws
for advance of Religion enacted, to the wonder of all, how soon the Papists
(frighted into fears of loosing their Estates) very forwardly subscribed to the
Reformed, which so heightened the Kirk into swelling Pride against Bishops
also, that their violence afterward could never be brought to Moderation.
Though the Protector conceaved the Prelatical function, to be no less necessary
in State, then warrantable in Reformation. And so he regulated them (as the
Bishops of England) Votes in Parliament, but abridged their Authority over
others. And thus stood the power of Synods, interposing the moderate Prelates,
who yielded much in Peace to the public Ministry, and belike, conceiving that
time and experience might mollify them to a more convenient Constitution.

The faction for Papists was of the French and Queen of Scot, whose countenance
were the Hamiltons, Arguile, Huntley, and Hume, ancient Barons, Grudging at the
Viceroy's Government, sought to undermine his Establishment; and he at home,
by pleasing the people gained the City and Kirkmen.

For now was Knox become the Temple incendiary imitating the Vandalls
devastatious, ruinates the Monuments of Ancestors Piety, Church-bells and Bed
coverings escape not him nor any other such like sacrilegious ravings; himself
accknowledged that Mary had and did then blame him for his too great rigor and
severity, that in his heart he never hated the persons against whom ^e thundered
Gods Judgments, hating their Sins, and forbore none of what ever condition;
doing it in Gods fear thus much he said for him self, and being the words of a
dying man, I say them over for Christian Charity, and Honor to his parts;
whose Character needs no more than the former History faithfully set down,
wherein it appears, a Beacon he had been, apted to fire the Kingdom. but his
blaze was this year extinguished and he died of good age 67. years; whether his
History of the Church were his own, is suspected of some, his name supposed to
gain credit to the work which in many parts seems ridiculous. Morton in some
eminency and luster, fell into an obloquie of an infamous Act, upon the person
of Thomas Percey Earl of Northumberland. whose desperate case (together with
Westmerland forced them from home (as you have heard) to seek for succor in
Scotland, Morton basely ^ells the E. of Northum.
after some time, Westmerland got into Flanders* but Northumberland wandered in
the woods of Hatles for habitation, and was (heretofore) by his Comrades
betrayed to Morton, and delivered up by him to the late Regent Murray; whose
Authority preserved him by the Law of Nations, from Queen Elizabeth's fury, but
now Morton powerful by preferment and plentiful in Estate whom honor, had
made so, and some meritt, valuable* yet I know not with what error of honesty
basely sold him for a piece of Money to Hunsdon, Governor of Berwick and so
became headless by the fatal Ax at York. The fruit of this ungratious Act,
unto execution
fell upon the Protector himself in the Ultimum of his life, by the like fall
of the Ax, that often cures great men of these wicked maladies 1581

The Kingdom of Scotland, Scotland in faction of the King and Qu.
heretofore in several fewds now was divided into two unnatural factions of
Son and Mother, the King and captivate Queen, in which dissension the Nobility
side into severals. England and France interpose accord, but with sinister
respects, for the French Ambassador had his Item, and meant nothing less.
Queen Elizabeth to countermine him, sent Killegrew to join with the King and
Religion; yet a Treaty was persuaded. In the interim, Kirkaldy Lord of Grange,
and Governor of Edinburgh Castle, Edinburgh besi^ged.
being on a high Rock, inaccessable, fortified by a Fe^ and Lake on one side,
and a Moss, which surrounds it; and to his faction (being the chief Baron) the
French, gave hope of assistance; To whom he sends over his Brother James
Kircaldy for men and money, with which returning, he lands at the Castle
Blackness, the Governor thereof Andrew Stuart, though before his Confident was
of late bribed to seize him into fetters, whilst he carried the news, and
1000. French Crowns of Kirkaldies to the Regent.

In his absence on this treacherous errand, Kircaldy corrupts his Keepers* and
they the Soldiers, and so of a Prisoner he has the Keys and custody of the
Castle. Anno 1573.
In two days returned Stuart, and no sooner entered, but is secured into
Irons; which he studies to revenge, and conceived, that the best way might be
the same, and so the less suspected, to catch his Adversary in the same Gyn,
which so lately caught him. With feigned tears, and a cunning tale, he melts
the hardened Gaolers into compassion, and they the Guard, with helps of some
bribings, some Crowns secretly sowed up in his quilted Wastco^e. And, as if
better than they could design it, Kircaldy would needs accompany his Wife in a
visit forth of the Castle, when as hastily he was shut out, and the late
Governor set at liberty commands all again.

During which time the Treaty came on, Regent relieved out of England,
but ended without effect, and Grange begins his fury on the City, as fuel to
his fire. Either part implore assistance. The Protector, from England, and soon
was sent to him by Land and Sea, nine Canons, six demi-Canons, six Sakers, 9.
Culverins, with all necessaries, and 1500. men under Command of the Marshal of
Berwick, Sir William Drury, who joined with 500. hired Scots, and so furiously
assaulted the Castle, that from the twenty fifth of April, in thirty three
days it was rendered to the Mercy of the Queen of England, who referred it
wholly to the Regent, and the Lord Grange, and wins the Castl^.
and his Brother Kirkaldy executed by the Hangman Metallan had poisoned himself
some days before, to avoid the Regents severity, which he deserved.

He was a man adorned with all natural parts, wise and prudent, indefatigably
busy, but Fortune (the Mistress of humane Counsels) delighted to make him,
like her self, inconstant. Hume, Petarrow, and Melvin kept in prison, and so
was the renowned Countess of Arguile, who was the Daughter of an Harlot.
Liddington was found there also, and sent away Prisoner to Lies; who, because
he had been a notable Actor all his life, and being a penman, not by Law of
Arms to die by the Sword, we may guess how he came to his end, by poison, the
fate of cunning politiques, who if they escape the Ax or Halter, are too wife to
be le^t long-lived for worser effects.

This Success set Morton aflote, which he husbands so ill, as made him (though
he governed all) submit to base lusts, Pride and Covetousness; to supply which
he abused his Trust, to the prejudice of the People, in each particular. His
exactions were ingeniously observed by (...) Fool Bovy, that often rubbed his
Masters Shins with his Giers, some importunate Beggars craved alms of the
Regent, the Fool bid him hang them, and why so cruel, said he? Because of your
custom and cunning to make an hundred rich men beggars when you please.

He coined for the King some pieces of Gold, His Coin.
with the Kings picture, and circumscribed, In utramque paratus.

And contraversed the Royal Arms of Scotland, with this inscription,

Parcere subjectis, and debellare superbos.

The silver pieces bore two swords, with Trajans Motto,

Pro me, si merior, si non in me.

He was the first Coiner of the Copper in that Kingdom, called Hard-heads, and
after abased them from 3 half pence to a penny, as also the black piece, and
abased them also* which never till then were corrupted. And by their neighbor
the Netherlands coined also, and exchanged for good Sterling, which in after
times made the Dutch cunning in that trade of cosening all Kingdoms; and thus
having reduced the Kings Coffers to a small purse, he sets upon the Clergy.

In the former Story of the Kirk in Queen Mary's time, Cofins the Kirk.
all the Revenues being then in the Papists, she settled a part of the third,
with which she was to relieve the Ministers, as a Donative; and indeed the
disorderly Collection (before mentioned) was then complained of by those
parties, and therefore now by remonstrance, Morton (siding with them) orders a
Supplement to inculpable (or well-affected) Ministers annually, and so takes
into the Kings Treasury all the Thirds, to which the Kirk subscribe
irrevocable, and thereby he commits the cure of 3. or 4. Parishes to one, and
so out of the Relic of the third, there must needs arise much gain.

The Church therefore in time, open their own eyes, to see this fraud, and
complain to the Council, but receiving delays, their implacable hatred to
Morton, increases with their suffering; and in this nick of time (Knox being
dead) returns Andrew Melvin, Melvin a Geneve Discipl^narian,
a Man of the Kirks own making, for being drencht in the Genevian discipline,
he reforms this Church according to a hairs breadth, and subjects them all to
his vehement spleen, against the very Office of Episcopacy; and thus broached,
it drowned withal both Laics and Churchmen, out of the easy apprehension of
both their advantages, and the Dispute was preached by their State-meddling
Sermons, which begat undominable Presbyterian licentious Tumults ever after.

The Archbishops of Saint Andrews and Glasgow oppose Melvins Discipline in
most acurate Sermons and Declarations. his Rantings.


The difference grew high and dangerous, unless to the Regent, whose aim was to
fish in troubled Waters, not caring for the future, gave fuel to the Zelots
flame, which neither command nor Counsel could ever after extinguish.

I may not omit to Memory the horrid Massacre throughout all France, upon the
persons of the reformed Religion, called by the Adversaries, Hugonites, from
one Hugo (as they would have them) the History is so horrid, and the more
uncertain in particulars, because the Papists strain their pens to piece it
with some Excuses. But the truth was written then by One Ernest Varamund of
Freezland, in the time of Charles the ninth King of France, 1573.

In Anno 1561. an Assembly of the Estates in the Kings house at Saint Germans
in Lay near Paris in France, in the time of Charles the ninth, concluded terms
of Pacification in Religion, among other Articles, It should not be prejudicial
to any Man to profess the Reformed Religion, in the Subur^s of Towns only.

Francis Duke of Guise (a Stranger, of the House of Lorain) was not present,
and within few days after in Champanie slew men, women and children in Vassey
200. persons; Among those of the Religion was Lewis of Bourbon of the blood,
Prince of Conde, Gaspar de Caligni, Admiral of France, and Francis Andelot his
Brother, Captain of the Fantarie, and others, Noblemen and Gentlemen.

Katherine de Medices (Pope Clements Brothers Daughter, and Mother of King
Charles) born in Florence, a City of Italy, had the Government of the Realm in
the Kings Minority; for though by the Law of France, neither Inheritance, nor
Government, are admitted to Women; yet by negligence of Anthony King of Navar,
She had the power. The Prince of Conde, in fear of the Guises, garrisoned some
Towns, stood upon his Guard, and so began their Civil Wars there, and published
his Reasons, For Defense of the Kings Edict for Religion. Several Battails, and
losses on both sides, and the Duke slain, peace was made, and liberty of
Religion in certain places, which continued for five years. The Queen, to
strengthen her Party, cunningly brought in six thousand Switzers, and pretended
them, for defense, quiet and peace to all; yet suddenly garrisoned such Towns
as the Religion had willingly surrendered, saving only Rochel, who stood upon
their former Conditions two hundred years past, Not to be forced to any
Garrisons. Upon some rumors and fears, the Prince of Conde, and the now
Admiral ^ly thither, the cause of the third Civil War.

The young King, by persuasion of Charles Cardinal of Lorain, the late Duke of
Guises Brother, published Edicts, That no man profess other than the Romish
Religion. But both parties wearied out with this last Miserable Distraction,
the King politiquely pretends to drown all Discontents by a Reconciliation, and
to join both forces against their Common Enemy the Spaniard, who in truth had
barbarously murdered the French Plantation in Florida in the West Indies, and
Marquisdome of Final. And to this Contract engaged the Prince of Orange in the
low Countries, by means of his Brother Lodowick, now in the Admirals Camp at
the very time when the Emperor had offered to reconcile Orange to the
Spaniard. And by these pretenses this third War was ended, with Toleration of
Religion as before, with unanimous Congratulation by Embassyes from the three
Electors of Germany (Princes reformed) and sworn to by the King sacredly to
observe. Which so encouraged the Orange party, as to bring all their Sea prizes
into Rochel, and this Contract drew in Eliz. Queen of England; and all these
overtures committed by the King to the Admirals prosecution.

Notwithstanding these public Conditions therein, the Pope sent Cardinal
Alexandrine from Rome, with Instructions to persuade the French King to enter
societ^ with the League of Trent, to make war upon the Heretics; and had
satisfactory answer from the King and Queen Mother; and on the Contrary all
possible tokens of favor to the Admiral and his Accomplices, in restoring their
losses, with a sum of one ^undred thousand pound Sterling, out of his Treasure,
not leaving the least action undon to amuse the Admiral into firm assurance of
the Kings faithful intentions. And to confirm belief, purposed to affiance his
Sister Margaret to Prince Henry, Son to the Queen of Navar, who had defended
the Cause of the Religion in the late Wars, and this to be celebrated according
to the Reformed Religion. The League between Charles the King, and the Prince of
Orange, and Articles concluded. The Marriage appointed in Paris, and the Queen
of Navar (of the Religion) repaired thither for the Solemnity. The Admiral also
sent for by the King to go before to Paris, promising himself to follow; and
the Spire-Cross-Steeple, called Gastignes Cross erected in the rage of the
Civil War, in Triumph and reproach of the Religion (a Monument of Civil
Dissension) was by the Admirals request overthrown.

Great Assistance of Men and Ammunition sent to the Army of the Prince of
Orange into Germany; And order to the Treasurer, to deliver moneys to the
Admiral for the Public Service, without account.

In this Interim, the Queen of Navar was impoisoned at Paris by a pair of
perfumed Gloves, by one Renat, a cunning Apothecary, and so the Kingdom
descended to Prince Henry her Son, who was to be affianced to the Kings Sister,
and the Marriage solemnized with respect to eithers Religion. And five days
after the Admiral solicited the Council in behalf of the Religion, and
returning home with diverse Noblemen, he was shot by a Harquehuss out of a
Window, through both his Arms, by one not certainly named, but the Abetters
were Guisets.

The King visits the Admiral in some danger of Death, from whom he receives
advice and Counsel in his private affairs, and with great affection and thanks,
the King commanded a Guard for security of the Admirals person, by Cossin
Captain of the Kings Guard an utter Enemy to the Admiral, and all his Friends
advised to draw into the Admirals quarters to be near to him.

Thus all things prepared for the purpose of a Massacre, the Queen Mother
summons all the Confederates, with advice, to spare the King of Navars life,
and the Prince of Conde, and the Execution to be the next night early, by Order
of the Duke of Guise, who summoned the Diziners, and told them the Kings design
to destroy all the Rebels of the late Wars, at the sound of the Tocksein or
Bell, and the Mark of difference, a while Cross in their hats, and a
handkercher about the arm. The Duke of Guise, with the Kings Guard, and the
Bastard Son of King Henry, assisted by Cossins, beset the Admirals house, who
nothing moved in respect of the Kings several sacred Oaths to peace, the league
with the Queen of England, Articles of Treaty with Orange, Faith to the Princes
of Germany, some Towns taken in the Low Countries by the Kings Command, the
Marriage of the Kings Sister, solemnized but six days before, Engagement of
Foreign States, shame and dishonor to the Law of Nations; all was by him argued
as security.

Cossin with others, enters the house, and slew all in his way; the Admiral
commanded his Servants about him to fly, and shift for themselves, being ready
himself to die for the Church. ^he Villains enter his Chamber, Benuese a German,
thrust the Admiral into the Body, and Attin a Picard shot him into the Heart,
with a Pistol, and threw his body out of the Window, down into the Court, where
the Duke de Guise, and the Bastard, and other stayed to view it, and so
marching out, cried, that this was the Kings pleasure, for that the
Conspirators had resolved to kill the King.

The Admirals head was sent to Rome, his body dragged through the Streets, and
after hanged up on the City Gallows with a rope by the feet, and so all that
day murdering and killing all of the Religion, Men, Women and Children.

The King of Navar, and Prince of Conde, in the Louvre were sent for to the
Kings presence (their Servants being all slain) and so preserved; all the
Noblemen and Gentlemen their friends slain, and the next day a fresh murdering
ranged through all the Cities, and all the Offices and Places of the dead
presented to the Murderers, and by this Example Post news commanded all the
other Places of Reformation to be so butchered throughout France, ^s in
Orleance, Angiers, Viaron, Troys, and Auxerre, etc.

The King fearing the Dishonor of this base Treachery, and perjury, posted
Letters to all his Governors of Provinces, and speedy Messengers to England,
Germany and Switzerland, of this great Commotion in France, raised by the Duke
of Guise, and his Accomplices, upon the Guard and person of the Admiral, and his
Friends, with the Death of many, and hazard therein of the Kings person, his
Mother and Brethren by the safety of his Castle the Louvre; this dissimulation
he was forced unto for the present; and yet within two days after, declared in
open Parliament, that the Admiral and his Confederates had conspired his
death, with his Mothers, Brethren, and King of Navar, which was prevented by
the others death. And this was published in print to this day; and from
thenceforth all public meetings of the Religion were forbidden.

Some Reluctancies there were of several persons that conclude this horrid
fact, surpassing the memory of all former ages; Others compare it with the
monstrous murders of King Mithridates, who with one Messenger and one Letter,
caused an hundred and fifty thousand Romans to be slain; some said it was like
the murders of Peter of Aragon upon eight thousand French in Sicily.

The difference was, their cruelty was executed on Strangers, this on the Kings
own Subjects and Countrymen.

These Discourses put the King to consider how to blanch this monstrous act
with some color of Justice. And therefore they framed a Body stuffed with
bottles of Hay, for the Admiralls, dragged again about the Stre^ts, his Arms
and Ensigns of Honor to be broken, his memory by a form of ^riting condemned,
his Castles and Houses razed, his children infamous, and his Trees and Woods to
be hewn down from the height of six foot.

One Cavaignes and Briquemaul, men of excellent merit (the last being seventy
years of age) were imprisoned and tormented for to subscribe, That they were of
counsel with the Admiral to kill the King and his kindred, which they endured
with horrid reluctance even of their Tormentors, with great constancy, and
therefore they had a form of Justice, and were executed with the Halter, and so
was the man of Straw the Admiralls Image, hanged with them for a ridiculous
example, first murdered, and then by a mute arraignment, sentenced and
executed.

Such as fled from slaughter, or were hidden in the woods, were by fair words
in a Proclamation promised mercy, but returning home were sure of the slaughter.

And so throughout the whole Realm of France, for thirty days together, were
so many thousands massacred, that besides the unmaried, there remained above an
hundred thousand wid^^s and children, well born, begging their bread.

When all was done, and wearied with slaughter, The Edicts came out, that the
former Treaties of Pacification should cease. And a form of abjuration for such
as were terrified by others sufferings to renounce the Religion, and none to be
suffered to profess other than the Romish faith.

Whilst these sparks of former feud lay raked up in embers by pacification at
home in Scotland, Bishop Ross in England, and but imprisoned in the Tower (as
you have heard) though a man full of plots and policies, Bishop Ross released
out of the Tower*
yet his privileges of Ambassador affording him protection for his life; It
being too much suspicious to send him under hand to his grave, and legally they
could not. He was therefore released, after 2 years imprisonment, and packt
away over seas, into France; in whose time of employment here, and banished.
as a faithful servant to his Queen, many Co-actors were put to death, others
detected and imprisoned, yet even with his parting, he left not unattempting;
and was for many years following, beyond seas, with all the Catholic Princes
in Christendom, a most pestilent disturber of Queen Elizabeth's quiet; for not
long after, he dealt with Henry 3. of France, to turn Morton out of his
Regencie, and to steal the young King thither, whose faction in Scotland might
weaken thereby; and as he grew in years (with the French Tutorage) his
affections might decay toward the English; the ancient league with the French
strengthened, and with England dissolved.

In this small time of cessation from War, The Borderers con^er,
the Scots without cause to implore England for any aid or relief. The
Governors of each Borders assign a meeting to compose differences for eithers
quiet, against the usual rapines of Robbers* where, disputes began, and
quarrels followed: the English were worsted, and taking the nearer way, and
quarrel.
fled from the fury into Scotland, and so for justice to Morton; whose censure
being much too partial, not only in not doing right, to punish his country
men, but dismisses the English, with much ado^, by Subscription, and Pledges.

This behavior of the Scots, Mor^ons wi^e submission.
soon incensed the Queen, who being presently upon the posture of a Bordering
War, Morton prudently lays blame on the Scots Commanders, beseechet^ her
Majesty not to raise a War with them, whose maintenance must be with much
blood, the common cause necessarily begging defense of peace, betwixt the two
Kingdoms, and if civil War should follow upon Scotland, it might introduce a
necessity in them, to call in the French, whom she in her Princely affection
and great wisdom, had but lately afforded them the means to ridd away. And
that before time should grow elder, his endeavors should be with such good
offices and service for her Majesty, as might countervail the inconveniences
already happened. And for questioning of the Governor, he remembered a
president under Henry 7. for expiation of Sir Robert Carrs death (then
Governor of the middle borders) which was then referred to a meeting in
Scotland to enquire. This gray-hair-instance incensed her the more, until the
Scots Governor Carmichell was sent to answer it in England, Anno 1574.
and then indeed, his Present of Hawks to the Courtiers, became a saying, He
gave them live Hauks for dead Herons; Two Brothers of that Name Herons killed
in the fray.

This petty disturbance, The Ministers styled Praecisians.
gave time and leisure for the Praecisians (now so styled) not to forget their
ministerial ragings, who evermore upon such occasions put in a spoke for
themselves, because their stipend was not redressed. And herein were so
presumptuous, as to utter their fancies, and to act what ere they thought best
for their advantage. But herein the Regent stopped them in their Career,
remembering them of the Treaty of Lies, which forbad all Innovation in
Religion, during the Kings Minority.

This year took away James Hamilton Earl of Arran, Duke Castle-herauld dies.
and Duke of Castle-herauld at Poictures a Province in France. He was
Grandchild to James 2. And after the death of James the 5. In the vigor of
youth, and Mary his daughter succeeding in the Crown, she had this Hamilton a
while for her Protector, and then declared her Heir apparent. His Character
A mild man and tractable he was, though her birth and quality, drew on
turbulent spirits, to bring him on the stage, and sent him into France with
her, where he was caressed for their party, and created Duke, and Captain of a
troop of Horse. Somewhat he meddled in state, after his return home, but soon
retired into privacie; for which the mad-headed Ministers and Buchanan blamed
him of sloth. and Issue.
From him, proceeds 4. branches, James Earl of Arran; John, Claud, and David,
three of them infected with the Mothers disease, became frantic, or rather
bewitched.

At this time was John Ormston, commonly called black Ormston, O^mston executed
for the Kings murder.
because of his Iron color, apprehended and had his trial, and executed for
being guilty of the late Kings Murder. Likely enough to have discovered more
particulars than he did confess, being Intimate with Bothwell, who communicated
the purpose to him, and showed him the subscriptions of the Earls of Argaile,
Huntly, Secretary Lethington, and Balfore, testifying their consents to that
horrid Act.

Nevertheless the Regent permitted Balfore to enjoy the benefit of the
Pacification, passing an Act thereof in counsel, to the regret of many: for
though it was doubted whether the subscription of Arguile and Huntly, were not
counterfeit, but of the other, the hate to their persons, made the sensure of
their guilt, easy of belief to all, but Arguile dying soon after, his office
of Chancellor was conferd on the Lord Glams.

Adam Heriot Minister of Aberdee^ dyed this year, Heriots death and Character^.
and of their Church is accounted worthy Record; he had been a Friar of the
order of St. Austin, living in the Abbey of St. Andrews, learned and eloquent
in the Pulpit, subtle also in school divinity. The Queen Mother, heretofore,
hearing him preach, was so affected to his wit, Anno 1575.
and judgment, and integrity, that in reasoning with some Lords upon the
Article of Real presence, she offered to be concluded by Heriots opinion; who
was required to preach thereupon, before her, and a numerous Auditory. But
there he flaggd so prevaricate, as most men were unsatis^ied, of which being
sharply censured by some, his worthy friends, he fell into sadness and regret
of soul, till he did openly recant, and renounce Popery, and forthwith joined
with the then congregation. And afterward in the ordering of distribution for
Ministers amongst the Burgs, he was elected for Aberdeen (the place then, of
the ablest Papists) the rather, therefore; to reclame them from their errors,
by practice of Piety, profound preaching, wherein he profited, to again of many
to the faith in 14 years labor: and dyed 60 years of age.

And now was Andrew Melvil, Inovation in Church* by Melvil*
a fiery zelot laboring for the absolute Presbyterial discipline of Geneva,
i^sinuating with John Dury minister of Edenburugh in their Assembly, to
question the lawfulness of the Episcopal function, and the Authority of
Chapiters in their election; but himself (cunningly pretended ignorance) but
since the question was so started he commended the speakers zeal, seconding the
purpose, with a tedious discourse of the flourishing estate of Geneva Church,
and the opinion of wise Mr. Calvin, and reverend Mr. Beza, and came to affirm.

That None ought to be Officers in the Church, against Episcopal ^unction.
whose Titles were not found in the (...). And though that of Bishops were in
Scripture, yet not to be taken in the same sense, that commonly was conceived;
Christ allowing no Superiority amongst Ministers. Himself only Lord of his
Church, and all the Servants in one degree, having like power. Concluding, Then
the Corruptions of Bishops were so great, that unless removed, Religion could
not be long preserved.

Hereupon diverse are selected to confer three to three, and concluded their
opinions to the Assembly.

1. That the Name Bishop was common to able Ministers of a flock, his chief
function to preach, to administer Sacraments, and exercise Ecclesiastical
Discipline with consent of his Elders. 2. That some one Minister might oversee
and visit such reasonable bounds besides his own flock. 3. And he to appoint
Preachers, with advice of the Provincial Ministers, and the consent of the
flock. 4. And to suspend Ministers from their Office, with consent of the
Ministers of the bounds.
It is strange that the Archbishop of Glasgow, and six other Bishops with
Super-intendents* and all interessed, were not called to the conference, though
present in the Assembly. Nor does it appear that they spoke at all therein, so
humble to hold their tongues in a case of their own, or rather referring it to
the Regents Wisdom, whose opinion had been ever to uphold Episcopacy.

The next Assembly altered the question, and formed it, Whether Bishops as they
were then in Scotland, had their function warranted by the Word of God? But the
Major part approved of those in the last Meeting.

The Regent finding them so to differ, sent them word, to settle upon somewhat*
and to abide therein. Of which they take advantage, and with much ado present a
form of Policy to the Regent; Acknowledging in their Preface, That they did not
account it complete, but to add or diminish as God shall reveal unto them; But
some Troubles in State prevent their further progress.

The Regent The Regent misgoverns.
flesht in the fury of rapine, having fleeced Commons and Clergy, and settled
the North and South Borders, cared not for the Gentry, and grieved the Peers;
His nearest friends, the Earl of Angus, and others, forewarned him of his
Slippery station; But Morton, settled in the very seat of the Scorne^, careless
of any complaints, made good his greatness by grace of Queen Elizabeth, whom he
conserved with all diligent observance. His aim was to ruin Hamiltons house,
hating them as his Hereditary Enemies, scared thereto by an old Wives Rhyme,
which bid him beware of Arrans Race (Hamiltons Family) whom he banished or
suppressed.

The two last years (as it seems) slipped away in show (I am sure in silence of
any disturbance, Q. of Sco^s designed to die.
for ought that Authors can tell, to much purpose) but it is like the more was
in secret hatching. For as the Queens Imprisonment grew to her impatient, so by
Q. Elizabeth it was heightened to some danger. As a Wolf by the Ear. To keep her
in durance, was her own disquiet, and to release her, dangerous to the State;
all their study was to counsel what to do with her, and with much difficulty it
was agreed upon to put her to Death.

There was one Antonio d' Peers, An^o^. d'Peres in Englan.
Secretary to Philip of Spain, escaped thence out of Prison, and over he comes
to England, as best able here to do his Master most injury. He was grown
intimate with the Earl of Essex, which being known to Caecil Lord Burleigh, he
advised, that Essex might deal with him, to fish out somewhat from his Masters
streams, which was done to the purpose, revealing all his designs for the
imprisoned Queen, and being rewarded here, had his Invitation home again, with
some hope of reconcilement and favor also, which fell out, not as he desired
but as he deserved, for he was at last hanged for his labor. In many of his
Letters to Essex, which since came to my hands, I find much of the m^tter, but
for want of the Key, the Ciphers put me to trouble, with some consideration,
What uneven policies there were, Anno 1576.
toward that poor imprisoned Queen.

Don Iuan Don John^ design bl^sted in the bud.
of Austria, Governor, for the King of Spain, over the Netherlands, proud and
ambitious; being Neighbourly acquainted with the Troubles of England and
Scotland (for to him all these discontented Fugitives repaired) was made
believe, that the Duke of Norfolk being gone, the Queen of Scots was most fit to
be offered to him, and easy enough to be effected, with the expulsion of Queen
Elizabeth, and assured hopes of both Kingdoms. To which purpose, he hastily
makes perpetual peace with the Netherlands, and labors his time and means to
infest England. But underhand to amuse Queen Elizabeth the more, gives her the
occasion to congratulate the Peace, by sending the Articles for her perusal;
intending secretly with all speed to surprise some Pieces and Ports in England,
and Scotland, with help of the Pope, who sent to the King of Spain in his
behalf; and the chief Fugitives of England and Scotland being with him, he in
an instant, had swallowed the Conceit and Marriage of a Queen, with two
Kingdoms to boot; but his wild ambition the sooner flatted, and he fooled
into neglect, and disdain.

And now dies that Princely Lady Margaret Douglas, old Countess Dowager of
Lenox, Ma^gari^e old Countess Lenox dies.
63 years of age; whom Queen Elizabeth kept in England at her elbow, whilst her
son Darly was married to the Scots Queen, and her husband had power there. She
was descended from Henry 7. by Margaret his eldest daughter, married to James 4.
who had James 5. And being a widow, married to a second husband, Her Royal
descent,
Archibald Douglas Earl of Angus; by whom she had Margaret Douglas of Harbotel
in Northumberland, who married Matthew Earl of Lenox, leaves France and comes
into England to Henry 8. And here invested with honor and land in Yorkshire.
and Issue.
From these issued Henry Stuart Lord Darly, who married Queen Mary, of whom came
King James 6.

So then, her descent was royal; in King Edwards time in much honor here, but
after in adverse fortune, she lived supervivor to eight of her children; thrice
imprisoned for affecting marriages with Thomas Howard, son to the Duke of
Norfolk; then for her sons match with Queen Mary; and the last was, for her
younger son Charles, with Elizabeth Candish daughter to the Countess of
Shrewsbury, and mother to the Lady Arabella. She was Nobly intombed at
Westminster, an elaborate Sepulture, and then left living King James the sixth,
and this Arabella, who was thus near to the Crowns; And therefore imprisoned
hereafter by King James for intermariage with Seymor the now Earl of Hartford,
but she died without issue, and so without (...) of future interest to these
Kingdoms. See anno 1616.

Amongst other of Mortons plots and processes, Anno 1577.
raising the Revenues of the Crown, one was, for recovery of some lands, which
was given by the Queen to Mary Levingston whilst she was her maid of honor,
Con^p^rators against the Regent
and now married to John Simple, who made his best defense in his suit; but
fearing the Regents rigor, had passionately avowed, That if he lost his land,
the other should lose his life. This, and other discourse, that he was
countenanced by Lord John Hamilton and his brother Lord Claud; instigating also
Adam Whiteford of Milton, Nephew to Simple, to kill the Regent in the street
with an Harquebus. Simple upon Torture confessed all, and more also, his
cowardice not affording him courage to hold out: Whiteford did better, his
constancy was not terrified with the wrack, and therefore, gave suspicion,
that the others confession was extorted, by the pain, of punishment, yet to
make out the matter, Simple was arraigned, condemned, and brought to the
Scaffold, but pardoned; the like had the other; and both of them, the favor of
the people, to blame the Regent for his rigor, whose main intention was
thereby, to invalue these Lords and their estates, to his griping gain.

One Allester Dow Macallan a notorious thief, was apprehended by Earl Athol,
Arguile and Athol at variance.
who was prohibited by the council, and charges directed against him, for
exhibition of the man. the fellow being set at liberty by Arguile, falls to his
old profession, and robbed Athol, who in revenge invades Arguile, and so the
country take uprore thereat, until an Herald discharges those convocations,
and cites them both before the Council, but were reconciled.

Arguile goes on and arms against Claudonald, seizes the Regents Messenger,
tears his Letters missive, and swears him and his Train not to return to tell
tales. This insolency, fires the Regent to revenge, and for the present did no
more, than proclaim him Rebel.

But these and other tumults showed an Eclipse of Ministerial Government, and
gave means to private men's discontents, to open a way of complaint against the
Regent. Alexander Arskin, Forerunner of the Regents fall.
attending on the King, takes advantage of Arguile and Athols reconcilement,
plots with them, to open their Causes to the King, which they must countenance,
and did, but so craftily, as that the one (Athols) counsel was called, upon the
others complaint. And advise, to summon the Lords (mostly enemies to the
Regent) to meet at Sterlin.

Mortons avarice and lust subjects him, from his strength and Power that ruled
all, to become weak in Authority over any; His enormities of several natures,
numberless, which brought him suddenly to sinck. Besides his fins, the
Hamiltons were his Enemies, made so by his own malice, upon that Noble Family;
as also upon the Earls Athol, Montross, and Arguile, whose kinsmen he
proclaimed Traitors, for not appearing at his Call.

Arguile invites these Lords and others to accompany him to the King at
Sterlin, Complaint^ against Morton,
with remonstrance of such grievances as the State groaned under; and were
seconded by fit Instruments, such as evermore reside at Court. He is sent for
by the King, and Council, but delays time to make Friends; their opinions
various, it was yet concluded as the safest way, to piece Friendship with
Arguile, who refused, unless he would also quit the Regency. To this he demurs,
and retires from his Enemies power.

And this gave good occasion to the boisterous Praecisians, which the Mini^^ry
increase
whose pursuit was after such prey, as might innovate Authority, which they
hated, because it was Regal, though Mortons interest had been ever to preserve
them; the Archbishops only being lately commanded not to obey the Synods
Decretalls, against which they complain in the Pulpit, and having there the
liberty of the tongue, for that time, they tell all to the people, and of more
than he could be guilty. The Earl of Angus was his Ally in blood, and the chief
of the Dowglasses, who with Carmichel a Commander of War, advise him to Arms;
But Morton rather submitted to a Parliament at Sterlin.

Thither he sends his Friends (but withdrew himself) and with them his Papers
and Notes expostulatory of his good Services, which were not liked, because not
Petitionary. And thus they seemed to signify, and first,

He craves leave of public Justice upon his Accusers. Regent offers to resign.
If otherwise that his Majesty thought fit to oversee their disobedience to
authority, then to be pleased to disburthen him of his Office, and not to
suffer his Royal Name and Authority to be despised in the Person of his
Servant; for as he had often times made offer to demit his Regency to his
Majesty, so now the more willing, if a Substantial course might be assured for
preservation of his Highness person, the ordering of his Majesty's Household,
and dispensing of the Revenues of the Crown. And herewith he recommended the
keeping of the peace contracted with England as a security to his Majesty's
Right and Title to Succession. And so recounting his former Services from the
Kings birth to this present. His assistance at the Kings Coronation. His and
his Friends hazard at Lanside field, the siege (...) Brichen. His legations
undertaken into England, the recovery of the Castle of Edinburgh, the
Pacification of the Realm, all on fire a^ his first entrance, the redeeming of
Jewels and Plate of the Crown, and restoring of the Royal Patrimony to some
reasonable condition. And in regard of all, he craved no more, than allowance
of his expense, and a discharge of his Intromissions by the Estates of
Parliament.

These not sufficient to prevail, and his friends having little Power, and his
bad Cause to plead, he was voted non-Regent.

And accordingly into the hands of Angus, Is deposed.
Claim, Ruthen, and Harris, he delivers the Crown, Scepter, and other
Regalities, which were presented by them in a great Convention of Lords, and
Angus invests them on the King, with the univocal acclamation of all. The King
12. years old is Crowned.
He having not yet attained to the years of youth, yet in this turbulent time,
took upon him the Scepter, which was celebrated at Edinburgh, and the affairs
of State rendered to the King now at twelve years old, but with assistance of
twelve Noblemen, three of them by turns always about him, and Morton of the
number, as to bring him to reason, not to cast him quite off to ruin; whose wit
and experience was useful to the State, which he soon employed to master them
all. A sactio^ Geneve Synod.


The deposing Mort on exalted the Presbyterian hopes, to erect the Geneve
Discipline, by Pastors, Deans, and Super-intendents, and now to bring it about,
they call a Synod, wherein all factions, to the prejudice of the King, were
more cherished than Divine Worship intended; for they decree, The
Ecclesiastical Regency to the Super-Intendents, and left the Bishops only to
one Church, and exempt from Jurisdiction* to relinguish Episcopacy, and to omit
Dispensation of Divine duties.

The King withstood this decree, and revokes the business to his own breast; and
therein the Bishop of St. Andrews was the greatest Stickler. The adverse party
had Andrew Melvin, Melvin.
a Man singular with them, but not with the learned; His tenants were To
vindicate equality in the Ministry, arrogantly endeavoring to suppress the
Churches ancient authority, and to erect to themselves, a Statue of honor,
from the ruins of the Bishops disgrace.

Sick, and ill disposed, was the estate of Episcopacy, the Praecisians
prevalent in number. The Nobles for Episcopacy, joined with the Kings
inclination, To take protection of the fainting Ecclesiastic Discipline into
his Care, commanding the other to infuse fidelity into the people, to abstain
from innovation, to reverence Bishops, and follow peace.

Mortons (...) gave him time and means to meditate Revenge, Morton plots
re^enge by the E^rl of Mar.
and (...) with the youthful inclination of the young E. of Mar, (...) quarrel
with his Uncle Erskin for assuming the chiefty of that family, and the
usurpation of the Kings Tut^lage. It took fire with the Gallant, who secretly
with his Train, possesses Sterlin Castle, his Uncle Erskin and the King, and
puts by Arguile, one of the three Assistants. The noise hereof brings the Lords
into Arms, and their care of the Peace of the Kingdom, assign Commissioners
herein, Anno 1578.
who decree all Erskins former interest upon Mar. The Queen of England sends
Randolph, Randolph Ambassador.
(whose often Legations had made him exquisite) to congratulate the King, whose
rare and various Ornaments of Wit and Learning, eminent in such an age, as no
Prince could ever parallel, assures the Queens great affection, and persuades
the Lords to peace, which was patcht up for the present.

But Morton grows insolent, abolishing the Triumvirate rule, and usurps all to
himself; of which Arguile, Athol, and Montross, remonstrate to the King, who
refers it to the next Parliament in July at Edinburgh, Parliament Royal,
where secretly some Lords covenant, whom Morton undermines by fraction, and
advises for the meeting at Sterlin, as more wholesome for the King and Nobles,
but indeed fitted for his faction of men of Arms, and so it was to be there, in
the Court of the Castle, and not, as usual, in the Common Hall; against which
the other Edinburgh Lords protested, as invalid, and would not meet. But the
Parliament sat, and the King this first time adorned with Majesterial
Ornaments, Robes and Scepter, told them, That it was not material where they
met, so his safety were included; that his Court entertained all, excluded
none; However this place should be no Prescript for posterity; that he intended
no innovation against his Predecessors Institutions; disagree,
that the opinions of a few, should not dictate to the whole, and so approves
the Act by Proclamation.

Montross, a Commissioner for the Lords remaining at Edinburgh, posts thither
with this news, they take Arms ten thousand men, and yet declare for the King.
Angus, Mar, and Morton, do the like at Sterlin, wh^re both sides incamp, but
fought not, at the earnest endeavor (...) the English Ambassador Sir John
Bows, and all disband. And to piece this Discord, and are made Friends.
the King proposes Moderators, Lindsey, Harris, Ogleby, Innerness, for Arguile;
and Rothess, Bucan, Ruthen and Boyd, for Morton; but not prevailing, Morton
retires to his Palace at Dalkieth; In whose absence, the Delegates accord, and
he, and Arguile, and Athol, meet and feast at Lies, which so pleased the King,
that he congratulates those whose endeavors had acted so much good, and they
again discuss, what can be commodious for his Princely Dignity, Magnificence,
and Profit.

And it began to be time so to do; the Kings wants the Council supply by over
value of Coin; Coin overvalued.
which the Citizens withstood, as over bitter for their digest; Experience
having taught this truth, That the value of Silver, alters the price of victual
and all vendables; the King, as the great Rent Master, or Landlord, bearing
the greatest Loss for the future, though not discernable for the present, to
his raw young Counselors; and this trick was put upon Morton, and worse
happened to his destruction.

The Earl Athole, Lord Chancellor, by the extremity of his disease, The
Chancellor impoisoned by Morton
yielded to nature, or rather a delaying, consuming poison forced him hence;
the suspicion fell sadly upon his Corrival Morton, and the revenge fell into
the Power of Arguile, who was chosen Chancellor in his Place. This occasion no
doubt, the very Devil put into Mortons head, to work himself mischief; for in
pure Conscience, he intimates to the King the story of his death, and so
instigates his anger, against the Hamiltons, remembering also, the slaughter of
his Grandfather Lenox, and of Murray, late Regents; and for these other crimes
(aforesaid 1573.) and so begins their persecution with fire and Sword, assisted
with Mar and Angus. The Hamiltons within their Castle, and other places
besieged, were forced to yield to the Mercy of the King, who executed the
Actors of the Paracide, and pardoned the rest. John, and Claud, the Sons of the
late Duke of Castle-herauld, in great distress what to do, adventured to fly
into England, whom the Queen vouchsafed harboring, and sent Master Erington,
to intercede with the King.

The next Parliament was in October at Edinburgh, Parliament, the Kings royal
appearance.
where the King shows himself to his People; his years advanced, with his
Princely understanding to extraordinary Fame, requiring his person more public
than at Sterling. Solemnities and Ceremonies of Princes being the formal
entertainments of reverence and respects. And so he rode in all possible State,
the first day of sitting.

A great novelty to many to find Majesty in Man, that had but seen the shadow,
for m^^y years in Queens or Counterfeits, but now attracted from the peoples
hearts and hands venerations and blessings.

He tells the Houses the benefit of peace, His Speech.
and this blessed opportunity to confer with them, for the good of the
Kingdom, which his nonage had denied them, administering rather occasion of
Commotion, than the remedy of public grievance; which now he resolves to
redress; always reposing confidence in their wise Counsels, and calls God to
witness, his part aimed at the Preservation of Religion, Subjects safety, and
Kingdoms security.

And first he enacted. Act^ ^or Religion.


The form of Confession agreed in anno 1567.

To the Prescript administration of the Sacraments in Act and Will.

That the present Religion embraced was to be esteemed Orthodoxal in doctrine
and discipline.

And to be imposed upon all that went beyond seas, by Oath and Subscription.

The Bible commanded in Scotch to each family.

The Power of Ministers regulated and limited; And the Discipline erected by
the Bishops and Super-intendents (which had suffered some Diminution, but no
Synodical act for abolition) should be confirmed.

And so with prosperous effects, the Parliament ended, and the King returns to
his Sports at Sterlin.

The Presbyters now took up some colorable fears, Aubigny Stuart in great
favor.
upon landing of one Amys (or Amatus) Stuart Lord Aubigny, so called from
Aubigny a Village in Aquitain; a Frenchman born, but of Scots family, and
kinsman to the King. A notorious Guisit (and Papist, as they would have him.)

The Town Aubigny was (by Charles the seventh of France) given to John Stuart
of the family of Lenox, who commanded the Scots there, and worsted the English;
which Town and Title, depend ever since, on the younger Sons, and so on this
Man. He was sent over by the Guises, or rather sent for over by Montross, and
Arguile, to subvert Morton, or to break the Truce twixt England and Scotland.
And no sooner landed, but received with all honor, and advanced in trust;
created Earl of Lenox, and after created Duke; a privy Counselor, of the
Bedchamber, and Governor of Dunbarton Castle.

He was soon accused for engrossing so suddenly so much favor, But disliked
there and in England.
and since it has been taken up for advantage; who ever was like to please the
King, was thereupon cried down by the Church, for a Papist; and so he was
presented to Queen Elizabeth, a dangerous Man, and what mischief an evil
favorite might suggest to the Kings maturity; fitted to act evil impressions;
his Mothers Designs, troublesome to both Realms, more easy and proper for him
to execute.

These in England, Qu. Eliz. Messenge^ neglected.
and somewhat at home, both together to wrest him from the King, and Bows is
sent from Berwick to charge it home before the King, and his Council. The Queen
of England not liking any so near the King so much of the French Faction, as
he, and one Monbirneau, an Actor in the Massacre of France. Bows, ere he
entered into his errand, required to have Lenox and him dismissed the Board,
which was refused before the cause or crime were charged; and bidden to produce
his Commission for his peremptory demand, which he could not, and so was
forthwith called home.

Yet to prevent the prejudice of his anger, Alexander Hume is sent after to
excuse it to the Queen, so to learn the truth of her mistrust; She, as in such
Cases to Messengers, so all Princes take, as Affronts to themselves, and so did
She, and remits him to Burleigh, Anno 1580.
disdaining to see him her self.

Burleigh Wisely assured him, the Queens affections to his own person, as a
Protestant, and his merits to his Master, which she would own in any of his
Ministers; Burleighs speech to the Scots Ambassador.
besides, she knew him a good Counselor for her Kinsman the King, but denies
you her presence, who looks not upon any Ambassador, from another, where her
own have been unheard, and his Commission demanded, without President. But,
these are the fruits (said he) of your young Kings new Counselors, whose first
principles are to discredit your best friends, and interess their factions,
such as the Cousin Guises, and a Frenchman or two of theirs, sent over for that
purpose, to hazard ruin to the State, if they be let to run on, unless, the
Queens prudence and power prevent. And so he parted.

Morton full of malice, Morton disconten tretires.
retires in discontent to Dalkieth, disliking the state, and manner of Court
Miners; for in doubt of some danger to his own person, he came not near the
King, but as commanded to counsel. This distance gave his Enemies cause to
fear, and to prevent his hatred, hasten their resolution to ruin him by the
accusation of James Stuart, son to the Lord Ucheltrie, a bold-faced young
man, and had his arrand to charge him home; which he did, (of murdering the
late King) and thus accused, Charged with the late Kings Murder.
to his face, and confined to his lodging, he might expect no better, than the
last act of fate, to take away his life; and though a Pensioner to England,
this was done, without dread of any. But this ill news coming to Queen
Elizabeth, Randolph rides post from Q Eliz.
she Posts away Randolph, now Post master of England, to remove Lenox, and to
plead for Morton.

And in their great Assembly he recounts the Queens favors, in freeing the
Scots of the French, with expense of English blood, and treasure; when her
power could have seized all, for her self, the King then in his cradle; his
Regents successively owning these kindnesses, till Aubigny and that other, came
in to ruin Religion, and rule the King, as their ward: producing letters to
some purpose, which most men thought, to be counterfeit; and so effected
nothing.

When nothing would serve his turn, to turn out favorities; Randolph takes upon
him to set them by the ears, abuses his privilege of an Ambassador.
and deals with both factions, Lenox and Mortons (underhand) working
jealousies, to free themselves by force, from eithers fewd, which grew high and
daingerous; offering aid from England, to set things square, which he made
round. These being marched to the Borders, and the Scots (as for the King)
prepared to receive them, the English faction withdrew then, and being
discovered, many were sen^ to prison, and Randolph thus far besides his
Commission, durst not endure the power of his privilege, but slipped away,
leaving his Nephew, and Angus and Mar, chief incendiaries to shift after; Anno
1581.
and Morton to his just reward, who was forthwith arraigned, convict and
beheaded, for the murder of the Kings father; and so confessed by him, before he
dyed, with this excuse, that in those times of distraction, Mor^on beheaded
with his own Ax.
he durst not but to do so. The fatal Axe (called the maiden) himself had
Patterned from that at Hallifax in Yorkshire, which he had seen, and liked the
fashion; for falling down between two posts, executed him sure and sudden. His
Honor and Title was conferred on John Maxwell.

He was an able man in what he undertook, His character.
so that we may say as of Cato, In hoc viro, tanta vis animi ingeniique fuit,
ut quocunque loco natus est, fortunam sibi ipse facturus fuisse videretur;
nulla ars, neque privatae, neque publicae rei gerendae, ei defuit, urbanas
rusticasque res pariter callebat. He was slow of speech, with a natural
composed gravity, his countenance Majesticall, his actions Princely, had not
that guilt of too much gathering and griping, degraded those excellencies, and
left him naked to deserve nothing. He desired to have a thing which dyed with
him, the Scots laws reduced into Method, and it was urged as useless. A great
question with them, to have Order in any thing that had none to serve God;
their opinion then has since infected us.

His great wealth got together, was scattered by unfaithful hands and hearts.
Livor post fata quiescit.

Discite mortales, mortalia temnere, and illa
Quaerere, quae miseris non rapit aura levis.
About this time Ruthen (lately created E. Gowry) the son of William Ruthen
Queen Mary's deadly Enemy, Ruthen created ^arl of Gowry.
with other conspirators, under pretense of conserving the peace of Religion,
to which they were urged by the factious Ministry, and which to secure, they
endeavor to remove Lenox and Arran from the King (that was their color) but
in their absence they invite the King to Ruthen Castle, and their seize him
Prisoner, with threats of death, until he consented to the imprisoning of
Arran, banishing of Lenox into France, and the return of the fugitive Angus out
of England.

Of this the distressed Queen of Scots, Q. Mary writes to Q. Eliz.
Prisoner at Sheffield, writes to Queen Elizabeth a long letter full of
miserable sadness, Exquisitely expressing all her sufferings, from the first of
her subjects very often Rebellion against her, from which persecution being
invited by her Majesty to rest secure upon her Princely succor and defense,
she is now by length of time drawn on to despair of release from that hand,
which lodes her with lingering of a lothed life; plainly and justly demonstrates
her, to be active and passive consenting to all her Mishaps. Anno 1582.
She calls God to witness her Impartial affection to her Person, and her
innocence from prejudice of her affairs and State. Desires justice of God and
her, and implores the mitigation of her misery, and some more freedom, though
with Imprisonment of her Person. Lays all particular differences home to the
Conscience of the Queen, and signs to her Letter,

Vostre tres desolei plus proche parente and affectionate Seure Mary Reg.


Indeed these were sharp and peircing, which so much disquieted Queen
Elizabeth's Conscience, Which troubles her conscience.
that she consults to release her, jointly to govern with the King. And eight
Articles were drawn up (even such as they were) the world knew she would never
refuse; for her extremity enforced her to yield to most unreasonable: but this
was but to spin time, till the State could find some other expedients, or some
exceptions, which daily happened by Examinations, Confessions, or Suspicions,
grounded upon slender, yet continual attempts of private persons, and public
Designs of Foreign States, for the poor Queens interests; which failing for her
good, she was, though innocent, sure to smart.

But because the manner of the Kings restraint in Ruthen is diversely related,
and which the Kirk justified for their own ends, I shall adventure upon the
Truth in these particulars hereafter.

Some of the Lords combining mischief to the King, Surprise of the King at
Ruthen.
under color of Religion and Liberty of the Kingdom, took occasion and
advantage of the Duke of Arrans absence from the Court, and detained the King
at Ruthen. These Conspirators were John Earl of Mar, William Earl Gowry, Lords
Lindsey, Boyd, Clames, and Oliphant, Some Abbots and Lairds, and stopped the King
going to hunting, who not being answered to the reason and cause, grew in
passion, which concluded in tears to be thus vilified. But it was reproached,
That better bairns should weep than bearded men.

This news hastens the Earl of Arran to Court, where he was soon secured, and
bid be patient, with safety of his life, for his brother William Stuart was
wounded by the way, and kept Prisoner. The like course they take with some
Noblemen sent by the Duke of Lenox to enquire of the King. Who cried out to
them that he was a Captive, and desired his good subjects to release him. The
conspirators excused themselves, that their surprise only restrained the King
from Arran, and from Lenox, whose banishment they threatened into France. And
forcing the King to pacify the people with a Proclamation, That for removing
some differences, His Majesty interposed himself Mediator, and resolved to
reside at Perth, being his own free and voluntary choice, and commanding such
as were in Arms upon pretext of his restraint, to dissolve within six hours,
on pain of death.

The Duke raises Forces, but was countermanded by the Kings Letter, to depart
the Realm within twenty days, yet he retires to Dunbarton, where the
Noblemen, and others, flock to defend his Cause. These uprores were posted to
Queen Elizabeth, who sends Sir Henry Carry, and Sir Robert Bows to advise the
King to be counseled by the Lords, against the Duke and Arran, and to restore
the Earl of Angus, exiled in England since Mortons execution. This last was
obtained, and soon after, he was accepted into favor, but much ado to incline
the King to part with Lenox.

The Lords carry the King to Edinburgh, Removed to Edinburgh, and are confirmed
by the Clergy.
where the Ministry justify their act, joyfully singing in Procession the 124.
Psalm, New Israel may say, etc.

And the Assembly then convened, ratify the attempt on the Kings person at
Ruthen, and published it in all the Churches of the Realm, to the regret and
grief of all good men, to see a bad cause thus colored over and defended by
the Church, which made much for their Popedom, that by these means of
distraction the Lords gave themselves up to be governed by the Others
Judgments. Many there were that sided herein, the most honest refused to
subscribe. But Arran was detained prisoner, till the Duke was gone over Seas to
France, who fell sick at Sea, and had leave to land at Blackness, and so to
pass, by Queen Elizabeth's favor, though England, where his sickness contracted
into a Disease, of which he died in Paris next year after, and confessed the
faith of the Church of Scotland, which he always maintained, though in the
Kirks policy he was accounted a Court Papist.

Two Ambassadors come from France, Ambassadors ill used.
Menvel and la Matt through England, with whom was sent Davidson from Qu. Eliz.
to undermine their Message, being, To work the Kings Liberty, to confirm him to
the French, and renew the purpose of Association, which was* That the Queen of
Scots should communicate the Crown with her son, and administration of Justice,
so that he may be acknowledged a lawful King by all Christian Princes; and
thereby all domestique factions suppressed.

This Embassy was voted in the Kirks Assembly to be a special grievance, a
wicked practice, declaming in their Pulpits against la Matt, who being a Knight
of the Order of St. Esprit, wore the badge of the White-Cross upon his
Shoulder, which they called, The badge of Antichrist, and him, The Ambassador
of the bloody Murderer, meaning the Duke of Guise, who sent him thither.

The King, The King Orders to feast them, but the Kirk command a fast.
not able to do it otherways, desired the Magistrates of Edinburgh not to
demit them without a Feast at parting, which was concluded on the Monday after.
And all cost prepared in Order thereto. When on Sunday the very day before, the
Kirk proclaim in their Pulpits the next day to be kept fast; and in malice to
the Kings honor therein, appointed three Preachers, the one succeeding the
other, to weary the poor peoples attention from Morning till night, Thundering
Curses, Anathema's and Excommunication against all Nobles, Magistrates and
Others that attended the Ambassadors. The good King sees these insolences, but
lodges them up in silence, till he got power to remedy these wrongs.

About this time dies Buchanan, Buchanans death and Character.
whose Character is chronicled by the Archbishop of Saint Andrews in his
History of their Church, For his excellent wit and incomparable learning. Born
near the Highlands. After his first commitment 1539. for his versifying against
the Friars, he escaped to France. Returning 1560. he professed Philosophy at
Saint Andrews, and became the Kings Tutor.

He is concluded by all moderate and faithful Records, That he penned his
Scottish History with eloquence, and with such Judgment, as that he is justly
blamed by most men, for joining with all factions of the time, and evermore to
justify any base and scandalous proceeding against Queen Mary, and falsely and
fowly he endeavored to depress the Royal authority of Princes, siding with the
Treasonable tenants of rebellious Subjects, which afterward he expressed with
bitter unmanerly sauciness of his Sovereign Queen then deceased. This is the
joint opinion of some, with whom we may be convinced to incline.

This next Summer the King got free from his Attenders, The King freeth himself.
for being in Faulkland, he desired to visit his Uncle the Earl of March then
at Saint Andrews, where he took a view of the Castle, and being entered, the
Captain of the Guard, Colonel Stuart (acquainted with the Design) clapped to the
Gates and shut out the Company, and the next morning came the Kings friends the
Earls of Arguile, Marshall, Montross and Rothess. And of his former Jaylers
none but the Earl Gowry was admitted by the Colonels means, who had been his
Servant, and upon his humble submission for his Fact at Ruthen, Anno 1583.
was received to mercy, and all these Lords elected his Counselors, with
Inhibition that none should presume to come to Court with more attendants than
fifteen with an Earl or Bishop, ten with a Lord, or Abbot, or Priour, and six
with a Baron. And now declares in public, That however his Majesty did with
patience perforce endure his restraint at Ruthen, and all those former passages
of Treasonable disloyalty, yet willing to be an Example of Clemency to others
he in favor pardoned all, admonishing the Lords to do so too amongst
themselves. Yet their consciences accusing left not to convene in tumult, and
therefore for more security to the King, they were confined to several Places
by Proclamation, which they disobeying were denounced Rebels, except Angus,
who submitted; and now was John Metallan, admitted Counselor, and hereafter
became Chancellor of State.

These affairs took up the summer, Ambassador from England plea^s for the
Rebels.
and at the fall of the leaf comes secretary Walsingham from Queen Elizabeth,
expostulating the Kings receiving of Arran and casting of his nobles, who
though thus mutenous as you have heard, were yet justified by her to be
defenders of his Crown.

The King told him, He was not to be taught to rule in his own affairs, being
as free, as his Princess, and that his promise against Arran was made under his
restraint, but now being at liberty himself he does him but the like justice.
Expecting his so much friendship from his Sister the Queen, not to countenance
his subjects in Rebellion.

The Ambassador replied that his Mistress medl^d not, but for his good, and
complains that one Holt an English Jesuit and plotter in Throgmortons treason,
should be imprisoned by the King, and yet permitted to escape by means of the
French, and not rather sent to the Queen; he was answered that Archibald
Douglas guilty of his fathers murder and in England, was not rendered to him,
as was desired. Though in truth, Holt got loose without leave. And so the
discourse ended in peace.

And in November Lodawick eldest son to the late Duke of Lenox, The late D of
Lenox children prefe^'d.
from France at 14 years of age (the King having sent for his Brethren before)
Investing him with his fathers honnors and lands, and the Earl Montross to be
his Trustee. Some years after came over his sisters, Henrieta married to the
Earl of Huntley; Mary to the Earl of Mar; the third avowed her self a Virgin to
the Cloister. A younger son remained in France until the King came into
England, where he was advanced to great honors. Thus did a gracious King for a
distressed family.

The former Declaration against the mutenous Lords, factious Lords submit.
could not deter them from conventions, pretending the time too short, which
was limited for their submission unto confinement. And therefore in an
Assembly of the Peers the King renews his offer of pardon to such as would
confess their foul act at Ruthen, and submit to conform themselves
accordingly. The Earl Rothess protests his subscription to that fact, was
forced upon him, and repents to mercy, from whose example the rest followed,
and the faction to fall asunder. They had pardon and leave to depart some into
Ireland, others to France. Amongst whom was Gowry who yet delayed his journey,
whilst he fell into new practices, which brought him to his death.

No wonder, to find the Ministry The Ministers meddle.
much concerned in their Sermons to justify, one or other of these Revolters,
and the fact of Ruthen, necessary and lawful. Andrew Melvil Melvils ill manners.
affirming to the Council, That the Presbytery only had power and authority to
judge and censure the Pulpit, and not the King, nor his Council. In prima
instantia, to meddle therewith though they should be treasonable. Telling the
King to his face, That he perverted the laws of God and man. Upon which he was
charged to enter his person in Blackness forthwith, but he turned back, fled to
Barwick that night; and always after the Ministry complaining, That the light
of of the Country for learning, and the only man to resist the enemies of
Religion was exiled, and compelled for his life to quit the Kingdom. And
though the King descended to satisfy the people by Proclamation therein, yet
it caused a murmuring, and encouraged Gowry, to expect Mars and Glammins
return out of Ireland to join in Arms, for Reformation of abuses in Church
and State, for preservation of the King and Kingdom. The wonted old pretense
of all Rebels.

Gowry to color his intended treason from suspicion, Gowry imprisoned,
comes to Dundee, and there presses a ship for his voyage. But the King
quickly advised, sent Colonel Stewart Captain, of the Guard to seize him, who
with others made some resistance, but the Town concurring with the Captain he
was taken and conveyed to Edinburgh under costody of Arran. Within two days
after Angus and Mar surprise the Castle of Sterlin, but hearing of the Kings
march, with formidable forces, they fly into England. Gowries confession under
his hand sets down their practices thus, His confession.
That himself perceaving the Kings favor declining and his estate aimed at by
power of his enemies, he was forced to seek his own relief by concurring with
other Nobles in the like Case, by the means of James Erskin, who traveled
therein, and assured me of their Return to Sterlin, where we concluded, That at
home it was expected, that all those who subscribed the bond in the first
alteration would join with us; and besides them, the Earls Marshal, and
Bothwel, the Lord Lindsey, and others of the West; From England we expected
supply, and that the Queen would intercede for restitution of the Hamiltons.

At his coming to Sterlin he writ to the King, thus; Anno 1584.


Please your Majesty, It is neither diffidence nor despair in your Higness
favor and clemency toward me, nor any desire I have of life, Petition.
that moves me to require some short audience of your Majesty: But there is a
purpose of such weighty importance, which is needful to be imparted to your
Highness, that might have endangered the Life's and Estates of your Mother and
your Self, if I had not stayed and impeded the same, the relation whereof
concerns you more than the lives of 500. such as my self, wherein I am assured
of your Majesty's gracious answer.

The matter is not the concealing of a Treason, but the revealing of a benefit,
April 1584.

His Petition is denied, and the same brought in evidence at his Trial,
Arraignment.
being in May indicted of four points.

1. That in February last David Hume (Mars Man) came at night to him at Perth,
communicating the surprising of Perth and Sterlin, and so concealing and
consenting to Treason. 2. The like he conferred with James Arskin a Trafficker
from Mar, Angus, and others. 3. That being in Dundee, and charged by his
Majesty's command to render himself to the Lord Petten Weym Chancellor, and
Captain of the Kings Guard, he did notwithstanding oppose him with Men and
Arms, convoking aid of the people to assist him in his Treason. 4. That being
obliged to maintain his Majesty's, Life, Honor, and Crown, and having
Intelligience that concerned the life and estate of the King and the Queen his
Mother, he treasonably concealed the same.
He excepts against Sir John Gourdon, His excep^^ons.
who sat chief Justice, for some enmity betwixt Gartland (his Kinsman) and him.
But this exception was soon refelled, being only affinitas affinitatis.

Then, that the Nobleme^ that examined him, promised that his confessions to
them, should not be urged against him.

But it was answered, That their words could not warrant him.

He stood upon forty days time to answer for Treason.

He was told, that the King might arrest at his own pleasure.

To the last point of Indictment, That what he offered to reveal to the King
was not of Treason.

But he was answered, that the concealing might tend to the Kings destruction.

The Indictment was found, the Jury were eight Earls, and eight Lords, and his
Sentence as in Treason, and so in the evening was only beheaded.

He had been of good Fame and Honor in Court, accounted wise, Cond^m^ed and
executed.
yet he dealt in Witchcraft for revealing the future state of things, though
for the general misopinion I find of the Presbyters against Judicial Astronomy,
His Character
we may conceive him no otherwise liable to their idle censure therein. Nor was
he accused thereof in his Trial, nor did repent of it at his death; yet is
acknowledged to take it with peace and patience in contempt of the World, and
assurance of Gods mercy. His Death showed the way to Archibald Douglas and John
Forbess, executed after him, the rest of the Conspiracy had Banishment or
Pardon. Some Ministers for meddling fled to England.
The Ministers had been nibbling at these treasonable Baits, and Polwart,
Galloway, and Carmichel, not compeering, were denounced Rebels, and fled into
England.

And in this Parliament in May, the Attempt of Ruthen, was ratified, the Kings
authority over all persons confirmed, the declining his Majestyes Judgment and
the Councils to be Treason, Declarations.
the impugning of the authority of the three Estates, or procuring their
diminution to be Treason, all Jurisdictions and Iudicatures spiritual or
Temporal, not approved by the three Estates, to be discharged.

And an Ordinance made, That none should presume, privately (...) publicly, in
Sermons, Declarations or Conference to utter Speeches to the reproach of the
King, his Parents and Progenitors, or to meddle with the Affairs of State under
grievous (...).

Now was the Ministers Spirits on fire, that they were not first heard, and
Lindsey, was committed, Lawson and Balcanqual flies into England, so did Poul,
who impudently protested against the Parliaments Ordinance, and were all
accounted Rebels.

Hereupon the King declares his Reasons to curb the Ministers. and Acts of
State.


First their allowance of the Fact at Ruthen. Melvils Declining the King and
Council, The Fast kept when the Ambassadors were to be feasted, and other
general Fasts through the Realm without the Kings Authority; usurping
Ecclesiastic Jurisdictions. Alterations of the Laws at their pleasure and a
number of such abuses.

To these they impudently replied in Pamphlets, They reply with Letters to
Edinburgh
Libells, and (...) pens against the Court. And Letters from those Fugitives to
the Ministry and Session of the Church and Council of (...) Town, Excusing
their Absence, for resisting the wicked Ordinance, and not submitting to the
Tyrannical Regiment of Bishops, whom they st^led Libertines, Belly-Gods,
Infamous, That after their zealous wrestling with God, they had revelation to
depart, and hoped after destruction of the Antichristian Prelates, to return
home to their several flocks in Peace.

But by the Kings direction, this insolent Letter was replied unto by the
Session; And are sharply (...).
wherein after the just confutation of their abuses on the King and State, They
discharge themselves of being their flock, and of they their Pastors; and thank
God, the Revealer of secrets, that made them manifest their own shame, and
relieved them from such wolves in show of Pastors, and being assured that his
Majesty will furnish them with more quiet^r Ministers, they commit the others
to Gods mercy, and to repent for their former offenses.

This letter subscribed and sent to England, was copied out and divulged to
their eternal condemnation, and out of regret of the guilt thereof, afterward,
Lawson died with grief at London.

And at home occasioned others, to follow per force, many imprisoned, some
executed for meddling with State-matters, Subscriptions and Sermons so
treasonable, although the Kings mercy endeavored to reclaim them, such were
their insolences, that sundry of them suffered for example to others
conformity.

These troubles in Scotland brought disadvantage to the poor distressed Queen
Mary, Design^ in England for Queen Mary.
for whose relief, some practices were set on foot in England, by Throgmorton,
Lord Paget, and others, the Earls of Northumberland and Arundel, the Howards
also (rather suspected out of their general profession of Papistry and
affection to Queen Mary) and also by Morgan and others in France, and all for
her; As more particular by Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador in England; who
being discovered, stole away secretly to Paris, being charged with Throgmortons
Plot, to bring in foreign Power, for which he was hanged. And Mendoza as boldly
recharged this State with practices against his Master, for at this time
England countenanced, the Netherlands, the Duke of A^joy, and Don Antonio the
Portugal, and the Ambassador of Navarr now in England; and all these against
Spain.

But to color these to excuse this State, and to complain of the Ambassador,
Wade an Envoy to Spain.
Wade, Clark of the Council, posts into Spain, whom that King refers to his
Council, without vouch^a^ing to see him; and not being heard at all, returns
home again. And by some papers of Creighton a Scottish Jesuit intercepted, and
discovering fresh plots of invasion by the Pope, Spain, and the Guis^s, the
State of England began more narrowly to look about, and to begin with the Queen
of Scots miserable Tragedy, herein Leicester and other Lords associate by oath
to persecute to the death the obstacles of Queen Elizabeth's peace and safety.

Mary fearing the effects, Anno 1585.
made the most humble and satisfactory propositions and concessions to what
Queen Elizabeth could possibly urge, and to which she (indeed) inclined; but
the Scots opposed, Mary propose^ condition^ The Kirk disquiet.
especially to hear of her return home.

And to assist the hight of evils, the Presbyters in Scotland are always at
hand, railing at her and the King in the Pulpits, and being summoned to answer
their contempts, absolutely refuse, saying, That Ecclesiastic persons were
exempt the Kings authority. Althought to suppress their insolency (very
lately, A Parliament.
even this year, and last Assembly of States) it was enacted, The Kings
authority over all persons Ecclesiastic and Layick, The Kings s^premacy and
other Laws confirmed.
and confirmed for ever. Their Assemblies, as well general as particular, were
condemned, as arrogating boundless authority, when they list to meet, and to
prescribe laws, even to the King and Kingdom. And here the popular equality
of Ministers were abrogate, and the dignity of Bishops restored, whose
vocations the Presbyters had condemned as Antichristian. The scandalous books
of Buchanans Chronicles, and his Dialogue De jure regni apud Scotos, and other
such were condemned.

So you see in this Parliament, the King had Royally and Religiously confirmed
the Articles of true Religion, and had united to his Crown the supreme
Authority Ecclesiastic and Civil, heretofore usurped by Papists, and lately by
Prebyters. Hereupon they declare the King inclined to Popery, and nothing to be
left of ancient from but the shadow, Ministers fly into England.
and not being suffered to vent their spleen, they fly into England under
pretense of persecution.

Yet the King dealt with them by hopes and fear. Appoints their appearance in
November from all parts; Presbyters equivocation.
And were then pressed to subscribe obedience to their ordinary. To obey and
acknowledge Bish. according to the Word of God, which words they construed to
be a restriction or limitation; for say they, The Word of God commands no
obedience, Thus either deceived or deceiving, to redeem their ease with
yiedling, cover it with equivocation; some subscribed* others refused,
preaching against them. And evermore Praying for the banished rebellious Lords
as the best Subjects who fled from ^yranny. Amongst sundry of such men that
suffered trial, and others executed. Daglith the chief Minister of St.
Cuthberts upon that score, Diverse executed for Conspiracies.
and for corresponding by letters with Walter Balcanqual he was sentenced for
Treason, but upon his humble supplication, was pardoned. David Hume and his
brother executed, and indeed diverse grand designs of Treason put the State to
necessary jealousies and fears. Robert Hamilton accuses Douglas of Mains and
John Cunningham of Drumhosel, for conspiring to intercept the King at hunting,
and to detain him, till the banished should return and receive him. Upon which
they were found guilty, and executed at Edinburgh.

And indeed Angus and others lay lurking at Barwick, who were removed therefore
further into England to New Castle, Angu^ and other Fugi^ives in Engl.
lest the Lord Hunsdon Governor of Barwick should suffer suspicion in their
designs, against all reason of State, which now in England seems to side with
King James,

And at New Castle they lodge; John and Claud Hamilton retire and take up by
the way to settle all here. The Scots Ministers wanderers were all found out,
and called to the Juncto, Lowson Carmichel, Erskin. And Mr. John Colvil sent
away to Secretary Walsingham at Court. Who led them with hopes that the Queens
fleet (usual) rigging was intentional for their interest; this encouraged them,
and gave occasion to the Scots Ambassador to draw up Criminations against
them, and so they were removed to Norwich, and after to London; and lodge at
Long ditch beyond Tuttle street against the Park-wall, Insol^nt.
to whom all their Ministers resort (a petty corporation) preach, pray, keep
fasting, more than private, and were so bold, as to expect leave, to be
allotted a Church of their own as French, Italian, Dutch and other strangers,
but the conformity of language with us, and the deformity in discipline, made
their request insolent; of which they complain in their preachings, and
therefore are all silenced* which they say brake the heart of Lawson, their
Malapert minister, or rather the letter from Edinburgh aforesaid renouncing him
their Pastor, who deserting his cure upon pretense of conscience, not to
subscribe, yet takes part the Rebels against his Sovereign. But the particular
manner and occasion in Scotland was as follows.

In civil affairs, Arran made Chancellor his great* p^^r* in State.
the Earl Arran commanded all; keeper of the Castle, of Sterlin, Edinburgh, and
Provost there, lately made Chancellor upon the death of the Ea^l Arguile. The
office of secretary he conferred upon John Metallan, Lethingtons son, having
banished the Abott of Dumferlin* who possessed that place, and made himself
Lieutenant of Scotland; which greatness, procured private envy of others at
Court, ploting his ruin. To conserve him self, he endeavored to gain Queen
Elizabeth to be his friend; and after, he had privately conferred with the Lord
Hunsdon Governor of Barwick several legations were sent to England by the
Archbishop of St. Andrews to confirm the Kings constancy in Religion, much
suspected by the cunning informations of the banished abroad, and Kirkmen at
home. And after him the Master of Gray came to remand the fugitive Rebels and
Lewis Ballandine Justice Clark, was sent to accuse them, as guilty of the
conspiracy of Mains and Drumhosell; but indeed Ballendines interest conniving,
his accusations were so slenderly urged; that the very ground was laid, to work
their restitution and Arrans destruction; the Queen and her counsel under hand
giving aim to all.

Arran abused with hopes of the Queens friendship, Maxwel misused,
continues his greatness into terms of Tyranny; against Athol, Hume and Casils;
With frivolous, arbitrary justice. It fell more particular upon the Lord
Maxwell for refusing exchange of Lands; the Barrony of Kinnell fallen by
attainder, with the Barrony of Mernis and other Lands of Maxwell Heath. And to
work out the mischief, the Lord Iohnston is made Provost, thereby being warden
of the West Marches, might curb the power of Maxwell, whose right it was to the
Provostry, and therefore rayses forces of his friends, and apposed Iohnston;
for which and other Insolences, he is denounced Rebel, takes arms against the
L. Johnston.
and commission to Iohnston with power to pursue him: Maxwell sends his two
brothers to intercept Lamby and Cranston, ere they should join head; in the
fray the first is killed, the other made prisoner; which encouraged Iohnston to
incurse upon Maxwells lands by fire and sword, with great spoil and booty: the
same were answered upon return of the like against Iohnston; who is taken
prisoner, and the regret thereof, g^eived him to his grave, shortly after.

The Quarrel now engages the States, who convene, and a subsedy granted of
twenty thousand punds (or pounds) levied also to pursue him; but the great
plague raging at Edinburgh that expedition for the present, was put off till
next year.

In this interim Queen Elizabeth's favor declines from Arran; the occasion
being a Tumult, Arran declines in Queen El^zabeths favo^.
arising between the Governors of the middle Marches, Sr. Francis Russell, son
to the Earl of Bedford, was killed near the Borders, the deed done by
instigation of Arran, and Farneyhast* the slayer, was denied to be rendered to
the Queens justice* yet not much insisted upon at that time, but rather to
contract former friendship; by Ambassy of Sr. Edward Wotton, offensive and
defensive with the King in cause of Rebellion; for then, came on, the Roman
holy League (so styled) with the Pope, Holy League.
Spain and Guisits in France and others in Germany to exterpate the reformed
Religion in all Christendom, though principally aimed against Q. Elizabeth,
who courts Leagues with other Princes reformed; Sr. Thomas Bodly treats
therein, with the King of Denmark; Wootton sent Ambass^dour to Scotland.
Wotton with Scotland; and at a Parliament in July was by Act confirmed for
ever, supposed sufficient, to return Wotton the sooner home. But he had private
comands countermines for the fugitive Lords restitution, lately concluded
before in England by the late Ambassadors; with whom now he keeps private
meetings, gaining time by the occasion of certain Ambassadors from Denmark, who
under pretense of remand to the Isles of Orknay and Shethland, upon the
Northern coast of Scotland, alienated of old from that Crown. But in truth,
they propounded reasons of State, For a Marriage with the King, and a Sister of
Denmark, Propositions of a Marriage with Denmark.
happily effected 4 years after.

These Ambassadors taking leave, the rumor grew high of the banished Lords
Conspiracy, which causes a Proclamation for a general Convention of all good
Subjects, to meet the King at the Castle of Crawford in October, The Lords
conspire,
to repel the Rebels; which the English Ambassadors craftily prevent, whilst
the Lords march apace, and come to rendezvous at Linton in Tweeddale, and there
Covenant by Oath, not to separate till they should seize the King, and remove
Arran: and thither comes Maxwell, with a thousand Horse and foot, that served
heretofore against Iohnston; all the rest making up but so many more; and to be
even with the King, and declare.
they proclaim also (the old and new Rebels rule) Defense of the truth, the
deliverance of the King from evil Counselors, and add, the Amity with England.
Interlacing each line with Odiums against Arran, amongst other charges; That he
claimed descent from Duke Mordach (beheaded by King James the first, upon that
title) which Arran now takes up, to be Heir to the Crown, by the name of James
seventh. And indeed this was now enforced, and a scandal, which all men
^nderstood; for, whether he had feigned such a pretense the last year, or
others for him had formed it, he was forced to purge himself then in
Parliament, by serious Protestation; which truly in pride of heart he did,
rather to deceive the World with that folly.

Thus far Wootton plotted with the Revolters agents at Court, Wotton plo^s with
them and posts home.
and being almost discovered by Arran, he departs hastily, without leave,
toward Berwick, and after him posts an Express, who overtook him at Anwick;
expostulating, Whether His Mistress directed him this mannerly departure? He
acknowledged to the Messenger, that he could not grant, that he came away
Insalutato hospite, seeing he performed that Office with Heart and Hand; and
would ever endeavor, by all possible means, that his sudden departure, should
rather help to maintain, than to dissolve the amity betwixt his Sovereign and
the King. By the word Hand, he referred to a Letter, which he left for the
King, in which he so far complained, that the cause lodged upon Arrans
discredit, who (he said) governed all. By which Arran suspected somewhat ami^s,
and accused the Master Gray for hastening Wotton away.

The Lords Revolters that had intelligence of all, The Lords seize the King at
S^erlin, and treat.
march with speed to Sterlin, and were let in by a back-way at Midnight. And,
whilst Arran was busy with the watch, at the other end, the Town was taken
and rifled; Arran and others escaped. The King enclosed within the Castle,
sends out two Counselors, to tell them, That humble Petitions better became
the duly of Subjects Complaints, and private address more fit than to force
their Sovereign, which violent forms they would find (...), that should be
extorted by force or fear, and he never to want men and means hereafter to undo.

They not as yet let in, were not to learn the art of dissembling, excusing
their actions, by their miserable conditions, reduced to this necessity, to
seek relief rather for the King than themselves. His honor and safety, highly
endangered by evil Counselors (excepting them that were sent) and laboring
these with arguments to intercede for his Majesty's grace and favor, and to
admit their address to his person.

The King knew their meaning, and intending to say no more than willingly they
should hear of, For my self (said the King) I never liked the man's arrogance
(meaning Arran) but I must secure my Servants about me; the quarrels betwixt
Crawford and Glammis, Angus and Montross, and Col. Stuart, as ill beloved for
serving me.

No sooner said, But they vow, Not to arm for private quarrels of their own,
or any others, not minding to mix particulars with the public.

Upon which, they get in, fall down on their knees to the King, and the Lord
Hamilton, being the best in blood, was their spokesman, who only craved mercy.

To whom, My Lord, said the King, I never knew you till now, and I am sorry to
see your face in this fault; you have been faithful to my Mother in my
Minority, and, I fear, may suffer more than these.

As for you (angerly browing upon Bothwell,) Francis, what ailed thee that
never could be injured?

But -- To you all that mean me no mischief, I am pleased to hold out my hand
and my heart, carrying your selves from henceforth, as dutiful Subjects.

It was no time to do other, and the next day in Council, to confirm by Act,
their Pardon, and their Assistants, and so proclaimed. Crawford and Montross*
delivered up to Hamilton, and Col. Stuart permitted to depart. Arran was gone
before, fled to Coil, deprived of all honors, lived from thenceforth privately.

And now new Lords and Laws share old offices. The Guard was given to Glammis,
the Castle Dunbritton to Hamilton, Sterlin restored to the Earl Mar, and the
Castle of Edinburgh delivered to Sir James Hume.

This relation the most certain, though I know it is otherwise reported.

And no wonder to find designs in policy how to clear these Lords of former
accusations, and confessions; the very Examinants and Deponents must now
voluntarily offer new Oaths, to purge them from all Treasonable Attempts.
Amongst whom Duntraith now confessed to be suborned to accuse Mains, out of
fear to save himself.

Besides these powers that overmastered the Kings party, the want of supply
from Edinburgh lost the Court; the raging Plague swept away twenty thousand
persons, and that City quite forsaken. He is forced now to yield to their
Domination; this Success imboldens the disloyal Ministers to return home also,
from all parts, insupportable insolent. One of them (Gibson) to the Kings face,
terms him Jeroboam, a Persecutor; threatens him, That if he went on in the
former way, he should be the last of his race.

And before the King and Council, he and Watson (such another) impudently
maintain the same and more to their teeth, which no Catiline could have done
more treasonable.

Then their Synod, being assisted by a number of the Laics, convene the
Bishops; Saint Andrews was compeered before them, upon accusation of Andrew
Melvil, in malice and private revenge, but his pretense was that the Bishop
devised and penned former Acts against the Presbytery; the Bishop protests
against their Judicature, and disputes his Innocence from any evil therein, and
to avoid their censures, appeals to the King and Estates, and they therefore in
fear what to do, a young Fellow, Andrew Hunter, professes to be armed by the
Spirit, and so usurping the Chair, he pronounced Sentence against him.
Cunningham the Bishops man, did the like, the next day, against Melvil.

These and other such disorders involves the King and Estates what to do with
them, when the Secretary of State perceiving their vexations, advises the King
to leave the Ministry to their own courses; That in a short time, he should
see them so intolerable, as the people would chase them out of the Nation.
True (said the King) if I were careless to undo the Church and Religion, it
were the best Counsel, but to preserve both I must suppress disorders, lest
Religion be despised.

And therefore, as these insolences gave the King occasion wisely to foresee
the dangerous events, if not nipt in the Bud, So ex malis Moribus, bonae leges
nascuntur, for the State publish these Articles.

That all Preachers should obey the King.

Not to pretend privilege in their allegiance.

Not to meddle in State matters.

Not to revile his Majesty.

Not to draw the people from obedience.

And being questioned, not to allege inspiration of the Spirit.

Nor to serve themselves with color of conscience, etc.

It is strange to observe, both before, and then, and sithence, even to these
our last days (as were by Wisemen always foretold from the beginning) how
this Gangreen spread, and that we are now wearied, as well as the Reader, with
these relations. Let me only observe further the Scots Acts and Ordinances
concerning their Episcopacy, and let any Historian tell me, when and how they
started into such a sincere Reformation, as to have no Bishops at all, as many
would pretend.

For first, 1567. Parl. cap. 2
reforming from Popery in 1567. That no Bishop, nor other Prelate should use
any Jurisdiction in time coming by the Bishop of Romes authority (but it
appears by all subsequent Acts, That Archbishops and Bishops were not only
allowed in their Kirk, but also had Jurisdiction and authority to govern the
same).

That Archbishops and Bishops have the Authority, 1572. Acts 46.
and are ordained to convene and deprive all Ministers inferior, who shall not
subscribe the Articles of Religion and recognoscing of the King and his
Authority.

That Archbishops and Bishops have authority to assign Ministers Glebes. 48.


That they shall nominate and appoint Visitations, 54.
etc. and persons in every Parochin for settling Taxation for upholding Kirks,
etc. 1573. Acts 55.


That they shall direct charges how the Minister of the Parochin shall proceed
to excommunications.

That they shall try the rent of Hospitals, 1578. Acts 63.
and call for the foundations thereof.

The Jurisdiction of the Kirk is declared to stand in preaching the Word of
Jesus Christ, 1579. Acts 69.
correction of manners, and administration of Sacraments.

And no other Authority allowed; but Archbishops and Bishops intended to
continue in Authority, as is clear by these Acts following.

First, All persons returning from foreign Travails are within twenty days to
pass to the Bishop, Super-intendent, Commissioner of the Kirk, Acts 71.
to give a Confession of their faith.

That none presume to impugn the Dignity and Authority of the three Estates,
1584. Acts 130.
or to seek or procure the innovation or diminution of their power and
authority, or any of them in time, coming under pain of Treason.

That Bishops are to try and judge Ministers guilty of crimes, meriting
deprivation. 132.


That no Ministers exercise any other Office beside their* Calling, 133.
and to be adjudged by their Ordinaries of Bishops.

All Acts whatever heretofore, 1587. Acts 23.
anent the Kirk of God and Religion now professed are ratified.

That the three Estates (especially considering the persons exercising the
offices, Anno 1586.
titles and dignities of Prelates, which persons have ever represented one of
the Estates, etc.) Therefore declare that the Kirk in Scotland is the true and
holy Kirk, 1597. Acts 231.
and that such Ministers as the King shall provide to the Dignity of a Bishop
shall have vote in Parliament, as any Ecclesiastical Prelate ever had by-gon.

And null all manner of Acts made in prejudice of Bishops, 1606. Act. 2.
Honors, Dignities, etc. competitent to them or their estate since the
reformation of Religion.

The same revived. 6.


Ordains Archbishops and Bishops to be elected by their Chapters, 1617. Act. 1.
and consecrate by the Order accustomed.

And yet we must confess, they were oftentimes striking at the root and branch
of Bishops, as others of them did against the Power and Majesty of Princes; for
Buchanan terms the phraises of Majesty, Buchanan. See his de ju^egni Page 50
usque 57.
Highness, Excellency, Solaecismos et Barbarismos aulicos.

Jeering at the outward State of Princes, comparing them to childrens Puppets,
garishly attired. That a good Prince should be defended with innocence, Non
superbo speculatorum et caetu sericatisque nebulonibus stipatus.

Another of theirs Davison, Davison.
his Pamphlet printed in those times forced through with base invectives, both
against the Government of Scotland and England, with most dangerous
insinuations to Rebellion.

The Genevian Ministers and their Tenants also were dispersed in England,
wholly into such Arguments. Out of two more pestilent sundry seditious
positions may be collected, Goodman and another Author styled True Obedience;
or rather perfect rebellion.

It may be true, The (...) trul^ stated.
it is no Treason to resist the Sovereign for defense of Religion, nor no
treasonable assertion, That a lawful Prince may be deposed in case of revolt
from God, and these are the proposition of all Christian Professors, but these
Men following their own deceiptful wiles, and irregular opinions, adjudged that
to be error, or idolatry, which perhaps may not be so, and may traduce
goodness and virtue by the rule of their own strained conceit, and so differ in
the manner and matter, as reason and conscience differ from fury and frenzy.

And yet these their Doctrines Whittingham (afterward unworthy Dean of Durham)
in his preface to Goodmans book, Genevians, Whittingham Goodman, Gilby,
Whitehead, Coverdale,
says, that they were approved by the best learned, meaning Calvin, and the
rest of the Genevians, Gilby, Coverdale, Whitehead, and others.

But then let me tell them who were the other, Orthodox men.
worser learned men (as he will have them) that fled Queen Mary's persecution
to Franckford, Zurick and Basil, declining Geneva; those were Scory, Barlow,
Cox, Beacon, Bale, Parkhurst, Grindall, Sands, Nowell, Wisdom, and Jewel, and
very many more, that maintained the Reformation of King Edwards time; and
therefore Knox said, Scory, Barlow Cox, Beacon, Bale, Parkho^st, Grindal,
Sands, Nowel, Wisdom, Jewel.
That the English at Geneva were separated from that superstitious company at
Franckford.

Notwithstanding these quarrellers, heretofore (at the first) yet in the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth's days, they pretended to agree in Harmonical
Confessions, though in several disciplines, till Cartwright and Travers in his
Disciplina Ecclesiastica, makes their own tenants so positive, as that, If
every hair of their heads were a life, they would lose them all, to defend
their Discipline.

Then came in to their Gang, Udall and Penry, and call that discipline only,
Udal, Penry.
pure, perfect, righteous, full of goodness, peace and honor; ordained for the
joy and happiness of all Nations. Therein followed them, Martin, and his two
sons, and Gilbie; and so like very apt scholars in evil, Martin, Gilby, and
others,
they out-went their masters to the Devil; for joining with Copinger, Hackett,
and others, they fell into a desperare design of Treason, See after anno 1591.
for which, Hacket was hanged.

At last, increasing in very bold ways, and desperate tenants, dispersed in
Pamphlets, Rithmes and Ballads; It was thought fit to open their eyes and
understandings, by some grave, and learned declaration, Learned Hooker.
for settling their mad brains, which was effected by that most reverend and
learned Divine Hooker, in his Ecclesiast. Policy, which for a long time
(during the time of times) silenced all their Railings; Cartwrights, and others,
and so satisfied the wiser sort, that the Church of God got quiet from such
disturbers, till of late days.

But to return to our History, In June was completed the League with England,
League offensive and defensive England and Scotland.
hammered out for defense of both Nations against the Holy League (as the
Papists would have it) the Commissioners meeting at Barwick, concluded these
Aritcles, upon the former reasons.

1. To join and unite in a more strict League than ever had been before. 2. To
draw other Princes Reformed into their society. 3. To be offensive and
defensive against any Contractors with their enemies. 4. Not to assist any
Invader of either Kingdom. 5. That the Scots to assist England against any
Invasion with two thousand horse and five thousand foot at the Queens charge
from the borders. The Queen the like to Scotland, but with three thousand
horse, and six thousand foot. 6. If the North of England, there the Scots to
assist with all their force for thirty days (the usual time of attending their
own King.) 7. The King not to suffer Scots to be transported into Ireland, but
by leave of the Queen. 8. Not to countenance either Rebels or Revolters. 9.
That all the controversies of the Borderers be civilly reconciled. 10. Neither
Princes to enter League with any other without the consent of both. 11. All
bygone Treaties of either, with other Princes, shall stand in full force, the
cause of Religion excepted. 12. These Articles to be confirmed by Oath, and
Hands, and Seals. 13. Lastly, That the King, at twenty five years old, shall
confirm these, by the States of Scotland, as the Queen will then do by her
Parliament of England.
This was the beginning of Q. Eliz. design, Against the holy League of Papists.
which she presumed would in time be considerable, with other reformed States
confederate; though in earnest; the whole intention of the Papists, had
reference to the Church of England, the absolute orthodox Conserver of the true
ancient Apostolic faith, though by observation of succeeding times in some
relations, it appears of late wonderfully endangered. But, besides that of
Religion, and strengthening her affairs in policy with other Princes, upon
that score, she had a further a^m, to confirm amity with the King whom she was
assured forthwith, mightily to offend, and to endanger her safety and honor
with all the Christian world.

For now (with leave of the Reader) having been led somewhat too long in the
Church affairs; Return to Qu^^^aries story.
let us remind the poor Captive Queen Mary, upon whom all the former suspicions
reflected, and so h^stened to her ruin; for Queen Elizabeth casting about to
make things safer, than fast, resolved upon the way, most desperate, which if
it took not well, was yet the only way, by taking Mary out of the way, and so
give end to Elizabeth's jealousies; to secure her Person from Treasons; to joint
her power now divided; and to settle her people from imbroiles and divi^^ons.
-- But soft and fair, the wily wits of Walsingham and Burleigh, must be busied
about it.

For now she is removed from her fifteen years custody, Remo^^^^ in^o custody
^o Pawlet.
under the good Earl of Shrewsbury, unto Sir Amias Pawlet, and Sir Drew Drury,
on purpose to put her upon extremity of redress against their extreme
imprisoning. And so she endeavors, and deals with the Pope and Spain, by
Englefeild, to hasten their designs, however; which designs indeed, is so
peeced and patcht together, by those that writ of them, as if each man's fancy,
in reference to the public, must needs take effect of Rebellious
interpretation. And what ere was whispered in that sense, was sure to be put
upon the poor Queens account, by which she smarted; for in this Parliament of
England, the former Association of the Lords was confirmed by both Houses, and
strict Acts against Catholics and abetters in Treason, ^rdundel (...).
which occasioned Philip Howard Earl of Arundel, eldest son of the late Duke of
Norfolk, (three years since restored in blood) to complain of his enemies,
pursuing him to the death, as others had done to his Great Grandfather
condemned, and never came to trial; his Grandfather beheaded for trifles, and
his father likewise for concernments of lesser moment. Himself thus afflicted,
endeavoring to retire out of the Kingdom, but was taken and sent to the Tower,
where he found Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland (as accessory to Thorgmortons
design) who Pistolled himself some days after, Northumberland pistols himself.
but Arundel was only fined in Star Chamber.

The Catholics desparate to do something, Babingtons Treason.
were animated thereto by Ballard a Priest, who from hence goes into France,
and there lays his designs with the Old Plotters, Pope, Guises, the Spaniard
and Parma to invade England, and free Queen Mary; and returning home,
confederates with Babington and six more principal gentlemen, to kill Queen
Elizabeth. All which their plottings were daily discovered to Secretary
Walsingham, by one Pooley their companion; Pooley.
and so confident were they of success, that Babington had his own picture, and
those about him, all to the life, with this verse circumscribed, Hi mihi sunt
comites, quos ipsa pericula ducunt.

But this verse too plain, they inserted in the place, Quorsum haec, alio
properantibus?

The Queen being showed these faces knew ^one but Barnwell.

Babington to hasten this design, resolves to go over himself. And by Pooley's
means insinuates with Walsingham, and ingages to discover Fugitives, if he
might be trusted with the Queens License, which was promised to him, but
delayed, whilst all was discovered to Walsingham (by one Gifford a Priest) whom
he recommended unto Amias Pawlet to suffer his servants to be corrupted by him,
Be^^ayed by Gifford a Priest.
and so to entrap the Queen his Prisoner; but though Pawlet refused to conspire
with his servants, Gifford a false Priest.
yet he permitted one that depended on the necessary service of his Family, a
Baker, to be bribed; and at a hole in the wall, to give out and take in
letters, between the Queen and all the confederates, which were (as sure) to be
opened and read by Walsingham, who got the Keys of the Ciphers, and had answe^s
counterfeited, to involve whom he pleased to suspect, in the Plot. At last (the
time being ripe for Execution) they were proclaimed Traitors, Traitors all
execu^ed.
and at several places seized, examined, and confessing to every particular,
they were executed as Traitors, seven of them most cruelly; the other seven
with more mercy.

The Queen of Scots was so narrowly watched, that she knew nothing of the
discovery; no, not when Mr. Gorge was sent to her, to expostulate these plots.
She being then on horseback a hunting, was not suffered to return; but in show
of honor* was led to several Gentlemen's houses, in the mean time, that her
servants and her Secretaries are severed from Communication, her Cabinet and
Desks, and Copies of Letters, with sixty several Ciphers discovering all, were
seized and sent to the Council.

Now is Gifford sent by Walsingham into France, Gifford sent unto France,
and given out as banished; who leaves a Paper indented with the French
Ambassador* In charge, not to deliver any letters from the Queen of Scots, or
from the fugitives, that came to his hands and to be sent into France, but to
such only, that brought the counterpain of the Indented Paper, and there
impoisoned.
which he secretly sent to Walsingham. And so dep^^ted into France, where soon
he died; for, having done the main work, ere he went over, was for his reward
discovered to be a counter^eit (even by slight of hand and Walsinghams
contrivement) and so had ^auce to his knavish face, that pined him away by
inches.

In this condition was the poor imprisoned Queen at Fotherringhan Castle in
Northamptonshire; Q^. of S^ots c^mes to her Trial.
when the Council were as busy what to do with her. At last, they concluded to
proceed upon the Act of 27. Eliz. made the last year, against Plotters or
contrivers of the Queens death, as before said.

To which purpose a Commission under the great seal issued out, impowring
twenty four Noblemen and others therein, who came to the Castle the 11* of
October, to try and censure her.

Against which she excepted, As being her self a free Princess, and not liable
to trial for life; Her ignorance of the Laws of England, and without Council;
Her papers and writings seized; and so utterly refuses to be tried. Yet being
overborn, and convinced with many strong arguments of Law and Reason, she
submits.

The manner of her Trial was thus. The manner.
A chair of Estate was set as for the Q. of England, under a canopy at the
upper end of the Presence Chamber. B^neath, against it, was placed a Chair for
the Queen of Scots; close to the Walls on both sides of the Cloth of Estate,
Seats were made for the Lords, Chancellor, Treasurer, the Earls of Oxford,
Kent, Derby, Worcester, Rutland, Cumberland, Warwick, Pembroke, Lincoln, and
Viscount Mountacute. On the other side, the Lords Abergavenny, Zouch, Morley,
Stafford, Gray, Lumley, Sturton, Sands, Wentworth, Mordant, Saint John,
Compton, Chenos. Next to these the Knights, Privy Counselors, Sir James
Croft, Sir Christopher Hatton, Sir Francis Walsingham, Sir Ralph Sadler, Sir
Walter Mildmay, and Sir Amias Paulet. Forward before the Earls, sat the two
Chief Justices, the Chief Baron of the Exchequer; And on the other side the
other two Justices, Dealt and Ford Doctors of the Civil Law. At a Table in the
midst, Popham Attorney General, Egerton Solicitor, Gaudy Sergeant at Law, the
Clerk of the Crown, and two Notaries.

The Prisoner being set, L. Chancello^rs Speech.
Bromley Lord Chancellor turning to her, said, The most illustrious Queen of
England, being certified, to her great grief, that you plotted hers and the
Kingdom of Englands ruin, and the overthrow of Religion established; Out of
duty to God, her Self and People, and no malice or ill meaning, has authorized
these Commissioners to hear what can be laid to your charge, and your Answer,
to defend your own innocence.

She rising up said, Her Answer.
She came into England to implore aid, and was promised it, but ever since kept
Prisoner. That she is not the Queens subject, but a free and absolut^ ^rincess,
and cannot be compelled to appear before Delegates or any other Judge, for any
cause whatsoever, but before God alone the supreme Judge of all; which
otherwise were der^gatory to her own Princely Majesty, to her Son the King of
Scots, her Successors, and all other absolute Princes: Nevertheless she did
present her self to refute all Crimes that could be charged upon her.

The Chancellor replied, Chancellou^s Reply.
that her Protestation was vain; for whosoever offends the ^aws of England, in
England must be subject to the same, examined and judged; and therefore not to
be admitted. Yet the Delegates commanded her Protestation and his Answer to be
registered.

The Patent, and late newest Statute made a Law was read and opened: to which
she answered, that it was purposely made to entrap her.

Gaudy averred, Gaudy.
that she had transgressed every part and parcel of that Law: with a Narration
of Babingtons Treason, to which she was accused, as conspiring, abetting,
assenting to effect it.

She denies all, Queen.
never to have received Letters from him, nor written to him, she knew him not,
and requires Proofs of her Hand by any Subscriptions or Letters, nay, she never
heard tell of any such* Treason; Ballard she knew not, only, she understood,
that the Catholics were grievously used, and therefore she writ to the Queen
for some pity upon them. She confessed those Letters produced from many whom
she knew not, that proffered their endeavors for her enlargement, but she
excited none to any wicked Design, and being a Prisoner she could not hinder
their Attempts.

Then was Babingtons Letters read, his Confessions and Correspondencies with
her, wherein the whole Conspiracy was expressed.

She answered, that Babington might write them, but prove any receipt of them;
if Babington or any other affirm so much, I say plainly, They lie. A Packet of
Letters detained a whole year came to my hand, but I know not who sent ^t: But
Babingtons confession accused her therein.

She blamed Sir Trancis Walsingham for his cunning plottings to entrap her,
with counterfeiting Letters and Ciphers* which he lamely excused, and put all
upon policy of State.

This held out the Fore-noon.

After Dinner, was produced Charles Pagets Letter, and Curls (one of her
Servants) confession that she received it; touching conference with Ballard and
Mendoza for invading England, and setting her free.

She acknowledged that a Priest told her, Queen.
that unless she interposed, her Se^^^nd Son would be excluded from inheritance
to this Crown, for that the King of Spain clamed a Right, and would give place
to none, except to her self.

It was insisted upon the Letters of Nave and Curl.

She answered, Curl was an honest man, Que^n.
but no sufficient Witness, and Nave was sometime Secretary to the Cardinal of
Lorain, and commended to her by the King of France, and might be drawn by hope,
fear, and reward, to bear false witness, and had a hand over Curl; either of
them might insert into Letters more than she dictated, often times she not
examining them; before she signed* that all Princes may this way fall into
mischief, if their Servants and Secretaries may falsely accuse them; I desire
their presence face to face, to reply to my Exceptions.

The Treasurer Treasurer.
objected, that she purposed to send her Son into Spain, and to transfer her
Right and Title to England upon that King.

She answered, Queen.
that she had no Kingdom to bestow; however, what was her own, she might
dispose as she pleased, and not render account to any.

It was urged her Assistance and Pension to Morgan, who sent Parry into
England, to assassinate the Queen.

She said, Queen.
Morgan for her sake, had lost his Estate, and therefore she was obliged in
honor to relieve him; nor was she bound to revenge an injury done to the Queen
by a Friend that had deserved well of her; yet that she did always deterr him
from any bloody Enterprises; However Pensions were allowed out of England to
Sir Patrick Gray and other Scots my adversaries, and to my Son also.

The heads of her several Letters to Paget, Inglefield, and Mendoza were read;
Queen.
She said, they made nothing to the Queens destruction, but if any foreign
Prince would endeavor her enlargment, it ought not be a crime in them or her,
having often intimated her self, to the Queen, that she would endeavor her own
freedom.

She complained of her Servants and Secretaries perjury and treachery, and very
unfaithful unto her; that being a distressed Prisoner, and grown in years,
there could be no hope to perfect those things which were expected from her,
and therefore she was advised to confirm the Succession of England to the King
of Spain, or to some English Catholic Nobleman; And said, that a Book was
tendered to her for that purpose, which because she not admitting incurred the
displeasure of some eminent persons, for being no hope from England, she was to
entertain foreign help.

She desired to be heard in a full Parliament, or before the Queen and her
Council.

And now rising out of her Chair in great Majesty and confidence, she exchanged
some words with Burghley, Hatton, Walsingham and Warwick apart. And so the
meeting again was prorogued till the 25. day of October next, at the (...)-
chamber at Westminster, before all the Commissioners; where Nave and Curl
constantly affirmed, viva voce, all those particulars which concerned them to
aver, and which she had denied.

So then Sentence was pronounced against her, and ratified under their hands
and seals, in these words recorded.

By their unanimous consent at the Day and Place abovesaid; Sentence against
the Qu. of Scots*
they do pronounce and declare this judicial Verdict, and say, That after the
end of the said Parliament (specified in the Commission) viz. after the first
of June in the seven and twentieth Year of the Queen, diverse matters were
compassed and imagined in England by Anthony Babington and others, with the
privity of Mary Queen of Scots, pretending Title to the Crown of England,
tending to the hurt, death, and destruction of the Royal Person of our said
Sovereign Lady the Queen. And furthermore, that after the said Day and Year,
and before the Date of our Commission, the said Mary has compassed and
imagined in this Kingdom of England diverse matters tending to the hurt, death,
and destruction of the Royal Person of our said Sovereign, against the form of
the Statute specified in the said Commission.

All the Commissioners declaring that this Sentence did no way derogate to
James King of Scots in right or honor, but that he continued in the same right
and honor, as if that Sentence had never been passed.

This Sentence (you see) depended upon Nave and Curl, Opinions of her Sentence.
and not face to face, according to the first Statute 13. Elizabeth; diverse
opinions passed, whether credulous or incompetent. Nave's Apology to King James
afterward 1605. purges him with deep Protestations, neither Author nor
Abetter, nor remiss in his duty by negligence, or otherwise; but opposed the
heads of her Accusation to the death. But this appears not by Records; his
guilt showed somewhat that needed an apology.

Not many days after a Parliament is called, A d^legate Parliam^nt require
Execution.
the which was begun by authority from the Queen, derived to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Lord Treasurer, and the Earl of Derby, and the same it seems
not without former Presidents. A kind of modesty perhaps, that if a Virgin
Queen must look upon her horrid act, it must be seen through her fingers, and
Mary's Sentence accompanied with the Proscriptions of the Lord Paget,
Inglefield, Throgmorton, Babington, Salisbury, Jones, Tichburn, Tilves, and
others, confirmed; and their Goods and Estates confiscate. And the House of
Peers by the Chancellor petitioned the Queen, that the Sentence might be
promulgated, and besought her Majesty for safety of her Person and Kingdoms to
execute justice on the Queen of Scots.

The Queen was not to be ^aught her Answer. Q. Elizabeth^ cunning reply.
She acknowledged Gods protection, and their love and circumspection, for
preservation of Her and her People, against the many and mighty Plots of Hers
and their Enemies. How sorry she was, that the Scots Queen, notwithstanding her
forewarnings, should be thus entangled and guilty; whom (she protests) as a
Princess, as her Kinswoman and Sister, she had reluctance to spare, and to
forgive, were not the security of her People involved; for, their Peace she
values before her own life. Concludes, her thanks for their care and advice.
But in a cause of so great consequence, she will not be rash, but consider.

Twelve days after, she desires the Parliament to consult some other way of
safety, and to spare the Queen of Scots; but they answer with no other
satisfaction. To which the Queen in an excellent method requests them to be
answered, without an Answer. For if I should say, (said she) I will not do what
you desire, I shall then say what I do not think; and if I shall say, I will do
it, I may precipitate my self to danger, whom, I know, you wish to be conserved.

Then was Queen Mary's Sentence proclaimed throughout London, Sentence proclaimed.
and all the Kingdom, which she apprehends cheerfully and resolute, and writes
to the Queen, for her Body to be allowed Christian ^urial in France, where her
Mothers rested, since violence was offered to the Ashes of her forefathers by
the Puritans in Scotland; nor could she hope for burial with the Kings of
England; that she might take her Death not in secret, but where her Servants
and Friends could give good testimony thereof.

K. James her Son in sad perplexity for his Mother, sends William Keith of his
Bedchamber with Letters to Q. Elizabeth; though it seemed strange to him, that
the Nobility and Counselors of England should take upon them to sentence a
Queen of Scotland, King Jame^ perplexed ^ends Keith to Q^. Eliz*
and one descended of the Royal Blood of England; yet he would think it
monstrous justice for her Virgin Majesty to stain her hands with the Blood and
Death of his dear Mother, a Lady of in comparable excellency in the worlds
opinion, and of the same Royal condition and Sex with her Self: So, if it
should be resolved, desires her to consider, how his Honor stood engaged that
was her Son and a King, to suffer his Mother an absolute Princess to be put to
an infamous Death.

Keith, With several directions.
after some time of delay, urges for an Answer, but finding no hope, he
receives other Letters, commanding him to show the Queen how unjust the
Proceedings had been against his Mother, the Laws of God and Nations, for an
absolute Prince to be sentenced by Subjects, and she the first Example of
profaning Sovereign Diadems, Himself concerned in Nature and Honor to revenge
such indignity; and wills him to labor the delay of her Execution, till he
could send Ambassadors of his own into England; for by Letters from Archibald
Douglas his Lieger in England, he found him evil disposed to the business, and
therefore resolved to send one more honorable, and of greater trust, in his
place.

But Keith doing his duty, The Queens Answer.
showed the Queen his Masters direction, enforcing her into some passion, till
Leicester and others calmed her; and then she told him, She would give no
Answer in anger, but consider till morning, when she told him, that no haste
should be used, if any other should come from the King in reasonable time,
^roceedings should be staid, and be glad to receive overtures to save the
Queens life and assure her own.

The King certified of her passion, Other L^tters more c^lm,
posts other Letters more calm, since his other were construed as threats to
her Estates; and therefore he courts her into kindness, protesting that the
Rumors spread amongst his Subjects moved them into disquiets and mutiny at the
forms of Proceedings again their Queen. That for his part, he could well
distinguish any pressure, by the peril of her own life, and so not blaming her
directly, prays her to put a kindness upon Him, Her real Friend; desires time
till his Overtures be heard, hastily coming by the Master of Gray and Sir
Robert Melvil, and Ambass^do^^s.
who were to set out on Saturday after, and came to London in eight days.

Queen Elizabeth was better satisfied with these, being frightened before into
fear of breach of the late League, and War with her Neighbors, and so gave
them speedy Audience.

She told them, how sorry she was, no means could be found to save their Kings
Mother, and secure her own life.

They answer, Their Sovereign to save her life will interpose his credit, his
Nobility as ^ledges, that no Plot or practice should be contrived by her
against your Majesty; or otherwise to set her a^ liberty, Ambassado^rs reason
with the Queen.
and send her into Scotland, and so the better to secure the Queen.

Asking the reason, What should move any man to attempt against her Majesty for
Queen Mary's sake?

Because (said she) they think Her to succeed me, and she a Papist.

Then (say they) these means being taken away, the Danger apparently ceases,
for if her Right in Succession to England shall be made over in our Sovereigns
Person, Papists will have no more hope, and this we are sure his Mother will
resign to him.

But (replied the Queen) she has no Right, being declared incapable of
Succession.

If so, that she has no Right (said they) the Papists pretenses cease, and so
no fear of them to enterprise for her.

But (said she) the Papists allow not our Declaration.

Then let it sink (said they) in our Sovereign, by her Resignation.

Leicester being by, objected, that She being a Prisoner could not (...).

They answered, It being made to her Son, with advice of all her Friends in
Europe, in case Queen Elizabeth should miscarry, none would partake with the
Mother against her Son; all the Princes her Friends standing engaged for her
Resignation, that it should be valid and essential for her Son.

The Queen misunderstanding, was told the Ambassadors meaning, that the King
should be in his Mother place.

Is it so, says she? Gods Death, that were to cut mine own throat. He shall
never come to that place, and be party with me.

She was told, that coming in his Mothers place through her Death, he would be
more party.

Well, (says the Queen) tell your King what I have done for him, to keep the
Crown on his Head since he was born; and for my part I shall keep the League
betwixt us, which if he break, shall be a double fault: and in passion got away.

Melvil made after, requesting respite of execution for eight days.

Not an hour, said she.

The King by this Conference expects extremity, The King written to Gray.
and therefore writes to Gray, Think not to reserve your self any longer,
nothing doing good if her life be lost, adie^ dealing with that State. As you
affect my favor, spare no pains, nor plainness. Read what I writ to Keith,
and accordingly conform; and in this your industry, let me reap the fruit of
your great Credit there, and Duty here, either now or never. Farewell.

Leicester took some pains in a tedious Letter to satisfy the Kings
importunity, by telling him the common jealousy of all Princes for their own
security, especially by such persons, as being within a Kingdom, and Leicester
to the King.
and claiming Title to that Crown, should conspi^e with Traitors to kill the
Queen; comforting the King (as well as he could) how more dangerous Queen
Elizabeth's Death would be, than his Mothers liberty would advantage; concluding
with grave advice, not to quarrel the breach of amity, and their last League of
firm friendship.

And to boot, So does Walsingham to the Lord Thirlstan.
Walsingham writes to the Secretary of Scotland, the Lord Thirlstan, (with whom
he kept private intelligence) as a wonder, the Kings earnest desire to save his
Mother, seeing all the Papists in Europe affecting the change of Religion in
both Realms, built their hopes altogether upon Her, who in passion to Papistry,
had transferred her Right to both Crowns, unto the King of Spain* in case the
King her Son should persist in his Profession.

And true it was, False Tale^.
that such tricks were rumored, to divert the King from constancy in Religion;
but never so done by her; if you will credit her Declaration at her Death:
though I know (for I have seen it) a Popish Abbot in the life of Cardinal
Laurence, at that time Protector of the Scots Nation, affirms, the said
Translation of these Realms to be in his hands, and delivered to him by Court
Olivarez the Spanish Ambassador at Rome; but such forged Tales and Titles
might have served the turn, if the Enterprise of Eighty Eight had taken effect
against England.

Thus the King leaving no means possible unattempted for a prudent and pious
King, Scotland in disorder.
but to to none effect; the State of Scotland then in a miserable distraction,
made so, partly in policy from England, and the most powerful Faction
soliciting Queen Elizabeth for their Queens Execution; insomuch that it was
objected, (as Pilate said) shall I kill your Queen?

And therefore now the King commanded the Ministers and Kirk in Scotland to
commend her cause to God in their public Prayers, The Ministers refuse to pray
for their Qu.
which by no means their charity could afford, but absolutely refused; then he
appoints a solemn Day of Fasting and Prayer, with Supplications to God for Her,
commanding the Bishop of Saint Andrews to pray and preach; against whom the
Ministers opposed, and in presence of the King put up in the Pulpit a young
Fellow John Cooper, Cooper a saucy Minister.
not entered into the Function, to whom the King cried out, Master John, that
place was designed for another, yet since you are there, Do your Duty, and obey
the Charge, to pray for my Mother.

He replied, To do no otherwise than as the Spirit should direct him.

Whereupon, the Captain of the Kings Guard pulled him down, and the Bishop
performed the Office, most grave and learned.

For this insolency, Cooper was called to account, accompanied with Balcanquall
and Watson, Is committed
who were discharged their Ministry, and Cooper committed prisoner to
Blackness.

Then he concludes his last Messenger with letters, More letters from the K.
Advising the Queen to conserve her fame and renown by her clemency, as yet
unspotted from any stain of cruelty, not to be now defied and polluted with the
blood of his Mother, the wound reflecting to his smart, which he should never
leave unconsidered, to the tyranny of them that thirsted his destruction long
since, as they do his Mothers now. Beseeches the Queens mercy and compassion to
them both.

In a word, A Mandate for execution.
It was a business that till that time had no President, and Queen Elizabeth to
say truth, as much perplexed what to conclude, brought her mind the more into
confusion.

At length, she signed a Warrant for a Mandate, fitted for the great Seal,
Davison.
and her Execution; and trusted it with Davison one of her Secretaries, to be
in readiness in case of danger. But he too hastily had it made up under the
Seal, which (some say) she would afterward have recalled, but was prevented by
the earnest prosecution of Beale Clerk of the Council, Queen Mary's enemy.
Be^le.
Him the Council sends to the Earls of Shrewsbury, Kent, Derby and Cumberland,
for her Execution, unknowing to Queen Elizabeth; for (it is said) at that
instant, She told Davison that she was resolved of another way than by death.
Indeed she was in distraction what to do, but whilst she doubted, the Council
did it for her. And so had her head taken off by the Axe at Fothringham Castle
in Northamptonshire.

But, The manner of her Execution.
because her high birth and Exellencies deserve particular Memorial, I may not
forget her behavior in the last Act of Life and Death. The Earls coming
thither, Pawlet and Drewry being there before, were added Commissioners to see
her Execution.

And gave her warning on Monday the sixth of February 1586. to prepare against
Wednesday next, the eighth day following. At which, she smiled, it being very
sudain, short, and unexpected: But said, that her death was welcome, seeing her
Majesty (meaning Queen Elizabeth) was so resolved; And that, that soul was
unworthy of Glory, and the joys of Heaven, whose body can not endure one blow
from the Hangman. A good while, she was silent, then weeping bitterly, retired
into her Chamber, where she spent her time in devotion, and settling her Will.

The eighth day brought her forth, Her featur^^.
to a sad execution. She was of Stature tall and Corpulent, thick shouldered,
fat-fac'd, and broad; double chinn'd, hazell eyes; Her (borrowed) hair,
somewhat appearing, was Aburnd; and her attire thus,

On her head, a dress of Laun, edged with Bone-lace; a chain of Pomander, Her
apparelled.
and an Agnus Dei about her neck, a pair of Beads at her Girdle, with a golden
Cross at the end of them; a Veil of Laun fastened to her Call, bowed out with
Wyar, and edged with Bone-lace.

Her Gown of Black Satin, printed, with a train and long sleeves to the
ground, set with Acorn-buttons of Get, trimed with pearl; her short sleeves
Black Satin cut, which opened upon purple Velvet sleeves under them.

Her Kirtle whole, of figured Black Satin, her Petticote and upper bodies of
Crimson Satin unlaced in the back; and the skirts of Crimson Velvet; her shoos
Spanish leather, the inside outward; a pair of green Silk Garters, watchet Silk
Stockings, clock't and edged on the top with Silver; and under them, a pair of
white Jersey-hose.

Thus set out (and not hastened) she willingly leaves her Chamber, Comes forth
of her chamber.
and paces toward the Scaffold, gently supported with two Gentlemen, Pawlets
servants; Thomas Andrews high Sheriff of North* going before.

The Commissioners ^^tended her coming into the Antichamber, Commissioners
receive her, who
with diverse Knights and Gentlemen of that Country. And amongst them, speaks
with Melvin her* man.
her servant Melvin, designed by her to go to Scotland; Ah Madam (said he) what
unhappy wretch am I, the Messenger of my gracious Queen and Mistress, and of
her death.

The Queen not till then weeping, My good servant (said she) mourn no more,
thou shall see Mary Stewarts troubles ended in an instant; The world is all but
vain; Say thus much from me, That I dye true to My Religion; faithful to the
Interest of Scotland and France. God forgive them that thus long have sought,
nay thirsted for my blood, as the Heart does for Waterbrooks.

O God, Thou the Author of Truth, the searcher of the secret Chamber of my
heart, know that I was ever willing to the Union of Scotland and England. But
well, Gods will be done.

Commend Me to my Son; Tell him, that I have done nothing prejudicial to the
State and Kingdom of Scotland, nor to mine own Honor. And so resolving her
self into Tears, bids Melvin farewell, and kissing his cheek, said, Once again,
Good and faithful servant farewell, pray for thy Queen and Mistress.

And turning to the Commissioners, And to the Commissioners.
she made some requests to them, That certain moneys in Pawlets hands, might be
paid to one Curl her servant, which was promised.

Next, That her servants might enjoy what she had given them by Will; and to
have conveyance into their several Countries, and this my good Lord of
Shrewsbury, I conjure upon you.

Then, That her poor servants might be witnesses to the world, of her patient
suffering; and that she died a constant Roman Catholic.

To this she was refused, Who deny he^ some requests.
and Kent humbly told her, It might interrupt her quiet in their passions and
behavior, as is usual (said he) in dipping their linnin and skarfs in blood.

My Lord, said she, smiling, I will give my word (though but in death) they
shall not deserve blame. Ah, las! poor souls! they desire to bid me adieu. I
hope your Mistress being a Maiden Queen will vouchsefe Me the modesty of
Woman-hood, to have of my own about Me at death.

You have not such strict Commission, but may afford Me more, were I less then
the Queen of Scotland.

But, At which she weep^,
being denied, She burst into tears and scorn, I am, said she, Cousin to your
Queen, descended from that Royal King Henry the Seventh; a married Queen of
France; and anointed Queen of Scotland. This is not well.

Upon which importunity they consulted, And they yield.
and appointed to her Melvin and an Apothecary, her Surgeon a Burgonian, and
one man more; and two women of her Chamber.

And now, and she come^ to the Scaffold
she passed on into the Hall, with undaunted courage, stepped up upon the
Scaffold, raised two foot high, and twelve broad, railed about, a low stool, a
Cushion and the Block, all covered with black.

Being set, Sits down.
the Lords and Shrieff on her right hand, Pawlet and Drewry on her left; the
two Executioners (common Hangmen, the one of London, the other of that Country)
stood before her; the Knights and Gentlemen, placed round about without the
Rails.

After silence made, Beale^ speech.
Beale Clerk of the Privy Council, having read the Commission for her
execution, the people shouted, and cried, God save our Queen. During which, the
Queen with very careless regard, seemed as not there concerned.

Then Doctor Fletcher Dean of Peterborough standing before her, Dr. Fle^cher
Dean of Peterboroughs exhortation.
without the Rails, bowing his body with due reverance, gave her this
exhortation.

Madam (said he)

The Queens most Excellent Majesty (notwithstanding this preparation for
execution of Justice, justly to be done upon you, for your many trespasses
against Her Sacred Person, State and Government) having tender care over your
soul, presently to depart, does by me, offer to your consideration, that by the
true faith in Christ our Savior, you may live for ever. First to consider,

Your estate past and transitory.

Your condition present and to come,

And the means of bliss, Or

Bane everlasting.

Herein, having read her a tedious Lecture of the bodies frailty, commends to
her consideration the Glory of Immortality, with comparisons of Mercy or Misery
for ever: and so concluding (with the best Counsel he could) to deny her Romish
Religion.

But she, She interrupts him.
not able to hold out till his ending, interrupting three or four times, tells
him, he need not trouble himself nor her, to change her faith, in which she was
settled during her life, the ancient Catholic Roman Profession, In defense
whereof she had been always, and yet would be ready to sacrifice her blood.

The Earls said, Madam, we will pray with your Grace, that you may be
enligh^ned with the true knowledge of Jesus Christ, and dye therein.

The Queen thanked them, but refused to pray together, unless in her own
devotions.

Then they required the Dean to pray, He prayed for her.
who effectually in a long Prayer, desired God to open her understanding by
Faith and Repentance, to turn from her vain affection of Papistry, and to dye
in the true Protestant faith.

All which time, Her demeanor in Prayers.
the Queen sat on her stool, with a Latin Prayer Book in her hand, a Crucifix
and Beads, not regarding what he said; Her servants also did the like.

But then the Queen, with all her people, with a loud voice, and in tears,
prayed in Latin.

And after that, her self concluded with an English prayer, for the Church
afflicted, for her Son, and for the Queen, and professed to be saved by the
blood of Christ. Upon this, kissing her Crucifix (said she) will I shed my
blood.

She earnestly prayed, That God would avert his judgments from the sins of
this Kingdom, and to afford the people grace of Repentance.

And prayed for forgiveness of her Enemies, who so long had sought her
destruction, to convert them into the truth, and desired all Saints to pray for
them and her.

Kissing her Crucifix, crossed her self, and besought Our Savior who spread
his Arms for all, to receive her now unto his mercy, Amen.

The Executioners kneeled to her, Executioners and servants disrobe her.
and begged forgiveness, which she granted very unfeignedly, as she said,
heartily willing to receive this cup, the end of all her miseries.

Her women began to disrobe her; one of the Executioners took from her Neck the
Agnus Dei tied behind, which the Queen laid hold on, gave it to her woman, and
told him, he should have money. But suffered them, with her women, to take off
her chain and apparel in some have and gladness, always smiling; and putting
off her strait sleeves with her own hands, denied the fellow, who rudely
offered at it.

With more than smiling scorn, told them all, never such Grooms; disrobed a
Queen, nor never did she undress before such company.

And now in her Petticote and Kirtle, Her servants sorrowful.
prepared for death, her women skreeking, cried out with exceeding sorrow,
crossed themselves, and prayed in Latin.

The Queen crossed and kissed them, desired their prayers without mourning, and
crossed her men servants, who stood without the Rail, weeping and crying out.

One of her women with a Corpus Christi-cloth wrapped corner-wayes, kissed it,
put it over the Queens face, pinning it fast upon the Call of her Head.

Then she kneeled down upon her Cushion, She kneels at the Block.
resolutedly undaunted, spoke aloud in Latin the whole Psalm, In te domine
confido, ne confunder in aeternum.

And groping for the Block, laid down her head, put her chin over the block
with both her hands, and held them there, which might have been cut off with
her head, had they not been espied.

But being advised, she quietly ordered her self again, and stretching forth
her Arms and legs, And is executed.
cried out, In Manus tuas domine, etc. three or four times, when one of the
Executioners gently held her down, and the other gave two strokes with the Axe,
before her head was off, leaving a little gris^e uncut, without the least stir
or remove of the body. He lifted up her head, and said, God save our Queen.

Her dressing fallen off, her hair appeared so gray as at seventy years, 46.
years old 18. years prisoner.
very short: Her lips stirred a quarter of an hour after.

Then said the Dean, So perish the enemies of our Queen. So said the Earl of
Kent.

Very remarkable was there, Observable, her Dogs d^meaner.
one accident; The Queen had a little Shag-dog, that always followed her
Person, even to her footsteps, who (unespied) crept under her Garments, and
would not remove but by force, snarling and biting; nor would afterward
depart, but laid down between her head and shoulders, most notoriously noted by
all. The Commissioners gave way to the humor of the Dog, who imbrued himself in
her blood, snarling and casting up his eyes as if to quarrel with them all, and
bite at them who washed him, as they did all things else* that were bloody.

The Executioners had money, but no part of her Garments. The Corpse was carried
up into the great Chamber, Her Corpse buried in the Cathedral of Peterborough.
Magnificently removed by K. James to Westminster, 1612.
and there imbalmed, and afterward buried in the Cathedral of Peterborough: and
her funerals were kept more Magnificently by the Guises at Paris; and yet more
illustrious twenty six years after by her son, the King, in the remove of her
Corpse from thence to Westminster, where she lies intombed amongst the Glories
of her Royal Ancestors.

And thus she died, Mary Queen of Scotland, great granddaughter to Henry the
Seventh of England, by the eldest Daughter Margaret, six and forty years of
age, and in the eighteenth year of her Captivity, Anno 1586.

Let us give her to the World in this brevity.

She was designed by Henry the Eighth to his Son Edward the Sixth, Her Epitaphs.
and by Henry the Second, King of France, for Francis the Dolphin; at five
years of age she was conveyed in to France, at fifteen married to the Dolphin,
who was after King of France.

She was sole Sovereign Queen of France one year and four months. Her Husband
being dead, she returned into Scotland, and married the Lord Darly by whom she
had King James.

Near to her Tomb in Peterborough Church was this Epitaph fixed in Latin, but
soon pulled down.

Maria Scotorum, etc. Thus Englished:

Mary Queen of Scots, a Kings Daughter, the French Kings Widow, near Kinswoman
to the Queen of England, and next Heir to the Crown, adorned with royal virtues
and a kingly mind; often, but in vain, demanding the Privilege of a Prince; by
barbarous and tyrannical Cruelties, the Ornament of our Age, and a right
Princely Light is extinguished; and by one and the same infamous Judgment both
Mary Queen of Scots, (to a natural Death) and all surviving Kings, (being made
common persons) are doomed to a Civil Death; a strange and uncouth Grave,
wherein the Living are shut up with the Dead. Cum sacris enim divae Mariae
cineribus, omnium Regum, atque Principum violatam atque prostratam Majestatem
hic jacere scito; and quia tacitum regale satis superque Reges sui Officii
monet, plura non addo, Viator.

Indeed so much was said and censured, that the Queen and State began to
double; she in a monstrous sadness and tears, denying Address of the
Counselors; and her self excuses her Death to the King of Scots by Sir
Robert Carry.

MY dear Brother,
I would to God you knew, though not to feel, how my mind with imcomparable
grief is disquiet, in regard of this lamentable Event, against my meaning and
intent, Q. Elizabeth's Letter to the K. of Scots.
which because my Pen trembles to utter, by this my Cousin, you shall understand
it. I am not so poor of spirit, to be afraid to do what is just, or to deny it,
I entreat you, that God above and many on earth may be witnesses of my
innocence therein; and that you would credit, had I commanded, I would also now
not deny it. being done; nor appertains it to a Prince, to shadow the meaning
with ambiguous words, nor will I dissemble my Actions, out of their own color.
Persuade your self to the truth. As I know this is deservedly come to pass, so
if I had meant it, I would never have laid blame on others; nor will I impute
to my self what I never dreamed. The rest he shall impart, by whom you receive
these; as for me, I would have you credit, that there is none more truly
affected toward you, or more studious for you and your affairs; if any shall
otherwise suggest, believe them not. God keep you long in safety and prosperity.


And Carry on his Journey, poor Davison her Secretary (to make good the Errand)
is called to trial in the Star Chamber, Davison sentenced in Star Chamber.
before Delegates assigned; a man of singular modesty and mildness, answered
much for his innocence, as being unwilling to contest with the Queen, yet could
he not endure his modesty should wrong the Truth and his own Integrity, and so
suffered himself to be be guilty and censured a thousand pounds Fine and
Imprisonment, which he endured a long time, and never could procure the Queens
favor, though he was relieved by her charity in his great necessity, which
after followed.

The Qu. (says he) upon the Departure of the French and Scottish Ambassadors
from Her, His apology unto Walsing.
of her own accord commanded me to prepare the Commission, for executing the
Sentence against the Queen of Scots, and when it was exhibited, she willingly
signed it with her own Hand; and after, gave order for it to be made ready
under the Great Seal of England; and merrily said, Signify thus much to
Walsingham, who is sick, though I fear greatly it will make him die with grief.

She added also Reasons, why she had deferred it so long, to wit, That she
might not seem to be drawn unto it forcibly or maliciously; though she were not
ignorant all the while how necessary it was.

She blamed Paulet and Drury, that they had not freed Her from that care, and
wished that Walsingham would try them therein.

The next Day the Great Seal was to it, she sent Injunction by Killegrew, that
it should not be done. And when I showed to Her, that it was done, she reproved
my haste, intimating, that some other couse by some wise Persons might be taken.

I made Answer, That that was always the best way, which was the justest.

But fearing that she might lay the fault on me, (as she had done the Duke of
Norfolks punishment on the Lord Burghley) I imparted the whole matter to
Hatton; protesting not to engage any further in so great an Affair. He strait
way did communicate to Burghley, and he to the rest of the Counselors, who
all consented to have it hastened: and severally vowed, that they would bear
the blame; and they sent down Beal with the Commission and Letters.

Three Days after, perceiving her mind doubtful, by reason of a Dream which
she told, of the Queen of Scots Death; I asked, if her mind were altered? No,
(said she) but some other course might have been thought upon. And with all
demanded, if Paulet had returned any Answer?

Whose Letters when I showed to her, wherein he plainly refused to undertake
it, as being neither honorable nor just;

She in anger accused him and others, which had tied themselves in Association
of Perjury, and their Vow violated, who had promised great matters for their
Princes safety, but would perform nothing: yet there were amongst them (she
said) that would do as much in their own cause.

But I showed, how infamous and unjust a thing that were, and withal into what
Dangers she should cast Paulet and Drury; for if she allowed the Fact, she must
draw upon her self Danger and Disgrace, besides a note of Injustice, but if she
disallowed it, she must ruin well-deserving men and their posterity.

Afterward, the same Day, that she was put to Death, she gave me a Check, that
the Sentence was not all this while put in execution, as thinking it not done.

Hereby appears foul play intended, Foul play on all hands.
by another (no doubt) wicked way, which Paulet and Drury boggled at to
perform: and yet we see, what daubing there was on all sides, to cast the blame
and after-shame on any, to keep the stain and blot from the eminent Actors.

And the cunning of Walsingham, who having the greatest hand in the contrivance
toward her Death, craftily got out of the way at the Deed doing; and therefore
Davison appeals to him, telling the truth in his politic absence of a
counterfeit cold.

And Walsingham is put upon it, Walsinghams Letter to pacify the K.
to work his wits how to pacify King James, with a tedious Letter to the Lord
Thirlstan, who had the chiefest interest in the Scottish affairs of State;
propounding to him, important Reasons, to keep the King from enmity with
England; which though very effectual, might meet with the like resolution in
Him, to forbear violence, and to take up a more calm consideration. But though
the Letter be long, we may not hinder it the worlds approbation.

SIR,
BEing absent from Court when the late Execution of the Queen your Sovereigns
Mother happened, Walsinghams Letter to the L. Thirlstan.
I did forthwith upon my Return impart to Master Douglas some things,
concerning the course was conceived here, by your said Sovereigns best Friends,
fit to be holden in this remediless Accident; for continuance of Peace and
Amity between the two Crowns, as the best for both Nations.

The rather, for that by advertisement out of Scotland, I understand that the
Queens Death is like to breed a strange Alienation of his Majesty's mind
toward this Realm, tending (as is reported) wholly to violence and revenge of
that, which has been done so necessarily by the whole Body of the same;
whereof, as for my own part I should be sorry, so it is generally hoped, that
his Majesty being of that singular judgment himself, by the good help and
advice of such as you are in credit and authority about him, men of wisdom and
experience, whom he will hear, this mischief, will (notwithstanding) be
carefully and prudently prevented; considering how every way all things being
rightly weighed, this course will be found prejudicial, as well to your
Sovereigns Estate, as to his Reputation, if he resolve to persist therein.

For first, the Enterprise will undoubtedly be condemned, in the sight of all
such as shall not be transported with some particular passion; for that they
shall see, that he takes Arms for revenge of an Action (besides the necessity
wherein it is grounded) full of so honorable and just Proceedings, as, however
the effect was contrary to their liking, the manner thereof, by the late Queens
great Favorers, could not but be approved and allowed. And as on the one side,
the King your Sovereign oppugning the course of Justice; of so unlawful,
unjust and desperate a Quarrel, cannot be expected any other thing than an
unhappy and miserable issue: so, we being assured, that in the defense of
Justice, the assistance of God his mighty Arm will not fail us, whose Judgment
this was, need not to fear* what ever man shall attempt to the contrary,
against this Realm.

But not to stand upon the justness of the Quarrels, which every man perhaps
will not so much regard; It would be considered, what means your Sovereign
shall have to go through with such Enterprise, if he take it in hand. For, the
Forces of his own Realm, being so far inferior to these in England, no man is
so simple, but sees it were no way safe for his Majesty, trusting only
thereto, to make Head against the power of this Land, neither is it thought,
that any man will be found so unadvised, as to wish him so to do.

But, as it may be, that a great Number (for lack of understanding) are carried
away with such Discourses, (as some without solid ground imagine) of that might
be done in this case by a King of Scotland, backed and assisted (as they
conceive in the air) with the French and Spanish aid; so it is likely enough,
there shall not want those, that either in satisfaction of their private
passions, or supply of their necessities, or better affectionating of some
other their private design, would be content to serve themselves of this
present public occasion and opportunity, who will propound and promise more to
his Majesty, of such foreign assistance, than they know in their consciences,
can be performed, if he would declare himself Enemy to this Realm; which that
he should, (though to his own ruin) the Enemies of both Nations, will do what
they can to procure.

But men of wisdom and understanding, laying before their eyes, as well the
accustomed delays, and after long ^ollicitation and pursuit, the simple
supplies and support, commonly found at these foreign Potentates hands; as also,
how doubfull and uncertain the success of War may appear; England (God be
thanked) being so prepared, and in case to defend it self, both otherwi^e, and
also by the conjunction of Holland and Zealands Forces by Sea; in respect
whereof, this Realm need not fear, what all the Potentates of Europe being
bended against us, can do, to afford the same; Due consideration (I say) being
taken hereof, you will easily judge and find, how vain it were, for your
Sovereign, upon so uncertain hopes, to embarque himself and Estate in an
unnecessary War: but much more, if you shall consider, what a sequel and train
of Dangers, this War draws therewith, the consequence whereof reaches to
whatsoever your Sovereign possesses, or hops for in this life. For, escaping
to be slain in the field, if he should happen to be taken Prisoner, or be
constrained to retire himself out of the Realm, (things that have often fallen
out in experience) and then, having incensed this whole Realm against him, he
should be disabled from any Right in the Succession of this Crown, (as
authority is given to do it by the same Statute, whereby they proceeded against
his Mother) for attempting the Invasion of this Land, what extremity should he
be reduced unto?

And truly it could not otherwise be, the ancient enmity between the two
Nations now forgotten, being (by drawing blood one of another again) likely to
be in such sort revived, that it would be impossible to make them to receive a
Prince of that Nation, and especially Him, who had (upon so unjust ground) been
the Author of so unhappy a Breach.

Besides that, the greatest part of the Nobility, by whose judgment the late
Queen was condemned, and the rest of the principal Gentlemen of the Realm, who
confirmed the same in Parliament, should have just cause to adventure any
thing, even to the marching over their bellies, rather than to yield to his
Government, who carrying such a vindictive mind, they might doubt, would not
day call their Lives and Honors in question.

And as for the remedy and relief which he might attend (standing on those
terms) of foreign Princes, there are many Examples of former Ages, and within
fresh memory; as the King of Navar's Grandfather by the Mothers side, and
Christian King of Denmark, both being allied to Francis the First, and Charles
the Fifth, two of the mightiest Potentates that reigned of long time: and that
this present Don Antonio, may su^fice for Examples, to teach all Princes, (if
they can avoid it) to beware how they fall into that state, whereby they shall
be enforced to seek their own by other Potentates means; Princes, not being so
ready in these days, to embrace other men's Quarrels, but where they are
extraordinarily interessed in their own fortunes.

Wherefore I doubt not, but it will be seen by men of judgment, (not
transported with passion, or led away with private respects) that it should be
every way, the only best course for your Sovereign, by a good and kind usage
of Her Majesty, and by showing that Princely moderation, as well in this
grievous Accident of his Mothers death, as his whole proceeding with this Realm
(which his Highness excellent Education seems to promise) to seek to win the
hearty good wills of this Nation; as the chief and principal assurance he can
in any sort obtain.

For, to trust and depend either upon the French King, or the K. of Spain, as
if by their assistance, he might attain to the present possession of this
Crown, they being indeed the only two Potentates, whom he must have recourse
unto, if he reject the amity of England; whosoever shall so counsel your
Sovereign, (as things now stand) shall in the judgment of men of the best
understanding, be blamed either of fidelity or want of wisdom, drawing his
Majesty unto so untoward and desperate a course.

For, it is no way safe for any Prince to repose his trust and strength upon
their favor and assistance, to whose desires and designs his greatness may
yield any impeachment or hindrance; so it were clearly against common reason,
to expect other support and assistance from them, than might stand with their
own commodities and pretensions, in respect whereof, neither of the two
foresaid Kings can simply and roundly join with his Sovereign to his good.

First, his Religion being odious to them both, and likely to prove most
prejudicial to the Catholic Cause, he growing so great, as he should be made
by the union of the two Crowns; the consideration whereof, caused his Mothers
affairs to stick a long time, and made now in the end, to leave him quite out
of the reckoning, ordaining the King of Spain her Heir, if her Son became not
Catholic.

Next, it is merely repugnant to the policy of France, were it but in respect
of the ancient claim which England makes to that Crown, to suffer the uniting
of this Island under one Prince.

They have been content in former times, when England had footing in France, to
serve themselves of your Nation, therewith to annoy this Realm, by the means of
diverting or dividing the Forces thereof; and so perhaps the Politics of
France can be content to wish at this day, by your Sovereigns Quarrel, or any
such like, to be eased of the burden and miseries of the present War,
wherewith they are plagued, by transporting the same into this Island. But as
this Realm has good means to prevent the mi^chief, if it were intended; so
were your Sovereign to look, when all were done, but to be made an Instrument,
as his Predecessors have been, of the effusion of much Scottish blood, for
French Quarrels, and the desolation of that Realm.

And as things stand presently in France, it is not to be thought that you
shall find the King ready to hearken unto any Enterprise of this Land; He
being most desirous to live in peace, both with his Neighbors abroad, and with
his Subjects at home; but that he has been forced full sore against his will,
by the practice of them of the House of Guise, to countenance with his
authority the Civil War raised in that Realm; which makes him (what ever show
he has to shadow out the contrary) to hate them in his heart.

Neither would it be held sound counsel, to be given him, by any that depends
upon his fortune, to further the advancement of a King of Scots so nearly
allied to that Family, which he has discovered, and greatly fears to level
at his own Crown, with any intention to depose him, which by the greatness of a
King of Scots, they should be so much the sooner and better able to effect.

The King of Spain's assistance, being now in War with this Realm, were more
likely to be obtained, but far more dangerous to be used, in respect of his
most insatiable ambition, deep practices, and power, accompanied in this case
with a color of Right, wherein how far he would seek to prevail, any
opportunity or advantage being offered, it may be justly doubted, by the
experience that sundry States have had, which upon slender grounds of Title,
have been extorted and wrung from the true Inheritors, and annexed to his own
Kingdom, as Navar, Portugal, and all that he possesses in Italy, has been.

It is believed, that the King of Spain, considering his years, and unsettled
Estate every way, would willingly incline to peace, if it were offered, with
reasonable conditions, and not over readily at this present, imbarque himself
in any new Enterprise.

But, otherwise it is well known, as he had fancied to Himself the Empire of
all this part of Europe, so he had an eye to this Realm ever since he was King,
in Right of his Wife. The Conquest was intended under color of Religion, as it
was discovered by some that were of his Privy Council at that time; his
pretension to be Heir of the House of Lancaster, and (since the late Queen of
Scots Death) the first Catholic Prince of the Blood Royal of England, as also
the Donation of this Crown, made to him by the Queen of Scots in her Letters,
with a promise to confirm it by Testament; (things blazed abroad by the Spanish
Ambassador at Paris) ought to breed jealousies and suspicions in your
Sovereigns head, and give him true cause to think, how he should be used at
such an Assistants hand. Auxiliary Forces have ever been reputed dangerous, if
they either in number or policy were superior to them that called them in. The
Assistance therefore of Spain and France being of this nature, as your
Sovereign has need of neither, so he shall do well to forbear them both, and
so shall it be well for his ease.

It may be, some will pretend by change of his Religion, your Sovereign shall
better his condition, in regard of these foreign Princes; besides, a great party
within this Realm, that thereby shall be drawn wholly to depend upon his
fortune; but the poor distressed estate of Don Antonio, being a Catholic
Prince, spoiled by a Catholic, and receiving so little succor at Catholic
Princes hands, shall be a sufficient bar to all that can be said in that behalf.

As for the Catholic party in England, in his Mothers life, it was never so
united, as they drew all in one line, much less will they be brought suddenly
to rely upon him, if he should alter his Religion, (as God defend) which would
be his utter discredit and overthrow, both with the one and the other party;
neither having cause to repose confidence in him; the Protestants, because he
had renounced the Religion, wherein he was with great care brought up.

The Papists, because they could not be assured in short space, that he was
truly turned to their faith; yea, all men should have reason to forsake him,
who had thus dissembled and forsaken his God.

And whereas it was given out, that diverse do insinuate into your Sovereign,
that his Honor and Reputation is so deeply interessed herein, as it must
necessarily turn to his perpetual ignominy and reproach, if he give not some
notable testimomy to the world, of the affection and dutiful love he bare to
his Mother; your King being of that singular judgment, that he is thought to
have, cannot be ignorant, how far true honor ought to possess a Christian
Prince, that is, not whither Passion or fury uses to carry men, but whither
Reason or Wisdom have laid the bounds, that is, within the compass of
Possibility, Decency and Justice.

If the late Queen had been innocent, Revenge had been necessary, just and
honorable; but being culpable, contrary, (in all reasonable men's judgments) he
has sufficiently discharged the duty of a Son, in mediating for his Mother, so
long as she was alive, and so far as he was able to prevail; they which require
more at his Highness hands, may be presumed, not to regard what beseems his
Place and Dignity, but to seek the satisfaction of their own particular
passions and desires.

And whoever persuades his Majesty, that the mediation used by him for his
Mother, contrary to the humble pursuit of the whole Parliament, has already
given that offense to the Nobility and People of this Land, as it behooves him
of force to have recourse to foreign supports, does greatly abuse both his
Highness and this Realm; for as they were not ignorant, what Nature might and
ought to move his Majesty unto, so long as there were any hope of her life; so,
they do not doubt, but that reason will induce him to leave sorrowing, and
thinking of her, in due time.

Thus have I troubled you with a long Discourse, whereunto the desire I have of
the continuance of amity between the two Crowns, has carried me unawares
further than I purposed; all which, I refer to your consideration, not doubting
that you will afford most readily and willingly all good offices that shall lie
in your power, to the end that a happy conclusion may ensue hereof, which shall
tend to the common good of the whole Island. And so I commit you to God.

From the Court at Greenwich, Martii 4. 1686. Your Lordships assured Friend,
FR: WALSINGHAM.


Here was good Counsel for the King, The King^ deportment upon his Mothers
death.
but for the present, in great discontent he calls home his Ambassadors out of
England; the States of Scotland urge him to a revenge, to seek aid of foreign
Princes, and a Navy from the King of Denmark, whose daughter then was in treaty
of Marriage with him.

The Catholics suggested, rather to join with the Pope, Spain, and France, and
to desert the Puritans; who (they said) would murder him, as his Mother. Some
willed him to be Neuter, to take time to bethink, and by that means, whilst his
distempered condition gave excuse for his Acting, he might piece himself to
that party, where he should be sure of best support. Always, he resolved to
keep peace with England, and constancy to his Protestant Religion.

And thus, Whom Queen Elizabeth caressed.
whilst his wisdom beyond his age (twenty two years) sat still, the Queen
feared the more; not knowing, what Counsel might provoke him to her prejudice,
and so stayed some time, till the length thereof might mitigate her sorrow,
being indeed to big to be cured, Anno 1587.
till it should lie down, and rest with its own weight and weariness.

Therefore knowing how mightily the French wrought in their mine to provoke
both Nations to public defiance, she maturely sends several Messengers, and
afterward the Lord Hunsdon her Ambassador, with studied arguments, to take off
his adhering to foreign friendships, and the danger thereby to both Kingdoms,
where his interest in succession was most of all concerned, being his just
right, to which his Mothers sufferings could be no prejudice.

But the next year, Philip King of Spain, sends to the Duke of Parma his
Governor in the Low Countries, Designs upon the King to revenge.
in his Name, to promise to King James money and Ammunition, sufficient, to
attempt revenge for his mothers death. Parma sends over to Scotland Robert
Bruce, a Scot by birth, and noble family, with money to quicken his purpose.
The Pope, also, Pius Quintus, dispatches thither his Bishop of Dublin, to
promise to the King the Infanta of Spain in marriage, if he would turn Roman
Catholic; but faithful, Metallan the Chancellor, frustrates those hopes, and
returns him home with a flea in his ear.

But ere he departs, he designs on William Creyton a Scot also, and sometime
Rector of the College, Designs in Scotlaand.
of Jesuits in Leyden, to stay behind; and this man treats with Bruce to
murder Metallan. Bruce refuses that Assassination; and then he is urged to
hire with Parmas money, some needy noble man there, at a banquet, to poison the
King his invited guest, and was denied in that also. Then he quarrels with him
to part with fifteen hundred Crowns, to distribute them to three other Lords to
effect it, but being refused in all these, he stays the time to work out other
mischiefs hereafter; and Parma dying, he accuses Bruce of Treason (for not
willing to be a Traitor) and for which he indures long imprisonment ere he got
liberty.

The Earl of Angus (to make him quiet) was sent the Kings Lieutenant on the
Borders* Earl A^gus dies bewitched.
this was done to rid hm out of the way of disordering the Court, where he was
ever factious, and to his own liking also, for he was contented with the
condition of those people, with whom he spent much of his former time of
treachery and trouble; But his disease, there, increasing, he dies. He was of a
swart complexion, His Character.
tall and slender, well proportioned and strait; of a weak and tender
constitution. His death was ascribed to witchcraft (frequent profession with
them) by one Barbery Nepair in Edinburgh, wi^e to Dowglass of Castogle, who was
condemned, but execution deferred, she being with child, and for the present
reprieved, and after neglected, and so saved from the Gallows. Annia Simson
also a famous Witch confessed, That a picture of wax was brought unto her,
having the letters A. D. written on it (which she was told, signified Archiball
Davidson) and which she execrated after her form; but it seems it proved
Archiball Dowglass (or Davidson) for his father was named David. He dyed the
nineth Earl, and the last of his race.

If it were not natural to the Scots to be contrivers of mischief in their own
Bowels, Civil broyl^ in Scotland to kill the Lord Thirslton by Gray,
yet now it was not policy for England to let them need their helping hands
therein; and therefore new troubles are stirred up in the Scots Court. The
Master of Gray conspiring with the Lord Maxwell to kill the Lord Thirlston, Sir
James Hume and Robert Douglas reveal it to Sir William Stewart (who was
returned to Court) and assure him, that Thirlston, Gray, Blantine and himself
brought in the Lords at Sterlin, and put his brother Captain James Stewart from
Court, which now he repented, and would this way assist him to revenge.

Stewart not confident in the man, accused,
discovers all to the King and Thirlston complains to the Council, which Gray
denies, and Sir William justifies, and more, accuses him of abuse in his late
Ambassie into England, and treacherously consenting to the death of the Kings
Mother. But these accusations referring to truth and a leasurely Trial, they
were both committed. Which came again to examination and further accusation of
Gray, of Treason also.
for letters to the French King and Duke of Guise; not to assist Scotland in
revenge of Queen Mary's death, unless the King would tolerate Catholics, which
Gray could not deny, but begged mercy, ingenuously confessing that he finding
Queen Elizabeth's resolution, advised to put her to death, rather in private,
than in forms of Justice; and acknowledged those words mortui non mordent, to
be his, and so meant, and not as they were detorted. And so craving the Kings
gracious favor, He was banished.
was condemned and banished; A rule of the Kings clemency, never to ruin, whom
he had affected.

The King now twenty one years complete (and more) calls a Parliament in July
at Edinburgh, A Parliament, the King reconciles the Lords.
and for preparation, summons the Noblemens whom he reconciled from all
controversy, and feasts them all at Court: And being the better whittled, they
went hand in hand by couples to the Market-cross. A rare sight to the people if
it would last.

He hoped to do as much with the Churchmen, And endeavors to do so by ^he
Kirkmen, who refuse mediation.
Ministers and Prelates: But soft, they are not in charity with the King
himself, for the committing of their brethren Gibson and Cooper, which was an
offense to the Godly, and for the admitting Montgomery (by the Kings desire)
who was excommunicate. It must not be but by sparing some of his punishments,
in case the King release Cooper; so nothing done for either. And being now up
in spiritual Arms, they petition the Parliament, That the Prelates might be
removed from sitting among the Estates, as having no authority from the Church,
no function nor charge at all. But the Abbot of Kinlass made answer, That the
Ministers had disorderly shut them out of their Churches, and now would turn
them out of their places in Parliament. And indeed do what the King could to
the contrary, there passed an Act for annexing the Temporality of Benefices to
the Crown, upon pretext of bettring the patrimony, and to leav the honor of
Estate without Tax on the people, but to the utter decay of the spiritual;
Priors and Abotts being turned temporal Lords, which the King afterward
finding inconvenient, advises his son in his Basilicon Doron to anull, That
vile and pernicious Act, as he calls it.

The Borderers were up, Borderers in ^^wd.
taking advantage of any quarrel, now make incursions upon England with fire
and sword, beginning the revenge for their Queen Mother, as they termed it.
Hereupon Hunsdon Governor of Barwick gets audience of the King (all others
before being refused) urging the most of Walsinghams reasons before mentioned,
Hunsdon Ambassador to Scotla^^*
as a hazard to his succession, to raise war with England, and satisfies the
King with a Declaration of the Judges, and the sentence of Davison in
Star Chamber, as if all had been done without Queen Elizabeth's knowledge, and
so the Borderers were commanded to be qniet.

An Ambassador Patrick Vaus of Barnborough from Denmark, Ambassadors about
the marriage with Denmark.
accompanied Peter Young the Kings Almoner, who had been sent to Treat of the
Marriage in May last, return now in August with the conclusion; and that in the
spring, a Nobleman should be directed to accomplish the Ceremony in Denmark and
bring home the Bride. But the death of King Frederick her father in April,
delayed the business for certain months after.

To end this year, Jesuit^ arrive in Scotland.
comes over diverse Jesuits and Priests, to deal with the Catholic Lords in
Scotland, to assist the next years invasion of England, in hope to find
friendship if they should be forced on their Coast, and outwardly made it their
business of revenge, for his Mothers death, promising to conquer the Crown for
his sake, that was sure, otherwise to wear it; but the King hastily returns
them home again, and proclaims against them, and their Abetters.

And the Churchmen taking fire, Kirk-men insolent.
though all fear was quenched, they Assemble Lords and Laics, and in a
confused multitude beset the Kings resolutions, to do of himself, what they so
earnestly desired. And therefore in great choler sends them word, That they
meant to boast him with their power, and force the execution of their demands,
and admitting some of the number, they confer with the Kings Council, and so a
good course was concluded against the Catholics, and the Ministers bidden to
depart.

Nay, Anno 1588.
now they are up, allay them who can, for ere they disband, the grievances of
the Church must be rectified. James Gibson heretofore censured for his
misdemeanour against the King, and had liberty upon promise of his Recantation
and Submission in the Pulpit; and in mutiny for Gibson.
but the man had a new Light, and told the People, that out of infirmity he had
confessed a Fault, but his conscience now was otherwise revealed; that his
actions heretofore were innocent.

The Chancellor has the opinion of the Assembly, Gibsons ab^se of the King.
whether To call the King Persecutor of the Church, and threaten him to be the
last of his Race, were well done? and this to the People out of the Pulpit?

Much ado in dispute, to find error in so godly a man; the major Votes made it
offensive; and in the afternoon he was to appear for defining the Censure; but
in the mean time Gibson gets away, and was excused, being in fear of the King,
so great an Adversary; and this endured a long debate, in behalf of him, ere
the Kings Advocates could plead a distinction, between his Majesty and their
Ministry; and all that could be gotten for the King was, the man to be
suspended, during the pleasure of the Assembly, which lasted but the next
meeting in August, where Gibson gives his Reasons of not appearing before, for
fear that the affairs of the Church might be hindered by disturbance, He flies
into England to the Schismatics.
if his person had then suffered in presence of the People.

Upon this deep Declaration, without asking leave of the King, he is purged of
his contumacy, which so incensed the King, who taking upon him to be somebody,
the Fellow was forced to fly to the factious Brethren in England, who were
laboring to bring in the holy Discipline into that Church also.

For the infection of Schisms had spread abroad in England greater Injuries and
more impudent Contempts than had been known before, Puritans of England.
upon the Temporal and Ecclesiastical Magistrates, Martin, f. 780.
by the Puritans (as one calls them) of those days; and Queen Elizabeth, Semper
eadem, not enduring Innovation, as impugning directly or obliquely the Royal
Prerogative.

The Zealots for the Geneve Discipline, railing at the English Hierarchy with
scurrilous nonsense Libells, by names of Martin-Mar-Prelate, The Demonstration
of Discipline, sought mischief upon the Bishops; the chief Authors were Penry,
Udal, Ministers; Job Throgmorton, Knightley and Wigstone, Laics; their
Favorites drawn in, to defend their Railings, and were soundly fined in
Star Chamber; yet they privately held conventicles, and had their Synods,
Classes and Presbyteries; for this cause Thomas Cartwright (the Father of the
Disciplinarians) Snape, King, Proudlow and Pain, were questioned, whom certain
conspired to rescue; and so great was the petulancy of these Patriarchs and
their Disciples, as would require a particular Volume to unfold. See Hist. Q.
Eliz. by Martin, fol. 782.

The King, to keep things fair with England, resolved to visit the Borders with
some Forces to the West Marches, Maxwell in Rebellion is pursued by the King.
whither the Lord Herries was fled, but submitting, and promising to conform to
Protestancy, he was dismissed, and sent to his charge there again.

Whilst the King was in this Expedition, the Lord Maxwell formerly having
leave to travel into Spain, and perceiving there the great preparations for an
Armado of Ships to invade England, returns home (invited by some Scottish
Catholics) against his promise, without the Kings leave; and lands in a part
of Galloway in April, where it was rumored that the Spanish Navy should land,
about the West of Scotland, and so by Maxwels means and assistance, they would
join with the Borderers and enter England that way, the most likely to prevail;
where numbers of loose Libertines and out-lodgers repaired to Maxwell, of which
the Lord H^rries (being in his Wardenship) acquaints the King. Maxwell is sent
for to compeer, but refuses, and fortifies his Houses and other Holds, levies
Horse and Foot, and expects to encounter with the King, who came to Dunfres
with so hasty marching, Maxwell fli^^.
that Maxwell was almost surprised in the House, but gat away some hour before
to Galloway, whilst some resistance at the Town Port, gave him that
opportunity and leisure to escape.

And on the King goes, Ca^tles rendered.
summons Laugholme, Treve, and Carlavarock, places of strength, who surrender,
but the Castle of Lochmaben commanded by David Maxwell, bids defiance to the
Kings face, and made it good against the Assault, until Ammunition and great
Guns were sent for to the English Warden, who forthwith committed them to a
Guard of Soldiers, and at the Approach and some Shot, they yielded to parley
with Sir William Stuart, for the King, and to render the Castle upon quarter of
Life; but the Captain refusing the Kings Summons, was hanged, the rest had
pardon.

The King stays not, but pursues Maxwell to Dunfres, and sends Sir William
Stuart to follow the chase, and forced him to fly to Sea in a small Bark, whom
he follows in a Ship of the Town of Air, overtakes him a fews Leagues off, and
forces him to yield, who is brought to land, Taken Prisoner.
and presented a Prisoner to the King; this was held timely good service, which
so pufft up the young Knight with pride, that some weeks after, contesting with
insolent words to the Earl Bothwell, at Edinburgh, he killed him outright.

The noise of the Spanish Navy gave fears of their setting forth in August,
Rumou^ of the Spanish Navy.
and in prudence for the Scots also to arm, not knowing whom to trust, the King
convenes his Nobles at Edinburgh for their advice.

For howbeit (said he) I have no occasion to distrust the Friendships and
League with all Christian Princes and Estates, The Kings Speech.
yet the Case of England lodges so near upon us, as in time may turn to be our
own, and we forced to share in their Troubles; the Spanish intention is for
England, and seeing my Right in Succession to that Crown, it were no wisdom for
me, to suffer another to possess it before; and the Spaniard has not usually
been so kind or conscientious to depart with any thing he lays hand upon,
though another Right; they take Religion for a Pretext of their Invasion, but
it is the Kingdom they seek; and we professing the same Faith with England, are
sure to fare accordingly, as in their Success; and the Prosecution of their
Holy League will fall upon us also.

But I have ever thought, mine own and the safety of Religion, so conjoined, as
they cannot separate; nor do I desire to live and reign longer, than I shall
maintain the same. I suspect what many may counsel, that this occasion fits
Revenge for my Mothers Death; but, however, I am not over credulous, as to be
confident of Queen Elizabeth's excuses, concerning here ignorance therein: nor
will I be so unwise as to accept the assistance of one mightier than my self,
to fight my cause, lest he become Master of us all. Thus you see my mind, and
my Reasons; give me your advice and assistance, what we shall do.

The Chancellor seconded the Kings opinion, The Chancellors opinion.
by many historical Examples, and discreet politic Arguments; yet since the
Queen had not desired any aid from your Majesty, it would not be amiss to
secure your own Territories, by not suffering the Spaniard to land in your
Dominions: that a general Muster may be taken, and some Noblemen named, to whom
the People might resort for Command; that Watches be set upon the Seacoasts,
and Beacons erected to allarm the Country, and that the King and Council would
reside at Edinburgh, for Command and Authority over all.

Bothwell urged other Arguments of Revenge, Bothwell persuades to invade
England.
and to invade England, from whom in this exigent (said he) we shall be sure to
force good conditions; and as for himself, he had already raised Forces, at his
own charge, for the public service, as an Example for others to do the same;
expecting that his opinion would prevail for Invasion. But the King commanded
him to guard the Coast, according to his Office, (Admiral of Scotland) and so
he seemed to be satisfied.

To instance the dangerous Treacheries amongst some of the Scots, Col. Semples
false designs.
against their own Nation, in reference to the Spanish pretentions, appears,
first in the Design of Colonel ^Semple, who had about six years before,
betrayed the Town of Lire to the Spaniard, and from that time remained in
Flanders with the Prince of Parma, arrives now at Lies, pretending a frivolous
Commission from Parma to the King, which seemed of so small importance, as that
it was apprehended rather a false color of practice with some evil disposed
persons, Sir I. Carmichel Capt. of the K. Guard is therefore commanded to have
an eye upon his Actions, till the King returned, being now journeying to
Falkland; Carmichel does so, and having intelligence of a Pinnace newly arrived
in the Frith, and a Passenger already landed, went hastily, and surprises
Semple, reading of the Dispatch, seizes him and them; the Colonel offers of
himself to attend the Council, is rescued by Huntley.
but by the way was rescued by the Earl Huntley, who undertakes himself to
compeer with him. The Chancellor hears of this, being then at Church, (the
general time of Humiliation) and with a throng of people following him made
after Huntley, but the King happily returning met them before, and brought them
all to Edinburgh.

The Chanc. informs the K. whom Huntley opposes with a weak Defense for
himself, whilst the Colonel escapes away, and never more seen. The King had a
gracious inclination to Huntley, having very lately married him to a gallant
Lady, of kin to the King, who is dismissed the Court.
but dismissed him the Court until the Spanish Navy was dissipated, and the
general joy of that Defeat made all Friends at home.

Queen Elizabeth much pleased with the Kings foresight, Q. Elizabeth's message.
and with Maxwell's Commitment, and Huntley's Banishment, with other the like
prudential Providence of the King, sends Sir Robert Sidney in August to
congratulate his wisdom herein, and to conclude mutual assistance, in case the
Spaniard should land on either Kingdoms: and discoursing of Spains ambition to
seize on England, Sidney said, Your Majesty may be assured of the like kindness
at his hand, if he prevailed. The King merrily answered, That he expected the
same which Polyphemus promised to Ulysses, to devour him after his fellows: and
so with great courtesy dismissed him, upon whose return home, another Messenger
was sent with News of the Navies overthrow.

But not to sit down with the contrary of Caesar's Motto, The narration of the
Spanish Navy.
who no sooner came but he overcame, this Fleet no sooner seen but was sunk in
the Sea; the wonder of the worlds apprehension, so invincible an Armado, must
needs demonstrate to these Nations Gods gracious and powerful arm in the
overthrow; and though the main intent was against England, whose Prayers and
Pens have often given the glory to their Redeemer; yet because some spoils of
that wreck were cast on the Scots coasts, we may not refer the Reader without
the Book to others relation.

This Discourse I find imprinted anno 1688. suddenly set out by the Queen to
rejoice her Subjects with each particular, and published after by other
Nations, in French, High Dutch, and Hollands.

The Introduction invites the Reader to a religious consideration of the
promise and power of God to defend his Church and People, by Examples; Lamech
(trusting to his sons inventions Iubal and Tubal-Cain) boasts unto his Wives,
that he would not take the least injury, but he would slay a strong man in his
wound, and a young man in his hurt. Nimrod (in the second Age) hunting men like
wild beasts, erected a Tower to reach to Heaven, in pride and contempt of God.
Nabuchadnezzar, Nicanor, and others the like.

It has been frequent for the wicked to encourage themselves, and discourage
the good, the one mighty in number, the last but few and weak; to that end
tended the railing Rabshake the blasphemous Ambassador, of the wicked
Sennacherib; Make war (says he to Eliakim) with my Master the King of Assyria,
and I will deliver to thee two thousand Horse: Have any of the Gods of the
Nations delivered their Land from the King of Assyria? Where are the gods of
Hamath and Arphad? those of S^pharvaim and Ivah, that the Lord should deliver
Jerusalem out of my hand?

Truly the Italian Lamech, and Spanish Nimrod, the Pope and Spain, the one by
his Priestly practices, Bulls, Excommunications, Interdictions; the other by
his several politic assaults heretofore not prevailing, now his Babels Towers,
vast and high built Bulks, Gallions, Galliasses, appear, to amaze the World,
and frighten Heaven it self: so that it may be urged in opposition to all, as
by the sequel was said of Iehosaphat, We had no strength to resist so great a
multitude coming against us, neither knew we what to do, but our eyes were fixed
on thee our Lord.

The first Squadron was of Gallions of Portugal, The number of particulars.
wherein were ten Gallions and Zabres, amounting unto and imbarqued in them
7737 Tuns. 3330 Soldiers. 1230 Mariners. 350 Guns.


The Army of Biscay ten great Ships and four Pinnaces. 6567 Tuns. 2037
Soldiers. 868 Mariners. 260 Cannon.


The Army of Castile fourteen Gallions and two Pinnaces. 8714 Tuns. 2458
Soldiers. 1759 Mariners. 348 Guns.


The Army of Andelusia eleven Ships. 8762 Tuns. 2400 Soldiers. 800 Mariners.
260 Guns.


The Army of Guipeuzie fourteen Ships. 6991 Tuns. 2092 Soldiers. 670 Mariners.
250 Guns.


The Army of the East ten Ships. 7705 Tuns. 2880 Soldiers. 807 Mariners. 310
Guns.


The Army of Hulks. 7450 Tuns. 2804 Soldiers. 640 Mariners. 315 Guns.


The Pitaches and Zabres of Don Mendoza three and twenty Hulks. 10271 Tuns.
3221 Soldiers. 788 Mariners. 410 Guns.


The Squadron of Zaregosse two and twenty Pataches. 1131 Tuns. 479 Soldiers.
574 Mariners. 193 Guns.


The Galliasses of Naples four. 873 Soldiers. 468 Mariners. 1200 Slaves. 200
Guns.


The four Galleys. 400 Soldiers. 400 Slaves. 20 Guns.


Summa Totalis. 130 Ships. 20 Caravels. 10 Saluces with Oars. for public
Service.
57868 Tuns. 19295 Soldiers. 8450 Mariners. 2088 Slaves. 2630 Guns.


The chief Officers were,
The Duke of Medina Sidonia Captain General. Officers.
Iuan Martines de Ricalde Admiral. Diego Flores General of the Army of the
Gallions of Castile. Don Piedro de Valdes General of the Army of Andalusia.
Michael de Oquendo General of the Army of Givopesque. Martin Bretandona General
of the Ships of the Levantines. Gomer de Mendoza Commander of the Hulks.
Antonio Hurtado Commander of the Pitaches and Zabres. Diego de Medrano Chief of
the Galleys.
The numbers of thousands of Quintals of Biscuit, Pipes of Wine, Flesh and
Fish, Rice, Beans, and Pease, Oil, Vinegar, the Carriages of War, and all
manner of Provisions for Land-service, would amaze the Reade^, and weary the
Accountant, which was truly summed up and imprinted at Lisbone before the Fleet
set out, being the 30th of May, 1588.

And afterward there followed out of Lisbon toward the end of June, a supply
of an Army of eighty Sail of Ships to join with the Armada.

Their design was to join with the Prince of Parma, Their Design with Parma.
who was to meet them in the Narrow Seas, and so to invade England together,
but whether he was kept in by the Hollands fleet, who assisted the English, or
was not ready, or bribed, he came not forth at all.

The English had Pinnaces of intelligence, The first approach.
that of long time before expected the Armado, who were detained by cross
winds. The English Fleet anchored at Plymouth, and having sight of the Enemy,
waited on them a loof, playing upon such as scattered or lagged hinmost;
amongst whom was the Gallion of Don Pedro de Valdes, taken in fight, and sent
to Plymouth. Another of Don Olenquo, Anno 1589.
which took fire, but he was saved and sent Prisoner. The Galliass of Naples
sunck in the sands of Callis, In which Road the Armado anchored, attending for
Parma, but by a Stratagem of eight old Ships, fitted with all manner of
combustable matte^, the Ordinance charged with Bullets, Stones, Iron, and
Chains, and fired at a reasonable distance (the wind and tide serving) they
were carried in a flame upon the midst of the Enemies Fleet, at which time, the
trains taking fire, it falling out to be night, Defeated by a S^ratagem, of
fire ships.
and so unexpected, that not able to weigh Anchors, they cut Cables, and in
monstrous confusion sailed they knew not whether, without Order or Command,
made to Sea, till the morning light ranged them in some Order, and sailed
toward Graveling; but no Parma appearing, the English small Ships, swift and
sure, chaced diverse of them and sunck the great Gallions of Biscay. Two others
of Portugal torn and tottered, Several Shipwracks,
fell upon Flanders, and were taken by the Dutch, The General returned Soutward
with such of his Ships best provided and arrived safe at Biscay in Spain. The
rest of the Fleet, taking the Sea Northwards (in distress for Water and
hindered with wind, ignorant also of those Seas and shoulds) that above 40.
sail were cast away on the Coasts of Scotland, the Isles Orkneys, and so round
again Southward, between England and Ireland. As the great Ship of Florence,
fell upon the West of Scotland, fired by the High-Landers. And of all the
Numbers of Ships aforesaid, only fifty five came safe to Spain, there were
lost thirteen thousand five hundred Men and Mariners, and as themselves say,
Great Losses.
not a family of repute in all Spain, but suffered the loss of some kinsman,
and in this fray but one English Ship, and one hundred men in all missing. So
that what the Spaniard provided in four year, was thus far ruined in four
Weeks, to the glory of God, and everlasting comfort of Great Britain.

The King on his part (first at Court; and afterward through all his Kingdom)
gave public thanks to God for this good riddance of so formidable an Enemy.

Whether the Astrologers were in the right or wrong, prophecies.
that foretold of Wonders to happen this year; and meant the success glorious to
Spain; or whether the wonder was that they should be sunck in the Sea, as they
were, certainly they writ of this and the succeeding years, full of fatallity,
as in France it fell out more fearful. But for the Western Isles we felt none
at all; and yet the effects were threatened by them upon all of us.

The Scots Catholics were much amazed at this event, Scots Catholics
dis^ayed
who Parma comforted with Letters, Intimating the loss not great, which should
been the next Summer, by a fresh Fleet prepared before to succor these, which
now joining, will soon make good all the defects of the former.

Robert Bruce brought this news to Huntley, to be communicated unto the rest of
that faction, and some money was sent amongst them, but because Huntleys share
was not parted proportionable to his desire, and desert, he grew cold in the
cause, and in some discontent; the King took the advantage, and advised him to
subscribe the Confession of Faith, and so was reconciled to the Church, and
neglected by the other ever after.

But he was put upon it, to satisfy the Prince of Parma, and by letter, Huntly
writes to Parma.


That after the escape of Semple, (as aforesaid) he was so beset by the Kings
jealousies upon all his actions, that either he ought to yield, or to depart,
or to have taken up forces to secure himself, which he was not then able to do,
all hopes failing, with the evil hap of the Spaniards. But what had evil
effect, he should endeavor to recover, by some good service for advance of the
Catholic Cause. However God had put him in such good credit with the King, as
that he has altered his Guards, and added of his own friends, by whom he hopes
to be assured, and at convenient time to be Master of the King. And so when the
promised support shall arrive, he should be able to spoil the Heretics, and
make sure for the Catholics. Besought him to be persuaded of his unchangeable
affection, though in outward show he was forced to accomodate himself with the
present time.

January 1589. Edinburgh.

Another such like was sent over from the Earl of Arrol (whom Hay the Jesuit
had seduced) So does Arrol.


That since his Conversion, he was obliged to advance the Catholic faith, and
that Religion, the greatest and most important cause in the world, being now
joined to another civil consideration of great affinity to the affairs at Home;
He was therefore the more entirely obliged to his Catholic Majesty; and that
in Scotland, His Highness had not a more affectionate Servant than,

ARROL.


And at the very same time, And so do Huntley, Crawford and Maxwell,
other letters were sent by Huntley, Crawford, and Morton, (so did Maxwell
style himself in prison) to the King of Spain, when after their great regret,
for the mischance of the Navy, they assure, that if it had visited them, it
should not have found resistance in Scotland, and with their Support have
assisted sufficient against England. The blame of all they lodged upon the
English Catholics refugers in Spain; who in enmity to others, did too much
magnify their own, as best able to do all. And therefore prayed his Majesty,
not to over-countenance the one, to other neglect; but that the ends of all
should aim at one. And then, remitting to the advice and Declaration of some of
his own Subjects, lately returned from hence for several Commodious advantages,
how and where to land an Army in Scotland, they proposed, that with six
thousand Spanish, and money to levy as many more, they might within six hours
arrival, be well advanced in England, to assist the forces that he should send
thither. They advise him, not to make Armies by Sea, but to assign some of his
forces to Scotland, others by the West of Ireland, toward England, and so the
forces divided, part at Sea, others in Scotland, the enemy should be amused
therewith; referring much more to the bearer Colonel Semples relation.

The Jesuits of Spain, Catholic Lords Rebel.
tired out of their plots and designs against England, resolved to work out
their way by Sedition in Scotland, undermining the affections of any
discontented parties, and so being put in muteny, they might easily restore
their decaying Romistry. Industry and Secrecy would bring it about.

To that end were employed Bruce (the old Lieger Jesuit) with Creighton and
Hay, his former Comrades, to persuade Huntly (bastard son of John the Prior of
Coldingham, son of James the fifth King of Scotland) with Arroll, Crawford, and
Bothwell, to force the King from the Chancellor and Treasureshands; and no
difficulty to induce the people to resent their actions, supposing the King to
be weary of such power about him, as reduced him to their dispose. The Faction
of the English flesht with his Mothers death, in time would do so by him and
his Friends; and no doubt these sufferings would soon justify their rising to
rescue him and the Realm from ruin; and no mention being made of Religion, the
Country would be more calm, to resist their enterprise.

The meeting must be between Lies and Edinburgh, Design how to meet.
and so to Edinburgh, to settle themselves at Court about the King, kill the
two Counselors; Bothwel aboade at Crichton, and kept about him some Soldiers,
whom he had seduced. Crawford and Arrol, with their Friends, came to the Ferry.
Montross* stayed six miles off; But Huntley came through, and the evening of
the appointed time, assisted by Kinfawnes, brother to Crawford, and some of
Arrolls servants, these filling the presence find the Chancellor with the
King, with some of his Friends, Ormston, Carmichel, and others, who
mistrusting, encompassed the Chancellor, and so he got forth.

The suspicion and danger of some design intimated to the King, Huntley is sent
for, examined, and committed to the Castle; which occasioned the company with
Crawford and Arroll, to dissolve, and their design discovered.

And for not appearing before the Council, Arroll and Bothwell are denowned
Rebels, Montross and Crawford submit, and Huntley left alone, does so too, and
is permitted to go to his North Government. By the way he meets with Montross
and Crawford, belay the way to surprise the Treasurer, and gave him chase to
Brikel, where he was received, and they fire the House, and so forced to yield
himself Prisoner, for some Weeks.

But thus prepared for the cause, they take arms again, close and undiscovered,
till several Messengers bring news to the King a Hunting, That Bothwell,
Huntley, and others were marching. The King gathers such Forces as he could for
the present; Bothwell (ever inconstant) retires to places of strength, and is
left of his Men. Huntley goes on, surprises Glams his Enemy, and Captain of the
Guard; But at the Kings nearer approach, quits all, and lurks at home amongst
the Rocks at Strathbolgie; but not safe from himself, his rebellious heart
suspects the issue, and so submits to mercy, which was no worse than a Prison
for the present, and afterward he and his pardoned upon Petition.

Whilst these disorders were at home, their former Letters sent to the King of
Spain, and to Parma, and some others also from Bruce, were intercepted by Q.
Elizabeth, which laid open all the practices of the Lords.

And therefore she writes to the King, Queen Elizabeth writes to the King.
Complaining of his remissness in punishing these Treacheries, and of his
kindness to such of the Spaniards, that fled into Scotland, after their wreck
at Sea; she besought him, not to delay opportunity to punish the Offenders, and
to rid the Realm of such Strangers.

Hereupon they were shipped over toward West Flanders, and by the way, were
met a league from that Coast, by some Hollanders, set out to intercept them,
who boarded one ship, putting all the Spaniards to the sword, the rest ran
their ships a ground, and most of the Men pitifully drowned.

A Proclamation issued out against all Jesuits remaining, Proclamations against
Jesuits who join with the Rebels.
and Hay, Creighton, Bruce and Graham, expressly commanded to depart, upon pain
of death; but they enticing Huntley, Crawford and Arroll, take arms together,
came to Aberdeen in April, and declare,

That the King is kept Captive, requiring all good Subjects to join for relief
and freedom of the people.

They depended on Bothwell, and his Forces in the South, whom the King
proclaimed Rebels. And for the present marches against the Earls as far as
Cowry, near Aberdeen, where he was told, that the enemy was three thousand
strong, and hastening to meet the King.

The King put to the straight, The King incourages his forces.
cheers up his Company, That they had the better cause, and himself in person
to suffer with them, against such, whose conditions could never be wrought
upon, by benefits or good deeds, to make them loyal; assist me therefore as you
shall find me forward, rather for you, than for my self.

Thus resolved, Hamilton and Angus differ for the honor of the Vant-guard;
Angus claiming the place by privilege, heretofore granted to his Predecessors;
Hamilton argued his neerness to the Blood Royal; who carried it by the Kings
favor.

But the next Morning discovers the Enemy dispersed, for fear or favor to the
Kings person, to which respect Crawford condescended; Commission* ers sent to
^etch the K. Bride from Denmark.
but Arroll earnest to fight, and they refusing, he parted from them at, Dee
Bridge, and the King returns to Edinburgh. And there in some assurance, he
disposes his affairs for consumating his marriage with Denmark, and to bring his
Bride into Scotland.

The Earl Marshall had the Commission, assisted in Company with the Lord
Dingwell, Sir James Seringeour, Mr. John Sheen, Advocate, and Mr. Young,
Archdeacon of St. Andrews. And for the more honorable defraying the expense, a
subsidy of a hundred thousand pounds (punds I conceive) was granted by the
Council (by a former Warrant of Parliament 1587.) and sudden payment was made,
by the well-willing Subjects, earnestly desiring a Marriage for the issue of
Royal Succession in his Race.

Against this time of public joy, Rebels submit, and are committed.
the Rebels humbly submit to Justice, and were impannell'd before the Earls of
Hamilton, Angus, Morton, Athol, Mar and Marshall, four Lords, and four Lairds.

1. They were charged for practicing with Jesuits, and others, against the
Religion; receiving money from Spain, and therewith raising forces. 2. That
they had confederacy with Arroll, Montross, and others, and treasonably
surprised Perth. 3. That they conspired to imprison the King, to murder
Maitland and Thirlstan, Counselors of State. 4. For besieging the house of
Kirkhill, firing that house, and imprisoning the Lord Treasurer Glams. 5. And
convocated by Proclamation, the Kings liege people against his Majesty. 6. They
opposed the Kings forces and his Person at Dee. 7. They seized the Kings
Herald, and rifled his Letters. 8. And the last concerned only Bothwell, for
entertaining Strangers, and others, at Dalkieth, forcing the Town of Lies.
They were adjudged guilty, but the sentence suspended; Crawford committed to
Blackness, Bothwel to Tantallon, and Huntley to Edinburgh Castle.

We may wonder, Ministers make work.
why the Ministers are missing in all these broyls; and now the Assembly
convened at Edinburgh, the King desired them to afford him Patrick Galloway to
attend his Court. They (now) acknowledge his Majesty's Power to command, and
his grace and favor to acquaint them with his pleasure.

A good beginning of their duty and obedience, not long lasting: For the King
having given his Kinswoman (The Duke of Lennox Sister) the last year in marriage
to Huntley, and the Bishop of Saint Andrews celebrating the same, was then
censured by the Acts of their Church; the Bishop not acknowledging their power
against his Majesty's command, they pronounce and deprive him of all function
in the Church, and ratify the judgment to be proclaimed in public.

This troubles the King, and in fear of more disquiet was fain to suffer their
Sentence, and to make peace with all and remits, the imprisoned Lords to
liberty; for now he hears that the Marriage is accomplished by Proxy, The King^
design to meet his Queen in Norway.
and the Queen at Sea; when lo, an unlookt-for message, that the Navy of her
Conduct was driven by Tempest into Norway, where she should stay till the
Spring. But his affection over-mastering all difficulties, he resolves to
hasten a Scottish fleet and fetch her home himself.

And to shadow his purpose from any home distempers, The cause and manner thereof.
he pretends to send the Chancellor and Justice Clark in Commission to her.
But the ships fitted, he in private sets sail in October, leaving a direction
to the Council, for Government of his Kingdom, under his own handwriting, thus.

To satisfy some, concerning himself, and to take off suspicion of blame upon
others; he shows them the Causes, and the reason of the manner. It has been
conceived overlong (says he) to defer my Marriage, being alone, without
Father, Mother, Brother or Sister, and yet a King of this Realm, and heir to
another, which nakedness made him weak, and his Enemies strong. For one is no
number, and where no succession, contempt follows. And my delay thus long may
beget a suspicion of impotency; nor am ^ over rash, or passionate, without
reason to direct me, but the treaty made perfect, I resolved of a Bridegrooms
honor, to make it possible on my part, which was not on hers to perform to me.

For the manner, I first intended the voyage to the Admiral Bothwell; which
miscarried upon his Miscarriage. Then I commended it to the Chancellor, who in
truth and prudence, made some difficulty for the State to furnish a Fleet,
seeing the Queen was there provided; but zealous of my service offered his duty
and obedience, which I made public, reserving my resolution only to my self;
not that I varied from his Counsel, as in my weightier affairs heretofore I
valued; but to clear him from advising me this way, with hazard of my person;
and which indeed had not become any Counselor to have done. And because his
wisdom, enabled me in my youth, to what I did, it might still reflect also on
my weakness, to be wanting to my self, and suffer him to act all, to the Malice
and envy of others, and so in pity to heap no more slanders on him, I made
this work my own without injury to any.

Besides what I have said, the short passage, and safety from Seas and Sands,
without Peril of Pirates, (for other enemies I have uone) conclude that it is
my pleasure; that all conform to my directions in my absence (God willing) not
twenty days,

Farewell, James Rex.


This Declaration was the next day after he was shipped, presented by Hay Clerk
of Register to the Council, together with the directions hereafter.

Seeing it has pleased God to bring Us to the age of Manhood, with further
direction^.
and that nothing has been more earnestly desired, by our good subjects, than
to have Us honorably matched, that the Crown might descend to our Su^cession
after so many worthy Progenitors. And so setting down the course of his
Treaties, with Frederick King of Denmark, lately deceased, and contracted by
Proxy with his Daughter, who in her voyage to Scotland, was by storms driven
to Norway, willing rather to winter there, than to return back. This hazard so
far adventured, it becomes him in Kingly honor and affection to relieve so
great a Princess from so long time of sadness; and to associate her Consortship
with his presence, and (God willing) to return back in twenty days.

We hope no man will seem to regret upon our pleasure and purpose, seeing the
Kingdom has wanted a Governor longer than we now intend by our absence; from
the Death of our Grandmother the Queen Regent, unto the arrival of our Dearest
Mother out of France, fourteen Months, and the State in that time more happy
in Peace and Quietness, than before or since, and yet we have and do Ordain.

That our Council remain at Edinburgh, What Lords shall govern and how.
and the Duke of Lenox our Nephew, Pre^ident thereof, assisted by our Cousin
Francis Earl of Bothwel, together with our Treasurer, Controwler; Master of
Requests, Privy Seal, the Captain of the Castle of Edinburgh, Advocate and
Clark Register, or five at the least of them.

Then he ordains several Noblemen in their Courses to attend at Edinburgh for
fifteen days, Anguss, Athol, Fleming and Innerness to begin; The next course
to be by the Earl Mar and Morton, Seaton, and Yester, the Barons of Lothian,
Fi^e, Shrivelingshire and Strathern.

The South to be commanded by the Lord Hamilton, Lieutenant General, to be
assisted by the Lords Maxwel, Boyd, Herris, Hume, Cesford, and to reside at
Dunfres or Jedbrough.

Finally he recommended the Church to peace and quietness, and to discharge all
Conventions, and other Assemblies till his return, and not to fail to remember
him in their daily prayers for his safety and happy return.

And thus, having settled affairs at home, he imbarks with Maitland, the
Chancelour, Ballendine, Justice Clark, Douglas, and the Gentlemen of his
Bedchamber and honshold Servants, and Lindsey his Minister, and ^rrived near
Upsto in Norway within five days after.

The Sunday following he did solemnize the Marriage, He mary's the Queen.
and the ceremony was performed by Lindsey in French, and because of the Winter
season, he was invited by Ambassadors, to visit the Queen Mother, and her Son
Christern King of Denmark, elect.

The King, And goes forward to Denmark.
Queen and Train set forward the two and twenty December, from Upsto, and came
to Bahouse, a Castle bordering Norway and Sweden the 1. of January. where he
stayed seven days for a Convoy from that King then at Stockholm, and was met
with a Troop of four hundred horse upon the Frozen River, and so to Denmark,
the next day to Westbury five days, thence to Falhenburgh, Holmstade, Cowhalm,
Elsingburgh, and the 21. of January received by Queen Mother (at Crownenburgh)
the young King, Anno 1590.
the Duke of Holstat his Brother, and the four Regents of the Realm, with all
possible magnificence.

There he remained till the end of February, and being to give honor to the
Nuptials of his Queens eldest Sister with Duke Brunswick to be in April next,
And returns to Scotland.
he advertiseth his Council, the reason of his stay, and sends for shipping to
return, which were six, arriving at Elsenore in the middle of April, and landed
the King, Queen and Company at Lies, the twentieth day of May.

Not without the general opinion that the Witches in the blind Light of the
Gospel usually trading for Devilish Money, had his help, to hinder the meeting
before; which now (notwithstanding) prospered well by the Kings presence (so it
was ascribed.)

It being confirmed also afterward, That Bothwell had inquired of them, the
Kings fortune, which by Law was made Treason.

Queen Elizabeth congratulates the Nuptials by her Emissary Edward Seymor Earl
of Worcester, with the honor of the Garter, as she had done to the French King.

In whose absence (a wonder to all) that no insurrection, or feud, had been in
public or private (unless two petty Riots by Wachop and Clangregore) nay,
Bothwell so reclaimed, that in true sense of his former debaucheries, does
voluntary penance, and confession in the public Church. But this resolution
lasted not long, for he returns to the vomit, to his utter undoing hereafter.

The Bishops absent, The Queens Coronation by a Minister.
Bruce performs the Ceremony of the Queens Coronation, a Jewish rite says the
Ministers, abolished at Christ's coming, and introduced by the Pope, and not to
be used.

Certainly that ceremony had not been used by the Jews only, and being
mentioned in Judges (by Parable) shows it was a custom in creating Kings; and
frequent with other Nations. Hasael of Aram, was anointed by Elias; and Esaias
calls Cyrus of Persia, Gods anointed. Nor was every rite (if introduced by
Papists) to be rejected. Seeing therefore all free Monarchs use the same, their
anointing was as justifiable as their Crowning, with other ceremonies of Sword
and Scepter. But rather than a Bishop should profane the office, and that one
of themselves be the first Minister Presbyter that ever sanctified that
ceremony, they were content that Bruce should do it, on Sunday following at
Edinburgh, and 2 days after she made her triumphant entry through the Town,
with Feasts and Banquets, Masks and shows for two months together.

These popish proceedings in Scotland, makes Queen Elizabeth more serious at
home, both Kingdoms involved in the like danger; which to prevent, she falls
upon such as gave most suspicion, and having restrained Philip Howard Earl of
Arundell, for three years in the Tower, to keep him out of the way of doing
mischief, she now conceives it more safe to take him quite away from further
danger.

He is arraigned therefore at Westminster; E. of Arundel arraigned in England.
The Earl of Darby, High Steward for the day. His accusations were such of
which usually the greater Catholics are guilty, and being confirmed by
Cardinal Allan (before his banishment) Parsons and other Jesuits with whom he
kept correspondence, viz. for reducing Papistry here, proved by his Letters,
and the confessions of several Traitors lately executed, Savage, Throgmorton,
Babington, Gerrard and Shelles.

But the Bull of Sixtus Quintus deposing the Queen, Popes Bull.
and so the Legacy of these Realms bequeathed to the Spaniard, together with
his devotions, prayers and Masses for success of the Armado the last year 88.
was the Choak-Pear, which could not be relished.

His tender years thirty three, not able to defend innocence, in opposition to
those excellent Pleaders Popham, Egerton, Scutleworth, men of admiral abilities
in the law, made him submit to their arguments, Condemned,
with some palliation and excuse, not sufficient to save him from sentence of
guilt; which he received with submission, saying, Fiat Voluntas Dei. His
request was eas^e, to see his Wife and young Son, and pardoned.
born since his imprisonment, whom he left to the Queens favor, which was
effected to the Father also, with pardon of his life, though she kept him up
from doing harm.

The loss of the Spanish Fleet and credit last year, English expedition to
Portugal,
incourages two gallant Undertakers, Sir John Norris, and Sir Francis Drake,
with the convenient assistance of the Queens men of War, to an expedition into
Portugal, with eleven thousand Soldiers, and fifteen hundred Mariners.

It was not amiss to take up the Claim, and to take in the person of Don
Antonio (base born) Prior of Cra^o, to the Kingdom of Portugal, upon his vain
expectation of that nations revolt from Spanish thraldom, and assistance of the
King of Morocco, all which failed.

They land at the Groyne, land at the Groyne.
take and drown it, burn the villages thereabout, with slaughter of the Spanish
forces three miles chase, and imbarque again for Portugal, where they land and
march sixty miles to Lisbone, over against the sacred Promontory St. Vincent,
where they feign there are certain Mares at a set time conceive by the Wind,
Col^mella, and Pl^ni^.
and bring forth Foals, who live but three years; several Authors say so.

The Suburbs of this City abandoned, they enter and entrench, whilst Drake
undertakes to pass up the River to the City; but he failing upon the
shallowness of the Water, and danger of the Castles, no Natives coming in to
their design, and the Calanture, infecting their Fleet, they return with honor
upon the enemy, but loss of six thousand men by sickness, to which the Northern
people are subject, and by contraries the Southern are rather confirmed in the
North. Inward heat being remitted or intended by outward air, as by sad
experience of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster in R. 2. and the Marquess Dorset
1512. and this now.

We call it the Earl of Essex Expedition, who indeed, ambitious of common Fame,
put himself to sea, and got aboard the Fleet, conceiting that their respect to
his birth and quality, would receive him their chief, but was mistaken in that
honor, though he carried all the commendations with the comman man, as titles
get advantage from the merit of others, more deserving, though I know this
comment upon that Lord, gains little credit in these our days.

With this honor of assisting the distressed Portugal, the Q. assumed an
interest in others her Allies, to balance her common Enemy the Spaniard, and
his Catholic cause, as it fell out forthwith in France and Nava^.

For the French King Henry the third, Navars title to France.
not likely of issue, that Kingdom was to descend to the King of Navar, and
afterward to the Prince of Conde, both Protestants; whereupon the Catholic
Peers of France combine a Holy League, Not to permit a Reformed Professor to
reign, Holy Leagu^rs
no though he renounce it, l^st he rechange his Religion with his State. This
design was to exclude Navar and Conde.

The fortunate Successes of the Duke of Guise, the chief of this Villainy,
magnifies him above the King, who in jealousy of surprise by the multitude,
retires from Paris to Bloys, where his necessity forces him to consent to the
Holy League, and ruin of the Religion, and Guise to be Generallissimo, and all
this under Seal, and receipt of the Sacrament. But repenting of what he had
done, Gui^es ^^r^hred.
caused Guise in the Presence Chamber to be run through, his Brother Cardinal to
be strangled, and his Son Cardinal Bourbon, and others of the League, to be
committed.

Hence followed a various Rebellion, the people at liberty to do what they
list; and several Cities affecting several Governments, Democracy, Aristocracy,
Oligarchy, few or none Monarchy.

The Leaguers get possessession of the Crown Revenues, a new Seal, Henry 3.
mur^hered.
share the strong Holds, are joined with some Parliaments, and all the Cleagie,
who cause one of their Monks, Jacques Clement, to murder the King.

The first Murder, and first occasion of that damnable Docctrine of the
Jesuits to murder Kings, Justified by the Pope.
which the Pope Pius Quintus styles, Rarum, in^^gne, and memorabile, non sine
Dei particulari providentia and Spiritus Sa^cti suggestione designatum, and
long majus esse, quam illud sanctae Judith, qu^ Holo^ernam e medio su^^uli^.
The Jesuit Francis Verona Constantinus in his Apology for John Casteelin, etc.
C^m e^ tempore, etc. that King being become intolerable, it was not lawful de
jure or de fa^to, ^o condemn this Act of Clement, by reason of King Henry's
tyranny in Church and State, for his horrid Murders at Bloys, oppression of
Catholics, and favor to Heretics, and so became a private man subject to the
Civil and Canon Law. Besides, (says he) this act was lawful, being committed
upon him, from whom all obedience and allegiance of his Subjects were taken
away by the Pope.

Platina, another Historian, makes it the common opinion, E^m (Clement) a
nemine ad hoc factum subordinatum, ^ed a ^eipso po^tquam duabus aut tribus
mensibus in hoc animi conceptu persever^verat ad hoc arduum opus permotum esse
and instigatum; post jejunia longa, post orationes ad Deum continuas sese
certissimum hoc periculum adiisse, in vita Quinti, page 180.

But Marian a Spanish Jesuit says, Clement had often premeditated with himself,
and imparted it to ^ome Divines, who concluded it lawful for any man to kill a
King that is a Tyrant. Mar. Lib. de rege et Regis Institutione cap. 6. page 53.
though the Council of Constance possitively forbids it.

The Leaguers banish Navar from the Crown and Kingdom, and differ about
election of a King, for though diverse were in dispute, they (with some Justice
in Rebellion) elect Cardinal Bourbon, (a degree nearer to the Crown, than
Navar) and released him out of Pri^on to the Throne. And the Duke de Maine a
pretender, is pleased to be Lieutenant General of France, who instantly intends
to surprise Navar (proclaimed likewise King of France) at Diep, or drive him
out of all.

Navar implores Q. Elizabeth, profers league with her offensive and defensive;
Q. Elizabeth aids Nava^.
^he, in reverence to Religion, and pity of his distre^s, sends him twenty
thousand pounds in Gold, by which he kept his Stipend^aries, Germans and Swisse
from revolt; some ammunition, and four thousand men, conducted by the Lord
Willoughby, with four Colonels, Wilford, Buroughs, Drury, and Baskervile. The
^ame of the Queen interessed, and these men's valor, discomfited the Enemy, the
day before their landing, who fled with bag and baggage to Paris, and are
pursued by the English and French, who take diverse pieces in Normandy, and
return home.

The King of Spain this while, lay gaping after these distempers, fomented by
Mendoza his Ambassador, and Cardinal Cajetan the Popes N^ncio, not without
their insolent proposition to nominate Spain Protector of the French
Catholics, Spain interessed.
with such Prerogatives to boot, as he enjoyes over Naples and Sicily, of
bestowing all Offices Ecclestiastical and Civil; By which the French themselves
foresaw his ambition, to promote their Religion, with loss of their Reason.

Thus stood the State of France, distracted, Navar unsettled, war increasing,
which hindered the Queens design to promote a Match between the King of
Scotland; and Katherine Navars Sister, as defensive interests in Religion to
counter with the Catholics, and therefore she had advised the King to mary
himself to his ^^king (for Katherines years was with the most, and her means
with the least) which she understood was settled a year since on Ann the
Daughter of Frederick the second King of Denmark.

But Navar she protects with great sums of money, As^i^ts France with more
money. 101560, 071165, 020000, 033333. 226058.
Crowns.
she had len^ him not three years ^ince, a hundred and one thousand five
hundred and sixty French Crowns, wherewith he levied his German Soldiers.

And the last year, seventy and one thousand one hundred sixty five more.

It cost her twenty thousand Willoughbyes expedition.

And now this year she lends him thirty three thousand (...) hundred thirty
three more, to muster an Army in Germany, and as much more she spent for sudden
service. Thus much for France.

Every two months she paid to the Garrisons of Flushing and Brill one hundred
and five and twenty thousand ^^orins. And the Dutch. 125000. 260000. 385000.
Florins.
And two hundred and threescore thousand more, to 3000 horse and foot in
service with the Low Countre^^.

Besides other Sums of mass expense, at home, and her own expeditions by Sea,
and in Ireland by Land.

Whether these moneys are mistaken by Historians figures, the addition of a
Cipher multiplying the same, otherwise they are incredible; but indeed this was
the way to die poor, for she was much in debt.

But she was not nice in Husbanding her expense to good purpose, or in
providing for the main, by extraordinary ways; for she was sometime put to
shifts then, See after,
as well as her Successor since; and by the Customer Carmardines intimation of
the value of Commodities, She raises her Custom-Farm.
she raised her Farmer, Sir Thomas Smith, from the rent of her Customs of
fourteen thousand pounds sterling annually, to two and forty thousand, and
after to fifty thousand. This gain was not put up to his own purse no doubt,
for the Lord Treasurer, and Leicester, and Walsingham opposed Carmardine;
whether of intercepting their Bribes therein, or disparagement of their judgment
and care, not to find it out themselves.

By her bounty to France, She ballanc^^h her neighbor interests.
she kept off the Spaniard from hence; her own judgment, that the end of France
its ruin would be the Evening to England, contrary to others opinion, that now
the cantoning of France by the Spaniard, Leaguers, and particular Pretenders,
she might put in for her share, Picardy, Normandy, or Britain; but she kept
them off from others.

For the Duke of Parma for his Catholic Majesty had run through Picardy,
called in by the Leaguers, to relief of the Rebellion at Paris, and Io: de
Aquila of Spain invited into Britain, to settle of pretension of the Duke
Mercoeur to that Duchy.

Queen Elizabeth looks upon this dangerous Neighborhood, and speedily she
resolves of three thousand men into Picardy and Britain; and it was time to
prevent the growing power of Spain admitted now into Paris, who vouchsa^ed
their lawful Sovereign no other Title but King of Bern, but the Spaniard as
their Lord and King; the Pope also lent some Switz to the aid of the Leaguers,
against whom the Queen proclames it Treason, to assist them by any Traffic.

This Assembly of the Church now in June, The Assembly petition the King.
petitioned the King*

1. For establishing the Churches Jurisdiction, and abolishing all Acts to the
contrary. 2. For purging the Realm of Jesuits and Papistry. 3. For providing
Maintenance of Ministers out of the Tyths, and the Remain to the Support of
Schools, and the Poor, and Repair of Churches.
For the first, His Answer and advice to suppress ^e^d^
the entrance into the Acts of Parliament, always provide for the Church.

For the second, he had already done it in part, and would willingly perfect
that Work.

And the last, was committed to Commissioners of their own and others.

But to conclude, the King advised them their duty, as Peacemakers on earth, by
Preaching and Practice, to remove the barbarous differences which the feuds of
the Nation daily foment, and which by their former encouragements, for private
ends, had been taken up so customarily, as became national; that their godly
care, for reconciling such variances, might amend that Crime, grown to that
height as was abominable to all strangers. I shall do my part, (said he) and if
you apply your pains, my work will be the more easy, and the success effectual.

And truly thence-forward such a course was taken, that in future all those
damnable feuds were quite abolished by this King.

Though for the present it prevailed not between the Earls Huntley and Murray
in the North; Huntley and Murray quarrel.
John Gordon married to Widow Grant, one of his Servants, in private quarrel
was killed by another of hers, whom Gordon pursues, and for not appearing, is
pronounced Rebel, and Commission to Huntley, to apprehend him, in a house of
the Grants; he takes it by force, but finds not the Fellow.

This was ill taken by that Family, who fly to the protection of the Earl
Murray, with whom adjoyn the Clanchattons and Dunbars. Huntley advertised that
Murray and Athol were to confederate with those Glamis in Forres, intends to
dissolve that knot, ere it were hard bound; but before he came, they fever
themselves, and Murray returns to Yarnwall; Huntley's way lay by the House, and
some of his men braving thereabout, they within discharge some Shot, which
killed Gordon, and for which Huntley invades the other with Forces, and Murray
assisted by Arroll his Cousin, prepare to defend. These tidings came to the
King, whose command separates each one to his own home, which served the turn
for a time, but brake out in disorder after.

Another of the same nature; Another of the Kers.
an ancient emulation of the Kers, the one of Cesfords Family, the other of
Farnherst, for the Wardenry of the Middle Marches and the Provostry of Iedbury,
which the Heir of Farnherst, William Ker, a young Spark, maintains to the
death; and in a Trial of Theft before the Council for English Goods stolen, it
was taken as done in spleen, and derogate to the honor of Sir Robert Ker of
Cesford, the Fellow being his follower. The lady Cesford (of an haughty heart)
never ceased peuling, until her Son had basely murdered the other. These were
men of good repute, wise, and of great courage, and of much loss to the
Borders, the one dead, the other undone, who fled for his life, until he made a
large satisfaction for maintenance of the fatherless children, and by Marriage
with the Chancellours Niece came again to his Family, and into favor.

We have hinted heretofore of the Northern Nations much inclining to
Witchcraft, Witches accuse Bothwel.
and in Scotland those of great Families: this Winter produced many
Examinations, Agnes Simson (the wife of Kieth) a Matron of a grave and settled
behavior, she declared, that her Familiar appeared in a visible form, and
resolved her doubts, concerning the Life or Death of any; she used to call him
Holla Master, (Ho la? in Spanish, Who is there?) as he directed her; and
confessed, that Bothwell bid her inquire of the Kings Reign, Life and Death,
whom the Devil undertook to destroy, but failing, confessed to her, not to be
in his power, speaking words in French, which she understood not, but could
repeat them, Il est homme de Dieu.

Another, one Richard Graham, confessed the like against Bothwell, who is
committed to Prison and escapes.
which was the cause of his Commitment; out of which he escapes by corrupting
his Keeper, and so far guilty, has his Doom of Forfeiture, and is denounced
Traitor; the Proclamation speaks, That he, being tender in blood to the King,
and further advanced in Honors and Offices above his Birth; having heretofore
in an unnatural humor committed Slaughters, raised Arms against his Majesty,
and practiced with strangers against the Religion, and whereof his Conviction
in May, 1589. was superseded in hope of amendment, but since, heaping Treasons,
he concluded with the consult of Witches, against the Kings Life, as by
confession of sundry persons appears; and for all being committed, he has
broken Prison, and thereby taken these Crimes upon him, which concludes him a
Traitor. But he enters band with the Lord Hume and others, and being forsaken
flies into England, his secret Harbors, till next year.

The Archbishop of St. Andrews lies Bedridden, Archbish. of St. Andrews die^,
and fallen into some wants by mis-government, the Presbyters (like Crows about
Carrion, the common way of the Romish Catholics to procure Proselytes) labor
him to leave some Lines under hand, his opinion of matters of Discipline; they
form his words, That he did not trouble himself then with thoughts of that
nature, and abused by the Ministry.
and had never allowed of any other Bishop of the Church but St. Paul' s
Bishop, to which he would sign. And so Articles were drawn framed to their
Design, which he subscribed; but whether in truth he did so, or some for him,
or that their charity (seldom upon better terms) wrought upon his necessity, or
weakness of his spirits, the Recantation came forth in public, of which injury
he complained, and committing his cause to Gods justice, died, the end of this
year, and accounted a man of some scale in Learning, as they seldom want to
account of themselves, one commending another, if he dies a Proselyte to them.
But presently that Church falls into Schism: several Assemblies to compose
Dissentions set up several Superintendents in one Presbytery (or Popedom) the
Lay Parishioners siding with each Faction, and coming to the question, most
Voices pretended best interest; but the other had gotten a new Paradox, Quod
suffragia essent ponder anda non numeranda: and yet to end strife, they part
stakes, and divide the Presbytery; the one to sit at Cowper, the other at St.
Andrews. I mention this for a Note, That of all men none could worse endure
parity, and loved more to command, Secretary Walsingham dies, his Character.
than these which introduced it into the Church.

We have had to do with Secretary Walsingham of England, and may not forget to
take our leave of him also, that lived not out this year.

He was industrious, wise and religious, a searcher in the secrets and
mysteries of all States; he had an art in past imitation, to dive into men's
dispositions, and something for polite service, screw simple Proselytes beyond
common danger; his Preferment no higher than Secretary and Chancellor of the
Duchy of Lancaster, and with Honor of the Garter; his profuse expense for
Intelligence abroad and at home, kept him under compass during life, and dying
so poor that they buried him by dark in St. Paul's Quier.

Another of the same, And so does Randolph,
Sir Thomas Randolph so near in time, that Death might do it with one Dart, He
was bred a Civilian, and taken from Pembroke College in Oxford to Court, from
thence his Employments were foreign Embassies, thrice to the Peers in Scotland,
and thrice to the Queen, 18. times Ambassador abroad.
seven times to King James, and thrice to Basilides Emperor of Russia, once to
Charles the Ninth of France, and again to Henry the Third, he was advanced to
the Office of Chamberlain in the Exchequer, and to be Master of the Ports, the
first formerly of great profit, the later not so, till these last times of
ours, which we make of immense gain, but he was rich of children, and therefore
(in my Lord Bacons opinion) poor in Purse, he had leave to retire some time
before his Death, to which his advice to Walsingham, to leave the Tricks of a
Secretary as himself would, the deceis of an Ambassador.

Sir Henry Wootton afterward observed as much, who could example with the
most, Hoc tandem didici (says he) animas sapientiores ^ieri quiescendo.

To accompany these of the Gown, And the ^. of Shrewsbury^dies.
died that gallant man at Arms George Talbot created Earls by Henry the Sixth,
and he the sixth Earl of Shrewsbury, who in Queen Mary's Reign with three
thousand Foot in the Scottish Wars, rescued the Earl of Northumberland at
Lowick, he was of the appointed Guard of that Queen whilst here in Prison, and
succeeded the Duke of Norfolk and Marshal of England, and in much honor for
fifteen yeas together, to his Death; at Bordeaux his Predecessor in the time
of Henry the Sixth has on his Tomb this large Title.

John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, An Epitaph.
Washford, Waterford, and Valence, Lord Talbot of Goodrich and Orchinfield,
Lord Strange of Blackmore, Lord Verdon of Acton, Lord Cromwell of Wingfield,
Lord Lovetoft of Warsop, Lord Franifall of Sheffield, Lord Falconbridg, Knight
of the Noble Order of the St. George St. Michael, and the Golden Fleece, great
Marshal to King Henry the Sixth of France, and died in the Battle of Bordeaux,
1453. These he had, and deserved more by the French Chronicle.

Orock Roe of noble birth in Ireland, Irish Rebels.
and by the Surname Mack-Mahon (being purchased by might or right) seemed to
privilege him in any tyranny over the People, for which he was hanged; his next
Neighbor Brian Orock in Brenny for fear of the like, turned Traitor, and being
pursued by Bingham President of Connaught, flies into Scotland, but was
delivered to Queen Elizabeth's command, and executed for the ease of the King,
esteeming her Enemies his; and caused Mack-Conel to give caution, not to
nourish Sedition by correspondence of the Hebrides and Orcades.

The Spaniard nourished Rebellions in Ireland, the Queen protected the French
against him, Essex expedition into France with 4000.
who by the Duke of Parma was got into Picardy, and his other Forces in
Brittany; wherefore she sends over four thousand (covenanted at her cost, but
for two months) under conduct of the Earl of Essex, and land at Diepe,
expecting to join with the Kings Forces, who came not in any reasonable time,
when they did, it was too late to do much service, yet they besiege Roan, to no
effect: the English wasted, the Queen displeased, she sends for Essex, but
leaves the remain of his men to the command of Sir Roger Williams.

The Reformed Churches of Christendom increased number and repute, by pious
Doctrine and Discipline, much to the prejudice of the Romish Catholics, that
mightily opposed the public peace of the Church, and certainly had Satan's help
to boot, to undermine the minds of some more fiery zealous Professors, that
took the poor peoples affections with their seeming devout carriage; and this
way the Devil in^inuates; to heighten their pride and self-conceited holiness
with some pricks in the flesh, and buffetings of Satan, every day producing
Examples of diverse kinds in several places.

At this time more remarkable in the person of one Hacket in London, Hackets
horrible Tenants and Treasons.
illiterate and insolent, (seldom separate) and poor, who becomes suddenly
seemingly holy, and by degrees, into that cheating way, to be inspired with the
evil spirit of Revelations.

He used (says an Author) a strange and monstrous form and manner of praying,
falling upon his face sometimes, as if in an exta^ie, otherwhile expostulating
with God himself; another kind of prayer he used, ordinary and familiar; for
as other men's devotions and ejaculations aim at the obtaining the sweet comfort
of Gods heavenly presence, he would in his hottest zeal entreat, and as it were
force upon God to depart from him, and not assist such sinful creatures, which
manner of prayer most of his own Disciples construed the effect of his rare and
excessive humility; and so, as a rare Example, might find charitable censure;
yet it was to be adjudged in him, (as in truth it falls out frequent with some
in these our last times) the voice not of man, but Satan dictated only to him
from that evil spirit that possessed him, for so his end discovered it in him.

He confederates, Mad-headed Hypocrites.
(the Devil goes by Legions) with Wiginton a Genevan Minister, Copinger a
Gentleman, and Arthington (like the Fool in the Comedy, a Lay admirer) to be
called by God to prophecy to the people, Anno 1591.
and alter the English to the Genevan Discipline, printing in Prose and
Dog-rythm what was fit to seduce others; and Hacket, as the most proper person,
must be Arch Prophet. But see how Satan brings it on, Copinger and Arthington
(Knave and Fool) tell Wiginton of Christ's appearing to them, (spiritually) by
Dreams and by Visions, that Hacket was that Angel, with his Fan and Hook to
separate Sheep from the Goats, overcome Satan and Antichrist, and then follows
the Day of Judgment.

These prostrate themselves before Hacket in earnest prayer, and he skips out
of his Bed, joins his devotion with acknowledgment of his own divine nature,
and so seems in a Trance, whilst Arthington bids Copinger in the name of
Christ to anoint Hacket with the Holy Ghost and make him King, kissing the
Ground with bended knee, and other reverence; but he with careless gesture
refuses, being (as he said) already anointed by the Holy Ghost; Go forth, (says
he) preach of me, that Jesus Christ is come with his Fan to judge the World, if
they believe not, let them come and kill me.

At the instant, His disciples,
(the Devil driving) they all in fury fly abroad, and cry out, Christ is come,
repent, repent; that Hacket had a body truly glorified, to constitute a new
Discipline and Commonwealth, that they were his Prophets of mercy, and others
of judgment, for perfecting his work. And this they declared by Vows,
Protestations of salvation to be all true: that he was sole Monarch of Europe,
and all Kings his Vassals, and the Queen to be deposed: and so, with a preass
of people, they return home to Hacket, who were apprehended, apprehended,
and are insolent before the Privy Council.

Hackets Crimes were condemned as Treason, for the Devil prompt him to confess
so much, with such horrid Blasphemies as I tremble to relate. He seems not as
distracted, but with settled gravity and temper: his blaspemy,
and in the way to Execution he cries out fearfully, Iehova Messiah, Iehova
Messiah, behold, the Heavens open, Thou Son of God come down and deliver me.
And at the Gallows he roars out, Thou God I^hova, Iehova, Alpha and Omega, etc.
Thou know that I am the true, etc. whom thou have sent, etc. Show some
Miracle from the Clouds to deliver me from these accursed; if thou will not,
then will I, etc. (horrid) Fire the Heavens, and with these hands pull, etc.
from thy Throne: nay, worse than can be imagined; then turns to the Hangman,
who hastened the Halter, Thou Bastard, (says he) will thou hang the King of
Kings? and facing Heaven, cried out, Is this my reward for my Kingdom bestowed?
etc. Behold I come and will revenge, and execution.
etc. the rest. Throttled with the Rope, he was immediately cut down fresh
alive and quartered. Copinger stervs himself to death in Prison: the others
repent and are pardoned.

On the other side, the Jesuits were lurking in every corner, Emissaries from
several Seminaries, Rome, France, and especially from Spain; against them
therefore, Proclamations forbid any man to be entertained as a Lodger, puny
Jesuits.
unless his Host examine his condition, his abode before, and whether he will
go to Church; and Delegates in every Shire, to receive the Accounts accordingly.

The Spaniard having very lately erected a Seminary at Valledolid in Castile,
Their Seminaries.
purposely for English and Scottish Fugitives, to draw their obedience from
hence, to him; and being finished, Pope Clement the Eighth must needs by his
Bull confirm it, which is dated the first year of his Popeship, Confirmed by
the Pope.
Quoniam, etc. multi Anglicani exules adolescentes fuerunt experti, qui ex
miserabili Angli^ Regno in Hispaniam transfugerunt. And why? because, (quod
alias tantoper^ floriut, erga fidem Catholicam devotisimam fuit, nunc etiam
Haereseos gravissimo infortunio affligitur atque opprimitur) in Hispaniam
transfugerunt, etc. But, not all Exules adolescentes; No, I warrant you, Ii
tantum (says one) qui ad finem illorum consequendum aptiores esse videntur: and
then swear to take Orders, and return home to England, to adventure for a
Halter, that is, To convert as many of my Contrymen and Kinsfolk as I can,
whenever I shall be called thereto by my Superiors, whose command I will be
ready to execute, as believing, that not He so much, as God himself does put me
on that Errand. And thus prepared they come in Disguises, with Equivocations,
that by their bare habit none can understand them, counterfeiing all shapes and
professions, and are justified (they say) by example of Eusebius, who in the
time of Constantine the Arrian Emperor did so, under covert to visit the
Assemblies of the Catholics, and to instruct them. Rabadineira Append.
Schismat* Angl. cap. 23.

But we must bethink what becomes of Bothwell, Bot^wels Treason to seize the
King and Court.
who being fled from his friends and almost forsaken, he was invited by some at
Court, Instruments to serve the time, and Servants to the Duke of Lenox, men of
mean fortunes, but fit enough to to add fuel to to any Enterprise, with their
assistance; and therefore had trained into the Conspiracy, Colonel William
Stewart, Neswich the Kings Surgeon, and James Douglas of Spot, who in truth
came in by another occasion, thus; a few days before, George Home of Spot (his
father in Law) was killed by some of the Surname of Home and Craw; Sir George
Home Nephew to Spot charged James Douglas as Author and Accessory to the
Murder; (this jealousy arising from some interest of an Estate in difference
between them) upon this (but suspicion) three of his men are imprisoned, and
threatened with torture, to confess; the King (some say) had a strong conceit of
their guilt, and commanded that course of Trial; Spot laboring for their
reprieve of this punishment, and not prevailing, he joined in the Treason,
being told of it in the heat of revenge.

The manner of the Conspiracy was thus, The manner the^eof.
Bothwell in disquise out of England, should lurk near the Court, with his
followers, dispersed, till the time should let them in by night through a back
way, into the Palace, and surprise the King and Chancellor, and (with hope of
Success) all the Court after. Each man had his quarter and particular charge,
to take the sign given, and to fall on.

It took effect thus far, they were entered, and after mastered the Inner
Court. Douglas too forward for his ^^rvants imprisoned, and to free them for
assistance, the number and noise breaking open the doors where the Prisoners
were, startled the King at Supper, and hearing the cry Treason, Treason, gat up
to the Tower for his better safety.

Bothwell earnest to order all, commands some to beset the Chancellors
Lodgings, Fire the Q^. lodging^*
whilst himself hastens to the Queens quarter, which he finds baricado'd, and
therefore endeavors to fire it. In which time Sir James Sandilands of his
Majesty's Bedchamber, with some Forces of the Town Edinburgh, entering by the
Church of Holy-rood-house, beat him and his company from the fire, and the
alarm happily hastened, the Conspirators fled and escaped in the dark, by such
several ways as brought them in. But Bothwell must have blood, and encountering
by chance with John Shaw, a Gentleman of note, who had the better at the Sword,
till Bothwell snatched a Pistol from his Page, and shot Shaw dead.

In the pursuit nine of the Train were taken, and (...)
and by Club-law were hastily hanged the next morning, before cold-blood could
quiet the rage of the people.

Thus far this defeat had Success. But Bothwell got Northward, toward Earl
Murray intending his Supply, Huntley and Murray fall into the mischief.
which the King suspecting sends the Lord Uchiltry to decoy Murray into the
South, as to work reconcilement with Huntley, but a false rumor being raised
this while, that Murray was seen with Bothwell in the late Enterprise, Huntley
hasty enough to malice and revenge, got Commission to bring him to a Trial.

Murray not minding any mischief herein, was on his way at his Mothers House,
the La Downs near Forth, and being too secure from sudden attempt, Huntley
gets aid of the County, and summons a surrender. Murray making much of a needy
case, returns bad words and Bullets too boot, which shot the Sheriff to the
heart, The Sheriff killed.
and some others into a fear that altered; their fighting to firing the House,
and forced them within, through smoke and flame, to come forth and yield.

The evening shadowed the enterprise from discovering their Prisoners for the
present; Anno 1592.
but whilst they peeped for Murray, he not yet come out; And being put to the
plunge, broke through them all with wondrous courage; escaping their seizure,
yet weary and tired shrunk down within the cleft of the Rocks, and by his
Headpiece discovered to be him, he was, without mercy of a common man, Murray
miserably slain.
miserably slain. For Huntley (in this treacherous, if true) fearing he should
be innocent of the Conspiracy, might in honor have afforded him quarter, which
was desired, but to be sure of his death ran him often through, after he was a
dead Corpse, and having hastened the news to the King galloped away Nort^^^ard,
leaving his cosen, Captain Gourdon, wounded, who was brought to Edinburgh, and
publicly executed to pacify the people.

I have seen what some have said, The cause of Murrays death put upon others.
who should be guilty of this good man's blood, but I dare not suspect, where I
am not sure of authority to bear out the blame; nor can I find any cause in the
King, the jealousy is raised by the sudden News that posted to Court, as of
good service; but that was Huntleys villainy, by the speed to lodge it on any
from suspicion of his own private revenge. Yet it fell foul on the Chancellor,
a fate or fashion of King and Favorite. Princes have Pupils to bear their
stripes, the Dog beaten for the Lion, and sometime Sovereign suffers for them.
when Revenge grows high, they meddle with the Magistrate, but being gotten into
power no Majesty escapes.

Who ere were in fault, Murry lamented.
Edinburgh was to hot, for the Court to hold out, Murray bemoaned of all, the
King removes, or rather ran away with the Council to Glasgow; not ^afe there
neither, till Huntley was ^ound out, to render his Person to Prison in
Blackness, but was soon demitted upon caution to answer any summons.

His sudden discharge set men's tongues on work, Huntley is at Liberty.
and encouraged their faction to unbury the dead (says one) and raise the
coffined corpse of Murray and the Sheriff, against Lies Church door, their
friends refusing them other funeral, until revenge were taken of their
slaughter; and who more earnest in this resentment than the Lord Uchiltry,
Uchiltry abused.
who, ignorant of any ill meaning, was put upon the errand to persuade Murray
to come to reconcilement, which by this means was turned to murder, and in
regret of his Dishonor, the rather sought out Bothwell, to bare stakes, at all
hazards with him.

And in earnest they are. But the Church interrupt the story, who when the
State was mostly in mischief, The Church interfeers the State Affairs.
then were they busiest for themselves the Ministry. Intermixing pious
Articles in their petition to the Parliament, but evermore interfeering with
Sovereignty.

The first of their demands being willingly confirmed against Papists, Idolatry
and crimes of blood, with which the Land indeed was then much poluted.

But for abrogating the former acts of Anno 1584. And Articles,
against discipline of the Church, and their liberty, and in place thereof a
Ratification now of the practice then.

The Kings wisdom foresaw the inconveniences which the Ministers assume from
that term of liberty.

But Bothwells Business interrupting the Kings quiet (a time of advance to
their demands) the Act was warily passed; agreed.
and as for the Statute of Regal power, Supremacy in the King which they mostly
aimed to abrogate. It was only declared,

It should be no ways derogatory to the spiritual Office-bearer in the Church,
concerning heads of Religion, Heresy, Excommunication, Collation or
deprivation of Ministers, or any such, having ground and warrant of Gods word.

The King removes to Faulkland, Bothwells other attempts at Faulkland,
where Bothwell attempts a fresh Conspiracy, being assisted by the Earls of
Angus and Arroll, the Master of Gray, Colonel Stuart, and the Lairds of
Iohnston and Balmery, they had their several Postures; the latter met him with
four hundred horse; Angus kept watch without, and Arrol was always with the
King; Stuart must be the Porter to let the others in* Somewhat they attempted,
which gave suspicion sufficient, so that Arrol was committed to Edinburgh
Castle, and the Colonel to Blackness.

But why these at Court were so hasty, without the power of Bothwell, fell out
upon a false Spy, that gave warning ere the Forces were nigh? For Bothwell,
with no more than six score, (the Rascallity picked up upon the Borders, English
and Scottish) marching two days and nights, with slender diet, and faint
watchings arrived at Faulkland at midnight, where he found the Court at their
Sentries, by which he feared the discovery. But the day soon opened (the midst
of June) and he encamped on the Hill side. His Followers fall upon any booty,
break open the Queens stables, and take out the Horses, and what other baggage
came to hand, more regarding present plunder, than the hazard of their Chief;
is defeated,
who thus at loss, and the County coming in, He was forced to fly, but how or
whether in martial Order he knew not, and therefore by the next Midnight he
stole away.

The King with his company followed by the Ferry (mistaking the way) hastened
his course by Sterlin-bridge, and flies to England.
where Bothwells men in disorder separate to all parts, and were soon seized,
some in the Moors of Calder and Carnwath; the Horses unmanned their Riders
falling from their Saddles for want of sleep. Others taken napping, not able to
stand, were committed to several Holds, and some knocked on the heads, by poor
Plow-boys, and all of them so weak, that a few women mastered the most of them;
and Bothwell got into England. And the King by experience, and his own clemency
found it the best way to proclaim pardon to all that would forsake the grand
Traitor and come in, knowing that some others might be interessed in that plot,
and too many of note, for him to meddle with.

For whether in affection to Bothwell or malice to the Master of Glammis (the
Treasurer) his Enemy. Lindsey Lord Spinie is susspected,
Alexander Lindsey Lord of Spinie in great favor; works secret attempts to
reconcile him to the King, Colonel Stuart still Prisoner in Blackness in hope
of nope of liberty discovers it to the King at Dunfres by Sir James Sandilands
the keeper of that house, who justified before the Council, That Spinie had
harbored Bothwel at Aberdowre. The other denies all and claims the combat,
which Sandilands not making good. and becomes a companion of Bothwells.
Spinie recovers into favor, and yet infected with treasonable intents, the
next year he openly takes part with Bothwell, and is denounced Rebel.

Others also, A love trick of a Woman.
Weymis of Logie, of the Kings Bedchamber, was more than suspected, and
committed to Guard, until his Mistress (the Queens Dutch Maid) in the Kings
name, after bed time, brought the Prisoner to be questioned by the King
himself, the Keepers waiting without, he was let in to the Chamber, and out at
a Window by a Rope, and this being a Lovetrick for her to hazard the halter,
the Ladies liking the conceit, and upon marriage with her Paramour, procured
the Queens favor, and pardon for them both. And with these aforesaid, and
diverse others, the faction of Bothwel increased with men of all rancks; Barons
and Burgesses, intertaining him openly in several parts of the Country, and in
Tweedale, the most part of those people; whether the King was fain to take
journey as far as Iedbury to pacify them and settle their fidelity.

No sooner returned but new factions at home against the Chancellor, Faction
against the Chancellor.
and by the greatest, Lenox, Arguile, Morton, Glammis, and Lord Hume, with whom
Angus, Arrol, (and but lately released prison) adjoin; occasioned by the
Chancellours refusing the Queens claim, to some Lands of his which set the
wheel in going; and which forced him in wisdom, to withdraw from Court, into
the Country for this year.

In the North also, the Clanhattons, Clanhattons against Huntly.
conducted by Angus Williamson, in pretense of revenge of Earl Murrays death,
make havoc of all that belongs to Huntley; with fire and Sword, and fell foul
upon an aged Man, Gordon of Barckley, for no crime, but his honesty and kindred
to Huntley, who in revenge commits cruelties upon his Enemies, encountering a
great party sixty of them were slain, and some of his own side. And not
satisfied with this he summons all the High-landers and with their help,
devastates all that Country, and kills many, until a Commission to Angus Lord
Lieutenant, with power of the Counties, forced a cessation on both sides, and
returning in Triumph, was seized as a Traitor, and committed to the Castle of
Edinburgh, upon some Letters intercepted and signed by him, Angus committed.
Huntley, Arrol, and others, to the King of Spain, and sent by George Ker,
whose confession was,

That upon the receipt of Letters from Creighton, Ker his Com^mission to Spain.
the Jesuit in Spain, unto Gordon and Abercrombie, for alteration of Religion;
those return answer of the Scots concurrence; and for more secrecy, these three
Earls undertake for all, and blanks signed by them to be filled in Spain, and
entrusted to the Bearers, in October last.

And he avowed also, That Angus and Arroll assured him, that the King of Spain
would send thirty thousand men into Scotland; part of this Army to force
Toleration of their Romistry here, and the other part to be convayed by them
into England, for the same design, and this Army to land in Kirkud-bright in
Galloway or in the mouth of Cluydo River.

These manifest plots of Papists, Plots of Papists.
drew the consideration necessary for the whole Nation; and meetings of the
Ministry, and all men, to propose their advice and aid, to pursue the Rebels
already risen, and to raise a Guard of three hundred Horse, constant with the
King, and the Conspirators to be called to Justice, and the first example fell
upon Graham of Fintre, and executed in February. And in this hurry Angus
escapes out of Prison, and flies to the North, unto Huntley and Arroll. But the
King in great perplexity of Murders, rapine and slaughters, public and
private, upon their submission are received to mercy, favor and preferment;
all means used to bring peace to these miserable people.

The French King in great distress, The French King relieved by Q. Eliz.
and overwhelmed in his affairs, craves more aid out of England, and is
assisted again with four thousand men more, and ordinance, But not to make
peace with the Leaguers until the Spanish forces were driven out of France. So
necessary it was for England by these means to stop their career, and to keep
off revenge, from home. These Forces entrusted with General Norris, land in
Bretaign, but find no French; and so being hurried up and down Normandy, Lamain
and elsewhere, the Spaniard increase number in Bretaign; Norris returns home,
and the French King in distress, upon some fear of his fewds, Turns Papist.
and hopes of advantage, turns Papist.

Whilst the Duke of Parma also, prepared fresh forces to assault Picardy, but
being in readiness, he fights a private combat with Death, and is overcome,
after fourteen years Government in Flanders; a man of excellent honor and
virtue, as Queen Elizabeth always acknowledged; Duke of Parma dies.
who to amaze and busy the Spaniard, and to divert him from hence, sends
several Expeditions by Sea into his Territories of America with singular
succession.

And to prevent his practices in Scotland of as great concernments to both
Nations, she keeps watchful correspondence with King James, who indeed wary of
the Papists encroachments at home, began to exercise his Regal power over his
Nobility and other seditious Subjects, having scattered the last Rebels into
their Holds, and Bothwel into England.

These Insurrections thus far happily suppressed, The Queens message by L.
Buroughs.
contrary to the imagination of the English policies; Queen Elizabeth to color
suspicion, sends the Lord Borough to congratulate the discoveries and the
succe^s, offering her aid, to bring the Malignants to Trial; and wished him, if
he could not apprehend their persons, to confiscate their Estates; and seeing
his case concerned all Princes of the Religion, she desired his resolution
therein, for her to satisfy all others her Confederates against Spain.

The King gives her thanks, The Kings Answer.
and that he was assured, Bows her Ambassador had certified her of all
proceedings in particular, (as aforesaid) wherein he had begun, and was fully
resolved to prosecute the guilty; but advised with her, how dangerous it might
be for him, to have such potent Rebels, without her help, to hunt such
fugitives; their Design being more dangerous to assist the Spaniards attempts
upon England, than either upon France or Holland, to whom she had liberally
already afforded supply, with men and moneys; and therefore, what he desired on
his particular his own Ambassador should declare.

The next Audience furnished the Ambassador with Arguments from his Mistress,
the Ambassadors reply.
to advise the King to wise and well-affected Counselors, help to disarm and
suppress such Rebels, and withal, intimating the Queens punishment upon those
that harbored Bothwel in England; and so by circumstances to draw out of the
King what resolution he intended toward him, in so troublesome time, and if it
were for his Majesty's quiet to receive him upon submission.

The King seeming not to countenance Bothwel, nor believing the Queens
resentment of his Receivers, said, That if his Mistress meant honorably to her
self or him, she would rather deliver him to justice, according to their
League, than to support him in her Dominion, whose Crimes were unpardonable;
and her further favors to him would induce a necessity for the King to join
with her Enemies, Anno 1593.
for his own safety. And so Buroughs returned, and Bows remained.

In an Assembly of the Church in April, the King resolving to give them Items,
Church Assembly.
sends them Articles.

That h^ would not suffer diminution of the Privileges of his Crown, nor
Assemblies without his order.

That an Act pass to inhidit Ministers to declame in the Pulpit against the
King and his Council.

That some of every Presbytery should inform his Majesty of the Papists
practices and Bothwels receivers.

That some of theirs should cause the Magistrates of Burghs, at Seaports, to
examine Passengers and Plotters against the Re^ligion.

To the first, they would follow former Acts.

The scond, they prohibit without just and necessary causes, which the King
esteeming no restraint, was as causless to answer theirs against Papists, his
necessities enforcing civilities to the Papists, to balance with the rigid
Reformers.

But the Mundays Market stuck in their stomachs, Monday Market to be altered.
against which their Act passed to alter for Tuesday, their Reason was
religious, to prevent the Tradesmen violating the Sabbaths Evening with too
much care and travail, against the next Morning.

The Shoomakers whom it most concerned, gathering tumult, menaced the
Ministers, if they urged their consents, to drive them out of Edinburgh, which
begat that saying, Rascals and Sowters obtain from the Ministers, what the King
could not do in matters more reasonable.

The King sends Melvil to satisfy Queen Elizabeth of the affairs of Scotland,
and to desire aid of money, for levying six hundred Soldiers for some Months,
and to renew the former complaint against Bothwels entertainment in England,
whilst he steals into Scotland and surprises the King. Bothwel seises the King
at Holy rood-house.


The Chancellor, as you have heard (retired from Court, upon displeasure of
Queen Ann) requests the King by Letter, that seeing his service was useless,
and his solitary life irksom, he craves leave to depart out of the Kingdom,
until his Majesty's pleasure command his return.

The King being earnest with the Queen upon his resign of Muskleburgh, which
she clamed, and his coming to Court resolved; Lenox, Athol and Ochiltry, plot
to prevent him, and bring in Bothwel under disguise of attending the the Lady
Athol, by the Postern-gate, with another, his Companion, armed into the very
Bedchamber.

The King at ^ight of them cried out, Treason, Treason, Strike Traitor, strike,
(said he) make an end of thy Villainy, I desire to die.

He answered with Oaths, that he came for mercy.

And the King replied, that Mercy extorted was Insolency, and not the form of
Suppliants: and suddenly rushed in the Earl Mar with numbers of that Faction,
having possession of the Court, and outward Gates, enforced the King to show
himself to the People (who were come to his rescue) as in freedom, and to
command them to depart. And enforces Articles.
And Bothwel thus emboldened, got Bows the Ambassador to side with them, and
to urge these Articles from the King, Pardon of all former Attempts and
Treason, by him or his Associates, with restoration of all, which they
heretofore possessed, and to abandon the Chancellor, the Lord Hume, the Master
of Glammis, and others.

To all the King signed with witnesses of all manner of men, Lords and
Ministers thereunto.

The next Day August 20. The King complains of Bothwels insolences.
the King removes to Falkland, Lenox, Ochiltry and Crichton of Clany, waited on
him with directions from Bothwel, to see that the King kept to his late
Articles; in which time Bothwel attained an Assise to purge him of his
practicing with Witches, the original of his mischief: but the King in disdain
to be thus misused, goes to Sterling, and under color of con^orming the
Highlanders, pro^ures a Convention of other Lords, necessarily frequent and
effectual, Hamilton, Mar, Morton, Glencarn, Montross, Lindsey, and Levingston,
two Bishops and two Priors, and some Burgesses. The King enters them with some
business of the Borders; but in earnest relates to them the Indignities he had
endured by Bothwel, which they knew, and puts it upon their Honors, whether he
were bound to the late Conditions so extorted from him in terror and fear of
his life; lets them see their own insecurity, when himself is over-powred and
forced by Villainies as a captive King to submit unto Subjects unjust demands,
in destruction of his loyal Councillors and eminent Officers.

They concluded Bothwels Fact treasonable, The Lords r^sent it, and send to him.
and those Articles void, freedom in the King to call his Servants and
Councillors about him; and resolved to publish by Act his Majesty's power, as
a free Prince, to choose his Councillors and Servants about his Person, and
that the Conditions signed to Bothwel in August last, to be null.

And being now set upon it, two Commissions were sent to him, to signify thus
much, and of the Kings favor for him to supplicate for pardon, before November
next, and then to depart the Realm, till the Kings pleasure.

Bothwel seemed humble, but meets with Athol, Montross, and a number of men, at
Sterling, to whom the King sends to dissolve his Train and retire home, for the
King was coming thither, with the Lord Home, and some Forces were sent before,
to scour the way, who encountering Montross, takes him Prisoner; and the Court
coming to Edinburgh, Denounced Rebel.
Bothwel is cited and denounced Rebel again.

These Troubles were raised by the Lords of Religion, but see what the Papists
do.

The Catholic Lords had been cited to the last Parliament in July, Proceedings
against Popish Lords.
but failed by some defect in the Libell, and so were remitted to the King and
Council, which was suspected in favor; the Synod of Fife therefore
excommunicate Angus, Huntley, Arrol, Home and Chisholm, and writ to Edinburgh
for them to do so there.

The King displeased with such Proceedings, requires M. Bruce there great
Pastor, to stay Sentence, the Persons neither cited nor subject to Fife Synod,
and if this be your Order (says he) for one to excommunicate, with their
direction for others to do so too, who can be sure to eschew trouble?

But Bruce boldly told the King, that the Ministers had their own Reasons, and
were answerable only to the General Assembly.

Well, (says the King) your Discipline has distasted all men, and seeing your
practices are without good President, I will bethink me of some Remedy.

The Popish Lords complain to the King at Falaw, and humbly crave a legal
Trial, but were commanded to enter their persons at Perth, and abide there till
the Trial; and lest any jealousy should censure the King, as conniving, the
Abbot of Lunders was sent to the English Ambassador, and to Edinburgh
Ministry, to tell them the truth; and it was time so to do.

For now such News got wings, by the Ministers.
and Commissioners of all the several Churches from all parts convene, and
finding the Church of God, King and Kingdom in eminent peril, they prepare
Articles of advice.

That the Trial of the excommunicate Lords be not prevented, but their Day
prorogued only for the convenience of the Professors of the Religion to be
their Accusers, for their Treasons committed; in the mean time to stand
committed; their Jury to be nominated by their Accusers, the whole Professors
of the Gospel; that they being excommunicate and so cut off from the Body of
the Church of God, have no benefit of the Law, till they be reconciled to the
Church: and that such only as profess the Religion may be a Guard to the King,
against the Enemies of God, the Country not brooking them and us together.

The King startled at their Inscription, The King displeased with the Assembly.
not owning (he said) such Convention, nor them Commissioners assembling
without his consent; ^ut vouchsafed to receive them as humble Subjects, but not
otherwise commissioned. And of his own gracious intention told them, That the
said Lords met him at Falaw, and humbly craved a legal Trial, to which the
Ministers had often solicited, and which in honor and justice he with his
Council had granted, and considering the time and place, Perth not so proper,
he had resolved it at Linlithgow, at the meeting of the Estates, and with their
advice; and that neither Judges nor Iuries should be other than men
indifferent; and for his own Guard, those whom he called thither should be
welcome, others should not be so.

They accused the Lord Home of residing at Court.

The King told them, His Day assigned to satisfy the Ministers was not as yet;
and if you can accuse him in particular for the present, let him answer for
himself. And so sent them away.

The Assembly unsatisfied, Their farther proceedings in Tumult.
advertise all parts to be in Arms at the Day of Trial (which the King timely
prohibits) without his Warrant.

They answer, that in the cause of God, their Defense must not be deficient.

Which the King inhibits by Proclamation, Declaring his course taken for their
Trial in July last, but hindered by Bothwels Rebellions, he now convenes the
Estates at Linlithgow, for that and other necessities of the Kingdom; the Lords
themselves earnest Suitors to abide the Law, and satisfy the Church; and
therefore commands the Subjects not to make Convocations; but if any meeting
were already of that nature, then to dissolve and return home, under pain of
punishment.

But meet they would, Commissioners to try the Popish Lords,
with such numbers as shortened the Proceedings; and in sum, Commissioners
were chosen by the Estates to consider of the Popish Lords their Offers and
Petitions, to try their Accusations and Purgations; and what they determine
should be valid and effectual, as in Parliament or Convention. The
Commissioners were, the Chancellor, Mar, Montross and Rothes, sundry Lords and
Lairds, and diverse of the Ministry named to be admitted to the Conference.

The 12th of November they meet and conclude, and conclude these Articles.
That the true Religion established the first of his Majesty's Reign should be
only professed in all time to come, within the Realm; and that none should
abet, or receive Jesuits, Priests, or other Adversaries of Religion, upon the
pain in former Acts of Parliament.

That all should conform hereto before February next, or depart the Realm,
whither his Majesty shall appoint, and not return, till they turn Professors;
they and their Heirs, always enjoying their Lands and Estates, by Procurators
in their behalfs.

The Earls of Angus, Huntley, and Arrol, and the Lairds Achindown and Chisholm,
to be unaccusable of the Crimes contained in the Summons, occasioned by their
Letters and Blanks intercepted, (as before remembered) concerning their
trafficking with foreign Princes against Religion, etc. discharging all
Proceedings against them: Provided, if they offend hereafter, the former Crimes
to be added to their Charge.

That such of them as shall profess Religion are to be assigned their places of
abode: not to dispute public or private in favor of Popery. Huntly and Arrol
to remove out of their company James Gordon and Oglevy Jesuits, to find
Sureties in forty thousand pounds to abide Subscriptions; and Achindown and
Chisholm in ten thousand pounds.

Such as leave the Realm, to give caution not to practice with Jesuits abroad,
against this State; and to declare their submission to their choice of
conditions before January next, or be liable to Trial by Law.

These were in effect concluded and signed unto by them; which the King and
Council confirmed, and the three Earls subscribed, but to small effect.

For the end of this Year, begins fresh feuds, the Iohnstons in the
West-Marches made Incursions upon the Sanhares, and killed eighteen persons;
and though great friendships had been contracted with Maxwel, yet having in
Commission as Warden to pursue the Offenders, the Sanhares offered their
assistance therein, to bring all Niddesdale to depend upon him, and Bonds
signed unto for performance: a Servant of Maxwels betrays this Bond into the
hands of Iohnston, who sends a Gentleman to discourse the truth out of Maxwel,
who first denied it, but afterward said, He must obey the Kings directions.

Iohnston to cope with such Combination, Maxwells and Johnstons fewds.
associates with those of Tevedale, the Eliots and Grahams; and so meeting
Maxwels Forces with the Commander Olephant, killed him and diverse others.

Maxwel to repair his dishonor, levies one thousand men, and like a Kings
Lieutenant, with displayed Banner, enters Annandale. Iohnston not so many,
deals by policy, sends out his Prikers, (the Boders cunning) to provoke; whom
Maxwel encounters, but by Ambuscade, Iohnston comes in with power, and puts
them all to flight.

Maxwel was taken, desiring Quarter, (as he had often given Iohnstons father)
and reaching out his hand for to confirm it, had it basely cut off, and
afterward butched to death; he was a man much lamented, of great spirit,
humane, and more learned than Lords are, yet like most of them, ambitious.

And this to be done to the Kings Lieutenant, The Kinds sad condition.
might amaze some men, to consider the Distempers of the Nation, and the wisdom
of a young Sovereign, how to balance these frequent Feuds, and to bandy
against Bothwels Treasons, Papists conspiracies, tumults, and insurrections,
the Gangrene Evil of insolent Assemblies, evermore eating into the Bowels of
Government, to devour and devastate all; for this present he assigns the Lord
Herris, Drumlanrig, Lagg, and other Barons, to abide at Dunfres, to quiet and
repress Disorders.

The time limited to the Popish Lords, Popish Lords come not in.
January 18. is past, and they omiting the benefit of Abolition, are charged to
enter their persons into Ward, Angus into Blackness, Huntley in Dunbritton, and
Arrol to Edinburgh Castle, and Achindon in Tantallon; but neither of them
obeyed.

The King removes to Sterling, where Queen Ann was delivered of her firstborn
the 19th of February, 1593. Pr. Henry born in Feb.
To which place arrives the Lord Zouch from Queen Elizabeth, to congratulate
her Delivery, and to complain to the King, his remisness against the Popish
Lords, Lord Zowch Ambassador from England
for she was informed of the Articles of November; and being told besides, by
some busy Presbyters at home, the Kings favor to his Popish Lords, (her age
made her often apt to entertain such Tales, and her Jealousy summed up Reasons
to her self, soon to believe them.) But, her Ambassador taking time, to
understand what had passed, could not be at leisure to suspend his judgment or
confidence in the Kings prosecution to effectual punishment.

And therefore to hasten homewards, he tampers for Bothwel, (the immediate end
of his Errand) deals with the Ministers, and Ministers assist Bothwels attempt.
the most especial amongst them, to countenance his fresh Insurrection with
numbers of loose persons; and (which troubled the King, they commend Andrew
Hunter, one of their own, to be Bothwels Chaplain in Ordinary. And being thus
emboldened, they go on to raise Moneys themselves, levy Soldiers, to assist
his Treasons; Nay more, (see their piety to Rebellion, their sacrilegious
assistance) even with those very Moneys, benevolent Contributions collected by
their Pulpit Oratory, out of the poor peoples purses for supply of Geneva
Brethren then in much misery; and in a mad fury distributed unto Robert Melvil
and George Strange, two Rebel Captains, for the well-affected Cause of the
Traitor Bothwell. His Design taking up a new motive and pretext, Justice
against the Popish Lords; but in truth his Malice and Revenge, pretended also,
for the slaughter of Murray. And with him joined Argile and Arrol, and so do
Arguile and Arrol.
to meet at Lies; not without hourly intelligence with the English Ambassador
Zouch, who fearing that the Kings foresight had espied his juggling, stole away
home, without biding Bothwel Farewell.

Whose Cause was cried up, advancing from the Borders with four hundred Horse
coming to Lies, very early the first of April, and this he durst do, the King
being so near at Edinburgh, but meanly guarded, Anno 1594.
and put to it to speak for himself after (...) Sermon, for the Pulpit would
not.

He passionately tells the People all the stories of Bothwels A^tempts, The King
pleads to the people after Sermon for assistance.
and his Treason now, reasoning with the Multitude, some suspicion of his
siding with Papists (...) of the Lords; (...) them in ^^inde (almost forgotten)
that he was their (...) King and Sovereign, and brought it home to their
self-conside^^tion, if Bothwel should prevail against him, what they must
expect of the Borderers upon them.

Much ^do they are moved to arm, and to accompany the^r Commander the Lord
H^me, who lead the Horse, and the bold trained Bands march after the Cannon,
taken out of the Castle, to besiege Lies.

But Bothwel was removed tow^rds Dalkieth, dividing into three Troops, Humes
Horse followed to obse^^e what course he held, whilst the King made a Hal^ ^t
^orrow^mo^r.

Bothwels Scouts finding them (...), encourage him to turn upon Hume, which he
did with some advantage, being above the others number, gave him ^^ace, in
(...) retire, which moved some to advise the King to secure himself in the Town
Resta^^^g No, says the King, (...) never quit the Field to a Traitor. And
though in eminent danger, stood it still, whil^st Bothwels eager pursuit,
stumbled his Horse, and in the fall, bruises him into some per^^, that he took
the readiest way to Dalkieth for that night, Bothwel dissipated.
and the next morrow dissolves his Troop^. Arrol has tidings, and does so too;
the Captains at ^ife take ship and fa^l away.

And this gave end to his three ^quadrons, and leisure to the King by his
Ambassador Lord Colvil to complain to Queen Elizabeth of her Ambassador
Zouch, Colvil Ambassador to England complains of Zowch.
and her harboring of Bothwel.

He writes plainly, Though she had recommended his Person, wise, religious and
honest, yet his ^arriage was more like an Herald, than to be a Messenger in
Commission of Pea^e, between two neighbor Princes, and therefore meeting with
his pride and wilfulness, he chose his own Emissary to carry this Errand, whom
he prays the Queen to credit. He marvelled the more, having received her many
Princely promises and Letters not to countenance Bothwel, nor his Receivers,
whilst some of her own Palaces had given him harbor, being assisted with
English Moneys to levy Scots and English in this his another very late
treacherous Attempt. To challenge her Princely Honor, he did not, nor could be
confident of her privi^y therein, yet considering her prudence and policies, he
was troubled to find the insolency of her Subjects, to hazard a breach with
her nearest Kinsman; and therefore leaving it to her self to resolve those
doubts, he put her in mind of his delivery of Orork the Irish Rebel to her,
and prays her not to put him in balance with such a traiterous counterpoise,
least he be constrained to speak like the Poet, Flectere si nequeo superos, etc.

Thus much the letter said, the Ambassador in private assured her Majesty the
particular prosecution against the Popish Lords, to proscribe their persons and
confiscate their Lands. And to go through with the work against them, and other
Romists, he craved a supply of moneys.

The Queen had no excuse but to balance her favor to Bothwell, by the slow
pursuit the King made against those Papists. The Queens ^nswer.
Henceforth she would cease, and for effecting his purpose against them. He
should not want what was in her power to afford.

The first she really per^^^rmed and speedily proclaimed against Bothwell, and
no assistance to him through her Borders, which the King heartily resented.

And by his Ambassadors invites the Queen to the Baptism of the Prince his Son,
and others were sent of the same errand, To the King of Denmark, the Dukes of
Brunswick and Megleburgh, and to the general Estates. (Men enough to one Woman.

The King so far affected with the Queens Publication against Bothwell, Papists
banished.
that the next Parliament the Scottish Papists are banished by plurality of
voices, Clergy and Commons (whom the Nobles would have spared) And Arguile is
sent with forces against such as would not submit.

The Assembly of the Church co^nvene at Edinburgh, and direct Commissioners of
their own to represent to his Majesty at Sterlin, the dangers of the State, and
to propound the remedies in eleven Articles.

They lay the ground from the late design of the Spaniard in eighty eight
against the whole Island, Remonstrance of the Assembly against Papists.
and his correspondence since with the Popish Lords, argues his intention, the
same still, and their continuance in Treasonable attempts ever since, does
evidence their obstinacy to prosecute the Conspiracy.

Then the Church lays open, how their counsel from time to time was neglected,
and the enemy encouraged, and none greater favorites in Court than Papists;
naming principal families infected therewith.

And recko^s up the Popish Lords neglect, and scorn of the Act of Oblivion,
their disobedience, not entering their persons to Ward. The arriving of the late
Spanish Bark at Montross, shows that their Practices continue, and their open
Conventions assure themselves safety; besides their preparations of Arms in the
North parts. And conclude, that the cause not being removed, the dangerous
effects are like to follow.

The Remedies they propound in eight conclusions.

That the Popish Lords be forfeited the next Sessions of Parliament.

And no Papists elected shall sit.

That they shall be pursued, And the Remedies.
their rents and lands annexed to the Crown without favor.

That seizure be made of several notorious persons named.

That none shall relieve them with any Supply or Intelligence.

That the people should put themselves into arms, as a posture of Defense.

Somewhat was said against the Lord Hume, but he appearing, was absolved.

These remedies were well accepted of the King, only misliking Subjects to arm
without his Warrant. And well he might reminding the last years insurrections
at the peoples pleasure.

The King granting theirs, offers some conditions for himself, hy his Messinger
Melvil.

That the Assembly should inhibit their Ministers irreverent speeches in
Pulpit, against his Majesty and Council under pain of deprivation.

And to censure John Ross for his insolency therein.

The like against Hunter another of theirs^ for his open consortship with the
late Traitors, he being a Minister of Religion, against his King of the same
faith, to the great scandal of the Church.

The third was to admon^sh their Congregations against Bothwell, his
treasonable attempts, or any other such insurrections against his Majesty's
person.

This last was enacted, but Ross was only admonished to do so no more; and
Hunter was pretended to be deposed from his function but they juggled him in
again.

The Parliament adjudged the three Earls and Achindown guilty of the Crimes of
Treason, their estates forfeited, their Escocheons torn by the Herald (as
their manner of degrading) and excellent Statutes passed for the good of
Country and Commons.

And now begins the Solemnity of Baptism for the Prince in August, The
Solemnities of the Princes Baptism named Henry Fred^rick.
from England the Earl of Sussex, the King of Denmark, and Duke of Brunswick
and Megleburgh, with the free Estates of the Provinces, had their Ambassadors
there present, from the French King came none. The manner of Ceremony was thus,
handsome. The Infant was brought into the Queens chamber of Presence, laid in a
Bed of State. The Ambassadors came in, and were presented with the Prince;
first from the Arms of the Countess of Mar, to the Duke of Lennox, who
delivered him to the Earl of Sussex; having the principal place of Dignity, who
bore him to the Chapel, being followed with a Noble Train of Lords and Ladies.
Before them all, the Lord Hume carried the Ducall Coronet, the Lord Levingston
bore the Towell; the Lord Seaton the Fontall Basin, and the Lord Simple the
Laver. Over the English Ambassador ^ Rich Majesterial Canopie, supported by
four Lairds. The Child's Train bore up by the Lords Sinclare and Urquart, and a
Gu^rd or Lane on each side of the young Noblemen and Gentry of the Nation.

Being entered the Chapel; At the Chaple,
the King already set, and ari^^ing from his Throne, receives and salutes the
Ambassadors; and then the Infant was delivered again to Lenox, who reached him
to the Nurse, and the Estates take their Seats. Upon the Kings Right hand a
Chair was placed for the French Ambassador who was not come. The next to him
the Ambassador of Denmark* on the left Hand the English Extraordinary and
Lieger sat together; and then the Ambassadors of Brunswick, Megleburgh, and
the States, before each Seat, a small T^ble covered with Velvet, and officers
only about the English to wait his pleasure.

The Service ending Sussex presented the Prince to David Cunningham Bishop of
Aberaeen, the action of Baptism administered by David Lindsey Minister of Lies,
and in French, because of Strangers, and naming him Henry Frederick. And so
returning in former Order. And the Prince being laid upon a Bed of Honor, Lion
Herald proclaims his Titles, Henry Frederick Knight, and Baron of Kenfrew,
Lord of the Isles, Earl of Karrick, Duke of Rothsay, Prince and Stewa^d of
Scotland. Meddals of Gold and Silver cast to the people* sundry Knights made,
with feastings and comedies, for a whole month.

The King amidst these Ceremonies of joy, The King sends to England for money.
minds his serious affairs.

For the Popish Lords in Rebellion, an Ambassador is sent to Queen Elizabeth
to remember her promise, to support his levies; after many shifts and delays
some small sums were advanced as a loan, (which in truth were due otherwise
upon account) and that very unwillingly too. for one Lock was now resident at
Court, the only agent for Bothwells business, and Mr. Calvil the Minister, his
Copes-mate, there also.

And again Bothwell is got up, Bothwel and the Popish Lords join in Rebellion.
and keeping intelligence with the Popish Lords in the North, against whom the
King intends an Expedition, resolves so to incumber his affairs in the South,
as to prevent his journey, and having received some Gold from his Foreign
friends, corrupts the Keeper of the Castle Blackness, to seize the King into
hold, till the Conspirators should come and force conditions. To this they all
are obliged by bond, assigned by Huntley, Arroll, Angus, Bothwell, and
Achindown, and in custody of Sir James Scot. By which and others papers,
discovered from Allan Orm, Bothwells Man, the whole plot came to light, and was
published to undeceive the Comm^nalty, upon what score of Religion Bothwells
Treasons were confirmed. And the Jayler and Orm, were both executed, to assure
the visible truth to the people.

And without more circumstance Commission was given to Arguile, Arguile and
Athol,
Ath^l and others, who besiege the Castle of Ruthen; but was beaten back and
meets with a Supply of more strength nowadvanced to a thousand horse and foot,
Huntley hastens to fight ere Arguile get more men. And being less in number,
but made desperate by necessity, Arroll leads the Van, with three hundred, and
Huntley has the Battle.

No sooner in sight, against Huntley and Arrol.
but Arguile (in some misdoubt) yet commands Ma^k^an, who led his Van, to
advance. Himself lodges in the fast grounds full of Moss and boggs, with the
main of his men. Huntley had some Field pieces which played upon Macklans
Highlanders; and they, as their manner was then (though since they have
appeared stout fellows and to stand to it) fell down on their bellies not
willing to look up so long as the Guns did thunder, which encouraged Arroll to
give the charge, but being forced to wheel aside, the Fellows got up on their
feet, and by that time they encounter, showring such a storm of arrows upon
Arroll, that the first flight (a quarter of an hour) darkened the day into
night, and at the fall of their Arrows, came in with their darts, that killed
Achindown, and dangerously wounded Arroll, Arguile discomfited.
many hurt, and the most fled.

Huntley sees this, and hastily spurs his Horse into the succor, and now
encountering for the day, continued a cruel fight for two hours, which routed
Arg^ile, not able to rally them again; yet Macklan stood it out, with courage
and skill, till he retired in order and honor, with loss of many men of note,
be^ides seven hundred Soldiers, and but a dozen on Huntleys part, though diverse
desperately wounded. And its called the Battle of Clenlivat a mile off. And so
the Lords for the Kings side separate, and go home.

But ere the Conquerors, The K. comes to the Good-speed, and they are banished.
could relish their welfare, the King was got into the North, and demolishes
Strathbolgy, Slains and Newton, principal holds of Huntleys, and though
themselves withdrew to his Aunt the Countess of Sutherland, they were so beset
by the Duke of Lenox, Lieutenant of the North, that they capitulate with
Sureties to depart the Realm, without prejudice abroad, to the State at Home,
nor to return ^ill the Kings pleasure. Huntley into France, and the rest into
several So^ls.

This condiscention to such notorious Rebels, lodged sometime upon the Kings
account; as in favor to the Romists; but if we examine the charge of the War,
uncertainty of his Nobles, faction of other fewds; and a ticklish jealousy in
the Ministry, not to suffer Bothwell to sinck, whose pretenses till now, they
always encouraged, these exigents may excuse the King.

Indeed in this public Rebellion, with Papists, Colwell his Chaplain, refused
his devotion, forsook his company, and came home again; yet to make himself
welcome, betrayed Bothwells Brother, Hercules Stewart, to public execution at
Edinburgh.

This frighted the grand Traitor into fears; Bothwel flies into France,
and forsaken or all but his guilty self, flies into France, and lands at
New Haven, where in disquise he lodges; but tidings of him came to the King,
who sends a Gentleman to France, to demand so reprobate a Rebel. The French
King professed not to afford him countenance, but being come for refuge, he
could not, in honor, debar him the free air of France.

And so wearied with the insupportable weigh of his sinful soul, and
quarrelling with any man to kill him, against the Edict of France. He was
thereupon banished from thence, wanders into Spain, and dies at Naples some
years after.
and so to Naples in Italy, where he lived, and died woundrous poor, and
unpittied of all men, about the year 1624.

And thus the Hydra's Heads of this Conspiracy removed out of the way, the
Members came in, discovering one another to procure pardon, and the very Bond
was brought in, which did assotiate these Confederates, by which the Ministers
eyes were opened, and by this new light they could see Bothwells guilt, which
heretofore they could hardly believe. And so ended this Rebellion with the last
of the year.

The next Assembly of the Church occasioneth the King then at Montross,
Assembly of the Church in Scotland.
to send Commissioners to them to urge these Articles.

That any subj^^t found guilty of Treason, should also be excommunicate; that
so the Swords of Justice, Spiritual and Temporal, should make inseparable Union
one with another.

That no Excommunication should be valid by private men, without major votes in
public Assemblyes of the Members of other Churches.

That no Excommunication should fall upon any, for slight causes, and suspected
crimes in Civil cases, lest the censure should come into contem^^, like the
Popes Cursings, and when they do, to give lawful citation.

A man would judge of these Articles without difficult Answer. Answer the K.
Articles.


Yet they shake their heads at all.

At the f^rst with this clause, Legitima cognitione Ecclesiastica preaeunte.

To the third and fourth they demur. Anno 1595.


And discharging any summary Excomm^nication. with this Exception, Nisi salus
Ecclesiae periclitetur.

Thus evermore they bare a starting hole, which the K. might easily see, would
serve turn for their turbulent intention to color their proceedings hereafter.

What the conceit should be, Q. Anns Design to seize the Prince.
that possessed Queen Ann she had an earnest design (envy to the Earl of Mar,
his Guardian, her only Warrant) to get the Prince out of his care, into her
custody, and dealt so with some Counselors in the Kings absence, that had not
the King timely prevented, and suddenly surprised the Queen, by posting to her
from Faulkland to Edinburgh) it had been too late to recall the danger, and
carries her in his company away to Sterlin, leaving her alone to ponder out the
plot; such a design, as for her honorable memory I dare not mention, having no
ground, but a Jesuits conceit, but boldly put in print; an authority enough,
for impudence only.

The King pondering with her the wily design, writes in secret to the Earl.

My Lord of Mar,
Because in the security of my Son, The Kings letter to Mar.
mine is conserved, and my concredit of his charge to you, upon trust of your
honor and honesty. This I command (as singly and solely of my self, being in
company with those I like not) that upon any charge or necessity that possibly
can come from me, you shall not deliver him; And in case that God call me at
any time; see you that neither for the Queen, nor for the Estates pleasure. you
deliver him out of your hands, fill he be eighteen years of age, and that then
he command you himself.

Sterlin July 24. 1595. James Rex.


In this case that the King was cooped, appears his great trust to the fidelity
of this Lord.

Some fire carries smoke, The Chancellor sick, and why.
which even choked the good old Chancellor, whether regret of the wrong,
jealousy of the King, or guilt of the Counselour? he contracts the melancholy
into a sickness? and being withdrawn to his Country House Lawder, sends his
Cousin the Secretary to the King then at Hamilton.

Excuses any evil design in him by his former continual fidelity to the Kings
affairs. Commends his wife and children, and some friends to the Kings favor.
Takes leave, like a man, not long of this Life.

The King ever compassionate, took it for no time, to dispute with discontent.

It was enough, his good services had been eminent and frequent; this last
account he commits to God, and like a Prince, wi^e and charitable, instead of
correction, sends him comfort, under his own hand and Seal.

Chancellor, The Kings letter to him, full of grace.

How sorry I am (says he) for this ill News, be your self my judge, I could
never dissemble my affection. God may spare you, for my sake, if you love me so
well, as to resist the assaults of your sickness, that his goodness may reserve
you (yet a little) to me, as Hezekiah was to his people (for the necessity
between Prince and people, is reciproque) Nor can any sickness (of it self)
seize the vital, if God cut not the thread of life. As to your suits; when God
calls you, I shall need no Remembrancer, for since I made you a mark of my
constant favor (as your self has often times said*) I am much more bound in
Princely care to conserve it to your Wife and children, that bear your Image, a
lively representation for me of my thankful memory of you, examples are begun
in others, what have I not done for the Duke of Lenox, and Lady Huntley, for
their Fathers sake? Suffer your thoughts in this assurance of the like to
yours; The Secretary is mine already. And if the distance of place, could
dispense with my time, I should desire to see you, and to have said thus much
my self. God keep you to me, and to your native Country,

James Rex.


He lanquished two Months, Chancellor dies, his character.
and died in October 1595. He was a man of rare parts, a deep wit, and learned
also, of good courage against mighty Assailants. Mar was the man he most hat^d,
the other the like to him. Both good men (accounting them Courtiers) private
emulation I fear, more of Policy than virtue; yet with great reservation of his
Majesty's affection to either, and in general to the public service, till, I
know not how he failed, in this last act.

The King in some passion for his death* having little more to do it seems
then, bestowed his Poetry, into an Epitaph for him of a dozen verses, which
because I find them much bettered, in comparison of his Ma^esties
after^ver^^^ying, his holy Meditations, in turning David's Psalms into excellent
Meeter, I shall silence these* and refer you to the other hereafter.

This year was held ominously evil in Scotland, dearth and scarcity of all
victual, abundance of winds in harvest, the natural cause; bloodshed and
slaughters in all parts, accounted unnatural, the curse of God haunting that
Nation, where such Wars (we call them civil) cry down vengeance on the
Inhabitants. Iohnstons and Maxwells had another bout in the South Parts. Those
from the Western, the Maxwells, had much the worse.

With the Isles and High-landers likewise, great dissentions. The In-countrey
no less behind, Murders, slaughters. The killing of one, though a private man
as to himself, engages his Kinsman, Master, or Chief, to procure the revenge.
David Forester (but a Citizen of Sterlin) murdered in his journey to Edinburgh
so I censure them that lay in wait by the way) we know not by whom; but see,
the Lairds of Arth, and Dunny pearce, in malice to the man (because to his
Master the Earl of Mar) endeavor to shadow the inquiry of the Inquest. The
Earl, in this affront for his beloved Servant, convaies the corpse with a Train
of Mourners from Linlithgow, to Sterlin, carrying therewith the body
barefaced, and the sheet gory in blood with the dead wounds, and all to move
compassion for revenge.

The body buried, Mar prosecutes some suspected; the Lords Levingston and
Elphingston boulster out the men; No Law, nor Justice to be suffered for quiet
and civil Trial. No! these feuds will fight it out, and did, to future example
of Gods Justice in the fall of these two families, much addicted to murders
and quarrels of blood.

This one, and some few such like, I mention for Presidents and Examples, not
glutting the Reader with too many, which in every place fill up the Scots
Chronicles, and which sundry of them boast of, for magnimity of Spirit, and
honor to their Gentry.

We lately observed, The King assigns Commissioners of his Treasury
the small effects the King found from the promises of England to aid him,
which brought him to take care how to advance his own, other helps he had not.
He commissioneth eight persons to govern his Exchequer, all of them Senators of
the College of Justice, only Peter Young his honest Almoner. The Commission was
ample in words and power, to them, or any five, To call to account all manner
of Officers Accomptants; To Order and Rate the Rents. To alter and change any
of the Officers. To do and act such and so many particulars, in terms and
words, with such exact particular powers over the rent Gatherers; profits and
duties of Caves, Customs, Fishings (take them as they are in this order)
Cole-houses, Parks, Steadings (Fool Coults) Orchards of Apples; other Fruits,
Conies, Capons, Geese. Good God, what not? Then to enterlace these, you have
the other particulars, Money, Plate, Jewels, Mines of Gold, Silver, Lead, Tin.
Certainly the West-Indie Fleets comes short of such wealth. But so the Scots
use to account of their own.

And to countenance their pains and care. He promises verbo Principis, not to
adjoyn any more, and if any did, the survivours to give their consent, for
admition. They had authority to revoke, disclaim, to direct letters of Horning.
(or Outlary) Pounding or Caption (suertyes) and many such like, etc.

These Lords make faith, etc. to respect his Majesty's weal and advance of
Revenew without affection or fraud. Provided not to be liable to Action, for
the King. seeing they did all without fee. And proclaimed at the Market Crosseat
Edinburgh, Iannuary 1595.

The Courtiers were blanck for such, must be their reward. But they complain as
an injury to the Kings honor, having little to himself, and less for the
meritt of any Man.

And to give them more Cause of Complaint. They begin to dispose of Places ere
they fall ^o the ground. David Magill Advocate, he is too old and dotes; and
must admit of one of them till of grief he dies. The Master of Glammis somewhat
in Arears of his accounts, and his deputy Sir Robert Melvil, the same, must
resign their Treasury to the Prior of Blantiere ere they obtain their quieti
sunt. Richard Cockhorn secretary, exchanges it to Lindsey for Privy Seal. The
collectary Linchclowden given to Elphinston. And their President they would
Create Chancellor. Soft Sirs. The King would not. These and many more made them
Clamored by the Country. Somewhat they deserved amiss; But, the fate of
favomites, and men of Trust, they bore the blame of all.

The Jesuit, much troubled to see the State, likely to settle into security,
by the severe proceedings against Papists. Papists private plots.
Whole families Grahams, Fentres, and others; the Lords banished; the fewds
dissipated; and the Ministry, in some measure of mildness: They counsel how
to involve both Nations, into some design together. And to set up A strange
medley of Pretenders, by protext of several Claims (besides the Kings right) to
the Crown of England. For they found by the sad affects to them, the birth of
the ^rince and likely hood of a numerous issue, if Queen Elizabeth failed and
the King also, it were the same to their successors.

They devised double ways, Devising sundry other Titles to both Crowns.
Title, and Poison the first was by Title (forsooth) of the Earl of Essex in
England. Though no Catholic, yet his Ambitious and vain popularity (they
conceived,) might quallifie his temper toward Religion, being of himself
doubtful in opinion, and so, his Clemency would incline to Tolleration, of E.
of Essex.
if not profession of Catholic.

They drew his descent, from Thomas of Woodstock son to Edwarw the 3, And so
to be promoted to the people, they dedicate a Book to him, styled Dolmans (a
priest) some say, written by the Jesuit Persons Cardinal All^^ and
Iuglefield; discourse of legallity and policy, inchanging hereditary
succession (...) England, by a new devised way of Election (only) of ^ Ro^^^^
C^^tholick; Ravelling into the History of most English Kings, (...) be either
not Legitimate or rightly incapable.

The other Title, Of Spains.
was of the in^ant of Spain; And therein they use their catholic doctrine, to
make up with monstrous Lies and many; 1. From Constance, daughter to the
Conqueror, married to ^^^gat (...) of Britag^e (though all our Chronicles
agree that she died without issue. 2. From Eli^or daughter to Henry the 2
married to Alphonsus of Castile. 3. And descends from Blanch his daughter. 4.
From Beatrice, daughter of Henry 3 of England. 5. From the Portugal family of
John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster.


Thus much Persons did then. And after the Queens death, he excuses it to the
King, as taking no effect. These were devised in case the King should have no
issue then in being. Whilst the Jesuit Spaniard, practices by poison to
hasten the Queens death, and no less than three in the plot.

Roderick Lopez of the Jewish sectary; P^actice to impoyson Q. Eliz. by Loper.
Physician to her household and of honest repute, till infected by Andrada a
Portugal and don de Moro a Counceler of Spain; with a rich Jewel, in hand,
and fifty thousand Crowns more to impoyson her, and this was certified unto
Fue^tes, and Ibarra secretaries to that King in Flanders by Stephen Ferreira
who writ Lopez his letters to them; and they returned Emanuell Lowise unto
Lopez, to hasten the plot. These circumstances they confessed and were hanged.

The reason so many Portugalls in a knot, shows the time of freedom here, for
them, under some pretense of don Antonio their pretended Prince, banished thence
and protected here.

There followed them to the Gallows, Cullen and Irish fencer, and York and
Williams hired also by Ibarra to kill the Queen. Cullen, York, and Willians,
and other fugitive tray^ors.


Of which she complains to Earnest Arch Duke of Austria Governor in Flanders
under the Spaniard, that Ibarra ^is servant hatched these treacheries, to the
Kings dishonor, if not by him punished; and to have the English and chief
complotters, Owen, Throgmorton, Holcot, a Jesuit, Gefferd, and Worthington
divines; delivered up to her.

We had of his here in England a fugitive, his late secretary Don Antonio perez
for some mischief he set on foot in Aragon, Ant* Perez infected Essex.
got away to save his head; And to the French King first, he revealed all his
Masters secrets, who finding him of a pregnant wit^, and malicious, sends him
to his Lieger in England to work, into some faction or design, against Spain.
And here he was, without pention or protection of the Queen; for she, nor
Burgly the Treasurer would not vouchsafe to see him; nor did any other, give
him countenance; unless the Earl of Essex* he did, to his cost, and used him
as an Oracle of Spanish polity; sildome from his sight, but when it was
supplied with interchange of letters in latin, which Essex understood* and
delighted in his phraze, and yet was not glutted, with threescore of them,
whilst he resided here; They are extant, eztituled. Antonii Per^^ii Epis^ol^ ad
Com. Essexiam Magnatem Angliae. They discipher him a buysie intermedler: fit
fuel for the Earls spirit,

The French King turned papist (as we said) thereby winning the affections of
his people, weakened the faction of the Leagues who also came in to the King,
and so never left, till the Spaniard had took leave of them all. Only those in
Bretaign called thither by the Duke of Mercoeur, strenghten the Sea Coasts and
resolve to stay, till by the valor of Norris by land, and Martin Forbisher by
Sea, who though wounded with a shot there, returned victor and died at Plymouth.
And Norris called home, to look after Rebellion in Ireland.

There was public Reports of the Spaniards mighty preparations by sea more
then in 88 pretended against Britaign in France, Spanish de^ignes invasion of
Scotland or England.
which the King of Scotland feared might fall upon him, or England, or both;
And therefore musters all his people, and secures the Borders, from pryvate
quarrels of each other, or to infringe the peace and Covenant of both Nations,
so firmly united, by Alliance and Religion. Language, and manners, that of late
they seemed one.

But to divert Spains purposes, Queen Elizabeth joins with France, who
denounces war against him* and is hotly pursued, in Luxemburgh and Picardy.
Where he has the better, Castelet, Dorleans, and Cambray taken; and the French
crave more aid from England, or to be forced, to make peace with Spain, which
indeed she suspected; He being already received (conditionally) into the
blessing of the Pope and conclave.

These successes hightned the Spaniards, Spaniards poo^ success* upon England.
to adventure over into England from Bretaign in four Gallyes; under Command of
Dudrack Brocher, and landed betimes in the morning, burnt^ poor fisher Towns in
Cornwall; and without loss of any one Englishman, stole home again. These,
being the first and last Spaniards that ever in Enmity durst set foot on
English ground.

And this their poor attempt, incensed the English to seek him at home, that
they might feel the different effects of English designs.

Sir Walter Ralegh, Sr. W. Raleghs Guiana voyage and other attempts in the we^^
Indies.
Captain of the Queens Guard, made an Expedition upon his Territories in
America commonly called, the Guiana voyage, Anno 1596.
within 8 degrees south of the Aequater. He burns some Towns and Cottages, and
so returns.

Sir Amias Preston, and Sir Georg Summers, also sack and burn the Towns of the
Isle of Puerto sant^ near Maedera and Coche near Margereta; Coro, and the City
Iago de Lion, but took money to spare Cumena.

Hawkins, Drake, Baskervile, with 6 of the Queens ships, and 20 other Men of
war, fire some Towns in the Isle Dominica in the West Indies and others upon
the continent. But the event of that voyage, Hawkins and Drake died of
sickness, and home came the Company poor enough for any Pillage; so we return
to our Scots story.

This new year some time sets variance between both Realms. Armstrong taken
prisoner in a treaty of the Borderers.
The Lord Scroop for the West Marches of England, and the Lord of Backlugh for
the charge of Liddesdale, design a Day of Truce to treat of disorders; and the
meeting even at the Brook that divides both nations. Mr. Salcallk was Deputy
for Scroop, and Robert Scot for Backlugh, and having met friendly, and composed
some differences, they parted.

At their meeting was Armstrong (nicknamed Will of Kinmouth) a notorious Thief
for the Scots; he, returning home, was set upon by some English, and after four
miles chase* brought him Prisoner to Salcallk, and so to the Castle of Carlisle.

The Truce was broken (being accounted evermore from the hour of Treaty till
next day Sunrise) and the Prisoner is demanded. Backlugh complains to the Lo.
Scroop.
But Scroop refused, unless by order from the Queen and Council; The man being
a notorious Malefactor, and Backlugh was modest, not to make many words, ere he
procured Bows the English Resident to write to Scroop for his enlargement,
which not taking effect; the King writes to the Queen, nor that neither.
Backlugh engaged in honor to the King, and his own right of Trust, Plots the
Prisoners Release, this Way.

The Castle of Carlisle was surprizable, Backlughs design to take the Castle
of Carlisle.
and in particular at the Postern-Gate, the measure of the height he had; and
there he meant to scale, or break through the weakness of the Wall, by Engines,
and so to force the Gates.

Thus resolved, he drew up two hundred horse to Mortons Tower, ten miles from
Carlisle; near Sunset he forded the River Es^, and two hours before day he
passed Eden, beneath Carlile^bridge, and so came to Sarcery* a plain under the
Castle. And making halt under Cadage Bourn, he dismounted fourscore of his
company, but his Ladders too short his men fell to mining, and himself retiring
to the rest, to secure those which might enter against any eruption from the
Town.

In fine the Breach opened entrance to single men, who brake through the
Postern-Gate for the rest; The watch awaked, and made some resistance, but were
soon seized into Guard, and afterward the Prisoner freed. And frees Armstrong.
The sign being forthwith given by sound of a Trumpet, a signal to the
Soldiers without that the enterprise was effected within.

My Lord Scroop and Salcalk, were in the Castle, to whom the Scots gave the
good night, and so parted. This Surprise was handsomely managed, having order
from Backlugh to break open no door but the Prisoners Ward; nor did they do any
more prejudice, though the Governor and Castle became under their power. Being
got out, their Prisoners were returned; The Town took the allarm, and all in
posture of war, but Ba^klugh; came back as he went to his own quarters two
hours before Sunset; the thirteenth of April 1596. a quick and resolute
design, performed with civillity and honor, which troubled the English, to be
outdone nobly in any Attempts.

For a Prisoner to be forced out of a strong Castle of Defense, so far within
England, and so handsomely, troubled the whole State of England.

And Bows the Ambassador, Bows the Ambassador complains hereof.
had post order to aggravate the fact, as a breach of peace, unless Backlugh
were delivered to the Queens pleasure. Backlugh having done this gallant work,
maintained his defense as discretly. That he marched not with design against
any the Queens holds, or in wrong to any of her Subjects, but to relieve a
Prisoner, unlawfully surprised, and illegally detained, being seized in the day
of Truce; nor did he a^tempt his Relief until redress was refused. And the
sober (...) civil prosecution, he was confident would be justified according,
to the ancient Treaties of both Realms, when mutual injuries were referred to
Commissioners, as both their Majesty's should appoint; to whom most humbly he
does submit.

This not satisfactory, the Queens displeasure took some time to consider, the
Queen offended.
until a month after, it was remitted to Commissioners. The King stood upon
Justice, and the rather against the Lord Scroop, for the injury committed by
his Deputy.

And in truth and reason, it was less courtesy to take a Prisoner, than to
relieve him, unlawfully taken. Yet all would not serve, Backlugh commi^^ed.
the Borderers make inroades upon each other; the English worsted in all* till
King James, out of complement to his Kinswoman, grown old and peev^sh, (...)
content to moderate her passion, by yielding unto the imprisonment of Backlugh
to Saint Andrews, and then conveyed to England, more for form than guilt of
punishment, and so sent home again.

The Isles were up, ^^bellion in the Orcades.
a petty Rebellion, naked, cold and hunger soon suppressed themselves, yet in
fear of Spanish Invasion, or a Receptacle ^or Revolters, a thousand men were
levied under Col. Stuart, for forty days (the custom to assist the King)
upon which the chiefs submit and give caution, to compeer before the King.

And as there was too frequent cause by these insurrections for this hurried
nation, Assemblies make things worse.
often to assemble, so in truth, little effects followed, as at this time, for
the Ministers, to color their intentions, would seem to enact against
Self-Interest, and begin with themselves, and fast, pray and preach; days of
Humiliation, that was all that they would do, as to their reforming. But then
there was sure to followcomplaint of the corruption of Courtiers, in the Kings
Palace, and justice Seats, and fear of the banished Lords, and left not till
the faults were found, such as are common, even to the best Estates.

Then would they ravel into Counsel of the Remedies; to which the King usually
would afford consent; but by experience finding out their aim, and danger of
them to be too severe and earnest (which they called zeal) the King wisely
chekt the bit.

Telling them, That unless there were any evident proofs, that the Popish
Lords, Policy to call home the Popish Lords.
since their departure beyond Seas, had conspired with Strangers, to the
prejudice of the Realm, in Religion or State, their cautions cannot in honor or
justice, be convict, nor would he change the course of charity, and conditions
to their wives and children.

And indeed in prudence, the King held himself unsafe, whilst such potent Lords
were abroad; for much mischief they might do underhand, unheard, and unseen.
And reasoning one day with Mr. Robert Bruce (a leading Minister) How much it
concerned him to have them recalled. That Queen Elizabeth grown old, if death
should seize her, he might need assistance of his own, Interest of State and
honor would balance these Lords, even against Catholic or Spanish Titles,
or other Designs, and by such interest may be sooner drawn to the reformed
Religion, than by compulsory extremity.

Mr. Bruce yielded to the Reasons, Mr. Bruce an enemy to Huntley.
to call home Angus and Arroll, but not Huntley, being so much hated.

The Kings opinion seemed further to oversway. Because Huntley, says he, has
married my Cousin, one that I esteem; a man of Power to do good or evil, and so
to be made accordingly.

In the end, Bruce was so bold, as to tell the King in plain terms,

I see Sir, (said he) your affection to Huntley, whom I must oppose and you,
either loose, him or me, for both you cannot keep.

This insolency lost him the King. This for one example of many, which their
own Historians record of their Ministers good behaviors, and certainly this
man's ambition and popularity, out-vied the Kings, who espying his Trayn; that
conducted him by the Court into Edinburgh, By my Sal, said the King, Bruce puts
me down in his Attendants. The Popish Lords return home*


The exiled Lords of themselves resolved to return, but withal possible
submission, and to avoid the least suspicion of jealousy; they separate;
Arroll through Holland, Huntley came before, and out of the North sends
Supplication to the King, and Convention at Faulkland, in August, to reside
where his Majesty would appoint upon caution of good behavior.

The King concluded aright. Either to ruin them and their race, upon Conditions.
or to receive them all into favor, and hope of reforming into Religion. The
first course, says he, has its own difficulties and trouble for me, if I
could effect it.

The other is more consonant to my humor and mine honor, I desire not
destruction; errors of conscience are not of matters of the mind. I like not to
receive conditions from Huntley, rather to advise of commands to them all, with
clemency and favor; which was submitted unto. And the public joy of the
Queens second Birth of a Daughter, Princess Elizabeth born August 16. 1596.
made up the common reception of these Lords, to community and fellowship with
the Congregations.

She was born in August the 16. day 1596. and to be baptized in November.

But now the Ministry make work, Ministers make work
their Commissioners assembling at Edinburgh, send Post to all their
Presbyteries, the State of affairs (for so is the Commission) That the
forfeited Earls were come home without Warrant, are like to be received to
mercy without submission for their offenses of Treason, or reconcilement to the
Church, and conditions confirmed unto them.

The Preachers Pulpit these tidings to their flocks, public and private to
provoke into Tumult, and to be in readiness to resist the dangers of Church and
State. The first Sunday of December held forth for Humiliation, and then the
power in the Minister to tell all to the people, and to enlarge as the zeal of
the Spirit shall promp them. They assume power to call to account all manner of
men; Entertainers, Receivers, or communicate with them to be canvased with the
censures of the Church, Una citatione quia periclitatur salus Ecclesiae, and
Reipublica. And with such busteling with several Commissioners from all parts
of the Nation to make Residence at Edinburgh, and daily to convene, to receive
intelligence from all parts, and return Edicts and Ordinances to prevent (if
possible) the eminent ruin to Gods People.

And this daily Convention being a New Model, so must it be styled, The
Council of the Church. And instantly they find o^ make work; the Lord Sea^on,
President of the Session, was (...) to account by the Synod of Lothian; The
Coun^il of the Church
Not that he was guilty, but that their power and pride might strike terror in
the people, for as they had no proof at all, and so (as by President of the
Popes inquisition) his Oath purges himself, assures him to their Conclave, and
so gets home again.

This monstrous manner of muteny, makes the Men of State to foresee mischief,
and the Kings Council confer.
and not being powerful to remedy, nor was it politic to publish their errors
to the people, or scorn upon the face of the Church. The President, Secretary,
Advocate and Lord of Colluthrie were commanded by the King to confer with as
many of theirs. To whom they move the question, whether if these Lords satisfy
the Church (otherwise his Majesty desires not) that then they might be pardoned
and restored to their Estates. But receive a Court Answer, They came only to
hear Prepositions, and to remit them to their Brethren. And so they did, with
Apostolic Conclusion. Their acceptance of the Kings behavior and respect to
the Church, not to resolve of any favor to them Rebels, till the Church were
satisfied. But their censure, by Gods Law condemned them to death, and being
also sentenced to lose their estates, they cannot be legally pardoned, nor
restored, or if the King or his Council, should take upon them to do otherwise,
they were to answer it to God and the Country, themselves make protestation to
be free, before God and man.

I shall not comment upon this Text. The Popish Sanadrin does so. An Historian
of theirs calls it Passionate zeal, under which all impudence may be
maintained, should they be ignorant of the tender bosom of the Mother Church,
parent to Babes, and to repentant sinners? Mark their distinction, The Church
has power to do as she pleases; but the King must not, he must do justice.

The King is wroth against them all, common resentment, private and public.
The King is offended with them.
And wise men advise the Ministers in prudence, to make address to his Majesty,
and to understand his displeasure, and also to offer on their parts terms of
satisfaction, and so modestly and mannerly to lay open the Grievances, and to
offer means of redress.

Somewhat they did, not as they were advised, or ought to have done.

The King tells them, There could be no agreement, till bounds of Marches are
designed, ^or reconcilement, till Jurisdictions are distinguished. Their
preachings, censured Councils of State, They convocate General Assemblies
without him or his Warrant, and conclude as they please without his consent.
They meddle with all matters in their Synods, Presbyteries and Sessions, and
under color of scandals, usurp that Notion to offend in all. Besides he could
sum up several sorts of their disorders, which would take up time, their own
guilt should study means to amend, otherwise things may become remediless,
neither to agree, nor to last long without.

But to come to their points, what could it be to kindle such fires and fears?
Their complaints.


The Kings favor to the Popish Lords at Falkland, and confirmed at Dunferlin.

His countenance to the Countess of Huntley, what^ that? She is invited to the
Princess baptism.

The Education of the Princess to the Lady Levingston, a Papist.

And to smooth all they condescended to say, They were sorry for his Majesty's
displeasure.

The last he took up first, Which the K. answers.
That their abusive Sermons had given him in particular just cause.

To the Popish Lords, what he granted was by General Convention and consent of
Estates; as needful for peace to the Realm.

The Lady Huntley was discreet, and deserved more, and that she is a Papist,
they are too blame that never taught her the Truth.

The Princess is entrusted to the Wisdom and Government of the Lord
Levingston, not to his Lady, he to command, she to conform.

Good God! their History of the Kirk, stories many, and many such Medlings,
which I forbear to mention. By these and the like may be measured out their
malice, pride, vanity, and their cunning, to color all with conscience, and
zeal of Truth.

But it becomes dangerous, The Minister Blake his muteny and story.
Mr. David Blake, Minister of St. Andrews, rails in his Sermon against the King
and Council, and Session of Estates, and called the Queen of England by name an
Atheist, of no Religion. Bows the Ambassador complains, and Blake is cited
before the Council. Melvil meets him, and makes it the common cause, as a
preparative against all, to bring down the doctrine of Christ, under the
censure of the King and Council. And so far was it plotted with the Council of
the Church, that they desert the day of his Diet (or appearing.) That it would
be ill taken to question Ministers upon trifling delations. When, as the
Enemies of Jesus Christ, were spared and protected.

Telling the King (who was descended, to show them Huntleys condition,) That
both he, and the rest should either satisfy the Church in every point, or be
pursued with Extremity, and so no cause to complain of their oversight of
Papists.

And though the Articles were framed, and Printed satisfactory to all. Yet they
Publish, That Papists were favored, the Ministers rebuked for siding against
sin; And that the Scepter of Christ was sought to be overthrown. And if Master
Blake should submit his doctrine to the trial of the Council, the liberties of
Church and spirrituall Government of Gods House be quite subverted.

And by all means. a Declinator is designed* to protest against such
proceedings.

And in this fire of zeal in opposition to better Council, They answered, that
the cause of God concerned them to withstand all future hazards.

It was trusted to Blake himself, to present (in presence of the King.) I know
not, whether prudentiall in me to suppress it, for fear of evil President. But
that it is a record. Take it in the Breef.

That howbeit his innocent conscience, Blakes r^monstance.
maintained him sufficient, against the Calumnies of whomsoever, and that he
was able and ready to defend his doctrine uttered, in opening the words or
application i^ matter. Yet seeing he was convened before the King and his
Council, to be judged for his doctrine, and that his answering might be
suspected a submission; and so imputed a prejudice to the Churches liberties;
and to be taken as an acknowledgment of the Kings jurisdiction in matters
spiritual; He was constrained to decline that judicature.

First, because the Lord Jesus Christ of whom we had the grace of his calling,
had given him his word, for a rule to his Preaching. And that he could not fall
in reference of any Civil Law, but so far as he should be tried to pass his
instructions. Which trial belonged only to the Prophets and Pastors, the
spirits of the Prophets being subject to them alone, etc.

Secondly, in regard the liberties of the Church and discipline were confirmed
by sundry Acts of Parliament and the Preachers. (office bearers thereof)
peaceably possessed therein, perticularly in the indicature of the word, He
ought to be remitted to the Ecclesiastic Senate, as the only compitent Judges.

For which, and other weighty consideracons, inconveniences to Religion, the
State and Nation, and to the King himself, by the appearance of destraction and
Alienation of his mind, from the Ministry, and the cause of God in their
hands. He for himself and in Name of the Commissioners of the general
Assembly, who had s^bscribed this Declinator, Besought, that the Church of God,
might receive no diminution, but rather manifest care to maintain the same.

The diet came, and he required to make answer. Blake brought to his Answer.
Said, That albeit he might object against the Citation, it being directed
Super Inquirendis, contrary to form, yet he would take himself to the remedy of
Law, and to be remitted to his own Ordenary.

Being asked whom he meant.

He answered, the Presbytery, where the doctrine was taught,

The King told him, the matters charged were civil; and that the Summons had
reference to the particular letter of the English Ambassador.

He replied, that speeches in the Pulpit must be judged by the Church, in prima
instantia.

Being asked, whether the King might not judge of facts of Treason, as well as
the Church did matters of Heresy?

That whether speeches in the Pulpit, though but pretended Treasonable, could
not be judged by the King till the Church had remitted thereof?

But he answered, That he was not come thither to resolve questions, and so
offered his Declinator.

The King not able to amend what was amiss, meant to work it otherwise by
remitting of further proceedings to Nov. 30.

Mean while, the Commissioners send copies of all transactions, to the several
Presbyteries; The Ministsters factious courses
requiring them for Corroboration to confirm the same by their subscriptions;
To commend their doing as the cause of God in public fasts and Humilliation
for the sins of the Nation by prayer and preaching. The meaning thereby was, to
tell the stories to the people, for maintenance of this their ill manners; And
which the King interpreted, a direction to dangerous Mutenie, and future
Rebellion. And therefore,

Proclaims all their particular proceedings, with remonstance of their
Misdemeanors and to prevent disorder now, The King by proclamation dissolves
their Assembly.
and confusion to follow, by advise of his Council discharges the
commissioners, and dissolves their convention, illegal in it self, and worse
unlawfully executed by them; Whom he commands by Name to depart home in 24
hours to attend their flocks and duties in their Ministry. And no ways to
return to convene either within or without the Buroughs of Edinburgh, under
the pain of Rebellion.

But we tire the reader and yet hereby, we may discover what they did in such
like many more, for to the death they will proceed. Hereupon they consult, The
Ministers Counterappose the King.
that seeing they had been convened by the warrant of Christ, to take care of
hazard to the Church, Et ne quid ecclesia detrimenti caperet. They should obey
God rather than man. And notwithstanding any charge to the contrary, to
continue together, and to send to the Octavians (those 8 Counselors of State
formerly mentioned) that seeing at the entrance to their places, the Church was
in quiet and peace; and now to be imbroyled; the Enemies to truth overpowring,
and all by their councels and connivance; The event of evil, must fall upon
them, the Contrivers or Connivers.

The President hastily made answer, As they began so let them end; the
Councills advice, neither was desired, nor given on either part, and therefore
would not meddle between the King and them, but leave it to his Majesty and
Nobles.

This answer taught them fresh advice; to remonstrate to the King himself by
Messengers of their own; and fearing the effects (the Kings anger) humbly
interceed, for surcease of Process against Master Blake, Until his Majesty
should be pleased to convoke an Assembly for deciding all controversies to the
Kings content.

To which he consented, provided, they would pass by the Declinator, or at
least to declare that it was not a General but a particular Declinator, used
in Blakes case only, as being a cause of slander, and so, appertaining to the
judgment of the Church.

This by the wiser, was held fit to be received, as an end of contention; No!
Rather to stand to their tacklings, Gods cause, Against worldly powers.
Ravelling into former examples, of prevailing against Princes. Others argued to
try Mastery with Majesty, may fail of effects; as yet the Court stand in some
fear of the Church, and to keep up their concept, let us take the best
conditions we can, least our weakness appear, if we have the worst, and so the
terror of the Church despised, or neglected; Much will portends little wit; and
as it is often seen, who gripes at all, grasp naught but wind: and to levy all
their wills, is to lose all their wits; of which, God send them more plenty
than appears by their proceedings.

But not prevailing, the King proceeds to proclaim their departure and Blakes
appearance as before ordered.

The next day, sunday, solemnized the christning of the Princess. Bows
Ambassador gave Her name from his Queen, Elizabeth. and the Town of Edinburgh,
by their Majestrates, assisted as other witnesses. Yet all that day in the
Churches were bitter invectives.

The Commissioners of the Church presented a Petition to the King and Council.
The Commissioners of the Church petition the K.


That seeing the decision of intricate questions could work no good, and was
subtly urged to engender discention, between his Majesty and the Church, he
would be pleased to remit the discision to a lawful Assembly, and not to
incroch upon the limitts of Christ's Kingdom, upon any pretense, but to bend his
actions against the common Enemy of the Church and state, the Papists.

Then they exhort the Noblemen to give his Majesty faithful Counsel, and not
to be subject to the guilt of sin, by the craft of such as seek the thraldom of
the Gospel, who intend to exite their honors to be the Executors of their
malicious devises.

With order to those that presented this Petition, that if the same was
refused, to enjoin them to protest against the preceding of the Council.

The King rejects it, Is rejected.
as not worthy of Answer, commanding to call Blake to his summons

First, That he affirmed in Pulpit that the Popish Lords were returned with his
Majesty's knowledge and further assurance, wherein he had detected the treachery
of his heart.

Secondly, Articles against Blake.
that he called all Kings the Devils barns, and that the Devil was in the
court and in the Guiders thereof.

Thirdly, That in his prayers for Queen Ann, he had used these words, we must
pray for her, in fashion, but we have no cause, she will never do us good.

That he called the Queen of England an Atheist.

That he had discussed a suspention granted by the Lords of Session in Pulpit,
and called them Miscreants and Bribers.

That the Nobillity were degenerate, godless, dissemblers, and enemies to the
Church.

That the Council were Holliglasses, Cormorants and men of no Religion.

And that he had convocated diverse Noblemen and others within Saint Andrews in
June 1594. caused them to take arms in troops of Horse and Foot and thereby
usurped the power of King and Council.

After reading of the summons, Robert Pont their Minister protested, that the
process in hand should not prejudice the Church.

To which the King answered that he meant not to meddle with matters of
doctrine, but to censure, the treasonable speeches of a Minister, which he and
his Council would judge, except, that by scripture it could be held forth that
Ministers were not subject in these cases to judicatures.

Blake makes answer; His answer.
that the accusations were false, calumnies; producing testimonies of two,
which he alleged should be preferred to a^y report whatsoever.

Next he said.

That to the first six points the Council were not lawful Judges of speeches
in Pulpit, but the Presbytery, where the sermon was uttered.

And so presents a second Declinator.

But being put to voices it was sentenced, That the crimes and accusations
mentioned in the summons, were seditious and treasonable, and that the King and
Council were competent Judges in all matters, criminal, or civil, as well to
Ministers as other subjects.

The Council dissolved, the King willing to conserve peace and amity, to the
Ministers offered terms of reconciliation and to return Blake to his charge and
Pastorage.

Bruce answered, That if it concerned only Master Blake, the offer might be
accepted, but the liberty of Christ's Kingdom, being wounded by the
Proclamation, and by usurping spiritual Jurisdiction, of greater consequence
then Master Blakes life and twenty more; and that if those things were not
retreated they would oppose, during the last aspiration of breath.

The King the next morning treated with some of theirs. The King treats wit^
them.
Showing how far he was from impairing spiritual Jurisdiction, that he would
amplify and enlarge the same; but (said he) to discourse of State in Pulpits
is intolerable, I clame to judge in matters of sedition and civil and criminal
causes; and of speeches that may import such crimes; and if the Pulpit should
be a place of privilege, under color of doctrine to stir up sedition, no good
man will grant. If Treason and sedition be crimes punishable, much more
committed in the Pulpit, where the word of truth only should be taught. I am not
ignorant what France of late and England formerly, have suffered by the
violence of such spirits. And I may not endure it.

Hereupon, the Church finding the King resolved, desire some Declaration to be
made to the people in favor of Church Assemblies, which they feared was
hereby, of late somewhat weakened; which the King assented unto, and it was
accordingly published, to give final conclusion to these differences.

Blake was required only to acknowledge his offense to Queen Ann. And to be
pardoned of all.

This he would not do, and was therefore sentenced. To have falsely s^andered
and treasonably calumniated the Kings Majesty, his consort the Queen, his
Neighbor Princess the Queen of England, the Lords of the Council and Session,
and that, till his Majesty's further pleasure, he should be confined beyond the
North water, enter ward within six days. and

Ten days more were taken up, Both part^e^ bandie.
to decide these differences; and the King condiscends to lesser submissions
than before. But the Commissioners refuse to agree to any censure of Master
Blake, as not done by the proper Judge. And so they ordain a fast, and pray, and
preach complaints, of wrong done to the Kingdom of Christ.

The King on his part, made the grounds of his displeasure known to his people,
by Decla^ation; setting forth particulars of the last Transactions. Ordaining
all Ministers to subscribe their obedience to his Majesty; and to set their
hands to the bonds presented to them to that effect, under pain of sequestring
their rents and stipends till they submitted. Blake to go to ward, and the
Commissioners to remove out of Town.

They increase Aspersions upon the King who willingly would have recalled these
sentences and Publications, and some Ministers, were treated therein, till a
scandalous Letter was devised and sent by under hand advise, that Huntley had
private reception by the King over night and caused the charge against the
Ministers. Balcanqual takes his text out of the Canticles, and so to present
the troubles of the Church, relates the late proceedings which he calls
treacherous forms of the Council, naming particular officers,

The President, and Controuler, and Advocate, with reproachful raylings; and
concludes to advise the Barons and Nobles to meet in the little Church for
assisting the ministry. From them came a petition to the King in behalf of his
Ministers, and presented to him in the uper house of session, with complaints,
uttered by Bruce of all which had passed. The King declining the petition and
remonstrance, asked who they were that durst convene against his proclomation.
A Dangerous tumult.
The Lord Lindsey passionatly replied, That they durst do more than so, and
would not ind^re destruction of Religion.

Numbers of people thronging into the Room, the King removed, the people
seduced by Lindsey and others, some said arm; others called out, to bring forth
Haman, others cried out, the sword of the Lord and Gideon. And with much ado,
to appease the peoples rage, at they knew not what.

The Lords and Ministers meet, propose Articles to the King, and whilst they
design who shall present them, The King and Council retire from danger.
each one refusing. The King and Council remove out of Edinburgh into
Linlithgow.

Ordering a Proclamation to signify the reasons of this departure, Proclaim.
the Town being unsafe for his person and Council, and unfit for the
administration of justice by the late in sufferable Tumults, commanding all
Lords of session, Commissioners, etc. and their Deputies to remove out of the
Town of Edinburgh, and be in readiness to that place they should be after
assigned. And the Noblemen and Barons to withdraw to their own Houses, and not
to covene or Assemble, under pain of the Kings displeasure.

The City is amazed with these proceedings, Mad preaching
not knowing what to do, or whom to trust unto. The Ministers night and day
restless to get subscriptions, and to covenant, to call in certain Noblemen of
note, Hamelton, Backlugh and others. Fast and pray, and preach what stuff,
best befits their projects, one amongst many others, John Welsh; takes his
theme, the Epistle sent to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, rayl'd against
the King, who he said was possessed of a Devil, and one Devil (the King) put
out, seven worse are entered in. That the Subjects might lawfully rise and take
the sword out of his hand, by example says he, Of a father fallen into frenzy,
might be bound hand and foot by his family from doing mischief.

Yet this execrable doctrine, was received by some; nay they preach, that the
Earl Arrol had come to the Ferry with four hundred horse the day of Tumult, but
the rising of the people, (as a providence of God for good) scattered his
forces, in fear of the Town so prepared. And being Masters of all, they
undertake to send Messengers to the Earl Hamelton, with letters, that the
people animated by motion of Gods spirit, Their letter to Lord Hamelton to be
Their head.
had taken Arms, with the patronage of such Godly well affected Noblemen, and
Brethren then at Edinburgh for the cause of God. Only they wanted a Head, an
especial Nobleman to countenance their cause. And having made chioce of him,
they invite him to Edinburgh, with all convenient speed, and thereby to
signify his affection, and to accept the honor which the Church of God had
offered unto him.

It was writ and subscribed by Bruce, and Balcanquall and sent to Hamelton, who
receives the Messenger with all show of kindness, and seems to prepare his
journey for Edinburgh; but, by the way, better advised, he turns to Linlithgow
and presents the King with the letter, Hamelton comes to the King.
who wondered at the modesty of the man, accounted more ambitious, than to
neglect such a rise to tempt his humor, by whom had the letter taken effect,
it might have caused strange Rebellions; when the Church had begun to act their
part with so much power, a bloody issue always following the pretended zeal
for Religion, as the most part of Christendom have felt the miserable effects,
and great Britain most of all.

The insurrection, proceedings against those disorders.
and letter made work for speedy Counsel to act for the King, and the Provost
had order for imprisoning the Ministers, who got loose, and fled to New Castle
in England.

The Town send Commissioners to purge themselves, protesting their Innocenc^e,
and offer their obedience, for repairing the indignity and dishonor done to the
King, but served not for their purgation; for the next day, the Tumult was by
the Counsel declared Treason, and the devisers, Actors, and Partakers to be
Traitors.

Edinburgh smarted for all, the inhabitants in fear of desolation; Citizens
brought to submit.
the law-Courts removed to Lith; the Session to Perth; the Ministers fled; the
Magistrates despised; and all men without the walls, their enemies. And again
most humbly supplicate the King with the best excuse for themselves. The King
told them that he would proceed with them contrary to what they did to him, by
form of law, not by violence: and that the estates should meet in the same
place, where the dishonor was done to him, for their trial and punishment.

The day before the convention. The keys of the Town submitted to the Kings
officer; a guard of the Kings forces ranged the streets; and the Citizens
disarmed, are commanded to keep within doors: the charge of the Town given to
the Earl Mar, Is rejected.
Lord Seaton, and Uchiltry. Thus prepared, the King enters with a train of
Nobles, alights at the Talbooth, where the Estates did meet. The Provost Sir
Alexander Hume, with the Baliffs and numbers of the City, fall down on their
knees; and to pacify the King, most humbly propose;

To purge themselves of the Tumult by oath before the Council, And humbly
propose.
having made diligent search for the Authors, and would proceed to inquire, or
to a^sist any other officers therein. They promise never to admit of those
Ministers pronounced Rebels, without his Majesty's command; nor ever to
receive any hereafter but at the Kings pleasure; and not to elect annual
Majestrates without the Kings approbation, and to accept others whom the King
would present. And in all, or any other manner, to submit, as his Majesty shall
ordain; under protest that they take not upon them the crime of the Tumult.

See the effects of Rebellion, in general, if they succeed not, advance the
Sovereign; so did this. The insurrection proceeding from the Ministers their
Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction, submits always after to the Kings authority. In
these stories of Bruce before, and Blake now, the grand Incendiaries of their
Riot, it appears how patiently the King proceeded, if possibly to have
confirmed them, and to have secured his Prerogative with their privileges,
which he could never procure from them, without this oversight of their own.

Besides; how submiss are the Lay subjects now; and how high grows the King,
and his Counselors! Advice is offered; to raze the Town and erect a Pillar of
repentance; a Monument of their misery; caused by their insolency; and this
their punishment. Others were less mild, but all for condign marks of revenge,
to teach others their duties, for the time to come.

Nay Bows, the English Ambassador was out, and in, and in, and out, with his
policies; he liked well to imbroile the State, but not to allow advantage to
the King, for by the faction of the Brethren, all the designs of England were
managed; and reciprocal assistance from them, to balance their quarrels at
home; and therefore Queen Elizabeth writes to the King her advice; fearing
belike, too much pressing upon the Ministry according to their merit.

My Dear Brother,
If a rare accident, Queen Elizabeth's letter to the King.
and ill welcomed News, had not broken my long silence, I had not used
Pen-speech, as being careful of your quiet, and mindful of your safety. To
omit the expressing of both, by letting you know how untimely I take this new
begun phrenzie, that may urge you to take such a course, as may bring into
opinion, the veryfying of such a scandal as you avowed to me to be far from
your thoughts. In this sort I mean it, some members of the Church with their
Companies, have over-audatiously imboldned themselves, to redress some
injurious acts, that they feared might overthrow their profession; which I
grant no King for the manner ought to bear with, yet at the instant when the
new banished Lords returned, and they seem to be wincked at without restraint,
and the spring time going on, when promised succor is near hand, together with
many letters from Rome and elsewhere, which tell the names of men, authorized by
you (they say, though I hope falsely) to assure your conformity, as time may
serve you, to establish the dangerous party and fail your own.

I wail in unfeigned sort, that any just cause should be given you to call in
doubt so disguised acts, and hope that you will so try this cause, as that it
harm you not, though it ruin them.

Of this you may be sure, that if you make your strength of so sanday a
foundation, as to call to your aid such as be not of your flock, when as the
one side be foolish, rash, headstrong, and brainsick, yet such as may defend
you, having no sure anchorage for themselves, if you fail them; and the others,
who have other props to sustain them, though they lack you, yea such as though
your private love to their persons may invegle your eyes, not to pierce the
depth of their treason; yet it is well known that their many petitions for
foraign and, might have tended to your perril, and Countries wrack; for seldom
comes a stranger to a weaker soil, that thralleth not the possessor, or
indangereth him at least; I trust you think no less; or else they must justify
themselves to condemn you* for without your displeasure not feared for such a
fact, no answer can shield them from blame.

Now to aver my folly, in seeming buysie in another affairs, I suppose you
will not mislike, since the source of all is the care of your good, to desire
that naught be done, that may imbolden the Enemy, decrease your love, and
endanger your securety: This is in sum the line whereto I tend; and, God I
beseech to direct your heart, in such sort as you please not your worst
Subjects, but make all know in a measure what is fit for them, and make
difference between error, and malice. So God bless you with a true thought of
her that means you best.

Your most affectionate SISTER. Elizabeth Reg.


The Queen suspected, The King^ merc^.
that the King would have given extreme punishment according to the fact, and
so highten their adverse enemy the Papists; whose cause she urges as more
guilty, to balance them both, with mercy, not malice. This moderate Council it
appears by the Kings former proceedings, he intended rather a mind to paliate
than to urge the occasion of greater diferences. And accordingly no farther
prosecution was made, only to pursue the Town criminally, and to appear at
Perth. February next.

And the Octavians not agreeing amongst themselves, The Octavians yield up
their office.
gave over their Commission of Exchequer into his Majesty's hand, fearing
belike in this time of examination, and purging defection, they might come to a
troublesome account; though generally, they gained repute of faithful Stewards
of the Kings treasure.

The King finding the Church affairs fall into his own hands, rectifies the
abuses (crep in sates one) amongst their articles of discipline, I cannot say
so; they were so framed and formed from the first; every day proceeding
absurdities, not disputed how reasonable, or religious, but as they made for
their advantage so were they ordained, and obeyed.

And therefore a National Assembly is appointed at Perth, must regulate all; to
treat and determine the bounds and exercise of the spiritual Jurisdiction.
Articles being drawn up and printed for to enter upon consideration, with this
Preface of the King.

He takes God the searcher of all hearts to record: That his intentions are not
to trouble the Church with thorny questions, nor yet to claim to himself any
tirany over the same, Only, to have these doubts, solved, to prevent debate to
him, or his Successors, and to settle the policy of the Church, that so the
corruption being removed, a pure Harmony might be fixed between him and the
Ministers, to Gods glory, etc.

The Articles were at first drawn up to fifty five, and to be supposed that
those questions were never decided, but effectually they were in use, to the
prejudice of the King, and people, which no man till now durst dispute, being
left loose for the Ministers mental reservation.

Many of them were much troubled; to submit their discipline to dispute, which
they had assured the people to be part of the Gospel, and therefore mightily
endeavored to prevent examining; but the business so far forward; the King had
his party to press it on. A note of observation, what packing there was of
voices for eithers advantage the policy of some; the late General Counsels of
Christendom having taught the way; and these are apt (...) to learn.

And therefore the Northern Conscientious Ministers, The Northern Ministers are
Courted.
not as yet tainted with the Iesuitical tenants, were dealt with, by a Message
from the King to be distinguished from the Mutineers of Edinburgh; not
esteeming them guilty of reproach, with such evil subjects. How well the King
intended to them in particular, and so hopes, that their behavior would
evidence their resentment, of his Majesty's favor and affection.

They are desired to subscribe to the bond in acknowledgment of the Kings royal
power, and to accept the E. Huntleys offers, and to absolve him from
excommunication; and reasons enough given for these. And lastly they receive the
Copy of the fifty five questions; and are desired to send Commissioners to the
Assembly appointed at Perth.

They with reverence make answer, Their answer
That as they were ignorant of the Tumult and the Ministers flight so they were
silent in their judgment and censure. This though in the general. The Authors
of that insurrection were Traitors; and if Ministers, to be double punished.

They had sworn to his Majesty's power and regallity, when they were admitted
Ministers, and would never decline it.

The bond mentioning Master Blakes speeches in Pulpit, concerning application
of doctrine, which his Majesty had pronounced as a question to be decided in
the next Assembly, they humbly reserved themselves, til that time.

And for the Earl Huntley, his repentance should be most acceptable, and they
were content to conferr with him, and use all means for his resolution; fearing
they should not find him earnest for absolution.

And least the Ministers should have cause to hank upon jealousies of the Kings
favor and affection to the Popish Lords; The King writes to Huntley
especially to Huntley, for whom in truth he had earnestly endeavored
reconciliation. He therefore writes to him peremptorily, either to make faith,
and satisfy the Church, or be banished for ever.

The day come; Twelve Articles from the King to the Assembly.
the Assembly meet. But not to trouble them with all those fifty five Queries
formerly printed, the King remits them to the future; contenting himself for
the present with a dozen Articles to be determined possitive.

1. That it be lawful to the Prince, or any pastor, to move doubts, and crave
reformation of any points in external policy, and discipline of the Church,
not concerning salvation, nor defined in scripture; and to be done, decenter,
animo aedeficanti, non tentandi. 2. That the civil and politic government of
the Realm, belongs properly to the Kings office, and his Counselors, and not
pertinent to the spiritual Ministry of the word; nor to meddle in matters of
state, nor his Majesty's Laws, Statutes or Ordinances in the Pulpit. 3. That
Ministers shall not name particular men in Pulpit, except upon notorious
crimes, as of fugitive, or excommunication. 4. That in application, the
Minister have respect to his flock, without extravagant discourses impertinent.
5. That every Presbytery, take diligent account of the doctrine of their
ministry. 6. That Summary excommunication be utterly discharged; and the
sentence, to follow three Citations, at eight days distance. 7. That no
sentence, or censure proceed from any Assembled, but of those within their
bounds. 8. That all summons contain special cause and crime, and not super
inquirendis, quod est mere tiranicorum. 9. That no meeting be without the Kings
consent, except the ordinary session, Presbyteries, and Synods. 10. That in
principal Burghs; no Minister be placed without the consent of the King and the
flock. 11. That seven or eight discreet Ministers, be authorized to reason upon
the rest of his Majesty's Questions; till time serve. 12. That the Northern
Ministers absolve the Earl Huntley fromexcommunication; if he satisfy the
Church.
Their answers to each were not received satisfactory, and therefore they
attend the King and Counsel; Submitted unto in effect
where his Majesty reasons with them the justness of his desires, and after
serious consideration they conclude to the Kings liking. A commission was
granted to some of them to reconcile the Popish Lords to the Church, And
Articles ordained for Huntley, Angus, And Arrol to subscribe. which they did.
And all ends in content.
The Ministers taken into protection and grace; and all Papists in general
(except the Lords) to depart the Realm before June. And all the former
offenders, and Mutineers remitted to pardon, which hapily concluded the end of
this year.

And to shut up all with the time, let us take leave of John Lesly, Bishop
(...) death and ^haracter.
Bishop of Ross, who took leave of this life at Bruxells in Flanders, his
constant abode since the execution of his Excellent Princess, Queen Mary of
Scotland; a man, memorable with reverence, for his faith and constant service,
to his Sovereign; and his extraordinary care and trouble, traveling to most
Princes in C^ristendom, to interpose their credit, with Queen Elizabeth for her
relief, enduring all hardships for her sake, examinations, disputes,
imprisonings, and at last, banishment out of England, as you have heard,
leaving his Mistress without hope of redemption from her Captivity. And
therefore administers his last and best service, spiritual consolations, which
he purposely writ to her in a Treatise, printed and published, full of piety
and learning. those no doubt composed his own mind with patience and comfort,
after her sad and miserable death, which he bore off for some time, till sorrow
seized him into a languishing sickness. He composed the Gests of his Native
Country into Latin from the beginning of that Nation, to his last time. He
was servent in his faith, zealous, and charitable, and died as he always
professed, a Juditious learned Romish Catholic. And so let us see the affairs
in England.

The Queen, to divert the growing greatness of the Spaniard, The Netherlands
called to account.
had assisted the Netherlands ten years in their rebellion (as some style it)
against him; and now considered, that whilst she established their tottering
territories, her self became poor, and they had plenty. And therefore by Bodly
her Ambassador, 400001 per annum, in ten years, 4000001 dept.
she demands to be eased of her charge in her Auxilliaries, and to be paid some
part of their dept, to her lendings.

These promise to ease the Queen of her forty thousand pound per annum, that
shortly they would pay her, twenty thousand pounds, part of their dept, and not
enter into league with any, without her consent, and after a peace with Spain,
they would pay her a hundred thousand pounds yearly, for four years, the full
dept, humbly imploring four thousand men, and to be raced out of her accounts
for all by past. To which she consented; least by her neglect, they should be
enforced, to disjoynt their Confederacy with her, and rejoice their common
Enemy. Against whom, she was rigging a Navy, and would have thirty of their
ships to adjoyn, and so they pieced again.

Her Rebels in Ireland increased to 1000 horse, Iris^^ rebels increasing.
6280 foot in ^lster, 2300 in Connaugh, all at Tirones beck; wherefore she
sends over Narris to assist her Deputy in equal power. Norris goes over
assistant
A marvail to many, a too headed Government, being monstrous in policy, as
well as in Nature; so that crafty Tyrone treats with Norris and gets Truce for
a time, who suttly took leisure to hatch and plot greater mischief.

The spring time begets a Treaty, with the Queens Commissioners, sent over to
Ireland to receive the Rebels complaints, They desire free ^se of their romish
Religion, and enjoyment of their lands Ecclesiastical, and others, upon
reasonable annual payments; all which, the Commissioners counterpoyze with
conditions more strickt for them to submit, which they refuse; bu^ between them
both, they continue Truce tell April after. Which time the Queen took to
consider; and Tyrone secretly to deal with the Spaniard, for a complete Army,
to their succor.

The Duke of Parmadead, Albert Archduke of Austria, and Cardinal, succeeds
him, Governor for the Spaniard in Flanders, Callis taken by the Spaniard.
and to credit his new-come Authority, (usually with Commanders) he prepares
fresh forces on the sudden, beseiges Calis, and takes it from the French. The
Queen startled at the report of the Cannon, which she heard into the Chapel at
Green-wich* ere she knew from whence.

But then, afraid to perrish in her Neighbors fires, raises an Army, the
English Navy.
and a Navy of 140 ships, 18 of her own* 22 of the Dutch, the rest for
necessary service; and 6360 soldiers; Volunteers 1000; Mariners 6722. The Lord
Admiral Howard Commander in chief at Sea. The Earl of Essex by land, their
design was against the Enemies ships, or provision of ammunition, rumored to be
sent against England Scotland and Ireland; of greater power then in 88, and to
land upon some of the Coasts, and Towns, She thought in piety to pray for
success, and that God might not be mocked with several bablings, as the fancy
should affect (and now newly in fashion to form it, ex tempore) she prescribed
them therefore, the manner, that the world also, should be witness of the true
ground of her public Actions.

Most omnipotent God, Public form of prayer for success of the Navy.
that searchest and fadomest, the secret conceits of the heart, and in them,
the true Originalls, of our actions intended. Thou know, that no malice of
revenge, nor quittance of injuries, no desire of blood, nor lucre of gain, has
bred in us a resolution now to set out our Army, but a h^edful care, and wary
watch that no neglect of the Enemy, nor security of our selves, might breed
danger in us, or glory to them; these being our grounds, we humbly beseech the
to prosper the work, and with the best fair winds, guide our Navy, and if it be
thy will speed us with victory, and the end to thy glory, thou the same, and
we, peace to the people and on all sides, spare the blood of thine, for they
are precious. To these petitions, grant thy blessings, for the merrits of
Christ, Amen. In those days they prayed so, and people understood it.

It was a wonder, whether they went, for themselves knew not, Take Cadiz Called
Cales voyage.
till at the hight of cape Saint Vincent they opened the Commission, which
commanded them for Cadiz, the sowth of Spain, and mouth of the Straits. They
take the City, burn and sack the Island, and ships.

The loss to the Enemy valued twenty millions of ducats of eight shillings
sterlin money. And Essex having Knighted sixty Gallants, with honor, and every
man enriched with spoil, they return, this success set up Essex, into a
ranting vain, not to be moderated with any Counsel. His extravagant designs by
the way homewards, not to return so soon till he had done somewhat more famous.
An observation of pride and ambition then, set that mark on him, that lasted to
his last breath.

To repair these losses, Spain riggs a great Navy at Lisbone, designed for the
West of England and Ireland, which by storm were separated and many shipwrackt,
the rest return.

And now it was time for England and France to fortyfie their former League,
and for Queen Elizabeth to send thither 2000 foot, into Picardie.

These were times of Action and Honor, and because no place circumscribes
valor. An English Noble man Thomas Arundel of Wardour, for his service in
Hungary against the Turk, is created by the Emperor, Earl of the holy Empire,
and to his Successors, male or female, and have place and voice at the Emperial
Diets, Digression how far foreign titles preceed at home.
and free Denizens. From whence arises a question of their use, and precedence
at home.

The defense may be from Presidents. Henry the third of England allowed it to
Mohume, created Earl of Somerset by the Pope. In England.
Henry the eight did so by Curson whom the Emperor made Earl of the holy
Empire.

In Scotland Earl Douglas had the title of Duke of Tours from the French King,
and so had John Stuart the Earldom of D'Everux.

The Exceptions are more ancient. No man being a Citizen of Rome, could accept
freedom elsewhere, At Rome.
Pompeyus Atticus refused therefore to be of Athens.

In Venice and Genoa. No man may receive dignity either Spiritual or Temporal
from any foreign Prince, Genoa. Venice and
for which he is suspected, and suspended all office at home.

And indeed the Earls of the Empire, are too common to have precedencie, or
value abroad.

And for the Scots, Scots.
their Kings coat of Arms, engralles them with their fl^wr'd Lis, and so under
tuition.

Valerian the Emperor said, let that only be Honor which we create. Queen
Elizabeth's censure was this. That, as a wife should dedepend on the man; so a
subject to receive no love tokens, but ftom his Sovereign, she knows not her
own sheep, by another brand, nor willing they should obey a strangers whistle.

Indeed, Nobilitas is derived of Nosco to know. Vir Nobilis idem est quod
nolus, and per Omnia. But our Law does prohibit any Subject of this Nation to
receive Titles of Honor, or dignity of the gift or donation of a foreign
Prince, it being belonging to the State of this Nation, est ius Majestatis and
inter insignia summae potestatis, vide Cook 7 part.

And if such a man bring an Action and the writ be so styled; the defendant may
plead Abatement of his writ.

Nor shall any Nobleman of any other Nation, hold plea in England by his name
of dignity, but only by his name of baptism and Surname, Cook 7. part.

Nay, though he mary in England, and have issue here, the Father dying, his Son
shall not bear titles of his Fathers Honor, because the title had original by
a foreign Prince, and not by English Peerage. Nay, a more strange case. A
Postnatus of Scotland or Ireland, (who is a natural Subject of this Land) be he
the Heir of a Nobleman, yet he is none of the Nobility of England. But if the
King summon him by writ to Parliament, and therein, styled by that foraign
Title, then from thenceforth, he is a Peer of England 39 Edw. 3 36.

But more, and worthy observance: A Knight of any foreign Nation, shall be so
named in all our Courts of Pleas, (for the highest and lowest dignities are
universal) 26 Edward 4 39 Edward 3.

And so shall any foraign King be sued here by his Title, otherwise the writ
shall abate, for observe the person of a foraign King shall be here impleaded
for debt, or trespass of life, so an Ambassador. Pardon this digression and
now we return to Scotland.

The King grants a Commissi^n to certain persons, The Popish Lords submit to
the Church
to see conditions performed by the Popish Lords in reference of their
obedience to the Church, and for them also, to subscribe to conditions for
peace and quietness to the King and Country, under caution of 20000. And in
particular for Huntley to be advised by some Lords assigned, to counsel him
especially concerning the Kings service.

But to prevent the Kings public intentions, Proclamation against Gaurdon a
Jesuit.
comes over from foraign parts, one James Gourdon, with designs of Treason,
and to deterr Huntley from subscribing, against him was published a
Proclamation, and a thousand Crowns to apprehend him.

At which time, there was discovered a practi^e of surprizeing the Isle of
Elsay in the West Seas for receiving forces resolved upon by the Spaniard to be
sent thither. Barcklayes de sign discovered he drownes himself.
The contriv^r of this design was Barklay the Lord of Ladyland who had escaped
out of Glascow prison last year, and now returned from Spain, and was secretly
gotten to this Isle, being. a high rock four miles compass, and thereon an
invincible Tower somewhat ruinate of difficult access which he meant to
victual. But was suddenly surprised by one Knox, who landing on the shore,
Barklay was walking down the Hill to take view of the Company; not mistrusting
to be known. And finding that he was thus betrayed, ran into the sea and
drownded himself. The news whereof coming to the Popish Lords, made them the
sooner conform; which they did forthwith.

The King thus enabled to command, ordains several Commissioners to reduce such
families in the North, that were in fewds, particularly these between Huntley
and Murray as you have heard; Huntley and Forbes; Arrol and Ladwhern, Drum and
Frendraught; men of considerable fortunes and fewds, so that the North was
cleared and quiet.

And now the King reminds the late behavior of the Malapart Minister, Blake
who was couvented before Commissioners at Saint Andrews his Church concerning
his Treasonable speeches in his former Sermon, whereof he had been convicted
before the Council, Blake the Minister (...) out of all.
and was now further accused, as wondrous factious, and so condemned, and
turned out of all.

And thus visitations being made through all Churches and Presbyteries a
strange reformation followed, both there and in the University, and not only
Inquisition of their Doctrines and behavior therein, Excellent reformation in
the University
but also concerning the Managment, of Lectures, Offices, Revenues, Rents, all
out of order, until this blessed way of altering all, for good. But more
especially, in the Colleges, in place of divinity Readings; Politic questions
were raised; whether the Election or succession of Kings, were the better
Government. How far the regal power extended* whether Kings may not be
censured for abusing the same and deposed by the people.

The King therefore prescribes the professors their Theme;

The first Master, to read the common places to the Students, with the Law and
History of the Bible.

The second Master, to read the New Testament.

The third, the Prophets, Ec^lesiastes and Canticles.

The fourth, the Hebrew Grammar, with the Psalms, Proverbs, and the book of Job.

A Council appointed for the Universitie, and that for their better improvement
and studies; the Doctors, Professors, and Regents, not being pastors should be
exempted from Church-meetings, Sessions, Presbyteries, and Assemblies, these
Orders and Articles, assented and sworn unto in presence of the King.

And being Northward, where pitiful ignorance possesses the common people.
Amongst many, one Margeret Attkin, Witches discovered,
apprehended upon suspicion of witchcraft, and threatened with Torture,
confessed her trade, and discovering her associates, to purge the Country of
all, if she might have but pardon, she gave her reason to be assured of their
guilt, all of that sort having a secret mark in their eyes, by which she could
certainly discover them, to be witches, and had by deceit (the Devil also
assisting (gotten credit and belief, and so carried through the Country for
discovery of others, Margaret Atkin (...)
and diverse innocent women by her asseveration at Glasgow (through the ignorant
simplicity of Master John Cooper Minister,) were put to death. But some, wiser
than the rest, altered the women, into other habits, whom she would then
acquit, and so she was sent back to Fife her first abode, and then hanged. But
belying her self, in what she had confessed, she was by some supposed not
guilty, and the King was moved to recall the Commission which authorized
proceedings against such seducers.

And yet the fearful abounding of these detestable slaves to the Devil, moved
the King to dispatch hastily a Treatise to the press of Doemonologie in form of
a Dialogue, and divided into three books. Digresses concerning witches and
witchcraft.


1. The description of Magi in special. 2. The description of sorceries and
witch^raft in special. 3. The description of all these kind of spirits, that
trouble men or women, and the conclusion.
Against the damnable opinions of two, Maintainers.
principally, in that age. One Scot, an English man, who denies in print, such
a thing as witchcraft; and so maintains the old error of the Saduces, in,
denying of spirits.

The other, of Wierus, a Germain Physician in his public Apology for all
witchcraft; discovering thereby, himself to have been one of them.

The Kings endeavor is to prove two things. That there have been, and are such
devilish Arts, and secondly what exact trial and severe punishment they merit.
And reasoning upon Genus, he leaves species and differentia to be comprehended
therein, for example; In the first book Chap. 6. (speaking of the power of
Magicians.) He says, that they can suddenly by their spirits, cause to be
brought, all kinds of delicacies, since as a thief he delights to steal, and as
a spirit subtly transports them, under which Genus, all particulars may be
comprehended; as bringing wine out of a wall, etc. proved by reasons of the
general.

In the second book^ Chap. 5 That witches can cure or cast on diseases; the
same reason, that proves their power by the Devil of diseases in general, their
power in special is also proved; as weakening the nature of some men toward
women, In others, to abound above nature, and so of particular sicknesses. But
in all, he observes the different ends of God, in the first cause, and the
Devil as his instrument in the second cause, as Gods Hangman.

For where the devils intention, is to perish in the patient soul, or Body, or
both; God, by the contrary, draws evermore out of that evil, glory to himself;
either by destruction of the wicked, or trial of the patient, and amendment of
the faithful, being awakened by that rod of correction. Several Authors in
this subject.


But, who likes to be too curious, of all their Practices, read but Bodinus
Daemonomancie, collected with greater diligence than Judgment. And further, if
you would be acquaiuted with the opinions of the Ancients concerning their
power, It is well described by Hyperius and Hemmingius, two Germain Authors.
Besides, many other Neoterick Theologues, largely setting down that subject.

And if, curious and inquisitive, of the rites of this unnecessary Perilous
black-art; the Devil may too soon, direct any, unto Cornelius Agrippa, and
Wierus before mentioned.

I know, how it has been of late urged, that King James was not of the same
mind always; and very tender of his Judges ^roceedings, ignorantly condemning
some innocent Melancholy simple old women; whose miserable poverties, made
them weary of life, and easily to confess themselves guilty, of they knew not
what, though in sad condition, otherwise; liable to Satan's suggestions and
deceit.

And so busied himself with curious perspicuity, into trial examination and
discovery of sundry counterfeits, pretenders to be possessed by evil spirits.
But yet, to my knowledge, he was ever constant to his former opinion, of witches
and witchcraft, in particulars I can evidence.

The King thus busied to quiet the North Countries, some Incursions were made
on the Marches of each Nation, the outlodgers of Tindale and Riddesdale for the
English made in rodes upon the Scots County of Liddesdale. The Lord Backlugh
commander of those parts, does the like into England, and apprehending the
chief mischief-makers 36, puts them all to the sword, and returns with great
spoil. Against him is Sir William Bows sent from the Queen to complain, and
with much ado reconciled. And for the future peace of the Borders, the time
was assigned for Hostages to be delivered on each side to either.

But Backlugh failing to perform his part, was feign to satisfy the Queens
displeasure by entering himself into England, as Hostage, where he continued
some Mo^^ths.

Queen Elizabeth evermore upon actions of diversion (never upon conquest) to
assist her neighbors, Expedition of Earl of Essex to the Isles of Azores.
French and Netherlands, prepares another Navy against Spain of 120 sail under
command of Essex, and Lord Thomas Howard, and Sir Walter Ralegh in three
sqadrons. they set out of Plymouth, but are weather beaten back, and put forth
again; but become distressed, ere they get clear of land; and so return. And
after fresh supply of men and victual, they resolve for the Islands of Azores.

In the voyage by the way cross winds separate Ralegh, who being missed when
the others came there. Essex overhastily sent intelligence by a Bark into
England; that Ralegh had on purpose, separated himself from the fleet. But he,
hastily coming in, Essex and Ralagh differ.
unto them; that rash act of complaint, was excused by Essex, which Ralegh
resented ever after. And he landing on the Isle of Fiall before Essex came
thither, takes the Town, which being misunderstood, as in dispite of Authority,
they are peiced again.

They land upon Gratiosa, and Flores, take the spoil, and depa^^ unto other
Islands, to seek the Spanish India fleet, which was then to come home. And no
sooner departed, but within two hours after the whole fleet of 40 sail, full
of treasure arrives there, and meets with some of the English ships. But ere
Essex came in, they were shrouded under the safety and shot of their own
Castles.

Yet Essex lands farther off and takes Villa Franka, burns a great Carocque
ship. But not much done in answer to Essex his ranting intentions, they return,
in some distress by the way, home.

And being come to Court, Come home and quarrel at Court.
the Repetition of their several incounters moved contention between Essex and
Ralegh, casting all misfortunes on each other. Besides Essex now blown up with
ambition, was offended, that Sir Robert Cacil in his absence was made Secretary
of State, and Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, emulous of his wisdom,
and besides, he was then Raleghs great friend. But more malicious, That the
Lord Howard Admiral of England, was created Earl of Nottingham; with some
Testimonialls mentioned in his Patent, That he had secured England from the
Spanish invasion of 88, and that (jointly ^ith Essex) he had valiantly taken
the Island and City of Cadiz, and that he had there wholly destroyed the Spanish
fleet, designed for their assault of the Kingdom of England, but Essex would
have it fancied, he did all himself.

For he that usually ascribed, all the glory to himself, could endure no
Rivalls; especially, that Nottingham, now Earl took place of him, and all
others of the same degree, as being Admiral, according to the Statute of Henry
the 8.

That the high Chamberlain, high Constable, Marshal, Admiral; high Steward; and
Chamberlain should have prehemin^nce of all others of the same degree of Honor.

But to please Essex, He is therefore made Marshal of England, and so his pride
took place of the Admiral. This I note in particular, to show, by what steps
and degrees of distaste, He took occasion to turn Traitor not long after. See
Anno 1600 and so we return to Scotland.

The winter quarter brought the Estates to Edinburgh, A Parliament at Edinburgh.
and the King timely holds a Parliament in some respects for restoring the
Popish Lords (now called Proselytes) to their honors and lands. And the
Commissioners for the Ministry are suitors for sundry Articles. Amongst them
this was one. That the Ministers representing the Church and third estate of
the Kingdom might be admitted voice in Parliament, according to several acts
here to fo^^ in favor of the Church, and the liberty, and freedom.

The King was earnest therein to please them, Ministers voice in Parliament.
and had it past. But then obtained the manner as for himself; thus.

That such Pastors and Ministers as his Majesty should please to provide to the
Place and Dignity of a Bishop, Abbot, or other Prelate at any time shall have
voice in Parliament, as freely as any other Ecclesiastical Prelate had at any
time bypast. And that all Bishoprics then in his Majesty's hands and
undisponed to any person, or which should happen to fall void hereafter, should
be only disponed to actua! Preachers and Ministers in the Church, or to such
other persons as should be found apt and qualified to use and exercise the
Office of a Preacher or Minister; and who in their provisions to the said
Bishoprics should accept in, and upon them, to be actual Pastors and
Ministers, and according thereto should practice and exercise the same.

But the Office of them in the spiritual Policy and Government of the Church
was remitted to his Majesty and to the general Assembly; and so hereby occasion
was soon taken to assemble at Dundee. And first advises them to consider,
Whether it was lawful and expedient that the Ministers as representing the
whole Church within the Realm should have Voice in Parliament or not? It was
concluded for them, They might; as also in other meetings of the Estate, and
very expedient to have some of them always present to give Voice in the name of
the Church.

The number of them was agreed upon to be one and ^ifty persons, (as of old in
the Papistical Church. But then, who should elect those to have voice? They
were pleased with much ado to grant. It did appertain, partly to his Majesty,
and partly to the Church, and so it came to after consideration. De modo
eligendi: whether ad vitam. What their Title? with caution to preserve them
from corruption? What their Rents and Revenues? with a number more such
circumstances are recommended to their Presbyteries to consider, and so to
certify his Majesty.

And because it was time for the Kings grace and favor to remit to mercy the
Edinburgh Ministers, such as of late were silenced, to suffer them now to
preach again, but with such articles and conditions as bound up their better
manners to the Kings turn, not their own old tunes in the Pulpit. Nor were they
safe as they thought they should be, till the King was pleased to declare, That
he did freely remit their former offenses, in hope that they would hereafter
deserve it. And so were all persons concerned in the late Tumult and all others
in honor to the King and charity to their brethren concluded and contented.
But Mr. John Davidson a malicious man, he being behind hand of preferment,
protested against the Assembly, as not free, but overawed by the King. And
when he had put his Spoke into the Wheel slip^ aside, but left it in motion
with more ado than was meet to make such a stir.

Mr. Robert Bruce a Preacher there for ten years, Bruce refuses imposition of
hands.
yet never received Ordination to the Ministry, pretending the approbation of
the general Assembly equivalent, if not more sufficient. He was told, that the
Approbation which he had, was only a License to preach, but now to receive the
Office, it was necessary thereto, Imposition of Hands. No, though he was
instructed, that the Ordination was not to question his former Calling, but to
confirm it; nor would that serve, unless he had a Declaration to him thereof
set down in writing.

A whole fourteenight was wasted to make the form, to please him, and others
that sided for him, and his day of admission came. Mr. Robert Pont in the
Pulpit signified their business, and being come down to assist the work. Bruce
was got up in his place, railed against all the acts of the Commissioners, and
with his Tongue raised such a Tumult of the Commons, that the poor Ministers
appointed to administer Ordination were in fear to be stoned by the people, and
so got away, and nothing done.

Upon this this the King commands the Commissioners to cite Bruce, but at last
is so admitted.
and censure him. He did appear, but excused himself, and laid the fault on the
peoples affection to him; and being afraid what would be the issue, pain of
deprivation, gave obedience, and accepted his Admission, with Imposition of the
Hands of two Ministers. Here was seen his perverse pride and wilfulness, which
fools referred to his true zeal.

And this good conclusion of the general matters of the Church gave like
success to the conference at Falkland, determining their Votes in Parliament,
concluding the manner of his Election, who was to have Vote in Parliament, that
the Church should name for each Prelacy six, whereout the King should choose one.

That the nomination of them should be made by the general Assembly.

And his Rent provided out of the Prelacy, whereunto he is preferred.

With such cautions to preserve him, as was not to be feared he could
transgress his bounds, or be deposed ipso facto; but his Title should be called
Commissioner for such a place, etc.

Indeed, some of the Articles of Caution were ridiculous and absurd to be
performed, but such was the Kings wisdom to consent to all their conceits,
knowing that in time the benefit and good use of this Government would appear,
which he purposed (says one) to have established, or rather, to permit those
inconveniences, until weight of their own sufferings should betake themselves
to abler conclusions.

The King having greater Councils of more importance to him, next to the
settlement of the Church, and not till then proper for him to ascertain. Queen
Elizaheth was grown old and weak in body, nor well in mind, and it concerned
him to establish to himself, such affectionate Princes in whose relations he
might find aid and assistance when time served.

To that end he considers of Ambassadors, The King sends Ambassadors to the
German Princes.
David Bishop of Aberdeen, and Sir Peter Y^ung Almoner, men of great abilities
and learning. They had in Commission to inform the free Princes of the Religion
in Germany, his Majesty's Right and Title to the Crown of England, and to
assure to them his singular care and endeavor now and always to conserve amity
with them all; Not that he minded injury to the Queen, whom he had just cause
to honor as his Mother, and to wish and pray for many days to lengthen out her
ample years; but yet to strengthen himself against foul pretenders he craves
their consideration, and to be pleased in common Embassage to entreat the Queen
as their best advice, to declare (in her own good time) the right Successor,
for preventing plots and practices of her and his Enemies, etc.

They had command to turn out of the way, and to take Letters commendatory of
the King of Denmark his Brother-in-Law unto each of those Princes, which were
Udalrick Duke of Megleburgh, Maurice Lantgrave of Hesse, Frederick Duke of
Saxony and Administrator of the Electorite, Henry Duke of Brunswick, John
Adolph Duke of Gleswick, and Ioakim Marquis of Brandenburgh. To each of these
single made their Journey tedious, difficult, and took up much time, a whole
year. Then they return with their Answers, in substance alike.

That albeit his Majesty's right was well known to them, Their Answer.
they did esteem it an Act of great wisdom in him, to acquaint his Friends and
Allies with the Exceptions which some may presume to take to his just Title,
that so, when occasion required, nothing might be amiss for them to do for him
within their power. But to move the Queen to name her Successor, they excused
themselves therein, as more dangerous to him than useful to his intent, lest
it might less promove the business, and offend her. Always (each of them) would
advise, but counsel together with the Confederates and Allies of either, and in
the close follow that course which was most likely for his benefit.

And at their return, December 24. Queen Ann was brought to bed of the second
Daughter, and Christened Margaret. The Earl of Montross, made Chancellor, with
the Lord Hamilton and Earl Huntley were Godfathers, and these two created
Marquesses.

And to mind men of Gods providence in their Declinations as well as
Creations, we may not forget to historize the Deaths, as we have done the Lives
of worthy men; John Lindsey Secretary of State, of a Noble Family, exquisitely
learned, held worthy of his Judicature in the Senate, wise and virtuous, he
pined away with the grief of the Stone.

David Carnegy of Colluthy, peaceable and sober, of good credit with the King,
and his Counselor, for his excellent knowledge in Civil affairs.

Thomas Buchanan, sometimes a Schoolmaster, I name him with distinction from
that other his Kinsman (whose Life and Death we have heretofore mentioned) this
man died Provost of Kirkheneh, learned and prudent, though a strong stickler
for the Kirks rights, and died of good age.

David Fergusus of Dunferling, a good Preacher, a sanguine pleasant condition,
and thereby the more regarded of the Court and Country.

But Robert Rollock, most of all beloved, and the more now lamented, because
his conscience could not conceal from his brethren, of what their conscience
was so much guilty; and therefore as a dying man, besought them to carry
themselves more dutiful to the King, lamenting to be so ill used by most of
their Members. His learned Works scattered into Pamphlets, the more pity so
dispersed, and not in Volume, preserve him learned to all posterity.

France was persecuted by the Spaniards in Picardy, France craves aid of
England against Spain, and comes to a Treaty.
who take the strong Town of Amiens, and therefore were sent over out of
England four thousand Soldiers to his succor, and so retakes it again. But
the fate of War interchangeable to either, with loss to both, inclines them to
Peace, by intercession of the Pope, interessing also the Queen, who sends over
Secretary Cecil, and Wilks Master of Requests; and the Netherlands send Nassaw
and Barnevelt; for all were included: but the States (gaining by Trade, whilst
their Neighbors fight) dehorted the Queen underhand, against any Peace. Much
altercation there was by the French to introduce England into the accord; (for
Spain now involved with the French, being but quit there, intended revenge on
England, and be able to do it:) and so their Delegates meet at Vervin, where
the French dispute place with Spain.

The French state their Precedence from the Sentence of Pope Pius quartus;
France and Spain dispute precedence,
the Spanish deny that, and urge besides a point of civility, that now they
were Guests invited into a Town of France, and so the French yielded, out of
respect to that and to the Popes Legates: but after much travel therein, the
Legate (extraordinary for the Pope) sits at the upper end, the Nuncio (the
Popes Lieger) is placed on the right hand; the choice was given to the French,
either to have the right hand next the Nuncio, or the left next the Legate: the
French accepted the left hand, and the Spaniard was content with the right,
though the second man.

Indeed, the King of Spain had delegated his Authority over to the Archduke,
whose Ambassador in truth was here, on purpose to avoid the issue of
contention, which rather than to submit, was worse to him than a War: and thus
was the Charters of Delegation drawn up only between them, and make peace.
so advantageous to France in the sequel, that he became styled Henry 4. le
grand.

And the Queen and Estates having offers of Treaty with Spain, she consults
thereon, and it became work it self for History; the disputes pro and con: The
wise Statesmen of the Gown were for Peace, Disputes of peace or war with
England.
Essex for War, Burleigh reached him David's Psalms, and had so stretched the
opening of the Book, that ten to one he should light on this Verse,
Bloodthirsty men shall not live out half their days. Upon this, there happened
contention between the Queen and Essex; and about sending one in chief for the
affairs of Ireland; in the presence of some of the Council and Cecil she named
William Knowls, the Earls Uncle; He in scorn bid her take Carew, (indeed
expecting his own mighty merits must needs be entreated) and in contempt turns
his tail to her; she in disdain gave him a box on the ear, Queen Elizabeth
strikes Essex.
bid him be gone with a vengeance. He in passion, claps his hands on his Hilt,
and vows not to put it up, and in chafe gets out of the Court: and being
admonished of his duty by the Lord Keeper who was present, he answers very
boldly by Letters, and more unadvised and unhandsom, gives them to his Captains
to d^vulge. They contained thus much.

That a weak Prince rages like the Tempest. He knows his observance as a
Subject, His angry letters.
but withal, what to do as an Earl and Lord Marshal, and can distinguish
Service and Slavery; It is a Wound that smarts; and it were a sin to serve
after such Disgrace. Cannot Princes err? injure Subjects? Is their Power
infinite? For my own part, I am rent in pieces with Injuries, and have long
enough endured the bitter^ess thereof.

This was enough to set out his inside, which the Queen observed, and lodged it
for hereafter, having for the present some use of his followers, who indeed
egged him forward to his future ruin.

But after this digression, we mind the occasion, (...)
and though no peace with Spain, the Queen makes sure with the Netherlands in a
new League, and agreements of addition to the former, (See before Anno 1585.)
viz. to pay her in all eight hundred thousand pounds sterling, (if the War
lasted so long) thirty thousand pound yearly, till they had paid four hundred
thousand pounds; but if the Peace should conclude by the Queen and Spaniard,
then to pay twenty thousand pounds yearly, King of (...) dies.
till they had paid eight hundred thousand pounds, with other covenants. But
the death of Philip 2. King of Spain, gave breath to them both, for he left his
Netherlands in Dowry with his Daughter Isabel, married at this time to Albert,
Cardinal of Austria, who returns his Cap to the Pope, and receives his
consecrated Sword, to conquer wherever he comes, and so hasts into Spain.

There was a fellow, One Squire impoysons the Queens saddle.
one Squire, taken at sea, and carried Prisoner into Spain, and by extremity of
the Inquisition, turns Papist, and for trial of his new Profession, Walpool a
Jesuit teaches him to compound a Poison, with which, if but anointing the
Queens Saddle-pummel, and she touch it, she should be infected; and for this
villainy he should be sure of salvation. He came now and put his Poison in
practice, which she touched, but took not effect; so did he to the Chairs of
Essex, which proved alike. Walpool in Spain wondering at Squires neglect (as he
thought) in very vengeance sends over one that accused Squire, who confessed,
and was hanged.

These and many other treacheries worrying the Jesuits with no success, Tomas
fals^accusation of K. James to Q. Elizabeth.
scattered some tales that King James favored Papists, and despised the Queen,
who had sight of some Letters, (in truth) indicted by the villainy of his
Secretary Elphingston, and the Kings hand counterfeit, and Seal to the same;
and seeming to confirm it, they had hired a notorious Villain in England one
Tomas, condemned for Theft, and to unburthen his conscience, pretends to reveal
a secret, and accuse the King in some generals, but never revealed any, yet was
the wretch reprieved; and though her wisdom knew well the malice and cunning
contrivance of these Plots, to clear her belief, she sends Bows Ambassador to
the King, and by Queries she examples her affection to him, before any other,
and expects no retribution, but by him, the glory of God, and not be wanting to
himself.

The King knew no better means to suppress the credit of false rumors, K.
James his prudence to suppress false rumors.
than by his own pious practice in Religion, by outward frequency in the
exercises of Prayer and Preaching; duly performing and executing his Justice
and Mercy, with such wisdom, and piety, as made his virtues thereby more
transparent to the common view and sense of all men.

He wisely gave way to diverse Books, publishing his right of Succession to the
Crown of England, with Arguments and Reasons of the benefit and advantage to
the people of both Nations; that in pious policy, his intentions would be
hereafter to force Ireland to Religion, and to continue War with Spain. He
numbers his then princely issue as the defense of State, his power and strength
to oppose Enemies, the good affections to him of Christian Princes, and
proposes miserable Examples of Usurpers.

Whilst Bows was about his business at Court, Ashfield surprised Prisoner to
Barwick.
he finds an Englishman (Ashfield) bold enough to bid himself welcome, besides
his merit, for his brave Present, some hunting Horses for the Kings Saddle; but
in his journey (it seems) over-saucy with the English Warden, or rather
suspected as a Spy, to carry Tales to the King: however Bows had direction to
teach him the Ambassadors craft, and enticing him by his servants to Lies,
was in his drink coached away to Barwick.

The King takes this indignity, offered, to himself, secures the Ambassadors
lodgings; and se nds to Barwick for release of the Prisoner. The Governor
excuses that demand, not to demit him without the Queens pleasure.

And so disputes grew high with the Ambassador, as injurious to the honor of
both Crowns; which he denied, and turned the fact upon his men, without his
knowledge; but this was Mentiendi facultate, and the King not vouchsafing him
any more Audience, he departed much discontent.

Sundry disputes were sawcily maintained, Colvil Recants his treatise against
the Kings title.
concerning the Kings Title to the Crown of England. Besides the discourses
oppugning, Amongst many, John Colvil Minister published his Recantation in
print, and styled, the Palionode of John Colvil, etc. wherein having confuted
the contrary reasons, he professed, That Maliciously in time of exile (as you
have heard) he had penned the Treatise, which now out of conscience he recants.

Some say, that he was not Author of that book which he appugned, only to get
favor of the King he professed the work, that had come forth without a name,
and was then accounted a Pithy and persuasive cunning discourse, of that
subject.

At this time was published the K. Basilicon Doron, The Kings Basilicon doron,
the occasion of it in public.
directed to the Prince, upon this occasion, Sir James Semple, servant to the
K. and Amanuensis therein, lent the copy to Andrew Melvil Minister; who
misliking so much ruth, which touched the Ministers copie-hold in their
discipline; tdispersed several transcriptions amongst the Brethren; and
thereupon a Libell was framed, and cast in before the Synod of Saint Andrews;
with such exceptions, as they pleased to set down. It was asked what censure
should be inflicted upon him that had given such instructions to the Prince,
and whether he could be well affected to Religion, that had delivered such
precepts of Government?

The Kings Commissioners in the Synod (apprehending the Libell to concern his
Majesty, whom they knew to be the Author of the book,) inquired for the
Presenters. And all pretending ignorance, the Commissioners shut the doors, and
purged each one by oath; yet was it prooved the next day to be John Dikes,
Minister; who, in fear of the Citation before the Council, fled, and was
denounced Rebel. And Hereupon, rumors were hatched, how prejudicial these
directions were to the Church. But to satisfy the truth, the Book came abroad,
and was carried into England, with admiration of all men, to read the Kings
piety and wisdom, Heretofore somewhat doubted, by the deceit of certain
discourses which now were sure to be replied unto, and evermore somewhat of
Consequence, for the Kings just title to the Crown of England.

By which, and his continual disputes, and reasoning with learned men of all
knowledge, He in truth soon became royally famed through Christendom, and more
effectual with her, whom he was to succeed. Her self grown very studious and
retired, and because she excelled in languages, she translates out of French,
and Latin, Salust, and Horace, which she writ with her own hand, and extant.

And in this general Assembly of the Church, The new year altered from 25. of
March to 18. January.
a politic Ordinance was published; To have the next year begin at the Calends
of January, and from thenceforth for ever. For before that time, the year was
reckoned, as in some other Churches, from the 25. of March.

And now, disposing votes, for the Ministry in Parliament, I shall close up the
year with the pitiful discovery of the State of Bishoprics, and how far this
godly Kirk had incroched upon them; So that, The state of Bishoprics at that
time.
there rested no more, but to Nominate perons to the Bishoprics, that were
void. Aberdeen and Arguile had their own Incumbents, at the time, both actual
Preachers.

Saint Andrews and Glascow, were in the hands of the Duke of Lenox.

Murray was possessed by the Lord Spinie.

Orkney, by the Earl of Orkney.

Dunkeld, Birchen and Dumblane, had their own titulars, but were not ordinary
Preachers.

Galloway and the Isles, so dilapidated as scarce to be remembered that ever
they had been.

Ross, and Cathnes, some provision were left.

And so we return to England. The Queen much perplexed, Irish Rebellion with
Tirone.
the Irish Rebellion mightily increasing, and that Nation in lamentable
condition by Ter-oen (or Tyrone) and others, though but lately broken out, and
how to quench that fire, was her and her whole Councils continual care.

And therefore, they consider of present forces, to be sent over,
extraordinary, under command of a Generalis s^mo, for that expedition. And
after some debate, the Earl of Essex was marked out by the Queen, to that
purpose, though Secretary Caecil hated him to the death. His wit made him
equal, to mate the others greatness, and never left, until he brought him to
the Block, with the weight also of his own wicked desert.

Give me leave to let in the Reader with some reasons why and how Essex and
Caecil, whom Authors make Antagonists, had several interests in one design of
envy. Queen Elizabeth was ever shy of her Successor; and these two families
were equal in power and affection in Court, Essex and Caecils Intelligence with
King James.
enjoying Her present favor, but looking to the future, in the Queens
declension. And in several held correspondence with some of the principal in
Scotland (if not with the King) which had she known, might have cost their
heads.

Secretary Caecil had the safer conveyance in disposing all public addre^^es
of State, and was in hazard to have forfeited his honesty, if not his head, but
his ready wit served the turn.

The Queen taking air upon Greenwich-heath, Caecil.
a post came thither to Caecil from Scotland; she hastily commanded the Packet,
which he, with much diligence to obey, s^ept near her person, telling her it
smelt, and looked il-favouredly, coming out of a filthy Budget, and that it
were fit to be ayred. She being averse from ill sents, bid him do so, and so he
gained time to sever what he would not have her to see.

The Earls accident of the same Nature, Essex.
had more cost and difficulty in the redress.

He entertained a domestic, Master Anthony Bacon, of a quick wit; by whom, the
Scottish intelligence was managed; which dangerous secret, he acted for reward.
And upon that score, had private invitation, to amend his fortune with Caecil.
Of which he makes use, and, as a mercenary man, revealed it to his Master, who
knew well enough, it behoved him to out-bid Caecil, and suddenly gave him Essex
house; which was disingaged for 2500l, besides another sum before, of 1500l, so
in all we may guess it, costly counsel.

About this time, There was a treasonable Assassination, Gowries conspiracy.
acted upon the King by John Ruthen Earl of Gowry, and commonly called Gowries
conspiracy.

The principal Actors, The Earl and his brother Alexander Ruthen, Andrew
Henderson, and John Cranstone.

The conspirators were Robert Logain Lord of Restalrigge, the Lord of Bour,
and See anno 1608.
Georg Sprot, the last were discovered afterward, and Sprot executed eight
years after.

And because Gowry had insinuated himself into the faction of the ministry,
presuming on their wonted way of countenancing all mutinous designs, These men
in malice to their Sovereign, who kept them under with Bitt and Bridle, began
to quarrel at the public declarations herein, till the Conspiracy was
examined and witnessed by their worships.

Their but infection has impoysoned others, Court and ch^ of King James pa^ 8
Hist: Gr: Br: Pa: 12.
who wilfully and maliciously, have now, very lately spit their venom in
print; as if the world had been (more than these half hundred years last past)
abused, with a false and feigned story.

We therefore, In perpetuam rei memoriam, have endeavored the truth, From such
information and printed Narratives, as we may with confidence satisfy the most
suspicious.

The name Ruthen in Scotland was not notorious, till Anno 1568; when the chief
of that family, Vide ante 1568.
amongst other confederates in those divided times of trouble, labored the
imprisoning the Kings Mother, et 1582.
Queen Mary. In 1582 his son William, was created Earl Gowry, in the Kiugs
minority; and two years after fell into actual Rebellion at Dundee, for which he
suffered at Sterlin, anno 1584.

His eldest son John, not long after, was restored in blood, and had leave to
travel beyond seas. I have a Manuscript which says, that in Padoua amongst
other impressa's, in a fencing school, he caused a hand and sword aiming at a
Crown, for his device. And the Earl of Arguile (this man's father 1552) told the
King, that in a house at Orleans in France (where Gowry had been lodged) he
found a prophecy, That he should with too much love, fall into melancholy,
have great power and rule, and die by the sword.

And thereafter his return home, he was extraordinary ambitious, proud and
haughty. His answer showed no less unto Collonal Stuart, a man of high esteem,
who humbly desiring, to be reconciled for acting as a minister of justice in
apprehending his father; He scornfully answered, Aquila non capit Muscas.

Himself, Earl Gowry retires home.
too big in his own thoughts, to be comprehended with Court observance, retired
to his family, accompanied with such of his Creatures, that could descend to
observe him, only his brother Alexander was designed to play the Courtier, to
take off the suspicion, being of the Kings Bedchamber.

And although diverse overtures were conceived between the Earl and Robert
Logain of Restalrig which took not effect; But at last it was resolved in this
manner.

The Earl sends his Brother Alexander from Saint Iohnstons his house, The
manner of the conspiracy.
to the King at Faulkland, to entice him thither with as much privacie as could
be. And overnight the 4. day of August 1600. commands one of his servants, 4.
of August.
Andrew Henderson, to ride with his brother Alexander, and one Andrew Ruthen,
to Faulkland to the Court the next morning by 7. a clock. The King putting his
foot in the stirrup to hunt, Alexander tells him That he had apprehended one
lately come from beyond seas, with much gold coin, and sundry suspicious
letters to Popish Lords; advising his Majesty to receive the money and letters,
and to examine the person, being in safety with his Brother at Saint Iohnstons
(but 10. miles) and this to be done speedily and privately; which was concluded
at Noon, whilst his train and attendants should be at dinner.

Alexander Immediately commands Henderson to speed to his Brother; finding him
in his Chamber, Hendersons Examination and confession.
where they had communication, and that the King would be there by Noon, and
that the business took well with the King, for he clipped him about the neck;
that he was accompanied with a slender Train, the Duke of Lenox, Sir Thomas
Erskin, and about a dozen persons. Well says the Earl, get on your plate
sleeves, for I must take an highland robber.

The King staying longer in his sport of hunting than was expected, the Earl at
middle of dinner; Andrew Ruthen came in have, and signified the King to be
nerer at hand; presently after came Alexander and William Bloire, and withdrew
themselves to consult, sending Henderson for the Earls Gantlet and steel
Bonnet; at the instant the King comes in, is received by the Earl, and retires
to dinner.

Alexander bids Henderson to fetch the keys of the Chambers from one William
Rynde; and presently after Cranston requires Henderson to come to the Earl; who
commanded him to attend his brother Alexander, and to do what ere he bid him;
which was, to be locked up within the round Chamber, and to stay in silence,
till his return.

Near the end of dinner, the King at his fruit, and the Lords and wayters gone
to eat, Alexander beggs of his Majesty, in this opportunity to withdraw, and to
dispatch the business. And up he leads Him through four or five rooms, locking
each door behind them, til they came into the round Chamber where Henderson
stood armed. No sooner entered, but Alexander pulls out Hendersons dagger, held
it to the Kings breast, claps on his Bonnet, and with stern countenance faces
the King and says, Now Sir you must know I had a father, Alexander treats with
the King.
whose blood calls for revenge, and you shall die, minting to the K. heart with
the dagger.

The King amazed, deals gently with his fury; excuses himself from the guilt of
his death, by his then Infancy; advising him, not to lay violent hands on the
sacred person of his Anointed Sovereign; especially in a cause of his
innocence; pleading the laws of God and Man; and his merits, by restoring
your brother in blood and honors; by breeding your Sister the nearest in the
Queens affection, and by his reception of his Bedchamber, withal promising
pardon of all that is past. And which wrought so much upon Alexander for the
present, that he leaves the King in custody of Henderson, until he returns from
his brother; having taken oath of the King not to stir, nor cry out, and so
locks them in.

Alexander gone, Henderson trembles, The King takes to Henderson.
with reverence of his Sovereign, and craves pardon; the King works upon his
passion, and asks him what he was? who answered, a servant of the Earls; and
will thou kill me? he replied with an oath, himself would sooner die.

Presently Alexander enters, with a Garter in his hand, Alexander (...) with
the King.
and says, Sir, there is no remedy, by God you must dye, and strives to bind
him. Nay (says the King) I was born free and will not be bound, and struggling
together, Alexander got the Kings head under his arm, and his hand upon his
mouth; which the King bit by the thumb, and dragging him to the window, bade
Henderson open it. The King cried out into a back Court, where the Duke, the
Earl of Mar, and others were, in pursuit of him who was rumoured to be gone out
the back way into the Park.

At the cry of Treason, The King cries Treason. John Ramsey comes up;
and known to be the King, they hastened to the Chamber where he dined, but no
entrance was found. The while, John Ramsey (formerly the Kings Page, and now
Groom of the Bedchamber) with Sir Thomas Erskin also, and Sir Thomas Erskin
follows.
sought counter, to get up by the Turn-Pike back-stairs, directed thither by a
Boy of the House, who saw Alexander ascend that way, and forcing one Door
finds them panting. Ramsey casts off his Hawk from his fist, draws out his
Fauchion, and wounds him deadly in the belly, Ramsey wounds Alexander.
Henderson slips away.
(being bid to strike low, for the King found him armed with a Male.) And the
instant, comes in Sir Thomas Erskin, Doctor Herres, and one Wilson, and by them
was the body dispatched, whilst Henderson slipped away.

When they soon suspected by the noise of unlocking Doors, that Gowry himself
might assail them, advising the King to withdraw into the Lobby, they cast the
Kings Coat upon the dead body.

The Earl enters by his double Keys with seven servants the fore-way, Earl
Gowry comes up to the fray.
and his Case of Rapiers, his usual Weapon, ready drawn, to whom Erskin
earnestly said, (to divert him from his purpose) What do you mean my Lord? The
King is killed, and points to his brothers covered body, bleeding on the ground.

At which Gowry stops, Gowry astonished,
sinking the points of his weapons; when suddenly Herres assails him with his
rusty sword; Ramsey steps in and strikes him to the heart, is killed by Ramsey.
not so soon, but that the Earl thrust him into the thigh, assisted by
Cranston, who hurt Erskin and Herres in the hand, Others hurt.
and they him through his body, who lived only long enough to be hanged and
quartered.

And forthwith came up all the Lords, The Lords and company come in. Gowries
Spells of Enchantment.
the Court, and Townsmen, After thanks to God for this mercy, they surveyed
Gowries body, which did not bleed, until a Parchment was taken out of his
bosom with Characters, and these Letters, which put together made
TETRAGRAMMATON; having been told, His Blood should not spill, whilst he had
that Spell. Being thus deceived by the Devil, he thought he should not die,
until he had power and rule, which he had of the King, and so suffered by the
Sword.

There remained in Scotland one younger son (two other brothers being fled) of
that House, Two other brothers William and Patrick beyond seas.
then a child, and was from that time imprisoned by Act of Parliament, and so
continued afterward in the Tower of London until this Kings death; and the
grace of the late King Charles restored him to liberty, with a small Pension,
1652.
which kept him like a Gentleman to these times, but now failing, he walks the
streets poor, but well experienced in Chemical Physic, and in other parts of
Learning, which he got, whilst he lost his liberty.

Not long after Herres well rewarded dies.

Ramsey has the honor of Knighthood, with additional bearing of his Coat of
Arms, The Kings grace and preferment to all those Rescuers.
A Hand holding forth a Dagger, mounted proper, peircing a bloody Heart, the
point crowned Emperial, with this Motto. Haec dextra vindex Principis and
Patriae. Not without increase of Wealth and Honor, to his Death.

Sir Thomas Erskin afterward created Earl of Kelly, and by degrees Knight of
the Gart^r, Captain of the Kings Guard, and Groom of the Stool.

Henderson had a large Pension confirmed by Act of Parliament, and died not
long since.

The Commemoration hereof was advisedly se^tled by Act of Parliament, The
Tha^ksgiving day settled by Parliament.
the Anniversary Feast Day of the fifth of August, solemnized to Gods glory,
during this Kings life; and Narratives in print in Scotland and England of all
these circumstances, which I have to produce; as also several Examinations
taken at Fawkland this year, viz. James Weyms of Bogye, William Rynde, and
Andrew Henderson, the very man assigned to murder the King, whose Examination
only I thought good to insert.

Fawkland, 20th August, 1600.
In presence of the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Advocate, Hendersons
confession of the whole matter.
Controuler, Sir George Hewme, and Sir James Methold, viz. That the Earl Gowry,
at St. Iohnstons, appointed this Deponent Henderson over night to ride with his
Brothers, Alexander and Andrew Ruthen to Falkland the next morn, who came all
together thither at seven of the clock; Alexander presently spoke with the King
in private, as he gat on hors-back, and instantly commanded this Deponent to
ride with all possible speed to the Earl, whom he found at St. Iohnstons in his
chamber at ten of the clock, and told him that the King would be there by noon.
The Earl presently with-draws into his Cabinet, demands, How his Majesty took
with his Brother? This Deponent said, Very well, for the King clipped him about
the shoulder. The Earl asked if there were many with the King, and what special
persons? He answered, The usual number, and the Duke of Lenox. And that within
an hour after the Earl commanded this Deponent to put on his secret
plate-sleeves, saying, He had an High-land man to take.

That about one a clock the Earl being at Dinner, Andrew Ruthen came from
Alexander, and whispered to the Earl, and presently after came Alexander, and
William Bloir, and took the Earl from his Dinner, and sent for his Gantlet and
Steel-Bonnet, and then the King came in.

That Alexander bids this Deponent, fetch the Keys of the chambers from William
Reynd, and so both went up the stairs; but afterward Thomas Cranston required
this Deponent to come to the Earl, who commanded him to go up to Alexander, and
immediately the Earl followed, bidding this Deponent do what ere Alexander bade
him, who forthwith locked him within the Round in the Chamber, telling him, he
must stay there till he returned; who shortly after came with the King, and
opening the Door, both of them entered, and instantly Alexander clapping on his
Hat pulled out this Deponents Dagger, and held it to the Kings breast, saying,
Remember ye of my Fathers murder; You shall now die for it. And minting to his
Higness heart with the Dagger, this Deponent tript the same out of his hand,
and believes, that if Alexander had retained the Dagger, so long as one might
go six steps, he had killed the King therewith. But wanting the Dagger, the
King gave him gentle language, excusing himself of Gowries death. Alexander
says, Well, if you keep quiet, nothing shall a^l you, if you will do as my
Brother will have of you. The King asked, What would you have? He answered, I
will bring my Brother. And having taken Oath of the King not to cry out, nor
open the Window till his return, he locked them both together.

The King asked the Deponent what he was? who answered, A Servant of my Lords.
The King said, Will your Lord kill me? The Deponent said, (with an Oath) He
shall die first.

Alexander enters, and says, Sir, there is no remedy, by God you must die. And
having a loose Garter, strove to bind the Kings, hands, who said, Nay, sall
you not, Ise die a free man. And this Deponent pulled the Garter from him. Then
Alexander clapped his hand upon the Kings mouth, to stop his crying, and held his
head under his arm. But this Deponent pulled his hand from the Kings mouth, and
opened the Window, and the King cried out thereat. Whereupon the Kings Servant
came running in at the Gate, and the Deponent ran and opened the Turn-Pike
head, whereat John Ramsey entered; and this Deponent saw him give Alexander the
blow, and then this Deponent gat away.

It is remembered by the Archbishop of St. Andrews in his History, Testimouy of
the Arch-biof St. Andrews.
page 460. that he three days after, meeting Mr. William Cooper (who had been
Tutor to Alexander) told him, that not many days before that Action, visiting
the Earl at his own house, he found him reading a Book, entitled de
conjurationibus adversus Principes; showing him, That it was a Collection of
the Conspiracies made against Princes, which (he said) were foolishly contrived
by all of them, and faulty, either in one point or other; for he that goes
about such a business (said he) should not put any man on his counsel.

But the Ministers refuse to give God thanks for the Kings delivery, excusing
themselves, as not being acquainted with the particulars, nor how those things
had fallen out. It was answered, That the Kings escape was evident. The
Minist^rs refuse to give God thanks for the Kings delivery
They replied, that nothing ought to be delivered in the Pulpit but that
whereof the truth was known, and that all spoken there should be in faith. And
so it was done only by a narrative Relation of Bishop Ross, at the Market
Cross, to the singular joy of the people.

And afterward the King and Council, with all the Nobili^y, solemnized the
Deliverance with Thanksgiving and Prayer, with great satisfaction to the
multitude, Who (as Domitian said) seldom give credit to the Conspiracy, unless
the Prince be slain.

Those Ministers that refused, were silenced from Preaching, They are silenced.
under pain of Death* and well they deserved it; until afterward, that they
declared, They were resolved of the truth of Gowries Conspiracy, and submit for
their former fault. And so were ordered to publish the same in sundry Churches.
One of them had his reservation, He would reverence the Report; but was not
persuaded of the truth. And therefore was banished into France.

The Bodies of the two Brothers were sentenced by the Parliament, hanged on a
Gibbet, dismembered, and their Heads set upon the Prisonhouse; and then
ordained the fifth day of August in all Ages to come should be solemnly kept
for Public Prayers.

The assasination of Princes, the more common, the more close, and as they were
mightily performed on the persons of his Pred^cessors in Scotland, so not
seldom practiced on Queen Elizabeth in England, whilst she was increasing in
years, but being declined through age, near her end, the le^uit Catholic
considered it to be lost labor upon her, then her death gave being to another
Ph^nix, as the only Defender of the Faith.

Upon him therefore they intend the like, which being known unto Ferdinando
Grand Duke of Tus^any, The King forewarned out of Italy of Poison.
out of the singular fame of the Kings princely virtues, he sent to him an
Express, an English Gentleman Sir Henry Wotton, a Traveller in Italy, with a
Dispatch and Packet of Letters intercepted by the Duke, in them, a Design of
certain men sent secretly to Scotland, to impoyson the King.

Wotton was well rewarded, and returned with many princely expressions of the
Dukes, timely intimation, and the Kings infinite obligation, and bad him say to
the Duke, as from the King.

That to him, it was less considerable to die than to fear. And whilst he was
here 26. of February 1600. was born the Kings third son (the second son Robert
died young) and Christened Charles, at Dunferling, a sickly weak Infant, but
recovered beyond expectation, and proved all his life exceeding healthy, and by
his constitution might have lived a great age, Prince Charles born.
had not untimely accidents bereaved us of him.

To give end to this year, The Life and Death of John Cragg Minister.
we recommend to memory the Life and Death of Mr. John Cragg, he had been
Minister to the King, (they will not style themselves Chaplains) of good fame
and scale of learning; without faction, (which I note, as a rarity in them) and
therefore his reputation. His Parent killed at Flouden-field; his means no more
than poverty affords; put him into extremities, to work out a livelihood.

To England first, an ordinary Pedagogue, to a private family; then he returns,
and necessity enforcing, he becomes a Dominican, and i^^prisoned for four
Tenants of Heresy, got out, and went back to England.

Then to France, and thence to Rome, where Cardinal Pool prefers him to
instruct Novices of the Cloister in Bononia; and employed their Envoy in
affairs through Italy, and in Commission to the Isle Chios in the Ionick sea,
to redress disorders there.

Afterward returning, he became Rector, and so access to the Library of the
Inquisition, where he happened on Calvin's Institutions, and by them, and the
Instructions (his own Tale) of an old man in the Monastery, he was confirmed a
Proselyte to his Discipline, and not able to keep counsel, was carried to Rome,
and by the Inquisition condemned to be burnt an Heretic.

That night Pope Paul the fourth dies, the people hating his person, in huge
tumult, tumbled down his Statue of Marble, dragging it about the streets for
three days, and then drowned it in Tiber, and increasing villainy, and power,
discharged the Prisons, and amongst the rest, Cragg gat loose, first into the
Suburbs, and there falling into mean company, was known by a Banditto, whom he
had relieved at Bononia, who gratefully assisted him with money for the journey
thither, where finding friends to fail, he took his course to Millan.

Ere he got there, an accident befell him; (his own relation, and a Bishops
record) for declining the common Road in fear of discovery, he fell into a
Forest, weary, out of the way, and want of food, brought him to rest under a
Birch, and near a Brook; when in much amuze what to do, a Dog comes fawning
with a Purse of money in his mouth, which he lays down in his lap, and whining,
(as to invite him to rise and follow him) brought him not far off, to a poor
Village, and into company, that conducted him to Vienna in Austria.

There he preaches before Maximilian the second; the fame of the man, and his
good manners to boot, brought him a Preferment, when by Letters from Pope Pius
the third he was demanded to Rome, as a condemned Heretic, but was dimitted to
shift for himself, under conduct, from the P^pes reach.

Through Germany he journeys homewards to England, where he was informed of the
Scots Reformation, and so comes home an effectual Convert; and instantly was
made a Minister. Disuse of his native speech (four and twenty years) made him
trip with his tongue; but being understood by the learned, in his Latin, and
not long after speaking Scotch, he steps into the Ministry at Holyrood-house,
and so in several years to seven sundry places; he came at last to serve the
King his Household Chaplain; full of age, even eighty eight; he ended his days
the last of December, (for so of late they end their year.)

We left the Earl of Essex designed against the Rebels of Ireland, Es^ex his
Treason,
where soon he learned to practice Treason at home. His story is thus.

This Earl was eldest son to Walter Devere^x (of a N^rman family) Viscount
Hereford and Bouchier, His descent.
Lord Ferrers of Chartley, and by Queen Elizabeth created Earl of Essex and
Ewe, Anno 1572. and Knight of the Garter; and was sent into Ireland, Lord
Marshall, against the Rebels; and as if but sent of an Errand, he presently
falls sick and dies at Dublin, 1576. His body brought over and entombed at
Carmarthen in Wales.

This Robert succeeded his fathers honor, He^r to his Father.
and was looked upon in Court by all with pity, through the sacrifice of his
father, but by the Queen with more affection, whom she advanced (his fortunes
low) with many gifts of grace and bounty. At his Arraignment, accounted by the
Lord Treasurer Buckhurst, to be twenty thousand pounds in pure gift, besides
the fees of his Offices, and the dispose of the Treasure of the Army.

His entrance into Court was let in by the Earl of Leicester his supporter, His
entrance into Court by the Earl of Leicester.
though he never neither lived nor died by his discipline, who though he
deserved it, was yet a better Master of Art, than to die by the Ax.

He called him to Court from his House near Carmarthen, settled there to his
book, in contemplation belike of his fathers fate, who had spent all, and died
when fortune turned him up Trump. Leicester did this upon design, not by
affection, (the honest man's principle) for having let in Sir Walter Ralegh a
little before, he soon neglected his Patron, and set up for himself. Essex came
in to allay him.

And Anno 1585. His great ^^ferments.
receives Knighthood, in 1588. the Garter, in 89. command in chief in an
Exp^dition into Portugal, which was his forwardest piece of service. In 95.
sworn Counselour of State. The next year sent with a Navy to the Spanish Island
Cadiz, his most fortunate; and therefore presently after made Lord Marshall of
England. In 97. he commanded in another Fleet to the Islands Tercera, which was
his best; and this last into Ireland, his worst, being the Sepulcher of his
Father (as we have said) and the Gulf of this Lords fortune.

So that in twelve years he had no rest from additions of Honors or profit,
which he supposed his own Metal, but indeed it was the Queens Mint.

His Contemporaries who stood in competition with him, His contemporaries Sir
Chapter Blunt and Gener^l Norris.
were Sir Charles Blunt, after Earl of Devonshire, who succeeded him in Ireland,
and General, Norris, both his near Friends, and yet whom he envied, the last to
his ruin.

But after the destruction of Norris, he takes upon him the Expedition into
Ireland, the place of exercise for the best of the Militia; and who durst
oppose him? Though Blunt stood in favor, whom she foretold, should discharge
the cares of Ireland, as he did, though after her death, in this Kings time,
where we shall remember him hereafter.

This Blunt was a gallant Gentleman, and learned, with whom Essex must needs
challenge the Duel, for wearing of the Queens favor, for his success in a
Tilting, and ran him also through the arm.

But Essex got the Employment from all, Essex goes into Ireland,
and over he goes Deputy of Ireland, and General of all the Forces there, with
Commission, strickt enough to imbound his popularity with the Soldiery, and
his own family, which followed him in Troops; indeed the flickering of his
friends (like so many Vice-kings) foretold his Funeral. (That Town is easily
undermined, whose foundation is hollow.) Besides, he left not a Friend behind
him, being fain to disperse his own Apology, for some airy objections, which it
seems he durst not leave unsatisfied, having never a Friend to do it for him;
either of them a weak way to manage a man's fame, and does but multiply the
discourse, which a wise man should shun.

And being landed there 1599. and lands at Dublin.
not long after he received the Sword as Deputy and General; He declines his
intended Northern journey, and engaged a fruitless Expedition into Munster, not
so counseled there, nor commanded here, nor so much as advertised home, from
him.

By which tedious Marches, his Army harazed and tired out, four Mone^hs of
Summer spent, three parts of the Forces wasted, he plots a Peace with the Arch
Rebel Tyrone.

He imploys one Lee, His M^ssengers and Tr^ason^ with Tyrone.
a man familiar with Tyrone, and one that (immediately upon Essex his Rebellion
after at London) attempted violence on the Queen, confessed his Design, for
which he was hanged.

Blunt Marshall of the Army had order to license Lee to treat with Tyrone at
pleasure, as also Lee's Messenger, one Knowd, who brings word from Tyrone, That
if Essex would follow Tyrones plot, he would make the Earl the best man of
England, desiring conference with Essex herein, and Tyrones eldest son offered
for Pledge.

This Message was delivered by Knowd, to Lee, and by him to Essex. And though
my Lord was charged herewith afterward, by my Lord Keeper in England, his
Lordship flatly denied it, till all their confessions condemned him, and
pretended their justification by general pardon from Essex in Ireland for all
Treasons.

And accordingly, (to shadow the odious overture, and to agree with so arch a
Rebel,) under color of a Treaty, he designs an Interview with Tyrone alone;
no third person admitted, and a guard of Horse kept all men off from hearing.

Considering the former Message by Knowd, what construction can this secrecy
produce, but great surmize of the height of Treason? and yet (though Essex was
not arraigned for his Irish actions, his latter in London sufficient,) let me
relate what is testified in pursuance of this, in the designs of Essex.

On Tyrones part it fell out, Warrens confession.
That the very day that Essex returned to the Queen, Tyrone told Sir William
Warren at Armagh, That within two or three Months he should see the greatest
and strangest alteration that could be imagined, and that himself hoped to have
a large share in England. And unto Bremingham he said, That he had promised ere
long, to show his face in England, little to the public good thereof.

Thomas Wood Confesses, Woods confession
That the Lord Fitz^orris in Munster, about the same time told him, That Tyrone
had written to the Earl of Desmond (so called) that the contract was, That
Essex should be King of England, Tyrone Viceroy of Ireland, and should assist
him in England with 8000 Soldiers.

With which agrees, the answer of Tyrone, to Mac Roories letter, That Essex had
agreed to side with Tyrone, and so be aided by them all toward the Conquest of
England.

The general opinion and discourse of the Rebels, That Essex was theirs, and
they his, and that he would never relinquish the sword of Ireland, till he was
Master of that in England.

Tyrone after the parley, grew proud and secure, into strange progresses,
visitations, homages of his confederates, as of a new spirit and courage.

Essex, presently thereupon, having retired thoughts, became melancholy, as of
doubtful ambition, and secretly imparts himself only to the Earl of
Southampton and Sir Christopher Blunt. Resolves how to return into England.


Resolving to go into England, with 2. or 3000. choice of the Army to make good
his landing at Milford Haven; so gather power, march to London, and make his
own conditions.

They diswade him, from the hazard, and odiousness of the design, but rather,
to draw out 200. of the most resolute, to make sure of the Court, and so to
follow the effect.

And accordingly over he comes; his Company in a muze of his intents, he
published his pretext to them, by the efficacy of his presence, to draw the
Queen to confirm his Articles with Tyrone.

But in great choler as to dispute, And lands with a 100. Gentlemen. September.
or Revenge, and without leave from England, He leaves his command to a
Lieutenant, and lands with 100. Gentlemen his best confidents, hastens to Court
ere it was known to any, but to his dear Uncle Sir William Knowles, Controuler
of the Queens Household, to whom he writes.

Dear Uncle, Receiving your last at my entering on shipboard, I return you this
account at my landing, being resolved with all speed (and our silence) to
appear in the face of my Enemies, not trusting a far off to my own Innocence,
or to the Queens favor, with whom they have got so much power.

At sight of him with amaze, The Queen offended.
the Queen swore, Gods death my Lord, what do you here, your presence hateful,
without Tyrones head? But he, falling more to a dispute, than any excuse, she,
in disdain to be taught, but what she pleased to do, bid him he gone, his boots
stunck.

So was he, He is committed,
commanded to his Chamber at Court, for some days; thence to the Lord Keeper,
til near Easter after; then to his own house, under custody of Sir Richard
Barckley, til the end of Trinity Term; so by degrees of restraint, to win him
to repentance, the Queen said, that he was young enough to amend. and make
amends for all.

Yet to repress seditious libels, dispersed in his Justification, And censured.
and to observe a form of justice, ere she gave him liberty, There were
associates unto her privy Council, some chosen persons of the Nobility, and
judges of the Law, to examine his breaking of his instructions in Ireland, his
treating with Tyrone, and leaving his Government, coming over without leave,
nay expressly, contrary to his command under her hand and signet.

With limitation, not to be charged with disloyalty, nor to be questioned
publicly in Starr Chamber, which upon his most penitent letter he desired to
be spared, and to be heard at the Lord Keepers house.

The sentence was then no more, than suspension from some of his Places; for he
called God to witness, He made an utter divorce with the world, and desired
favor, only for a preparative for his Nunc Dimittis, the tears of his heart
having quenched in him, all humors of ambition.

Upon which, in few days his Keeper Barckly was taken from him, with this
admonition, That he was not altogether discharged, though left to the guard of
his own discretion.

He had taken into his service as chief Secretary in Ireland and long before,
Consults of Treason with Cuff his Secretary.
one Henry Cuff; base by birth, a great Scholar, of a turbulent and mutinous
spirit. This fellow, a Month after his Lords liberty, practiced with Sir Henry
Nevil lately Lieger Ambassador with the French King, and now newly come from
Bullen, Insinuating as a secret, That the breach of the treaty of Bullen, was
like to light upon him.

By Cuff it was first concluded, that ancient principle of Conspiracy, To
prepare many, and trust but to few; and after the manner of Mines to make ready
the powder, place it firm, and then give fire in the instant.

The first of Nobility was Wriothsly Earl of Southampton, Blunt and Davis
confession.
and some others of quality, and with Profane policy to serve their turns with
both factions, Papist and Puritan; Essex, his outside to these professing
Hypocritical zeal and frequent Sermons; To the other, as to Blunt and Davis,
his inmost secrecies for Tolleration of Religion. And thus he spent Michael^as
Term.

Toward Christmas there passed a watchword amongst his associates, That he
intended to stand upon his guard; a double sense, as of circumspection, or
force. But in truth, not to be cooped up, with restraint.

The time of execution, was Hilary Term, when by invitation, or business,
Blunts confession.
the Town would fill with his friends. But in Candlemass Term, they fell to
consult at Drury House, where Sir Charles Davers lodged; a man obliged unto him,
for his pardon about the Murder of one Long. Sir Ferdinando Gorges, Governor
of Plymouth, sent for by his letter, not to fail before the second of February.
Sir John Davis, Surveyor of the Ordinance, his former servant; And John
Littleton, a man of wit and valor.

Their consultation rest upon three parts
The perusal of a List of confederates. Their plot
How to act. Distribution of each man's action.
The List was 106. Noblemen, Knights and Gentlemen, of Essex own hand writing.

The action, was in two Articles,
Possessing the Tower, Surprising the Q. and Court.
In which was deliberated, what course to hold with the City toward effecting
the surprise, or after.

The Tower would give reputation and security to the Action, by means of Davis;
For the Tower
but most of the rest were jealous, that whilst they built upon two
foundations, one must fail, and distract the other; therefore the more certain,
To surprise the Queen, the rest would follow.

The manner thus; For the Court
Certain select persons well known at Court, for access, should distribute
themselves into the Present, Guard-Chamber, Hall, and utter Court and Gate. And
in each of these places, one principal person, to guide the assistants.

Their distribution; Sir John Davers, to the Presence and Guard-Chamber, to
seize the Halberds of the Guard; Davis to the Hall; Blunt to the Gate. These in
readiness; by a signal, Essex should remove from his house, and well attended,
or to meet him, should with correspondence of the setters and some tumult and
confusion, effect their design.

Thus the plot-form; the second act to their Tragedy, that Essex should
prostrate him self at the Queens feet, desire removal of evil Counselors, who
possessed her Majesty and State; Then, to summon a Parliament, alter
Government, and confirm conditions to themselves.

In this consult, And for the City
Essex inclined most for possessing London, as a surer ground to that of the
Court also. Being wedded to his false overweening opinion, of the people and
Citizens, and their number. Suspecting belike the instinct loyalty of many of
his Train, when the fury should be over, and he perhaps left in the lurch, with
the fewest of his friends. The true Nature of usurping Rebels, to ^rust more
to the main of Multitude, than of quality; especially Essex, who had gotten (I
know not how, nor by what merit) the specious Mark of a Patriot; proper to
infuse, and mint jealousies, into the heads of the more unworthy, and less
prudent, and these he could easily stir up by Emissaries, who lie at watch to
bo utefeux it, and inflame men's minds, to disperse abroad unshrowded sparks of
discord, and that way to convert a Kingdom into a flame.

But this Counsel was afterward refined by Essex, Nevils confessions
Cuffe, and Blunt: To assemble a Troop to come suddenly from the Mews in
scattered Numbers, and unite in a moment at the Court Gate.

And as good Commonwealths men, lest their new contrivements should want
Ministers, they would supply in a readiness of their own for Counselors, and
Servants to the Queen, in place of such evil ones (the beaten path of Traitors)
as they thought fit to remove; which should be their plausible pretext to their
own practices, and a general ground, to the common people.

The day drawing nigh (but not assigned, being left to my Lord) the Curse of
the Psalmist interposed, like the untimely fruit of the woman, brought forth
before it came to perfection.

For many that knew of the plot, diligent, with too much resort at Essex house,
brought forth mutterings of somewhat, which states soon discover. The afternoon
7. The day of Preparation February ^.
February before the next day of Rebellion, was sent to Essex house Secretary
Herbert, to summon him before the Council, sitting at Salisbury Court, at the
Lord Treasurer Buckhursts, which he excused not to do, under color of being
ill.

And suspecting the discovery of his Trains, and doubting delays, resolved upon
his enterprise the next day, Sunday. But then, upon advertizement of doubling
the Court Guards, He is sent for to the Council.
and allarum there, he determined on his former conceit, of being the peoples
darling, and the Minion of London, upon confidence of Sir Thomas Smith the City
Sheriff. Giving out that Evening, that he was sent for to Counsel, to be
betrayde by an Ambuscado of Musketeers, upon the water, by the devise of the
Lord Cobham and Sir Walter Ralegh, to murder him by the way.

This mean design, the best he had, took fire like a squib; the Messages and
warning, to his chief confidents all that night, and next morning. And his
servant Temple took up his Tale and told it to the City. And to color it the
more, watch and ward was up all night, to open his gates to all comers in, so
that the morning hastens Manors Earl of Rutland, Southampton, Lord Sands, Sir
Henry Parker (called Lord Mounteagle,) with some Number of Knights and
Gentlemen, and being Sunday, it gave occasion to others, to come to his Sermon,
whom he carressed with his Cap in his hand, Earl Rutlands confesion.
telling them his former tale.

But to his more confidents, That he was sure of the City, and that strength,
which the Queen could not oppose, nor his Enemies withstand his revenge.

Always, with this caution, to his Gate-Keepers, to suffer none to return out,
to tell News.

Sunday at 10. a clock the Queen had intelligence, and yet was willing to cast
water on this fire, ere it should flame to a Rebellion; her authority, before
her force; The day of rebellion.
she sent the Lord Keeper, Earl of Worcester, the Controuler of her Household,
the Lord chief Justice, Council sent to Essex house.
who finding the Gates shut, after some stay, were let in by the wicket, but
all their servants kept out, except the bearer of the Seal, the Court full of
Company with Essex and his Lords, to whom the Lord Keeper said, That the Queen
sent them to understand the reason of their Assembly, that if they had cause of
griefs against any persons whatsoever, they should have hearing and justice.

Essex told them aloud, That his life was sought, to be murdered in his bed,
and had been perfidiously dealt withal.

The Chief Justice answered, If any such matter were attempted or intended,
Essex pretenses.
it were fit for him to declare it, and to be assured of their faithful
relation, and so He should not fail of her Majesty's Princely Indifferency, and
Justice.

Southampton objected, And Southhamptons.
the assault upon him by the Lord Gray, to which the Chief Justice said, that
justice had been done, and the party in prison.

The Keeper required Essex to impart his griefs, if not openly, yet privately,
and promised satisfaction.

Upon this, The multitude clamor.
arose a high clamor of the multitude, Away my Lord, they abuse you, they
destroy you, they undo you, you lose time.

The Lord Keeper putting on his hat, commanded them all upon their Allegiance
to lay down their weapons and depart, When Essex and all the rest clapped on
their Caps, and going into the House, the Lords followed him, as to have
private conference, and fearing the Multitude, who ^ryed out kill them, shop
them up, keep them pledges, ^^st the great seal out at window.

And accordingly, Secures the Counsel, and goes into the City.
he gave them in custody, principally to Sir John Davis, and one Owen
Salisbury, a seditious notorious robber; guarding them with Muskets, fired, and
cockt; and left the charge of his house to Sir Gilly Merrick, bidding the Lord
Keeper to have patience whilst he would take order with the Mayor and Sheriffs
for the City, and be with them again within an hour.

So goes forth with his Number 200. men, entered Ludgate, and with a fearful,
timorous, discomposed tale repeated, That he should have been murdered; and so
passing through Cheap Side unto Sir Thomas Smiths house in Philpot-lane who was
at Church; where he shifts into a dry shirt; the passion of fear firing him
into a hot sweat. The people flocking and gazing as he went. Earl Rutlands
confe ssion
To whom he said; they did him hurt and no good, without weapons.

The Queen and Court, somewhat frighted, commanded the City to be in readiness,
but to keep within doors.

The Lord Burghley with Garter King of Heralds proclaimed him Traitor in the
principal parts of London, Proclaimed Traitor
which was done with expedition and resolution, though with loss of some of his
Train, and hurt of many.

Clifford Earl of Cumberland, Earl Rutlands Confession.
with Sir Thomas Gerrard Knight Marshal, rode up and down proclaming them
Traitors. And so, diverse withdrawing, he altered his former pretext, and said,
That Kingdom should have been sold to the Infanta.

Then making stay in Grace-street, Forces oppose ^ssex.
and dismayed at the tidings that forces were aproaching under conduct of the
Lord Admiral Lieutenant for the Queen, resolved to return by water, and make
good his own person by the pledges of the Lords, which a good fellow
over-hearing, and not well assured of his part there, being as deep in the
design as death, hasted before by land, told Davis and Merick, that by any
means they should release the Council, and so got his own pardon, and this was
Sir Ferdinando Gorges.

But Essex ignorant as yet, Encounter at the west end of Paul's, some slain.
goes on by land to Ludgate, there at the West end of Paul's, he was resisted by
the forces of the Bishop of London, commanded by Sir John Luson. At which
Encounter Blunt was wounded, young Tracie slain, and others, on his part. Wyat
slain, and some hurt on the Queens part.

But upon this small repulse, He slips from his Train, turns down to
Queen-hith, and by a pair of oars, was received into his Watergate at home,
which he fortified and baricadoed. He returns home by water and is besieged by
land and by water.
And as instantly was he besieged on land, by the Earls of Cumberland, and
Lincoln, Lords Thomas Howard, Gray, Burghly, and Compton Sir Walter Ralegh, and
Sir Thomas Gerrard.

And by water; by the Lord Admiral, the Lord Essingham, Lord Cobham, Sir John
Stanhop, Sir Robert Sidney, and Master Foulk Gervil, and this way, forcing the
walls, won the Garden; And being offered parley, and time to remove his
Countess and Sister Rich, with other Gentlewomen, before they would storm the
Hourse.

But Essex, with his Lords upon the Leads, would not capitulate, Submits the
same day.
but entreat.

That they might be used Civilly.

To have an honorable Trial.

To have Ashton his Preacher with him in Prison.

And so by ten a clock at night, they submitted themselves Prisoners to the
Tower.

This monstrous Treason, of this mighty man, thus weakly managed, was began and
ended in twelve hours, and the next day as calm, as if no Motion or Billows
had been before.

For which he, Essex executed.
and Southampton, eleven days after were arraigned and condmned, this one had
his reprieve, but Essex the reward of his merits, Southampton reprieved
and executed the 25. February, upon the Inner Hill in the Tower.

Several days before Sir Charles Blunt suffered by the Axe, and Cuff by the
halter.

Essex before his, and at several times (so not surprised) betrayed most of his
confederates, and discovered Sir Henry Nevil, late Ambassador in France, as
privy to all his conspiracies, of whom til then there had been no suspicion,
which was construed in him an Act more of temerity and hope of pardon, than in
Grace, and good Conscience of a Repentant Offender.

And this being his Tragedy. It is no wonder though our Adversary Authors, the
one, The History of Great Britain, the other, The Court and Character of King
James, should so slightly pass over his Treasons.

With them we shall have some dispute, as we meet them Contemporaries in our
farther proceedings, in the second Part. Let me add the Opinion, that a writer
had of Essex, and published in these verses.

Quod Regina, scelus; scelus est; quod Virgo petatur;
quod pia Virgo, scelus; quod tibi grata scelus;
Cum Virgo, Regina, Pia, et tibi grata, petatur,
Proh scelus! et superat quod scelus omne scelus.
It Is Treason, that a Queen should ruined be;
That a Maid, ill;
That she was Good, yet worse; that good to Thee,
More wicked still:
But when a Queen, a Maid, Good, and thy Friend,
Thou would dispatch,
The Treason, that thy black heart does intend,
Dares Hell to match.
England thus long sick of the disease of Irish affairs, Blunt sent Deputy of
Ireland
the expense whereof had brought the State into a Consumption, which put the
Queen to seek money of her Subjects; besides her way of sweetning them with
good words. Tyrone grew so Insolent, asto act Sovereignty, where ere he came,
disposing Honors, Estates, Privileges, Freedoms. And therefore Charles Blunt
Lord Montjoy, is sent over Deputy; and though others as fit as the former, the
Queen (who seldom chose amiss) picked out him to command, for his readiness to
obey; a fault in Essex, proud, and stubborn, uncounsellable, and unconstant.

The Rebels put him to it, salute him by Allarm, in the very Suburbs of
Dublin, which the Deputy with his selected Veteranes meant to requite soon
after, in a Massy-body, and fight him, Tyrone had friends in the English Court
which the Enemy sought for, and had been worsted, of which some underhand
Counselors at the Queen elbow warned him to prevent, by turning a to-side. But
with several light Brigadoes he was so hotly pursued, asput him to his holes
again.

Sir Warham Saint-Leger, meets Mac-guire, (a graceless wretch) and with their
Lances full Career run each other thorough, and dye.

Romes friendship to those Rebels, The Pop^s pardon to the R^bells.
much encouraged by his Indulgence, (the abundance of the Churches Treasure)
was pleased to spare them pardon of their sins, Anno 1601.
for the good service of shedding so much blood of their S^veraigns Subjects;
and for fighting in the faith of his beloved son Hugh Prince, O-neal, and
Earl of Ter-Oen, Captain General of the Catholic forces in Ireland; Whom His
Holiness accompanies with all his spirritual graces, and those that follow him,
or favor him, (by pains, counsel, arms, provision, or any other means) a
plenary pardon of all their sins; the very same pardon (says he) that was
wont to be granted to those that war against the Turk, or for the Holy land.

However the deputy sends Docwray into Ulster Garrisons; himself with 4000.
foot, and 300. horse, put the Enemy to his lurking, and with new supplies in
Angust out of England, he breaks through many difficulties, into Ulster: Erects
Mont-Norris fort in memory of that gallant John Lord Norris, under whom he
first exercised arms. Docwray likewise, being assaulted by Ter-oen with
treachery, perjurie, and cunning deceit, and wounded; yet gets out of all
dangers, and takes Dunalong, a lesser Castle. On the other side the Deputy in
winter, forces several Rebels to Obedience; passes victoriously (in compass,)
so far as Ulster in his first years Regency.

George Carew no less fortunate in Munster; The Southern parts, George Carews
service
burdened by the Tit^lar Earl Desmond (of Ter-Oens making) he surprises; but
was again rescued; Takes seven Castles; drives him out of that province;
reduces many Rebels to obedience, quiets the County, and comes home at
Christmas; And this was done there.

In England they consult for peace with Spain; being invited by the Archduke
Albert, Spanish designs.
lately returned to Bruxell with his Bride the Infanta. And inclusive, he knew
the better how to condition with the Dutch, to save charges of his war there,
convey home safe his Indies Fleets, and so at last grow infinite rich.

By which, the English would neglect their navylodg in peace; lazy and wealthy;
discontinue war, the easier hereafter to be soon invaded.

The Queen old, Treat with English commissioners at Bulloine.
and weary of war, very willing to make peace within her self, and outward,
with all the world, leaves the motion to the Fr^nch Kings managing, for time
and place of meeting; He appoints May, the time; and Boulen the place.

For the Queen, came Henry Nevil her Lieger there, her new Secretary Herbert;
Beal, Secretary in the North; and Edmonds her French Secretary.

For Spain, came Don Balthazar domine de Zuniga Fonseca (the prolixity of whose
Name, strecht out like a Cable (says little Nevil) is longer than I am) his
Lieger in the low Countries; Ferdinando Corel a Counciller of Castile. And for
Albert, came Ricardot, and Verskenie. And must not these men quarrel for
Precedencie, as before Anno 1598. at Vervin ^ They did so now; and did nothing
else, but quarrel the peace. By which means, they were the better known,
Dispute precedencie and titles.
for the arrand of the English; which, was first, to stand upon punctilios of
place; but not, altogether, before profit: or else, by ca^ting lotts. Then, not
to be cousened into any kindness for the Low Countries traffic, Nor in the
trade to the Indies; but to be free, as in 1591. general freedom to all places
of Charles the fifth. But then, if Spain has the place, let him lose the
advantage, and propound first; He inviting the Treaty.

Copies of their Delegation being given to each other, they now differ about
Title; Most Illustrious, she gave to the ArchDuke, but he clames, to be Most
Puissant, as descended from sacred Emperors, and he son in Law, and Brother to
the King of Spain.

The English Answer; Kings, have no more difference from an Archduke; And
Archduke Philip, father to Charles the fifth, had no more from Henry the
eighth. But then (say they) those times afforded no more unto Henry himself.

The English found fault with them. The very Form of the Delegat^on to be
wanting; and ob^curely Intermixing other Commissar^es; an^ made up, only, with
a Privy Signet; when theirs was, with the Broad Seal of England. Nor does their
King ratify what ere shall be concluded. They Answer to all. Par trattar y
hazar trattar, in Spanish, comprehends all formal subdelegation. That, in
Spain, no such distinction of seals, Private and Broad. This, being yo, el Rey,
the Kings own hand in presence of his Secretary; with the public seal, And by,
Estar y passar, y ^stare y passare, all warrants filled.

Then they meet, Priority disputed.
(as yet but by papers) the English demand priority, as if Le premier demandeur
estoit le vancuer. A Challenge (say they) never presumed upon before, nor
equality yielded. Little Edmonds was angry, who had prepared Richardot with the
Queens Priority; That the presence of an Ambassador Nevil, was to be preferred
before a Delegate Title.

They reply, for England to be but equal, submits Spain as inferior to
France, England always yielding to France. And such a do it came unto, that
Edmonds comes over, and ^ath Item not to stand upon Place so he should get the
Profit in particular demands; hard enough to be allowed.

In the mean time the Spaniard complains; that succor and subsidy was sent to
the States; and ships, ready for the Indies. They were answered, it was in
balance with their assistance to the Rebels in Ireland. And so far they were
from Submission to Priority, or to admit equality, as to break off the Treaty.

And so at leisure let us discuss Priority for England. Among the Temporal
powers The first place was to France, the second to England, the last to
Castile; and the Book of Ceremonies at Rome says so, as a Canon, at three
general Councils, Pisa, Constance, and Basil, And defended for England
it was in Example. The title Castil^, which the Spaniard most boasts of, is
but a late Monarchy to England; having neither Earls nor Kings before the year
1017. and those Kings not Anointed. That England is the third; Entitled Most
illustrious, and Spain the fourth. Pope Julius the second gave it to Henry the
seventh before Ferdinand of Castile. The Queens ancient years and Reign (an
argument they urged at Bazil against Henry the sixth) and all this original,
exceeds man's memory.

Whilst these treat for peace, The Dutch soring high, imped with English
feathers bethink how to fall upon the Spaniard. Battle of Newport in Flanders.
It was, when their Enemy Archduke Albert was weak in forces, and those in
Mutiny. Hasty intelligence did this good service to Prince Maurice, who finding
them in this disorder, resolved to fall upon him in Flanders; And because the
English had the brunt of the Battle, and Sir Francis Vere the honor of that
day, we may take boldness to add it in memory, with matters of our own
History. Our fate with those people, evermore to be left out of the fame,
though we fought for their freedom; and is called the Battle of Newport.

The Princes Army lands at Philipine, upon the River Scheld, 12000. foot, and
3000. horse in 3. Tercias; Commanded by Count Ernest of Nassaw, Prince Ma^rice
his forces.
Count Solms, and Sir Francis Vere, taking their daily turns by change, of
Avant-guard, Battle, and Rere.

The Van of Horse consisted of ten Cornets and led by Count Lewis (Brother to
Ernest) being Lieutenant General. And to them were adjoined Prince Maurices
guard, and the Regiments of Sir Francis Vere and Sir Horace Vere, accounted
1600. English. As also the Frizons being seventeen Companies. In all, of the
Avaunt forty foot Companies, which Sir Francis Vere commanded.

The Battle was Numbered seven Cornets of Horse; To whom were joined nine foot
Companies of Walloons, and four Swisse for the first division. With two other
divisions of French; the first of three Companies, the second of twelve. In the
midst was Prince Maurice himself, with his Brother Prince Henry, and diverse
Noblemen, strangers, and volunteers; so that the Battle had seven Troops, and
25. Comapnies.

The Rere consisted of three Cornets and thirteen colors, in the first
division. And in the second eight Companies. And in the third three Troops and
twenty six Comapnies.

The Archdukes army had 25. hundred horse, and 15000. foot, Anno 1601.
divided also as the other, into three Brigades.

Before the Armies should meet the Dutch conclude the siege of Newport; (the
States taking leave and go to Ostend,) The Archdukes forces.
and got to the Downs by the Seaside and so to Newport; where in three days
they had taken Fort Albert; encamped and quartered, raising a stone bridge over
the Haven, for the Carriages to pass.

The Archduke hastens his Marches, and came near the Fort Albert with some
horse and foot, which the Prince supposes but a Bravado, and meant to retire.

Sir Francis Vere was of opinion that it was the gross body; and therefore
advised to meet them, before their forts should fall into their hands; And
whilst these disputes; The Spaniards Cannon was come, and the Fort yielded to
him; and as in a trice, had seized the Bridges and was entered on the Downs.
But by the way, met with some forces sent by the Prince, to hinder his free
passage, who were encountered, fought bravely, though against a puissant army,
till they were too weak and fled, the fate falling upon the Scottish forces
about 800. eleven Captains, besides other Officers. The hasty News gave heart
to the Archduke, to write to Burges that he had vanquished the Princes Van,
and engaged his whole Army, which made them Triumph, and the States at Ostend
to tremble.

The Archduke thus encouraged, Marches in have to Newport; The Prince,
presuming that the late defeat must needs frighten his Army, forthwith sends
away their shiping to Ostend and fords over the Haven, and lodges between the
Spanish and the Sea, so to fight, or dye. The rest of the Army of foot, passed
over the next day at Ebb, being the turn of Sir Francis Vere to have the Van,
where he found the Archduke with all his Army in Battalia, who apprehending,
that these forces were the whole Army, come over, otherwise it had been easy
for him to have prevented the Princes fording the rest. And besides, the dust
of the sand-hills drove upon the Spanish, that blinded their sight, who were
forced to halt, until all were got over.

Vere with the Troops of the Van, leaving the foot, ranged into Order, behind
the sand-hills, hastens not to engage with the Enemy, as yet, but only to chose
the place, to attend for them, being all the advantage was left. And so got to
a hollow bottom between the Hills and Downs, which they might make use of, and
stop the Spaniards way, by the Seashore, also. And so draws out 1000. men,
whereof 300. English, and 50. of the Princes guard were lodged on the top of an
Hill, steepy and sandy, and so hollow, that they were covered from the other
Hills, and might shoot as from a Bulwark. And the like order upon two other
Hills with 700. men more, the rest of the English; so that this avant-guard
took up the third part of the downs.

The Prince comes to Vere, and consult, whether to advance upon the Enemy, or
to stay his coming: Most voices (as in honor to advance) conceived it would
rather daunt them, and prevent their fortifying upon their Princes passages to
Ostend, and so stop their victuals, and cut off any retreat thither.

Vere was of the contrary opinion. That the Archduke gathered his Army in
have, and brought thither, where they intended not to make a seat of war,
unprovided and without any Magazine of victuals, and so no fear to starve the
Prince who had the sea open. And according to his Counsel here they stayed.

The Prince returns, places his horse next the sea, six pieces of Cannon
advanced and planted in the head of the Avantguard with advantage of wind and
sun, some ships of war waved so near as to gall the Spanish Battalions upon
the sand.

The Archduke had been hurried out, and tired, his men with a nights March and
all that day; and his adversaries moving he rested a holt, for some time, and
staying till half flood, that the Dutch might have less land for their horse,
He marches, and before him some light Horsemen to discover; One of them
suffering himself to be taken, and tells Vere (what he knew) that some Dutch
forces had been routed, brags of their Number, valor, and resolution speedily
to give battle.

And so they did; their Horsemen come in the head of their Divisions, a
competent distance, who marching nearer, Vere discharges his Cannon, scatters
their Troops in disorder, and fly. The Spanish foot come on and discharge their
Ordnance roundlyand did much hurt, which drew them on into the Downs, where
Veres horse stood, and a fit place upon a Hill for two demi Cannons to be
planted, and himself on the Top of another which commanded all; fromw hence he
gave his Orders.

Thither comes the Spaniards with 500. pikes, without Ensign or order, labor
to enter upon Veres Hill, who was forced to succor himself with more shot, and
gawled them.

Their horse likewise, Marching between the Hills, were sore put to it by the
two Demi Cannons, gawling them upon the first profer of a charge; with the
advantage also of the Princes horse encountering, put them to a disorderly
retreat.

The Battle begins, Battle.
the Ordnance on all sides, increasing the Fight, with diverse charges; Vere
beats two Regiments of Spaniards to a ^etreat, which incenseth the rest to
advance their Battle and Rear, so does the Prince the like, and at the first
Charge came to handy blows, the French against the Spaniards and Ital^ans; and
not long after a second Charge also, and retired.

The Prince sees this, and once more commands Solms with the French to fall on,
assisted with the Walloons Regiments called the new Geux, and fought bravely
against Burlette and Bucquoy, the Enemies Rere.

The Princes Rere come in with five Regiments, and a lasting fight of three
hours was doubtfully performed: the Arch Dukes side declining, had their Horse
driven almost to Newport; but then, their Foot did the like, against the Orange
party on the Downs, to the hazard of their Ordnance.

This while, Vere, with the Van, and his shadowing Hills, had advantage
thereby, to gall his Adversaries, who retire to their Gross, from whence
disbands five hundred Spaniards more, and fall upon the Assailants, forcing
them back to Vere, who not used to give ground, beats the Spaniard home again;
whilst their Battle of Foot are come up to the Gross of their Van, under good
covert, and by fresh men force Vere's men from his Grounds of Advantage, which
he sometime lost and won again, with loss of men, his Design being to beat upon
his Adversaries gross body, and to engage them till the Orange other Troops
might advance, which did and retreat, and were pursued; by which occasion the
Arch Dukes Horse were got out of the Foot-mens reach; an oversight in fight;
for in Battle the success of Foot depend most on the Horse.

But the fight increased on all sides, the English on Vere's side pell mell
with the Spaniard, and seeing their Gross disband by degrees, sends to the
Prince to second him, with some Horse; lest his Enemy grow too strong upon him,
and so increased, that he was forced to descend and encourage them in the
Downs; who were driven from their good Ground to Disadvantages. And at his very
Approach had two Bullets through his Leg and Thigh, which he dissembled from
his Surgeon, knowing, that his presence must encourage his Troops near foiling;
for in all this time, the Prince sends no Relief, being put hard to it in the
Battle. Vere gave Ground, and retires to his Canon, when his own Horse being
shot, fell dead upon him; and his hurts affording him no help of assistance
being alone, there he lay, till by good hap Sir Robert Drewry and Sir John Ogle
drew him from under his Horse; and being set up behind one, he escaped the
Enemy at his heels, his hurts bleeding much at four holes, he was forced to
fall off for that present.

His Brother Sir Horace, he found at the two Canons, having gathered some three
hundred retreat Foot, and there staid the Enemy, who came up to the very
handing the Ordnance, Anno 1600.
which fired on them, with a Train also of some Barrels hid in the sand, and
made wondrous Execution.

And not till now comes Succor, two Cornets of English from the Prince, which
encourages Sir Horace, and bold necessity to boot, beat the Spaniard back
again; by the way, some others fell on also, and followed them to Execution.

The Arch Dukes Phalanges and Battalions startle, and rowse up, rather for
defense, than revenge: and now Orange finds his Friends have fresh courage, by
the tottering effects of fight, caused his whole Battle to advance; both meet,
and join pell mell, Horse to Horse, Foot to Foot, till the fate of fight forced
the Arch Duke to turn faces and fly, and were followed to Execution as far as
the Morish Dam.

The English having the Chase, took Don Jasper Sampen, Don de Villars Maestro
del Campo, and the Arch Duke escaped hardly, for his Horse-bit was held by a
Soldier, and he spurred on and got off; losing in this Battle the most of his
chief Officers: the Prisoners were Don Francisco de Mendoza Lieutenant General,
(...) Count of Solms on his side, Don Lewis de Aville, Don Piedro de Mendoza,
Doctor Anarea the Arch Dukes Physician, Don Iaspar Marogan, and five and thirty
Horse and Foot Captains, three hundred and ten more men of note, eight Pieces
of Cannon, most of the Ammunition, Baggage, and Furniture, the Arch Dukes own
Tent, Cabinet, Plate, Seals of Arms, one hundred and six Colors, five thousand
slain on the place, besides hundreds of others out-lying, in fight; the loss
fell most upon the Spaniards and Italians, who fought bravely, and bore all
their brunt, taking too much heart upon their morning success.

On the Orange part were slain two thousand and five hundred, most English, who
were put to it against the Spaniards and Italians, in several brave Charges,
and so lost six English Captains, Yorkley, Hu^^iwood, Tyrrill, Duxborow,
Priton, Woodward, and most of the Officers slain or hurt. The Spaniards
complained of their own Horse which j^ded and should have succored their Foot
that fought bravely, and commended the Dutch's order in marshalling their men
into several light Divisions, when as the Adversaries great P^alanges and
Stand of Pikes were unwieldy heavy to charge.

The Danes dispute the English Fishing upon their Coasts Norway and Island,
1601. The Danes deny the English to fi^h.
and seize the English and Goods there, who indeed, made no claim of Right, but
only, Leave and Custom from Norways Kings, before their conjunction with
Denmak; and confess, that by the League with King John heretofore, they were to
ask it from seven to seven years, which had been neglected with King Christian;
for in 1585. they had Liberty without further License; and concluded (which I
wonder at) Mare liberum. Anno 1601.
This occasion acquainted the English Delegates (that were sent thither to
treat) with the mystery and benefit of Trading, and for the Londoners to be
instituted into an Eaest-India Company with great Privileges.

King James nearly concerned to congratulate the happy prevention of Essex his
Rebellion, The King congratulates the defeat of Essex's Treason.
sends to England the Earl Mar Ambassador, with the Abbot of Kinloss, to
congratulate the Queens happy success, against such treasonable Attempts; which
she takes well, (coming so seasonably, to satisfy ill Rumors, That Essex was
made away for affection to the King of Scots Title, and that the Ambassadors
Commission had been to plead for his part.) And withal to expostulate her
remisness, for not due punishing Valentine Tomas a base Calumniator of their
King: and that Ewer and Ashfield should be shadowed here, two Fugitives from
Scotland; But Ashfield might be ^eleased; And in conclusion, (their chiefest
Errand) for Assignment of some Lands in England, as a Rentcharge, for
defraying the affairs in Scotland, then too burdensome for the King.

She thanked the King, The Queens Answer.
and wished that all Rebellions against him, might the Eve of that Day find
the same End and like Success of all Traitors to Him, as Essex was to Her.

That Tomas was spared in prudence to their Masters honor, lest by rubbing old
sores with often Trials and Executions, (too frequent Examples) might rather
increase slanderous Tongues, whose impudence in accusing, even without any
possibility of truth, or show of proof, yet through too common rumor thereof,
may beget (and that, in time) belief.

Ewer indeed was an ill man for denying peremptory things of evident truths,
which yet his protestations wrought upon easy spirits with credulity.

As for Ashfield, he had cousened the President of the English Borders of
Scotland, with a Trick to go thither, and played the Knave to get home again.

She always found with long experience, that to countenance evil manners in her
neighbor subjects, was, to teach her own, to do worse to her self, and made a
distinction of that, with national protection, which in some cases must be
maintained.

And that for Lands she would add to the former Advance two thousand pounds a
year, for maintaining inviolable unity and agreement with her, with caution to
him, not to entrust such, as seek their own private gain, with the public loss.

Thus much in public, besides their private contrivance with the principal
Nobility and Council, to work them the Kings Friends; who assured him peaceable
reception into England after Queen Elizabeth.

The Pope Clement the Eighth had that fear, and therefore by his Breves
prohibits all such Professors of the Roman faith not to admit any, how near
soever in blood, Pope Clement his Bulls against Scotland.
unless upon Oath he promote the Catholic Doctrine; and the like is brought
over to Scotland by Hamilton and Hayes, two Jesuits, men of fiery spirits and
working brains, chief Instruments of Sedition at the holy League in Paris;
these men are proclaimed Traitors, but lurk in the North for a long time.

A general Assembly is there resolved at Brunt-Island for repressing Papists,
An Assembly.
and very conscientious, begin to rectify themselves; careless Ministry,
hasty admission of mean men, pleasing the people, and ruineth the Church; and
therefore they ordain Days of Humiliation and Prayer.

But Mr. John Davidson was of opinion, Davidson's Letter to them.
they did ill, not to blanch the King and Court, and therefore writes to them.

HOw long shall we fear or favor flesh, and follow the counsel and command
thereof? Shall our Meetings be in the name of Man? ( The King called them,
etc.) Is it time for us now, our Brethren thrust out without just order;
Papists, Jesuits, Atheists countenanced and advanced to the best Room in the
Realm, bringing Idolalatry and Babylonish Captivity? Shall we be inveigled with
pretenses, petty Preferment to Parliament Votes, and Titles of Prelacy? etc.

Then scoffing at the King, But Boniton (says he) that Thief is executed,
What Is that to Religion? Is there none offends but Boniton? But the King is
sound, if so, the danger the less, but there is nothing sound in Kirk or King.

Melius and obtabilius est bell^m pace impia, and a Deo distrahente.

Do what the King could, such Libells were licensed, for which he was committed.

Their Church thus settled, He desires a new Translation of the Bible.
the King urges for a new Translation of the Bible, being miserably lamely
done, disputing with them the Errors therein, as also their Prose, and Singing
Psalms, wherein he showed the faults of Meeter and Matter, with admiration to
all that heard him so ready to reason with them, their discrepance from the
Text, by proofs of other Languages, which though he could not obtain from them
therein, yet he had it accomplished, where he found obedience to his commands
afterward in England, Anno 1603.

The King caresses all his Friends, 1601. The Duke of Lenox Ambassador into
France.
and sends Lodowick Duke of Lenox Ambassador into France, with some persons of
Honor, and two Counselors of State to caress the King; he arrives at Diep,
and enters Paris with a train of Scots, that met him from all parts, a custom
they ever had, to set out themselves the best side outward, especially from
home, where they are least known, but by their own declarations.

And not long after Audience, at St. Iermans, (the Queen in childe-bed) and
then took leisure to visit his Mother Madam d' Aubigney, whilst the King
poasted to Callis, upon false intelligence that Queen Elizabeth was desperate
ill, or that the affairs of Flanders, invited him, Ostend then besieged. No
doubt, his mouth watered to have found such another faction, as might foist in
another Bastard of Normandy; in gallantry he would say so. Upon his return the
Duke takes leave, and lands in England.

We may guess what he had done, From thence comes into England,
assured the Kings affection to the French, and as of ancient amity, so craves
continuance and support toward his new Inheritance, in case of necessity, when
his time should come to the Crown of England.

And here he finds the Queen ill disposed, and the Parliament set, suspected
of all, to have made his Masters clame to the Right of Succession, and many one
ready to offer assistance, but he declared to them, the Kings dislike to breed
jealousies by such unkindness; his Commission being no other, than to salute
her, with the Kings filial affection to her Majesty; and because he found the
Irish malady oppressed her most, he proffered his Masters aid, and returns home.
to serve her there, which she took well, and he took leave.

The Mighty States (ou^ of sunken Netherlands) will have no delay, The siege of
Ostend.
but to subdue Flanders; and to amuze the Arch Duke, Maurice Prince of Orange
is sent into Gelderland, to besiege Reinbergh, and had assistance fron England
of four thousand men; but the Arch Duke was more forward, and fell upon Ostend;
to whose Relief are sent twenty Companies, and Sir Francis Vere their General,
both without and within.

Ostend from a poor Fisher-town, had repulsed the Duke of Parma, Maltee; and
now this Arch Duke with all his seventeen Forts erected round about it.

For Sir Francis Vere in the fifth month of the Siege, treats about the
Surrender, delaying the Delegates, till Auxiliaries were raised, and then sent
them away, with a fig for them.

The Arch Duke was angry, batters Ostend with eighteen Cannon, drives on two
thousand Foot to set upon the old Town, the Horse put them on, and take two
Fortresses and the English Trenches; nine Ordnance out of the West Gate with
Chain-shot miserably rent the Assailants, with mighty loss in other places.

Sir Francis Vere quits his six months Government (as it was ordained) to
Frederick Dork a Dutchman, who with others succeeding him, defended it three
years and four mouths, against Spains fury, and the raging sea, the more
troublesome Enemy, and in that time were entombed in honor, many brave English
and others the most warlike Soldiers of all Nations in Christendom, contending
for a barren piece of sand.

The French King fearing such an evil Neighbor, Marshal Byron sent to the
Queen,
provides for his own Coast, and comes to Callis, whom Queen Elizabeth
congratulates by her Secretary Edmonds, and he returns the Visit to her by
Marshal Byron, Monsieur Arvern, and Sir Aumons, and besides they had in charge,
to wish her happiness in the timely suppression of the late Rising and sudden
Execution of Essex and his Accomplices.

She said, His faults deserved that punishment, of which she gave him timely
warning, foreseeing his ambition, edged on by others, to commit Treason; for
which yet, had he begged it, she might have given him pardon.

Byron not long after, felt the like destiny for his Plots against the French
King, though his merits to his Master were far exceeding any pretenses of
Essex; yet all of them and his thirty wounds in the Kings service could not
prevail, executed after.
though he begged it, with too much desire of longer life. And indeed, they
were both equally matches, in most things parallel, either in vice or virtue.

Money was scarce in England, Iris^ money abased, 160000. per annum.
being transported yearly into Ireland, one hundred and sixty thousand pounds
sterling, and under that color the Merchants had a common way, to convey
elsewhere much more; and once got to the Rebels, it was good barter for all
commodities with any foreign Nation, and (by stealth) with English; the Coin for
Ireland was therefore abased, with some Brass, which would bring over the
sterling money back again into England.

The Arguments against this could not prevail with Treasurer Burkhurst, besides
the Law of that time, Necessity. It Is true, the Soldier lost in his pay, which
they felt, but understood not, and the Queen was not so nice of her public
repute, but to veil to the benefit, which lasted not long; and the
money-masters not then so well experienced to manage the advantage; the Spanish
policy therein grown cunning might have taught us what they practice for gain.

With fresh pay, the Deputy goes on, removes Ter Oen from Black-water, Derry
Castle, Donegal Monastery.

The tittular Earl of Desmond and Mac Carty are surprised, arreigned and
condemned of Treason, and sent into England, by whom and others is discovered
the intention of landing Forces from Spain at Cork, which was therefore
fortified, and fresh manned with help of two thousand new Soldiers out of
England.

The Spaniards lands in September at the mouth of Kingsale Haven, and the
Governor there, Percie, retires (...), and the other let in with thirty five
Ensigns, (...) welcomed by the Inhabitants. The President Carew bestirrs him;
drives the County about; Spanish land in Ireland,
lodges some forces in places of advantage, ready with his Army, to expect don
John D' Aquila with his title of Master General and Captain of the Catholic
King, in defending the war of God, and maintenance of Religion in Ireland, and
to deliver them from the jaws of the Devil.

Carew forthwith drives them out of the Castle, by the Haven, when 150. more
got in, and the Haven blockt up by Levison, the English Vice Admiral; This news
brings Ter-Oen with all the chief Rebels, to join with some Spanish got out of
the Town, and all together make up an Army of 6000. foot, and 500. horse,
assured of victory. And the English, wearied with winter sieges, spent with
poverty and hunger, yet ply the siege, are defeated,
not suffering the Enemy without to recruit the Town, or Spaniards to re-enter,
but they adventure, and are repulsed, and retreat, but are hotly pursued by the
Deputy, (whilst Carew keeps the Spaniards from breaking out of the Town) and
forced to make a stand and fight, 24. December,
with great loss, and then to fly. Don Alphonso O'campo taken pr^soner, with
three of his Captains, and fix Alpherez, (Ensigns) Nine Colors, whereof six
Spaniards, and 1200. slain; with very little loss to the English; And within
six days after, Don John designs a parley, And to yield up to the Deputy what
they possessed, and to depart with life and goods, and depart home.
but brave Don to be the last Man left behind.

Their departure so sudden, troubled the Irish, who are worsted every where,
many of the chief Surprised and taken.

And now the old English Adage, Ecclesiastic Papists at difference,
When knaves fall out, truth comes to light. The Ecclesiastic Papists in
England go by the Ears; The Jesuit against Secular Priests: No blows but
Books, and pens for Pot-guns, the general thus.

One Blackwel sometime fellow of Trinity in Oxon was made Archpriest for the
Seculars, and he too much a friend to Garnet their Jesuits general, they
decline him with scorn.

Hereupon they are degraded, Seculars set out the Jesuits in their Colors.
and appeal to Rome, and therefore are Booked for Schismatics and Heretics,
but they got the censure of the University at Paris to approve the same, and
meaning to prevail in the Queens favor,

They show, that in her first eleven years reign not one suffered for his
Conscience; Nor for ten years after that Pius Quintus Bull against the Queen,
there were executed but twelve Priests; most of them convicted Traitors; And
that then about the year 1580. crept in the Jesuit, whose mischievous
practices against the State had disturbed all, and accasioned the severe Laws
against Catholics. And yet they say, in ten years following, but fifty Priests
were executed, Anno. 1602
the Queens mercy b^^ishing fifty five more, justly deserving death.

From that time (say they) Parsons in Spain an English Iesui^e entertains all
Vagabond English into their seminaries there, and from thence came hither
turbulent Priests. That he incites the Spaniard now to invade Ireland again,
and consirms the Infanta's Title to this Crown, which all the seminary Students
maintained by oath.

That Holt the Jesuit suborned Hesket to rebellion, Cullin, York, and
Williams, to kill the Queen, Walpole and Squire to impoyson her.

They set out Parsons for a Bastard, a seditious Sicophant; and condemn the
Jesuit libels to be full of falsities, and traiterous to God and Her; And
conclude, with advise to the English, not to hazard their Children into their
seminaries, where, with the Elements of Learning, they infuse Tenants,
poisonous Treasons.

The Jesuits thus set out, they retort on the other; Both are banished England.
and it was best wisdom for the State, to banish them both, and but time; for,
Winter and Tesmond a Jesuit, were sent for into Spain, to consult the
destruction of the Queen, and by other plots, to exclude King James Inheritor.

The like Conspiracy in the Low Country against the Archduke, and in France
against the King, (and so against most Princes; The Planets then in
Conjunction, Malevolent to great men, and foretold by most Astrologers.) In
which he escaped hapily, Byrones Treason, who was beheaded and accuses
Bouillon, confederate, who fled into Germany, and was complained of to Queen
Elizabeth, whose Counsel he craves in these his difficulties, dangerous to his
safety, and the hazard of the Monarchy, somewhat drooping, which in police she
endeavored to support, and did, with Counsel and Arms, in much affection also
to him and reformed Religion, which faith she defended always, in every place.

And now the Town and signiory of Geneve is assaulted by the Duke of Savoy,
Geneve besieged, the peoples contribution of ^ony.
much pittyed by their Pupils here in Scotland and England, having their
Nourishment from that seminary (then) of seditious reformers, who by their
preaching to the people, procured great sums of money to be gathered by the
bevolence of most Churches in this Island. The Common People well minded were
often cacht, in that time and opportunity of Devotion, liberally to contribute;
especially, if it please the Preacher to set it forth, with Rhetorical
San^tion; as the Presbyters use to do, for the dear Brethren of Geneve,
Germany, and Scotland, etc. One for another, as they for us, when in truth
these other were (the most of them) rank Revolters, and it was then, a great
suspicion that much of moneys, drapt short of their receiving; we return to
Scotland.

The King minding to take leave of his Native-Countrey in peace, The Isle Lewis
reduced to the Kings Commands.
and so to settle the continuance after his remove to his second inheritance,
now at length very near, He resolved to reduce the High-land Inhabitants of the
Northern Isles into the Main; to civilize them, and to plant Low-land men in
their habitations.

Some forward Gentlemen, The undertakers.
were undertakers, Guided by the affection and Prayers of the Abbot of Lenders,
who went with them. The Gallants were Colonel William Stuart, Captain William
Murray, Lermouth of Balcolmy, James Spence of Wormston, Sir James Amstrader,
and James Forret of Fingasker. These well furnished, fell first upon the Isle
Lewis, and within four days voyage landed there.

It was Commanded (for Government these had none) by Mordoch Macklond, base son
to old Macklond, tirannously lording over the poor people. Being surprised, he
made bad resistance; his base usage of the Natives, made him more fearful of
their revenge than of an Enemies Conquest, and therefore hnmbling himself to
Conditions; even in the Treaty, his heart distrusting quarter, Macklond flies
to Sea and takes Balcolmy.
who never gave any, he stole away, and fled to Sea, leaving the Inhabitants
soon to Obedience.

The Lord of Balcolmy returning back with this good news to the King; and not
many Leagues lanched from Land, but Macklond with a Number of Birlings (little
vessels) boarded Balcolmy, killed all his men, and kept him alive, for advance
of a Ransom, which was procured out of the Kings Cofers, and he conveyed into
Orkney, where he died.

The other Conquerors interessed in this injury, conjure Neill Macklond
brother to Mordoch to betray him, for a piece of money and hopes of preferment;
He did so, by Ambuscado surprises him and twelve Men more. Mordock Executed.
Murders these in could blood; but to keep his word, delivers Mordoch to the
undertakers, who sent him to Saint Andrews, where he was executed.

The New Planters, began to settle, and share out Lands to themselves, and
tenure it out to the poor Natives, drudges, and sworn Subjects; whilst in this
seeming security, Norman Macklond, Natural son to old Macklond, with a Regiment
of Rogues, The new Planters beaten out of all.
raised from all the Neighbor Isles, fell upon them unawares, and forced them
to these Conditions.

To procure Him and His remission of all offenses and pardon.

To resign to him all their right, to the Isle Lewis.

That Sir James Spence and his son in Law, should be Pledges to him, til these
were performed, by Patent from the King.

The case thus altered, Sir James Armstroder with his company came home (many
being killed) obtained them remission, and security of the Isle, and sent to
Norman, by James Lermouth; the Pledges released, and this Enterprise defeated;
but was again attempted three years after, 1605. in this manner.

The first Undertakers weary of their Design by excessive expense made over
their Right to Lumsdale of Ardie and Hay, and again attempted, but to no
purpose.
who with the treachery of Mackey Mackerzy, and Donold Gorum, forced the
Indabitants out of the Isle; and having done this work, sends to the South-land
for Artizans and Laborers, and beginning to build and plant, but wanting means
to pay, the Workmen went away; the Natives abroad associate with a number of
Islanders, invade the Planters with often Incursions, and so wearied them out
of all, for a piece of money to boot to Mackerzy.

There being no remedy left for Robert Bruce, Bruce the Minister his (...).
exiled into France, yet upon intercession of some friends, and submission to
the King, he had leave to return; and so appearing before the King and
Commissioners of the Church, acknowledged his Error, concerning Gowries guilt,
(as you have heard) and further to recant it in his next Sermon; which
Protestation he subscribes, witnessed by eleven Commissioners, and so had leave
to preach, but did not, pretending, That his ministry would be discredited if
he should preach by injunction; and was therefore discharged his Ministry by
the General Assembly, who enacted, That in memory of his Majesty's Deliverance
from Gowries Attempt, Sermons, Prayer and Thanksgiving should be solemnied in
all the Burghs every Tuesday the fifth of August for ever, as the Parliament
had prescribed in all Churches of the Kingdom.

The Jesuits (as in England so in Scotland) having no hopes of Toleration,
Mowbrays intent to kill the King,
but much urged in both Kingdoms, and that their pitiful Pamphlets, for the
petence of the Infanta's title to England, not prevailing with the people, nor
their Treaty of Marriage of the Lady Arabella, with the Prince of Savoy, nor
with her and the Earl of Hertfords Grandchild; they went the old way to work,
by Murder; and Francis Mowbray son to the Lord of Barru^ho^g all, by the
Infanta'^ Court at Bruxels, undertook to kill the King; and in his journey home
through England was discovered at London; and accused by one Daniel an Italian,
which the other denied, and were both sent secure to Scotland; and there by
more severe Examinations, Mowbray was committed to Edinburgh castle, where,
forcing the Grate Irons of his Window, intended to let himself down by his
Bed-sheets, which proving too short, He breaks his own neck.
he fell from the precipice, and dashed out his brains upon the Rocks; his body
was ordered into quarters, as the manner of Traitors, though his kindred (well
born) pretended that he was strangled in Prison, Anno 1601.
and his body flung out of the Window, to amuze the world with his own death
and guilt.

Queen Elizabeth's increasing toward her decreasing, The French Ambasladours in
England.
she was now left of all without recovery, which occasioned the French King to
send his Ambassador into Scotland, and another into England, under pretense of
impeaching the policies of Spain, but rather to observe the motions and
disposition of either people, in reference to the Queens death, accompanied
with Letters to certain Lords of either Nation.

To Secretary Cecil with extreme affection, Delivers Letters to Cecil and
discourses with him.
it being high time to caress such men of interest in State, when in a visit,
the Ambassador to sound him, fell into heart-burning for the miserable
calamity that would befall the poor Nation, in the death of the Queen, and in
particular Cecil's exchange, of a gracious Mistress for a stranger, King of
Scotland, if he should succeed; a Prince no doubt subtle (said he) enough, as
yet, to seem fair, until the future occasion give him power and means to
revenge his Mothers death, as upon others, so in particulars on you, for your
fathers fault then, and your counsels since.

The Secretary suspecting his drist, Cecils answer.
answered, That it was the usual reward of unspotted duty, when Ministers of
State chiefly respect the service of their Sovereign, without regard to their
own safety: himself ready to suffer with comfort for so just a cause, the
credit thereof being the best security to an even conscience; esteeming that
Mary's Martyrdom the highest honor; but he supposed, that matters past would
not be challenged to memory; if it should be so, and his own case desperate, he
might be minded to flee into another City, and take the benefit of his
Majesty's royal offer.

The Ambassador made fair retreat, and said, That in case the King of Scots
should carry himself with respect which was due to a King of France, his Master
was not purposed to impeach his interest.

Cecil replied, The King was wise, and showed it in that resolution.

The Secretary sets down this passage to King James, taking occasion thereby to
assure him his faithful service, Though he does not as others had done,
needlessly hazard his fortune, before fit time.

The King returns him this Answer.

As I do heartily thank you (says he) for your plain and honest offer, so may
you assure your self, that it would do me no pleasure, for you to hazard
Fortune or Reputation, since the loss of either would make you less valuable to
me; No, I love not to feed on such fantastical humors, though I cannot hinder
busybodies, their own idle imaginations; but I hold it the Office of a King,
as sitting on the Throne of God, Anno 1602.
to imitate the Primum Mobile, and by his steady and ^ver constant course to
govern all other changeable and uncertain motions of the inferior Planets. And
I protest in Gods presence, that for your constant and honest carriage in your
Sovereigns service, I loved your virtues, long before I could be certain that
you would deserve at my hands the love of your person. Wherefore go on and
serve her truly that reigns, as you have done; for he that is false to the
present, will never be true to the future.

To give your judgment of the Kings wisdom and piety, see the difference in his
answer to the Earl of Northumberland, who certified him of the Queens weakness,
and advised him to make sure of his Title, by apprehending the necessity of
hasty possession whilst time was offered.

To him he professes, The Kings answer to the Earl of Northumberland.
That man can neither be religious nor just, that deals not by his Neighbor as
himself would be dealt withal, and in a Person of quality it can be no wisdom,
to ^eap Hedge and Ditch, and adventure his neck, for gathering forbidden fruit
before it be ripe, when as by waiting the seasonable time, he may be sure to
find the Gates of the Orchard open, and with freedom, to enter, take, and taste
at liberty.

Sure it were a weakness and unworthiness in me to come in as an Usurper, with
offense and scandal to the Laws, and present Estate of Government, when I may
in the right time clame the Crown as nearest Heir to the Prince deceased, and
possess it with equity. Should I, out of untimely ambition break the long
continued and faithfully preserved Amity, that by the proof of many mutual
kind offices has taken root amongst us, were an error inexcusable. And though
I do acknowledge your kind^ affection in the offers you make of assistance; I
must tell you freely, That no Prince can presume of any Subjects loyalty to
himself, that has been unfaithful and unsound to his own Sovereign; nor could
I ever look to be secure in a Kingdom so traitorously disposed.

And advises the Earl, To forbear such Letters, and when he did write, (which
he wished but rarely, and not but in great occasion) to beware of any thing
justly to offend the Queen; lest by interception or other misadventure, he
might be disabled to serve him hereafter.

The Spaniards driven out of Ireland, Spaniards drove out of Ireland.
Ter Oen retires to his Fastness in Ulster, the Deputy pursues him with a great
Army, burn, kill, and take all that come in their way of enmity, diverse of the
chief Rebels submit, whom the Deputy receives to favor and preferment,
somewhat (the common sense) before others, of that Nation, always loyal; It was
his wisdom so to do, to quiet the Kingdom, and quench the issue of Blood, by
forgeting rather injuries past, than for the present to reward the merits of
others, much deserving. And it took effect also in the person of Ter Oen, who
tired with treachery, his best defense, and weared with a world of miseries, in
this time of Rebellion, having leisure, Ter Oen submits to mercy.
whilst he lurked, to meditate and bring all together to the sadness of his
soul; he humbly offers his submission to the Queen, and prays for pardon, which
she in distemper of health authorized the Deputy to promise, and to receive his
subjection, which was done at Dublin, in that State of Vicegerency, the Deputy
sitting in his Throne, incircled with the most of his Militia.

Ter Oen, whose wicked life had brought him to misery, despicable to himself,
humbled him at the very threshold of the chamber, prostrates his knees, for
pardon of his many offenses of God and his Sovereign, to whose princely
clemency he flies, as to Anchor-hold, submits his life and fortune, having
heretofore found her goodness, as he has felt her power, now seeks for mercy
as an Example to everlasting memory of her present clemency; assuring, his
years not so many, nor his body so weak in power, nor courage so cold, but that
by valiant and loyal service, he may live to expiate his Rebellion.

Upon this score he was taken to favor and pleasure of the Queen: Charges of
the Irish War in the four last years and a half. 1198717. l. 9. s. 1. d.
now eight years after his first Rebellion brought to an happy issue, under the
Lord Mountjoy the Deputy; the long destraction whereof, added to the Queens
age, often distempers of the mind, which settled into a sickness of her
climaterick seventieth year; and with a fatal longing to remove from London to
Richmond, The Queens ominous remove to Richmond in January,
in a foul day, to talk of death, and divorce between Her and her Kingdoms, to
whom she wedded her self, she said, (When first she put on a remarkable Ring on
her finger) and never removed, till now, it was cut off.

And thus sadness increasing, past hope of recovery.
no wonder at what cause, for she had many; most men, the multitude, will have
one to be forsooth the want of Essex; such also were his admirers, and none
other of honesty or discretion. Indeed the French King to curry favor, had
sent her Letters of suspicion, That the Nobility neglected her too much,
affecting the King of Scots, that the dawning of her day should S^n-set, when
too timely they endeavored to adore the morning-rise. The Court custom.
And this was true, her Ladies weary of waiting, wish for a change, and all
together, long for a Successor, whom they advise to be sent for. The Queen not
so sick but to see this, and complained, That being yoaked she could trust to
none, and her Estate turned top-side turvey.

She was told also, the frequent poasting to Scotland, at which she did not
repine, having settled her affection on the Kings succession, though not
necessary for her heretofore to declare. In March she hastens with some
symptoms of deaths approach; very froward and pettish, evermore declining
Physic, and now only took Medicines for the souls health, communicated to her
by the Archbishop of Canterbury in Discourse and Prayer.

The Lord Admiral, Lord Keeper, and Secretary Cecil, Counselors come to her.
came from the Council, to know her pleasure for her Successor.

She said, My Throne is for a King, none other shall succeed me.

Ce^il asked her, What King?

She said, What other King than my Kinsman, the King of Scots?

She was frequent in Prayer, till her tongue was weakened into silence, hands
weary with heaving up, or eyes able to look out, then after some time, not
stirring, she leisurely turned her head, with rattling in the throat, Q.
Elizabeth dies on a Thursday, so did her Father and all his children.
and gave up the ghost to God Almighty on that day of her Birth, from whom she
had ^t, seventy years since, on a Thursday night this four and twentieth of
March, the last day of the year 1602. and in the five and fortieth of her
Reign, an Age and Reign not to be numbered by any one King of England before.
Her Successor said as much in his Preface to his son, The like had not been
seen or heard of since the days of Augustus. Basilicon Doron.


And one speaking of her days, See Boltons Lectures, p. 13, 14, x 5.
We have lived (says he) in a tim^ of miracles; Was it not a miraculous mercy,
that Queen Elizabeth that m^t^hl^ss Princess and Pearl of the World should in
in these (...) times be preserved in safety, as a sweet harmless Lamb, amidst
so many merciless, Romish Wolves, who implacably thirsted for her precious
life? Was it not a wonder, that the sacred hand of that self-same crowned
blessed Lady (next under Gods Almighty one) should in despite of all the P^^ers
of Darkness and popish rage, raise our tr^e Religion, as it were, by mirac^e
from the dead, a thing which the World hoped little to see, that ^ven they
which beheld it done, scarcely believed their own senses, that after the silver
line of her most hououred life, should be hid in the endless maze of Gods
bottomless mercies, from the fiery assaults of so many popish Bulls, such a
prodigious variety of murderous complotments against her sacred person, and all
these desperate Assassines of Rome, who all her life long, hunted full greedily
after her virgin blood? And was not our Deliverance in Eighty Eight a miracle,
when the Sea fought for us? There was a Day, which (as many of us remember) the
Papists called, The long look^ for Day, the Day should pay for all; Answer to
the Libell of England, p. 176, 185.
they meant the Day when she should die; that it would be a bloody Day, by the
uncertainty of the next Heir; our Country is in the most dreadful and
desperate case, in the greatest misery, and most dangerous times that ever it
was since or before the Conquest, and far worse than any Country in
Christendom, by the certainty of the most bloody, civil, and foreign Wars; all
our wealth and felicity whatsoever, depending upon a few uncertain days of
Queen Elizabeth's life.

Clouds of blood (says another) hang in the Air, which at the death of Queen
Elizabeth will dissolve and rain down upon England, W^stonus in peroratione ad
Academicos.
which then is expected as a Prey to Neighbor Nations.

These false Prophets spoke this sense; for the Sun set, and no night followed.

Mira cano, Sol occubuit, Nox nulla secuta. The same merciful hand, at the
same time, crowned Queen Elizabeth with immortal glory, and set the Earthly
Crown of this Kingdom upon King James his head, without shedding so much as one
drop of blood.

Sic transit gloria mundi. Queen Elizabeth was a Princess excellent in all
Tongues; she translated the Prayers of Queen Katharine into Latin, French, and
Italian; she wrote a Century of Sentences, and dedicated them to her Father;
and translated Salustius; she made several Orations in Latin in both the
Universities; and entertained Ambassadors always in their own Languages: many
of her excellent Speeches in Parliament are in print.

Queen Mary of Scotland wrote a Book of Verses in French of the Institution of
a Prince, all with her own hand, wrought the Cover with her Needle, which the
King Kept as a Relick of her Memory, as I have seen.

The End of the first Part.
REX FIDEI DEFENSOR POTENTISS: IACOBUS* D. G. MAGNAE BRITANNIAE* GALLIAE ET
HIBERNIAE*
FIDEI DEFENSOR
Behold Great Britains* France and Irelands King
About whose Brows Clusters of Crowns do spring
Whose faith him Champion of the FAITH en-stiles
Upon whose head fortune and Honor smiles
The Rod of vice and Virtues Recompense
Long live King JAMES in all Magnificence


Printed and sold by P. Stout



THE REIGN AND DEATH OF King JAMES OF Great BRITAIN, FRANCE, and IRELAND, the
First, etc.

The Second Part.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, 1655.

Introduction.
WE read in Stories, how perplexed several Princes have been in some dependent
policies, Dilemma in King James What to do in reference to his Inheritance in
England.
at their first acquisition to their Governments, especially such Sovereigns as
come to their Crowns by accidents mixed with Succession: I find not any
(amongst many) more difficult to decide, than that which befell King James, and
followed the death of Queen Elizabeth.

The horrid remembrance of the late execution of his Mother Queen Mary, famed
by all foreign Nations, for a Lady that had born the Illustrious Diadems of two
glorious Scepters, the one by lawful Succession of former Kings, even from her
Cradle; the the other by powerful Conquest of a mighty Prince, with her
incomparable merit, beauty of her body, and more of her mind, living long
time, to see her Son a King, renowned for wisdom, and thereby apt to apprehend,
and powerful of himself, and so fitted for Revenge.

The splendor of Imperial Crowns are eclipsed by suffering such ignominy, the
sacred character of Church and State defaced, the magnificence of the most
secured Thrones destroyed, and Sovereignty would cease to be the image of God.

But for him to ascend that Throne steeming with his Mothers innocent blood,
wrought amazement to himself (no doubt) and wonder to the world, what he would
do in this Dilemma.

Best of beauties may be discolored, and so the complexion alters; Christian
policies are good rules for Sovereignty: we may examine his Resolution by the
happy effects of his Actions.

Besides, he was bound to acknowledge Truths. Her Adoption of Him to his
inheritance, sweetened Him into the peoples candid Acceptance. And though by
that solemn Action, on Her deathbed she gave Him but his Own; Yet she might
have rendered Her self and former Cruelty less disputable, by objecting against
Him, his Mothers Religion, averse to the reformed in England; strangers they
were both; and He Her son, whom in Justice she had destroyed.

For though her fathers will settled the succession, Her power with the people
might have allowed it, she might have Married, or Created another, and so made
a favorite. Or indeed (the sure of all) she might have settled this Nation in
the people, to succeed Her as heirs to all. The times and Relations then, more
likely than ^ver since as now it is. Thus she might have done, see what she did.

Seeing, She could not repair Her cruel Error, Yet by those means She manifested
Her resentment, of what, She had done amiss, by recompensing that Evil, with
this Good.

And ill humor of Malice, is not easily purged, It reaches to the Person
hated; and to all near Relations Children and Friends.

And no doubt, some secret Maxim or Policy of St^te might be taken up
sufficient to have accused Queen Mary of Crime, and so to have put a fixed
Resolution to that Action, which otherwise, in it self seems Savage.

Her Adoption of Him, was of equal Balance with His Birthright, and (usually)
as Venerably received, as Inheritance from Parents. It Is true, They give the
Birth, but leave us, to Succession, Free Election (as the Gift) is most
admirable, for its merits; so ought it to be, the more Acceptable for the
Miracle. The One, Natural, even to Brutes, in their Ordinary Inclinations: But
Adoption operates with affection, and choice; not from Sense, but from Reason;
and examines the Object, ere it settles the possession. And so, thus
considered, she, merits Pardon; He, Excuses.

Another Relation, falls upon Her Counselors then, the most honorable birth;
admirable in wisdom; and Eminent in Power; for the King to confide in These; or
They in Him. Those, that found an Executioner for Her, might in time, bring
forth a Regicide for Him.

See, how his wisdom, Expiates all.

Those hands, that hurt Her, healed Him, who sealed to Her death, signed to His
Reception. Nor, could any private malice of theirs, be directed toward Her
Person, but Her Power.

Necessity of State, made Them submit, to sentence Her, which otherwise, they
(perhaps) would have spared, in Reverence to Her, and Honor to Him. And, as
their Persons were Eminent, so was it hazardous for Him, to question a Crime,
that He had not power, to punish.

Acts they are, so different in Them, as make up the wonder in Him. How to
revenge the One, and not reward the Other. Acts of Oblivion, always more
Noble, than Revenge. Caesar's. erection, of Pompeys Statue, secured his own.

Acts of Honor to others memory, reflect, in effect, upon the person present.

And therefore; He, rather chose to Court Her Counselors with the favor of
Clemency, than to correct Them, with the Rod of Justice. Rigor has much of
Majesty; but Mercy has more of Glory. The One may be more safe, the other more
secure. And though Machivael, makes Fear, and Love, incompatible and
inseparable: Justice and Mercy may Kiss each Other; we may Fear and yet Love
the Lord.

Virtues consist in Concatenation. He who styled Hanibals Cruelty a Virtue, by
the same Argument, concluded Clemency a Vice.

He had Examples of former Presidents; The King of France forgot the Quarrel of
the Duke of Orleans; He did so: And more did King James, which overruled Him,
to that pious, and prudent Consideration, that resolved into the most hapy
Event, The aim, and End, to make His design also Practical, and His Precepts an
admirable Pat^ern. And indeed, the Paths, which He always walked in, were the
less obvious to Common footsteps, as they were confirmed to choicer Limits:
Being almost an example to Himself, and Inimitable of all; for in His way, few
went, before Him.

And thus resolved, whilst Queen Elizabeth's age and weakness increased, He
wanted not Parasites of Her own Court, that constantly offered their
Intelligence of all Her Actions and weak condition, which gave him timely
occasion to consider the settlement of his affairs at home in reference to his
Inheritance of England. His first was for Religion, and to judge with what
affection the Kirk of Scotland had faction, The King settles affairs in
Scotland in Religion.
with Calvin's documents; very averse from Papistrie, but subject to the
Infection of Neighbor schisms; And how to balance them, was his work to wade
through.

It was no boot heretofore to strive against this stream at home, and therefore
he suffered the violence to run into the usual Chanel, for that time; Wisely
weighing, the perverse peevishness of the Ministry; And with what
constitutions they had linckt themselves, with the public affections of the
People, and withal got a mixed power in the affairs of State; And it was not,
for him, to break through that Custom, which yet he foresaw must afterward
quarrel with the Customs of his successive Inheritance, where Episcopacie had
fixed such firm footing.

But, Bacilic on doron.
laying the foundation of his adventure on His own Penn; in his Instructions to
his son Prince Henry, stated to him, the estate of that Kirk.

And indeed, their Reformation from Popery, as it was extraordinary, by God, so
was it done Inordinately, by popular Tumult and Rebellion; of such, as did the
work; clogged with passion, and particular respects (as in other Neighboring
Nations,) fiery Spirits of the Ministry, got such a guiding of the people, in
their times of confusion, partly in the Governments of his Grandmother and his
Mother (as has been related) and afterward, usurping larger liberty under
four Regents in His Long Minority; and by these occasions, settled themselves,
in hope, to lead the people by the Nose, and so in all factions, then, (and for
many years before, and sythence) to spouse any quarrel, as their own; evermore
esteeming Him, the highest evil, not by any Vice, but only, to be a King.

And because, some of the Ministry, the more grave and learned, were ashamed
to side with them, therefore the other sort, preached themselves, a Parity in
the Church; the Mother of Confusion, and enemy to unity.

By which means, great disorder was likely to follow, which the King sought by
several ways to prevent, or countermine their subtlety, with His wisdom. The
professed Puritan being a Sect, whom no deserts could oblige, nor their own
Oaths, or promises bind; and whose consciences, had not more of credit, than
their own conceits.

And therefore, the Kings preservative, against such, was to advance learning
in their Ministers. In whom truly, ^il His time, (who was able to try Men) it
was very defective, (taking a pride in their pretended zeal, to shadow their
great ignorance in divine knowledge, making their shop dark, thereby to vent
false wares to the people) And so, to keep balance in their different
conditions, with those of the Episcopacie. And to avoid extremes, to repress
the Vanity of the Precisian, so not to suffer the excess of a Bishop, and to
chain them both, with such bonds and ligaments, as did preserve that Estate,
from creeping into very great Corruption; Even in the period of time when their
Doctrines had amplified into Heads of very dangerous Consequence. Errors grow
fastest in hot brains, but their Obstinacy therein is that dead flesh, which
makes the green wound of an Error fester by degrees into the old sore of an
Heresy.

And for his Nobility, And ordering his Nobility.
as they were ancient, so, and oft-times in former feuds, had sucked in with
their nursing, a very proud conceit of their greatness and power, (such as it
was) among their parties of Kindred, or otherwise allied, or won by kindness to
their Tenants, which evermore had a mixture of some cuning, not less to be
considered than in other Peers of neighboring Nations, I mean, the English and
French, with whom that Nation had great interest.

To keep those (I say) his own Peers in Peace, out of the sad experience of
former Times, intestine Divisions, (not occasioned as in some other Dominions,
from their several changes and quarrels to Sovereignty, or Title to a Crown)
but always from private faction of their own; to which, either party pretended
the Sovereigns safety; to settle and secure their own pretensions, by
possessing of the Regents, for so heretofore they hurried his Parents, his
Protectors and Him, from Post to Pillar.

And therefore he preferred such as had been faithful to his Predecessors, He
preferred faithful servants near his person. Bazilicon Doron,
and to the safety of him, in his minority (a Rule of direction herein he marked
out to his Son) keeping such, (notwithstanding) under his elbow, with places of
Judicature or Offices of honor, so to divert them and their interest abroad.

And having for some years thus settled his Kingdom, and disposing himself for
his Succession.
he began more particular to look upon himself, and to consider his near
relation to the Crown of England, which he long looked for, and warily expected,
well knowing (through his undoubted right) the jealousy of Princes, upon their
Successors, they too hastily coveting that, which long delay might breed to
impatience: and it fell upon Him, with as much fear, as upon any Heir that our
Histories can parallel, in all the Factions and Interests of neighbor Princes,
wisely how to guide himself, as an accountant to the Kingdom of England.

For Q. Elizabeth, Q. Elizabeth not willing to publish her Successor.
after her settlement here, held it a Maxim of policy, not to publish her own
Pedigree, which must draw down the Scots Line to the absolute necessity of
succeeding: and yet to balance the French, and to keep up her power over the
Scots, she took upon her to meddle in all their affairs, and so to tamper with
their Factions, as not to suffer the Scots Queens and others Regents there, to
get to great power, which the French endeavored mightily to promote: and
therefore Mary's head was the sooner struck off, to remove the dangers, and
make Queen Elizabeth of more absolute authority in that Nation, which she was
not over-nice to take upon her.

But to amuze them and the world besides, she was ever busy with Suitors, to
make all men believe, she meant to marry; which had the King opposed by any
cunning whatsoever, (if understood by Her) he might not so easily have come to
this Crown.

And truly, whether his virtue and goodness (more remark in Him than usual in
Princes) guided him in that, to depend only upon the providence of God, for
his Birthright, or that his policy, under hand, wrought him any advantage;
certainly, the Success must crown the Work, to admiration.

For, though he might not despise honest and honorable advice in such
correspondence as was necessary under hand, with the Counselors of Queen
Elizabeth, to secure himself, for the time to come; yet, we read not of any
that came to light, or so much (in her days) as private suspicion.

The Reign and Death OF KING JAMES, OF Great Britain, France, and Ireland, the
First, etc.
SO then, Q. Elizabeth dies.
in a seasonable conjunction of things and time, he succeeded Queen Elizabeth,
who departted this life on Thursday the 24th of March, 1602. at her
Manour-house of Richmond, early in the morning, that day being fatal to Henry
8. and to all his Children, dying on Thursdays: and her Funerals sumptuously
solemnized with all speed in April following.

The same day the Lords Spiritual and Temporal assembled, King James proclaimed,
and having proclaimed her Death, and the Right and Title of King James to
succeed her, being lineally expressed from Margaret eldest Daughter to Henry
7th. and Elizabeth his Wife, who was eldest Daughter to Edward 4th. and married
to James 4th. King of Scotland, in the year 1503. (just a hundred years since)
who had issue James 5th. Father to Mary the First, and Mother to this King
James the Sixth, now 36. years of age, and so long King of Scotland.

Then they poast Letters to the King by the hands of Sir Charles Percy Brother
to the Earl of Northumberland, and Letters sent to him.
and Thomas Somerset Son to the Earl of Worcester, signifying the Death of
their late Sovereign betwixt two and three of the clock that morning. And
knowing his Right of Succession, they have made Proclamation thereof at
Westminster, White Hall, and Cheapside Cross: and seeing they remain a Body
without a Head, they humbly desire his Majesty to hasten, how soon, and in what
manner he pleases.

And therein complain (as in public) that Sir Robert Carry poasted from hence
toward your Majesty, contrary to their consent and command, thereby as much
(as in him lay) to prevent and anticipate their duty and respect.

They acquaint the King of a fleet of ten ships royal, Anno 1603.
ready furnished for the Coast of Spain, under Command of Sir Richard Lawson,
whose Commission no^ ceasing, by the Queens death, they desire his Majesty's
pleasure, whether they shall guard the Narrow Seas, or be c^lled to the Coast
of Scotland as a Convey, for the Kings use. Dated in London. And therefore
Robert Leigh Mayor Signed first.

But as in this letter, so it goes in Common report, that Carry (let out by his
father Hunsdon Lord Chamberlain) came first to the King upon his own score; But
secretary Cecills secret Packquets went before him or these letters, or else he
had little credit in his own Commands.

The King communicates these letters to his Lords, The King returns them thanks.
and returns them his acknowledgment of their dutiful affections. He confirms
for the present all Offices Civil, and Martial, as at the Queens death, til his
farther pleasure. Dated the 28. and 31. of March, which the Lords here
proclaim, the 5. of April after.

And though the King sets forth his interest, of succession commanding both
Nations in unity of duty to him, and brotherly affection to each other,
Borderers executed.
yet did the Scots Borderers make Inrodes into England, which was severely
punished, and all for Example executed to death.

The King orders his Journey the 5. of April, the Queen to follow 20. da^es
after, Prince Henry, Duke Charles, and Princess Elizabeth, at further pleasure.

Brings with him those of the greatest birth and most interest in the blood
royal, The King sets out for England.
who though far enough off to follow after his Numerous issue, of a teeming
fruitful Consort, yet too near to be trusted at home. And each one of them
begat trouble and charge upon him, ever after, to reward, or to raise them up,
beyond any desert; in both, he was wisely regarding.

Those were Lenox, With his Lords.
Hamelton, Arguile, Mar, Kinloss, and Lord Hewm, and a couple of Knights Sir
George Hew^ and Sir John Ramsey, of near affection with the King. So it became
his future security and advantage, to caress those, that ushered him in and had
underhand merited somewhat, from former very late advise and Intelligence, how
to correspond with his jealous Predecessor; we may conceive those then in
being, (for most of the old Ones, outlived not that their policy) were the
Howards, and Percies, and Caecils.

The first of them of high birth and former merit, the Lineage of the late Duke
of Norfolk, Howards.
who suffered under the Axe for his affection to this Kings Mother, as
aforesaid anno 1569. And his brother Henry Howard with the Lord Cobham, were
the first of Eminency, that met the King at Barwick.

The last, Caecil.
of great wisdom, and experience, for the Kings urgent affairs to make proper
use of.

And at York, Thomas Cecil, Lord Burghley, President of the North, receives
him, who comes on with his Train, and needed no other Guard, At York met by the
President of the North.
than the affections of the People that hurried him forward, with Excessive
Acclamations; soon forgetting (as the manner of the Multitude) their late
Sovereign, in the hope of a likelyer change in a King, with which for many
years, this Nation had been really unacquainted.

And so was He feasted by the way freely, A Notable P. esent.
at each Residence of his Person where he lodged, until he came unto
Godmanchester, in the Country of Northampton, where they presented him with 70.
Teem of Horses, fairly traced, unto as many new Ploughs in honor of Tillage; A
Custom very ancient, when their Sovereigns pass that Town, being his Tenants,
and holding their land by that Tenure. The King told them, He liked their air
so well, and took their gift so kindly, as (but for undoing such good people,
in their bounty) to visit them often; which afterward he performed (that
Custom being but for the first time) to the comfort of that Town and County.

At Broxborn his next Gest, The grand Officers meet the King.
there met him the gravity of the greatest Officers; Egerton Lord Chancellor,
Buckhurst Lord Treasurer, Howard Lord Admiral; with the most of the Council and
Nobility; At Ware the King came to Wiggen, heretofore so base a Cottage, as
begat a saying, If a Man would answer the Asker as in despair, Wiggen.
That it should be granted, when as the King comes to Wiggen.

And at Theobalds, Theobalds. Counselors sworn,
the seat of Sir Robert Cecil, Secretary of State, he stays for four days
Entertainment, where were made of his Council these Scottish Lords, Lenox, Mar,
Hew^, Elphington, and Kinloss.

And of English, Henry Howard and his Nephew Thomas Howard, And Knights made.
brother and son to the late Duke of Norfolk; and 28. Knights-Bachelors
dubbed.

The Name Knight is from Knecht a German word, an Institution of dignity, De
moribus Germanorum.
by that Noble and ancient Nation. Tacitus says, the manner was not for any to
take Arms, before the State allowed him sufficient; and then some one of the
Princes, or the father of the young man (termed Knecht) furnished him with a
Shield and a Javeline, The dignity of a Knight.
(as the Romans did virili toga) the first honor done to youth, and afterward,
members of the Commonweal. This being the first and simple manner of Creation,
they were afterward styled Bachelour Knights. Baccalarius, quia olim
coronabantur lauro cum baccis. Vel potius, quia Bedellus ipsis aureum baculum
ex^ibebat cum ad concilia irent. Vnde primus gradus in professione scientiarum
est Baccalauri; secundus Licentiati; ultimus doctores. Indeed as he is; so
Baccalaureus, or Batalareus dicitur is Miles, qui jam semel praelio sive
Bataliae interfuit, collatis signis, et manum cum host conseruit. And thus for
the Name.

Their dignity was from serving on Horseback, so the Italian call them
Cavaileiri, the French chivalier, the Germans Roisters, all of riding, the
Latins equites aurati; for properly being created with sword and girdle, guilt
spurs were added, for more necessary Ornament. The original dignity was given
to Marshall men; but since, in all Nations, it is bestowed on men of peace and
merit; the better, (in civil policy) to level the service at home, with that
abroad. Tullie says, Parva sunt foris arma, nisi est consilium domi. And of
late, his dignity is called dubbed, because the man kneels down, and the
Sovereign lightly lays a sword upon his shoulder, saying sois chevalier nome
de dieu, and afterward he says Avances chevalier.

It seems to be done as it were upon the sudden, in the field; and thereupon
are called in our Law Miles, a militia. But the King may do it by Patent; And
though the first in Title by Institution, yet are they the last in degree of
honor, which dies with them.

There had been anciently another degree of Knighthood made by the General,
under the Kings standard in the field, called Banneret; but he was ^eacefull,
and so none of them were made in his time. See after Knights Baronets, and
Knights of the Garter.

Being come to London* his first Reception was at the Charter House, The King
comes to Charter House in London and creates Honors
the then Habitation of Thomas Howard (lately made Lord Chamberlain) for four
days, where 80. Gentlemen were Knighted, from thence in private to White Hall,
and then by water to the Tower of London the 11. of May 1603.

During his Journey hither, prisoners were set at liberty out of the Tower, and
amongst others, Accessaries to Essex Treason, was Henry Wriothsly the third
Earl of Southampton, made Barons by Henry the eighth, and Earls by Edward the
sixth. And this man, by King James made afterward Knight of the Garter, a
Privy Counselor, and Captain of the Isle of Wight, Thomas his son now Earl of
Southampton 1654.

Here at the Tower He creates diverse Barons. Barons created.
Sir Robert Caecil Baron of Essenden, Sidny of Peshnurst, Lord Knowles of
Grayes, Lord Wotton of Morley. And dubbs eleven Knights.

The King had knowledge of the death of James Beaton in France, Archbishop of
Glascow; Beaton Archbishop of Glascow dies in France.
he had been consecrate Bishop at Rome 1552. and not enduring the reformation
of the Church, forsook Scotland, and conveyed with him to France, all the
evidences of that See of Glascow, the Ornaments and Relics of that Church,
the Image of Christ in beaten gold, and of the Apostles in silver (not over
large you may believe.) And being there Queen Mary settled her Lieger
Ambassador, when she returned to Scotland. And so continued, until the
Government of the Regents who deprived him, whom the King afterward restores,
and imployes him in Ambassies to France, being wise and faithful to his
Mother. He by Will leaves all to pious uses, for benefit of Scotish-men
Scholars, and consigned the Utensils of Glasgow into the hands of the
Carthusians of Paris, until Glasgow becomes Romish.

John Spotswood at the Kings elbow, was soon preferred thither, and sent with
the Lords to fetch the Queen. Queen Ann sent for.
But she resolved to bring the Prince along with her self, and being refused by
the friends of the Earl of Mar, til order from the King, incensed her into a
sickness, and to recover her, the King humoured her willfulness, and sent home
the Earl of Mar from England, to present her with her son; but continues her
anger to be debarred her desire Her desire to seize the Prince See 1595. pa.
183.
by such a subject, whom mortally she hated (as you have heard heretofore) and
though the King sought to sweeten her with his letters, That he ascribed his
peacable reception in England unto his wisdom and late Negotiation, The Queen
in fury replied, That she had rather never see England, than be beholding to
him.

Whether in Malice or other defign, It was remarkable, Her studious intent, to
seize the Prince to her self.

And so she set forward with him and the Princess Elizabeth, who by the way,
was left to the Government of the Lord Harrington. But Charles Duke of York an
Infant, and sickly, came not til next year after.

The Earl of Rutland was sent in Commission to the King of Denmark, The Garter
sent to the King of Denmark.
to present him with the honor of the Garter, and to Baptize his first son.

And Sir Henry Wootton Lieger to Venice. He was called from his private travels
at Venice; Sir Henry Wootton sent to Venice.
formerly known to the King, an Emissary from the Duke of Tuscane into
Scotland, to forwarn him of a Treason against his Person. And was now sent
again thither, Leonardo Donato being then Duke; with whom and the Pope Paul the
first, The Pope and Senate at Variance.
hapened two Contests; For restraint of Lay Persons donatives unto Churchmen
of lands or goods without License; for so becoming Ecclesiastic they were
exempt from taxes.

The other was, The imprisoning an unchaste Abbot and a Canon, being conceived a
diminution of the Papal Power, who therefore excommunicates the whole
Republic. They fly to King James by their own Ambassador here, and by
Messengers and Letters; disputing their privileges with the Popes power, which
was thus weakened by exceeding it; and so they obtained Absolution, with much
ado, but not until the report was, that the whole Senate would turn
Protestants. Wootton continued at Venice near twenty years, with some Returns
and Messages extraordinary: this Donato being the fourscore and eleventh Duke
of Venice, successively, from Anno 697. having been a Republic long before,
and governed by Tribunes.

In July was solemnly performed the Rites of St: George at Windsor, St:
George's Feast ar Windsor.
where were installed these Knights of the Garter, the Prince Henry, Duke of
Lenox, Earl of Southampton, Earl of Mar, Earl of Pembroke.

This most honorable Order of the Garter was instituted by Edward the third,
Order of the Garter.
after he had obtained many great Victories, (K. John of France, K. James of
Scotland, being then Prisoners in the Tower of London, and King Henry of
Castile the Bastard expulst, and Don Piedro restored by the Prince of Wales,
(called The black Prince) did upon some weightier occasion, no doubt, than a
Ladies Garter, erect this Order, Anno 1350. The Emblems are a Blue Garter to be
worn daily, buckled on the left Leg, set with Gold or Pearl in these words,
[Honi soit qui mal y pense,] Shame take him that evil thinks. This Order is
inferior to none in the World, consisting of six and twenty Martial and
Heroical Nobles, the King of England the chief, the rest are either Nobles of
this Nation, or Princes of other Countries, Friends and Confederates. Emperors
and Kings have desired and received that Honor. The^e are depending this Order
six and twenty poor Knights, with sufficient maintenance. The Officers were,
the Prelate of the Garter, (which is inherent to the Bishop of Winchester, for
the time being) the Chancellor, the Register, (always the Dean of Windsor) the
principal King at Arms, (called Garter) and the Usher, (called the Black Rod)
The site of this College is the Castle of Windsor, with the Chapel of St:
George erected by Edward the third, and the Chapter House there also. The
Protector-Saint (olim tam nobilis) is St: George, whose Picture on horseback,
killing the Dragon, does always hang at a Blue Silk Ribband, about each Knights
neck. And the outward Vestment or Cloak has a Star embroidered in Silver,
encompassing a Shield bearing the Red Cross of England, with the Garter about
it. This I mention, lest it be forgotten to after ages.

Amongst sundry men of valor in ancient days was George, Of St: George's story.
born at Coventry in England, his Mother with child of him, dreamed, that she
conceived with a Dragon, which should be the cause of her death, but the
Wizards (Witches) assured her to die in childe-bed of a Son, whose life and
fortune shall be a mirror to posterity; and therefore he was brought up with a
Person of Honor, with great observance, which made him capable of mighty deeds
in Arms: and being famous for several Adventures, traveled to a place infested
with wild beasts, chiefly a ravenous Dragon, whom the Sorcerers pretended so
far to inchant, as to be for ever satisfied with a virgin Salve, fastened to a
Rock, and fitted for Sacrifice.

In whose defense George fights on horseback, with his Lance and Sword, and by
his skill and force, kills him: this service done, he missed not the Merit of
his Reward, Marriage with the Maid; instructed her in Christianity, with whom he
lived honorably, and died sainted for his virtues and valiant acts; and by the
Kings of England assumed for many Ages, in warlike Atchivements of Honor, to
be their Patron.

This story not difficult for the Moral, which served those times to instruct
the ignorant with such Tales, to be told to posterity; that the Christian
Soldier in the warfare of the World, meets with Satan's temptations, which by
the grace of God sanctifying are overcome; and in particular ^escues his own
soul, bound under the chains of sin, to be devoured of the Devil, and which
being redeemed by the merits of Christ, is married to Him in faith, and becomes
an eternal Saint in Heaven.

Whether this Saint and his story (with others) were invented to cosen men,
these Tales wrought much with valiant men at Arms; Valor swells, when set out
by Examples of Extremes, and often times goes beyond her self in her
atchivements; conceit sometimes does things above conceit, especially when the
imagination apprehends them founded in Religion.

It is said by Matthew Paris, in Gulielmo secundo, page 57. that St: George
appeared in the air with an Army of white Horses, fighting for the English at
Antioch against the Turk. But to say, there was no such Saint, and to change
all literal sense into an Allegory of Christ and his Church; yet it may seem
more improbable, that our English Nation, amongst so many Saints that were,
would choose one to be their Patron that was not at all, especially seeing the
World in that Age had rather a glut than a famine of Saints.

The intent of those times was pious, to gain credit, and to convert to
Christianity; but then, so to prosecute it, as the Papists still continue to
do, must be condemned, thinking to grace the Gospel by such absurdities; for
Heaven has a Pillory to punish fraus pia her self: and indeed, better to leave
Religion to her native plainness, than to deck her with counterfeit dress.

And there were created at Windsor these Earls, Earls created at Windsor.
Thomas Howard Earl of Suffolk, Montjoy Earl of Devonshire; and of Barons,
Egerton Baron Elsmore, Russel Baron Thornhall, Danvers Lord Danvers, Hist. Gr.
Brit. p. 7.
Gray Baron Grooby, Peter's Baron Writtle, Harington Baron Eaton, which so
troubles an Historian, as a wonderful weakness in a King, and concludes
against his own Argument, [Nothing more destruction (says he) to Monarchy than
lessening the Nobility] But he means, increase of number lessens their value;
and has not enlarged his reading, by knowledge of their condition in other
Monarchies, Spain, France; and yet poor enough in those places where Anarchy as
yet is not come in.

Originally within this Kingdom, Of Earls their dignity.
Earldoms of Countries (in the ancient English-Saxon Government) were Dignities
of Honor, and Offices of Justice; they had Officers under them, as Vice-comes
or Sheriffs.

The Earls therefore received Sallary, the third penny of the profits of the
County, of long time after the Conquest, and were inserted in their Patents of
Creation, which afterward were turned into Pensions.

Of the single Earls (not Palatine) there were two kinds, subdivided into
several Branches, either take name of a place, or without place; those of a
place, are of two kinds, either of a County, as the Earl of Devonshire,
Cornwall, Kent, etc. or else of some place not being a County, as of a Town,
Castle, Honor, etc. of which later sort, as ancient as the Conquest, those of
Richmond in Yorkshire, Clarence in Suffolk, Arundel in Sussex.

Earldoms without any place, are likewise of two kinds, either in respect of
Office, as Earl Marshal of England; or by Birth, and so are all the Kings Sons;
and therefore it is a mistake to say, They are born but Gentlemen.

Earls are adorned with a Cap of Honor and a Coronet, and the Body with a
Robe, in resemblance of Counselors, and are girt with a Sword, to defend
their King and Country, Cook 17. Part. And are called by the King, his Cosins,
and his Title is afterward become parcel of his Name, and so they sign T.
Suffolk.

Not to speak of Barons by Prescription or Tenure. Barons their dignity.
These Barons were made by Patent, as others are by Writ to Parliament; and
these by Writ were devised not before 49. Henry 3. for want of Peers, the most
of them slain in the Barons Wars.

Those Barons by Patent began by Richard 2. John Beauchamp being the first, and
is now limited in descent, according to the Habendum, for Life, or for term, of
others, as Estates in Tail. They being thus entered into Nobility, have large
Privileges as Peers of the Realm.

Note, that there be Lords in Reputation, only by courtesy of Speech, not de
jure, nor have privilege as Lords of Parliament, and these are the Son and Heir
of a Duke, called an Earl, his eldest Son a Baron, but not in Pleadings; and so
of Daughters, styled Ladies, by courtesy only.

On Saint James his day in July the King and Queen were crowned at Westminster
in that fatal Chair The King and Queen cr^wned at W^stminster in that (...).
of Sovereigns anointing; in it remains a large blackish Stone, Jacob's Pillow,
(say the Scots) in his Ladder Dream of the Messiah from his Loins; and indeed
so ceremonious he was then, that he sacrificed thereon, naming it Domus Dei;
and in his Return from Laban forgot not thereon to pay his Vows; in which
esteem, he conveyed it with his R^licks, in his general remove to Egypt; but
from thence the Israelites flying in haste, and pursued, they (it seems) left
th^s Monument behind; and one Gathelus wedded to Pharaoh's Daughter (though a
stranger, observant of the Hebrews Rites) transported it to Galicia, (of his
name Port-Gathelick) thence by his Seed carried into Ireland, so by Ferguard
sent to Penthland, (or Scotland) crowning their Kings thereon; And Edward 3.
brought it from thence; Even then when grave Bards did sing that ancient Saw.

Ni fallat fatum, Scoti hunc quocunque locatum
Inveniunt Lapidem, regnare tenentur ibidem.
The Scots sall bruke that Ream as Naitiff Grund,
(Gif Wierds fail nocht) quhair eir this Chair is fund.
Another very ancient.

Post Iacobum, Iacobus, Iacobum, Iacobus quoque quintus,
At sextus Iacobus Regno regnabit utroque.
After a James sall be a James, a third James, and a fourth,
A fifth James also, but the sixth sall sway the Scepters both.
These are no conceits, Hist. Gr. Brit. p. 6.
[commonly made up ere half-molded] for they were read many Ages before he or
his abortive Book were born.

And with his Crown he takes Oath, Coronation Oath.
To keep and maintain the Right and Liberties of the Church; and shall keep all
the Lands, Honors and Dignities, righteous and free of the Crown of England;
and the Rights of the Crown decayed and lost, he shall call again (to his
power) into the ancient Estate; shall keep the peace of the Church, of the
Clergy and People, and do Equity and Justice with discretion and mercy; shall
hold the Laws and Customs of the Realm, and the evil Laws put out, to establish
peace to the People* and no Charter to grant but by Oath. Abridgment Henry 8.
Statutes.

This Ceremony ended, there were 24. Knights of the Bath invested, Knights of
the Bath their manner of creation.
who were received into White Hall in the evening, and supped together in one
Room, sitting by degrees, with their Escocheons of their proper Arms placed
above their Heads; they were lodged upon Pallats on the floor under their Arms,
after they had been bathed in several Baths provided in Chambers; the next
morning they were apparelled in Hermits weeds, and marshalled into Saint
James's Park, with loud Music, and the Heralds going before, and so about the
Courts of White Hall, and then into the Chapel, with their Reverence before the
Altar-table, and the Cloth of Estate (as at St: Georges Feast) they take their
places in stalls, theirs Arms above, and hear Service. Then each Knight with
his two Esquires offered at the Altar Pieces of Gold, and so retired in the
former manner to their Chambers, and then adorned themselves with Robes of
Crimson Taffata, with Hats and white Feathers, and so were conducted to the
King into the Presence Chamber, under the Cloth of State, who girt each of
them with a Sword, and had gilt Spurs put on their Heels, dined together, and
so to the Even-Song at the Chapel, where they offered their Swords.

The next day in Robes of Purple Satin, with Doctors Hoods on their shoulders,
Hats with white Feathers, and so feasted again, and lodged that night as
before, and the next day departed.

They are dignified and distinguished from other Knights, by a Medall of three
Crowns of Gold, which is hanging at a Red Ribband, which they should wear about
their necks during their life. These Knights are commonly Youths of the Sons of
Noblemen or Nobless.

So now the King is established with all the Rites of Confirmation in Honor
and Love of his People, Digression concerning Imperial Rule.
and may be ranked in competition with the most for the Western Monarchy, which
had been hotly pursued by Henry 8. in opposition to France and Spain; about
whose time the House of Austria settled into that Design.

And because we have left the King in joyful solemnity, let us step aside out
of the Court jollity, and seriously consider the cunning contrivances of
neighbor Kings, heretofore for Imperial domination.

It was set on work, by union of Marriage in Charles the Grandchild of
Maximilian the Emperor, Emperor,
of the House of Austria, and of Ferdinand of Spain, Spain.
who being heir to them both, inherited also the Netherland, Arragon, Castile,
Scicile, and the Indies. 1503.

And because Lewis of France, France,
as great in power, stood in Competition, the other therefore, sought to Master
it, by cunning inter-marriage with Charles and his daughter Claud, which was no
sooner contracted, but as suddenly cracked, and He affianced to Mary the
Daughter of Henry the seventh of England, and to whose son Arthur Ferdinand
had married Katherin his youngest daughter. 1506.

This double union with England, England.
encourages the other to break with France; but Arthurs death, and his father
soon following, and they still afraid of France, clap up a fresh match with the
widow Katherin and Henry the eighth: and a Bull (subdated the Popes death)
dispensed with it. 1510.

Henry the eighth left rich by his father, young and active, is put upon
quarrels with France, that either Kingdoms might spend themselves in War, as
they did in wonderful designs; To whose assistance, the other interpose, with
either party, and with inconstancy as the necessity of State-Interest
intervened. But upon Maximilians death, the Emperial Crown falls in Competition
of France and Spain.

Charles, Charl^s cunning.
now put to it, seeks to get in with England, and acknowledges the fowl
Inconstancies of his Predecessors toward Henry the eighth. In which he
confesses, as he was involved, so his youth and duty then, tied him more to
Obedience than Truth, but now grown a Man and Himself, the mutual dangers of
either, would give assurance for his part, where otherwise (he says) single
faith might mistrust.

Henry the eighth thus cousened into some kindness, Is made Emperor,
both by his own power and purse, makes Charles Emperor, and the French King
his Prisoner, 1519. And so his turn served, a peace is concluded with France,
and the King of England (at whose charge all was effected) is left out, of any
satisfaction. And to amuze him from revenge, intices Desmond to rebel in
Ireland, and assisted James the fifth of Scotland, with ammunition and money to
buysie England at home, 1526.

And being in this height of Imagination, to have wrought wonders, in reducing
the Election of the Popes from the Cardinals to the Emperor, set others to
quarrel with the Pope also, who very hapily in the nick of time, confederates
with the Italian Princes, with the French, and with Henry the eighth, as Caput
foederis, But to little effect.
and so Charles is forced to descend: and at a Treaty at Cambray, obliged to
render some Pieces to the French, and so to sit still from open violence. The
General safety of Christian Princes necessarily being involved in the danger.

But He begins again, and contracts to assist Henry the eighth for his Title to
France; He tacks about with England.
who no sooner entered into war, and recovered Bullen, but the Emperor
concludes a perpetual peace with France, and joint confederation for restoring
the Catholic Religion, which was much declined of its luster, by the
protestation of Luther and others in Germany; and soon after spread into all
parts of Christendom.

Henry the eighth wearied with other men's designs, with vast expense of blood
and treasure dies, and leaves all the glory of his good actions to this son
Edward the sixth, who succeeds with no advantage by these, and with less money
in his purse, whose wise Counsel, meddles the less with Spain, or France; but
contracts only Union with the German Princes, and other Allies in
confederation of Religion, that could best balance the Emperors ambition.

His successor Mary, Queen Mary.
Imbarks her body in marriage with Philip of Spain, and her Estate in war with
France, and lost Calice into the bargain. 1558.

Queen Elizabeth Queen Elizabeth.
comes to the Crown, and at the Treaty of Cambray, King Philip pretends to
assist her in recovery of Calais, but his own turn served, he leaves her in the
lurch, to work out her own safety; but under a feigned pretense of Marriage,
wrought a stay of the Popes declaration against the Queen, grounding this
favor, (no doubt) from his own fears, lest that a Union of France with
Scotland, in the person of Mary the Mother of this King James, should Unite
these three Kingdoms against him.

How equal soever Queen Elizabeth had been for peace or war, in her own
nature; and her people humble, to follow her will in either; yet her course,
more ambitious in ballancing Neighbor Princes from overgrowing, than apt to
conquer others, carried her all her life, in defensive actions at home, and
abroad, and so to impoverish her Enemies, but not to enrich her self; for by
those courses King James found her Treasure exhausted, and the Estate of the
House of Austria, in this Condition, when he came hither.

As for the French King, his Crown-demain exhausted, French interest and
condition.
which he endeavors to recover by Impositions; the people light enough, the
Nobility prone to dismember upon every occasion, and so not easy to be
governed, for the Sovereigns Designs or Interest; the Kingdom thereby the
likelier to be cantonized by self-division, than to conquer others; yet their
native wealth and variety of Objects preserve both King and people, to live
secure from their mighty Enemy the Spaniards, even by the providence of chance.
I speak as it was when King James came here.

He saw Germany upon an immovable center of self-greatness, Empire.
governed with Bit and Bridle, by the Emperor, to do as he list with all the
Princes; or they, by love or by fear, obeying.

And however the Danish King was so much of Kin, Dane.
as to stick to his Brother King James's friendship, the benefit of his Sound,
and unexhausting profit, able to second with Ships and Money and active
undertaking; yet no doubt, if to be trusted unto, with all these helps, the
King might find him wary, lest by strengthening a Neighbor, himself become
overmastered: And indeed too wise in common actions, to entangle his Estate,
being also in those days not so absolute, to do of Himself, without leave of
his people; what he has done very lately against this State, in favor of the
Dutch, he feels the smart, I need not repeat it.

The Swede Swede,
encompassed with dangers and Enemies; the Pole pretending Title to that
Kingdom; and in Arms they were for the wager; and defended barely enough, by
the distance of Sea and Land between them. Be fi des, the Dane upon his back in
all Advantages, to quicken the quarrel, though Providence since has done
wonders.

The Cantons Switz^rs.
swollen big with pride and equality, divide themselves between two Monarchs,
France and Spain, that for each others ends, they are supported by them both,
as their hired servants.

Italy Italy.
distinguished into Principalities, yet bundled together by common caution,
restrained of their freedoms, by force of French and Spanish; Multiply profit
by strangers, and spare the pains to do it themselves; So by this narrow kind
of wisdom, become all Merchants, and abused by the Conclave and Spain, as never
to be Monarchal.

The Muscovite, Muscovite.
from a Duke, grown big with a Timpanie of Titles, was kept under by the more
huge and vast Enemy the Tartar, making Inrodes of barbarous Murder upon each
other; without any Interest of Christian Princes, unless sometime, the Pole (at
leisure) quarrels for the skirt of his Empire, as he did very lately, and
prevailed.

Now whilst these Potentates lived, thus fettered within the narrowness of
their Estates or Humors, Spain Spain the most Monarchall.
managing the Popedom, by his power in the Conclave, and pensions to the
Cardinals, seemed to give law to the Western part of the Christian world; His
Mines of gold effectual, not only to carry on any design, with Fleets and
Armies, where he had will or interest; But also to make way, where he list, by
corrupting the Counsels and Actions of any King, with temptation and
underminings, either by his purse, or the pates of Jesuits. So that in a word,
he was now grown hard to be pleased, and dangerous to be offended.

Through all these Considerations King James King James Interest.
comes in, to choose his Game, and through all these distempers abroad, he was
to secure himself, and his new Inheritance. His safest way to take breath for
the present, was to make peace with Spain first of all, and after with the
rest; (which indeed were done together) presuming that being in his power so to
do then, it should depend on his pleasure, to break off after, or to conserve
it to his death, which he did.

And being a wise and wary Prince, rather solid than formal, having been well
seasoned at home with practice, and broken to affairs abroad; therefore now
freed from former Distempers, he began to search into the ground of his
preceding miseries in Scotland: Of the consequences of War and Conquests.
and well assured, where the Sword bears sway, Virtue and Fortune (the Guiders
of the best of humane Action) do not always endure the lasting, no not of the
memory of the Actors.

Here therefore He began to consider, what advance ambitious Princes lust
after, for the present, when hazardous success hurls upon them miserable events.

He was not ignorant of the interests of Christian Estates, one with the other
(as is said) and how it concerned them to caress him for his amity.

Amongst them all, whom to trust, he was not assured, and how to depend upon
his new Inheritance without confederacy, might be the best Counsel, but the
most difficult.

He therefore (to avoid difference with any) made Peace Peace and the ^ff^cts.
with all. And as a wise King lead them the way to do so, each with other,
being the surest Maxim to himself, and to the foundation of greatness, upon
popular love to his Subjects, to afford them ease and justice.

This Peace ever after attended his Age and Hearse, to which he always intended
to fashion his Son and Successor; but in future, fate followed the change, not
without our overhasty exception, to the Fathers settlement, mistaking it to be
the consequence of evil event in the Sons succession.

But we ought to know, that Events are always seated in the inaccessible Light
of Gods high Providence; Of success in evil, and the consequence of good.
and cannot be concluded but by supernatural Arguments, which must decide the
miscarriages of pious Designs.

-- careat successibus opto,
Quisquis ab eventu facta not^nda putet.
We may learn his will, by the effect of his works, but not in the consequence
of his proceedings; we may discern the handwriting of his Decree to be his
Character, but not thereby his Sense; yet this we presume to run and read.

The Providence of God is often most violent to Reason, when yet in truth it
runs in its proper chanel of equity to all. His way is in the Sea, not to be
always traced by steps.

What confused conceits carry us on when a prevailing party succeeds in
opposition to truth and justice? But he that looks thus asquint has an
imperfect sight, not the eye of faith.

The Scales of Gods Providence are never at rest, always moving; now up, now
down; to humble, and to exalt; to which we must submit, because we cannot
comprehend.

And it is a Rule derivative from hence, That where Religion is loo^est, men
sacrifise their best Reason to visible Success; and private fortune becomes
their public Profession: not remembering what Isay, says, In the path of Gods
judgment we should patiently expect. We do not so by our daily censure.

David was in this storm, driven to the strongest Anchor of Hope; in the
contemplation of the wicked, he was much trouble, to see them prosper, and the
godly persecuted; until he entered into the Sanctuary of Gods universal
providence, the chain whereof meets in the center of all.

Read but the story of some Centuries of our Christian world, Preface to the
History of the World.
abreviated in the Preface of Sir Walter Ralegh's History: How long was it,
that wickedness had leave to lord it? With what strength of policy, the Tyrants
of each time, sold themselves to settle the work of sin? And though in the
period of that portion of time (compared with everlasting) and of our
neighbour-affairs, (with the succeeds of the vast Universe) In these (I say) he
religiously observes (perchance in some) the most notorious impieties punished
and revenged, yet he could not live to find the effects of Gods justice in so
perfect an Audit, summed up, but that he, and we, and others hereafter, shall
still remain perplexed.

And here in order and time, Sir Walter Ralegh's Treason.
we come to consider the tempers of the Court Statists; those in favor with
their former Sovereign, had a new game to play with this King; and such as were
kept under heretofore, began now to raise their hopes and endeavors, for fresh
preferment.

Amongst many of sundry conditions, Court and Character of King James, p. 31.
we fall upon the Conspiracy of a few Discontents; Hist. Gr. Brit. p. 4.
and it is generally named Sir Walter Ralegh's Treason; so shadowed out to
posterity by some late Relators, and huddled up in obscurity, as not many men
in these days believe it for truth: to undeceive them, I shall give the world
that story.

Sir Walter Ralegh was a Gentleman of good Alliance in the West of England, and
very well descended; His birth and breeding.
he began his Improvements by the University and Inns of Court; the later was
always the place of esteem with Queen Elizabeth, which she would say, fitted
youth for the future. But he staid not there: and as his fate would have him,
of the Sword first, so destiny drew him on, to have a mixed Reputation with the
Gown; for he was often called to counsel in her time, but never sworn.

He was twice in Expeditions of Land-service in Ireland, His Employments.
under General Norris and Gray, as also in the Low Countries, and a Voyage at
Sea, ere he was known at Court.

And such ways as these, were his introductions (the best hopes of his Risings)
Some natural parts he had, a good wit and judgment, but his best Weapon was his
Tongue, which gave him repute to be learned then, but after, he improved to
more value in his future troubles, the best School to a wise man.

His quarrel with Gray in Ireland was there complained to a Council of War,
Occasion of his preferment.
but by Reference came over to England, to the Council Table; Gray had the
better cause, but Ralegh the advantage in pleading; which so took them,
especially Leicester, that the Queen was told the Tale, and more of him; which
begot esteem from her, and envy from others; however, he held up, being
accounted a cunning Courtier, in that ticklish Trade, whereof, he that once
breaks, seldom sets up again; but he got by those losses, and thrived best
after such compounding.

Indeed, being still under-wood, Envied in Cour^.
cut, and yet growing, he became, Silva caedua quae succisa renascitur, and so
flourished often times after, without absolute impute to his Princes pleasure.
His Enemies of greater Rank kept him in and out, which made him then to decline
himself out of the Court-rode; in Voyages to the West Indies, Guiana, New
Plantations, Virginia; or else in some Expeditions against the Spaniard, which
confirmed him a grand Opposer of the general Peace which King James brought in,
and that brought Ralegh to his ruin.

He rose no higher than Governor of Iersey, His Preferments
Lord Warden of the Stanneries of the West, and Captain of the Queens Guard;
which last Place brought him to esteem at Court, but not in the State at all:
by the Queen.
and therefore most men of parts that want of their pride of Preferment, are
tired with lingering expectation of change, from the settled way of Sovereignty;
which in every shift of Princes gives fair hopes to many, neither so mean nor
modest, but to please themselves with Objects of Advance: So this man,
ambitious of his conceited merits, put himself forward, a little too soon.

Busy he had been heretofore, to speak his mind of the general affairs, and
therein he pleased his late Mistress; for then, his inclination went with the
humor of those times of War; but now, his counsel came out of season.

For, at the entrance of the King, he was presented by Ralegh with a Manuscript
of his own making against the Peace with Spain: it was his Table-talk to beget
more esteem, which took accordingly, and the way, to unbend him, was the work
of the Spanish Faction; either to buy him out of that humor, or to abuse him
into worse condition, which was effected by this way.

To mould him into Treason, there was a medley of diverse conditions, His
Conspiracy and manner of Treason.
but the Contrivers were two Priests, Watson and Clark, and Count Arembergh
Ambassador Extraordinary for the Arch Duke, who brought in the Lord Cobham,
and he his Brother, and the Parham, and others, and they the Lord Gray of
Wilton: Then came in Sir Walter Ralegh, the wisest of them all, who dallied,
like the Fly with the flame, till it consumed him.

Willing he was (it seems) to know it, and thought by his wit, to overreach
the Confederates whom he knew well enough, though none but Cobham, (for a good
while) dealt with him; and with him Ralegh played fast and loose, till himself
was caught in the Gin.

There was one Matthew de Laurencie Laurencie.
here at London, but a Merchant of Antwerp, with whom Cobham held intelligence,
for many years before, and for some Reasons of State, connived at, by the late
Queen and her Council. This man, was the property, which Arembergh used to
Cobham, who was now much discontented.

These three made the first step to the Contrivements, and it has been my
jealousy, (for I labored the truth) that Laurencie betrayed it; I being often
present with Sir Walter Ralegh in his Imprisonment, when he privately
discoursed hereof.

But such Designs, like wounds, if they take air corrupt; their Project could
not be covertly carried, consisting after wards of several persons of different
tempers and unsuiting souls; and so, through the rifts and chinks of their
several aims and ends, which could not be close jointed, the vigilance of Cecil
(perhaps) or other Counselors of State* stole a glympse of their Design,
apprehensive enough, to light a Candle, from the sparks of Arembergh's
Discourse.

And being ripe, they were severally examined and restrained, no^ without
watchful eyes on either; then to Imprisonment, and last to their Trials before
the Lord High Steward and the Peers, at Winchester, whither the Term removed,
out of this evermore Pestilential City.

And on the seventeenth of November, His Arreignment at Winchester.
the Day of Arreignment for Ralegh, the Jury called to the Bar, against whose
Persons he did not except, nor could, for they were his Pares, the most able
sufficient of Middlesex, were the Fact had its Scene.

The Indictment was managed by the Attorney General Sir Edward Cook, His
Indictment.
Sergeant Heal, and Sergeant Philips, drawn from the ninth of June, 1603. June,
1603.


The Accusation double, against the King, and against the State; the personal
had two parts, Two parts.
against his life, and to disable his Title to the Crown.

To the first was read Brooks Confession, Brooks his confession.
that his Brother Cobham used these Speeches, That it would never be well, till
the King and his Cubs were taken away; and said, That he thought it proceeded
from Ralegh.

Ralegh answered, That Brooks was his Enemy; it was replied, That Cobham was
ever your Friend; and it would seem a strange malice in Brooks, to ruin his
Brother, to undo you.

To the second part, there was produced a Book (which I have read) A Defense of
the Queens Proceedings against Mary Queen of Scots: The Title could defend it
self, but the matter therein meddled too much in a dangerous consequence, to
the Kings Succession, and treasonable enough.

Cobham had confessed, Cobham's confession.
That Ralegh delivered to him that Book, and he to Brooks, and Brooks to Gray,
upon Cobham's discontent. Ralegh acknowledged, that it contained matter of
scandal to the Kings Title; and that he had leave of Sir Robert Cecil (after
his Fathers death) to look into his Study, for Cosmographical Manuscripts of
the West Indies, and so lighted on this Book.

Cecil then present upon the Bench, Cecils speech,
acknowledged this leave, and said, He would then, as really have trusted him,
as any man, though since for some infirmities of Sir Walter, the bonds of
affection were crakt; and yet, preserving his duty to the King, which may not
be dispensed withal, he swore (By God) he loved him, and had a great conflict
in himself, that so complete a member had fallen from the State.

And this passage needs no soothing to excuse Cecil either Father or Son; for I
have heard Sir Robert Cecil when he was Salisbury to say publicly at his own
Table, that he had intercepted and kept all the considerable Libells against
the late Queen and this King; but though justifiable in them as Counselors of
State, yet was it a crime in Ralegh, who never was any. And this Book, as I
remember, was of one Brag or Crag a Jesuit. But Sir Walter excused all, That
there was nothing acted thereby, to the Kings prejudice, for that Book was
burnt, and others are in print.

But to insist hereupon, Cobham had confessed, that Ralegh had agreed, Cobham's
confessions.
that he should treat with Arembergh for six hundred thousand Crowns to advance
the Title of the Lady Arabella to this Crown; that Cobham under pretense of
traveling, should prosecute this Design in the Low Countries, Flanders,
France, and Spain; and to carry three Letters from Her to the Arch Duke, Duke
of Savoy, and King of Spain; and to promise Toleration of Religion, and Her to
be disposed of in Marriage; that at his Return, he should meet Ralegh at Jersey
(the place of his command) and there to agree, how to dispose the money to
Discontents; and Ralegh should have seven thousand Crowns from Arembergh to
himself.

And further confessed, That Ralegh had instigated him to all these Treasons.

And that Ralegh should say, That the best way to trouble England, was to cause
Division in Scotland.

To this only of Scotland, Ralegh answered, and confessed the words, and that
he had so thought these twenty years. It seems by the sequel since, in these
our days, that he was not much mistaken.

Laurencie confessed, Laurencie's confession.
To have delivered Leters from Arembergh to Ralegh, who presently with Cobham
conferred thereof in private.

To all these, Ralegh craved, Ralegh desires his Accusers to be present.
That Cobham might appear to accuse him face to face.

I may not omit this passage, that when the Confederates had suffered under
some Examination, and restrained to their several Houses; and Ralegh well
knowing that Laurencie was suspected, Ralegh at first discovers Laurencie.
but not examined, then did Ralegh discover in a Letter to Sir Robert Cecil,
where Laurencie was in secret with Cobham, and to advise to apprehend him, and
so to intercept their intelligence, whilst matters were ripe.

What Ralegh's Design was herein, is not imagined, but this use was made of it,
to Ralegh's ruin; for, after that Cobham had denied much of the former stuff,
upon his first Examinations, this Letter was showed to him, under Ralegh's
hand; then Cobham in an ecstasy, railing against Ralegh, delivered his positive
Accusation of him, as is before mentioned, and added, that after Ralegh's first
Examination before the Lords, he writ to Cobham, That although he had been
examined of many matters, he had cleared Cobham of all: when (as the Lords
protested) he had not been at all examined concerning Cobham: and thereby this
was inferred (by the Council) to confirm Cobham, to deny all, when he should be
examined.

Sir Walter said, That Cobham had not signed his Accusation, and that he was at
the worst, but singularis Testis. Cobham singularis testis.


To which the Lord chief Justice gave it for Law, that it was not necessary for
either.

After much pleading, Ralegh urging Law and Scripture, for not admitting a
single witness, to condemn, yet the Court was satisfied by the Judges, to the
contrary.

Then said Ralegh, Prove it by one witness, face to face, and I will confess my
self guilty.

But the Judges were of opinion, not to admit that neither; yet Ralegh insisted
thereon with many stories and Presidents, which took up much time.

But being asked, Will you be concluded, if Cobham should justify his
Accusation, under his hand.

To this it may be observed, that Ralegh made no Answer at all, knowing his
guilt, but consented that the Jury should consult.

The Kings Council being to speak last, Cobham's last Letter condemned Ralegh.
they produced Cobham's Letter, under his hand, writ but the day before. In
effect thus:

That Sir Walter had writ a letter to him, wrapped in an Aple, and cast in at his
window in the Tower, ten days since, to entreat him for Gods sake to write to
him under his own hand, that he had wronged him in his accusations; advising
him to be constant in denials, rather than to appeal to the King.

And now (writes Cobham) It is no time to dissemble, and therefore protested,
before God and his Angels, that all and every part of his accusation of Sir
Walter Ralegh, was substantially true, and added that Ralegh had dealt with him,
since the Kings coming, to procure him a pension from Spain, for Intelligence.

Then Ralegh rayl'd at him, Ralegh desires his Answers to be read.
confessed that letter, and produced Cobhams Answer, desiring it might be read;
which the Attorney Cook opposed, to whom Caecil replied, Sir, you are more
peremptory than honest, come you hither to direct us? and so read it, which in
effect was a Confession, That he had wronged Ralegh, and that he was Innocent.
This bore date ten days before.

And here Ralegh confessed, that Cobham had offered to him a Pension from
Spain, and that he had concealed it, as loath to ruin Cobham.

Then the Jury went out and returned in half an hour their verdict Guilty, So
was sentence as in case of Treason, and he returned to the Tower, where he lay
reprieved 12. years. And three years after that, was executed in October 1618.

Two days before Ralegh trial, Trials of the ^^st.
were sentenced these; Brook, who only excused his intentions, merely to try
faithful Subjects, and said he had a Commission so to do, but produced none.

Markham confessed the Indictment, pleaded discontent, and desired mercy.
Watson confessed he had drawn in all the rest, holding the King to be no
Sovereign, til he were crowned, instancing in Saul, and Jeroboam* Clark said
the like. 1 Samuel 9.


Parham and Brooksby were acquitted by the Jury.

Watson, Clark, and Brook, executed.

Markham, Cobham, and Gray, brought severally upon the Scaffold to die, and at
the instant on the Block had their particular executions remitted by a letter
to the Sheriff under the Kingsown hand, without the knowledge of any person,
but Master Gibb of the Bedchamber, that brought it.

The warrant was directed to Titchburn high Sheriff of Hampshire, The Kings
Letter of Reprieve for three of them.
for staying execution of the late Lord Cobham, Lord Gray, and Sir Gr. Markham
at Winchester. 1603.

Although it be true that all vell-governed and flourishing Kingdoms and
Common-wealthis air establishid by Justice, and that these two Noblemen by
birth that air now upon the point of Execution, air for their treasonable
practices condamned by the law, and adjudget voorthy of Execution thairof to
the Ex^mple and terror of otheris; The one of thaim, having filthily practiced
the overthrow of the q^hole Kingdom, and the other for the surprise of our owin
Person, yet in regaird that this is the first year of our reign in this
Kingdom, and that never King was so far obleished to his people as ve have been
to this, by our entry here vith so hairty and general an applause of all sorts;
Amonc quhom all the Kin friends and allies of the saidis condamnd parsonis,
vaire as fordurat and duetifull as any other our good Subjects, as also that at
that very time of their arraignment none did more freely and readily give their
assent to their conviction, and to deliver thaim into the handis of Justice
then so many of their nearest Kinsmen and allies (as being Peeris) vaire upon
their Jury, as likevaise in regard, that Justice has in some sort gotten
course already by the Execution of the two Priests and George Brook that vaire
the principal plotteris and intisaris of all the rest, to the embracing of the
sadis treasonabill Machinations; ve thairfore (being resolved to mix Clemenie
with Justice) air contented, and by these presentis command you our present
shief of Hampshiere to superseid the Execution of the sadis two Noblemen, and
take them back to their prison again qwhile our further pleasure be knowin. And
since ve vil not have our Lawis to have respect to personis, in sparing the
great and strikking the meaner sort, It is our pleasure that the like course be
also taken vith Markham, being sorry from our hairt, that such is not only the
heinous Nature of the sadis codamned personis crime, but even the corruption is
so great of their natural disposition, as the care ve have for the safety and
quiet of our state and good subjectis vil not permit us to use that clemency
towardis thaim quhich in our owin natural inclination ve might vary easily be
perswadit unto.

James Rex.


However the King was me^cifull, yet an evil fate followed them.

Gray died in the Tower, the last of his line.

Cobham, Markham and others, were afterward releast imprisonment, but died
miserable poor.

And Ralegh fifteen years after lost his life by the Axe for this Treason. See.
1618.

I have been the more prolixe against our Adversaries, Court and Charact. p.
35. Hist. Great Brit. p. 4.
that thereby the world may judge with the Jury, of his Guilt, or innocence.

How could Wade, the Lieutenant of the Tower, Observations of the Trial.
who was always esteemed honest, tamper with Cobham to write his Name to a
Blank, to which Wade framed an accusation against Ralegh, when it appears
Cobham never signed at all to any, which therefore Ralegh insisted upon, for
his advantage in the trial.

But in truth, (besides the confessions) His fatal evidence was Cobhams own
voluntary last letter overnight, writ every whit with his own hand.

The King commanded (as the Court was assured at his trial) that no Examinant
should be wrackt, which made Captain Kemish (the Emissary between them) to
protest afterward in my hearing, that in truth he was threatened with the
wrack, which was showed to him, and that had he tasted thereof, it should have
enforced him, to tell an odd tale, meaning of guilt.

Sir Walter was admitted a chair, pen, Inck, paper, and truly he rather tired
the Court and Jury with Impertinences, though he spoke well.

Not much to remind what we have said concerning the humors of the
Presbyterians, Presbyterians perplez the King.
so thoroughly canvased in all our Scottish discourse. Yet at this time, they
renew their former wont, as in Scotland, and begin to perplex the King at his
Entrance.

To pacify such, He appoints a Conference, to be held with the Episcopacie,
and Them, at Hampton Court. In the mean time to let them see what they should
trust unto, he sets forth a Proclamation,

Against such as seditiously seek Reformation in Church Matters; Proclamation
against them.
And that the Constitution and doctrine here, is agreeable to Gods word, and
near to the Condition of the primitive Church. And forewarnes them of public
invectives, gathering of Subscriptions to supplications for Reformation,
savouring of Tumult, sedition, and violence; Protesting to preserve the Estate
Ecclesiastical as politic, in such form as he found it: Reforming abuses, if
they be made apparent. 14 October. 1603.

But in truth these men were too hasty, and might well remember the King of
such their behavior in Scotland, which to prevent, he did for ever after
advance the power of Episcopacie there, to even that Discipline with this in
England, and to enlarge their Bishops into some Eminency, heretofore clowded
with Envy and Malice.

It was now time so to do, when the Presbyterian Doctrines had amplified into
these Heads.

The Reformation of Religion belongs to the Cominaltie.

The punishment of such Crimes, Knox to the Cominaltie. fol. 49.
as touching the Majesty of God, Knox. apeal fol. 30.
does not appertain to Kings and chief Rulers only, but also to the Body of the
People.

Princes, for just causes may be deposed.

If Princes be Tyrants, Knox. Hist. page 372. fol. 78.
their subjects are freed from their Oath of Obedience.

Populo jus est, Buch. de jure. Regni. p^. 13.
ut imperium cui velit, deferat.

Penes populum est ut leges ferat, sunt Reges veluti Tabulariorum Custodes.

The people have the same power over the King, pa. 25.
as He has over any Person.

It were good, that rewards were appointed by the people, 38.
for such as should kill Tyrants. 40.


The People may arraign their Prince. 62.


The Minister may excomunicate Him. 70.


He that by excomunication is cast into Hell, is not worthy of Life upon Earth.

Objections to some of their Doctrines, with their Answers.

Custom is against such dealing with Princes. Buch d^ jure Regni pa. 49.


Answ. Nothing more dangerous to be followed than Custom.

Ob. We must obey Kings be they good or bad. Knox. apeal fo. 26.


Ans. It is blasphemy to say so.

Ob. Jeremie commanded obedience to Nebuchodonozer.

Ans. The Example is but singular. Buch. de jure regni pa. 53.


Ob. God places Tyrants sometimes for punishment of the People. page 57.


Ans. So does he private then sometimes to kill them.

Ob. The Jews dealt not so with their Kings.

Ans. Their Kings were not first elected by the People, ibid. 57.
but Ours have nothing but from the People.

Ob. Show an Example out of Scripture.

Ans. Sundry good laws in diverse Countries, ibid. 57.
though no Example in Scriptures.

Ob. Saint Paul commands us to pray for Princes. Tim. 2.

Ans. We may punish Thieves, ibid. 57.
and yet we ought to pray for them.

Ob. Saint Paul commands us to be subject and obedient to Princes. Tit. 3.

Ans. Paul writ in the Infancy of the Church, ibid. 50. 57.
the Christian not ripe, nor rich for such a purpose; and if Paul were now
alive, he would leave Kings to be punished by their Subjects, not to be
accounted any longer King, etc.

These and many more such, not only held by Buchanan and Knox* but by their
whole Consistorians beyond seas, as Calvin, Beza, Hitamor, Ursinius Vindicae
contra Tyrannos, Eusebius Shiladephus, etc.

And now was their former proceedings in Scotland Examined according to their
doctrines, for setting up their Co^sistorian Discipline.

The Parliament in Scotland 1560. being disolved, and their Book of Discipline
compiled by Knox and others, which their favorites, notwithstanding termed but
a devout^Imagination, yet they threatened the chiefest Noblemen, if they should
reject it: some refused, but at last it was forced upon all.

They appoint their Assemblies, Knox. Hist. pa. 504.
particular and general.

They exercise Jurisdiction, and cart Saunders for Adultry.

And excommunicate the whole Multitude about a May Pole. Declar. B. 1. 2.


They burn diverse places (pretending of superstition) Bishops houses, Knox
hist. p. 523. 527.
Protestants also at Pasley, the Bishop hardly escaping life.

The very calling of Bishops, Knox Instit* 534.
though Protestants became Antichristian, and command them (by their Authority)
to leave their Offices and Jurisdiction.

That they should have no voices in Parliament, Declar. B. 2.
and desire that such as themselves should send* might vote. Commanding the
King and His Council, under pain of Excommunication, to appoint no Bishops
hereafter, because the Brethren had concluded that estate unlawful.

Beza, their Consistorian Patriarch from Geneva, Epistol. 79.
had assured them of well doing, and moves them, Ne unqnam, etc. That they
would never admit again that Plague (Bishops) although it might allure them of
keeping Unity.

The Bishops being discharged, Declar. B. 3.
they agreed of Superintendents; but that device was laid aside, and afterward
conclude, that Ministers of the word, should be equal; and then began the
Presbytery to flourish.

For then they usurped the whole Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, B.
altering all laws as they pleased,

They assembled the Kings Subjects, Act Parliament.
injoyning Ecclesiastical pains, Cap. 4.
unto them, make decrees, and execute them.

They Traitorously rail against the King in their Pulpits, and being
questioned, utterly disclaim his Authority, as an Incompetent Judge.

That the Pulpit matters, Declar. B. 3.
were exempt from the Judgment, or correction of Princes; They prescribe laws
to the King and State. Appoint Fasts to the whole Kingdom, when their faction
were to act any enterprise.

Anno 1582. The King to prevent the dangerous consequence thereof, Declar. 1582.
diverse of them were silenced and imprisoned, but what was the Issue? They
surprise the King at Ruthen, and declare it to be done, for resisting the
present dangers to Gods true Religion, and for removing from the King the chief
Authors,

The King being afterward released, Parl. 1584. Ca. 7.
that act was adjudged Crimen laesae Majestatis, and some were hanged, others
fled into England.

Yet afterward 1585. They avow the same, Declar. 1585.
and excommunicate such as would not subscribe to Them.

Another treasonable Attempt they had against the King at Sterlin, Anno 1583.

So that in the Parliament, 1584. the Kings lawful Authority Ecclesiastical
was confirmed, Cap. 2.
the Bishops restored, 3.
and to be Treason for any man to procure diminution of the three Estates.

The Judgments, Senates, 4.
and Presbyterian Jurisdiction discharged.

An Act made for calling in Buchanan's treasonable Book, 8.
his Chronicle, and his Iure Regni apud Scotos.

That none shall preach, declame, confer, or utter scandalous words or slanders
against the King or his Council, or to meddle in State Affairs, Sub poena, etc.

And because they did advance their Model, as the most agreeable to the best
and most Reformed Churches against Episcopacy, it was examined the numbers that
refuse their Sanedrim, besides the Eastern and Western Reformers.

All in the Duchy of Saxony, Brunswick, and Luxemburgh.

All those Churches in the Countries of the Marquesites of Brandenburgh and
Badu.

The Churches in the Earldoms of Henebergh, Lemings, Marisfeilt, Stalburgh,
Renestern, Swatrenburgh, Wertenburgh, Hannaw, Oeting, Glick, and Leonstime.

All in the Baronies of Lenefergh, Schenburgh, and Wildenfield.

All the Churches of at least thirty free Cities, Many of whose Territories are
as ample as Geneva, and yet none of them have received the Presbyterian
Discipline.

Add to these, the remainder of the Albigenses and Waldenses in Piedmont in the
parts adjoining, or of the Taborites in Bohemia; the Lutheran Churches also in
Poland, Denmark, and Swethland.

And indeed, Calvin and Beza both are sufficient Judges to prove, they were no
Enemies to moderate Episcopacy, but only against Romish Hierarchy. See Calvin
de necessitate reformandae Ecclesiae, and Beza de grad. Minister. Evangel. 18.
Sect. 3. Themselves well knowing that Episcopacy then did direct the guidance
of grave and wise Overseers, which otherwise would fall into Schisms, and
after grow into Heresies.

These Items, and many more such, were put together, to set them forth in some
measure, until the Day advanced for the Conference at Hampton Court,
Conference at Hampton Court.
in Iaruary.

Whether was summoned by Letters, the Arch Bishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of
London, Durham, Winton, Worcester, St: David's, Chichester, Carlisle, and
Peterborough; the Deans of the Chapel, Paul's, West-Chester, Salisbury, and
Westminster.

On the other part were these Doctors, Reynolds, and Sparks, Mr: Knewstubs, and
Mr: Chaderton, Agents for the (Millenary Plaintiffs, See Confer. at
Hampton Court.
says the Book) and these four were the fittest, that could be found amongst
them all.

The King sent for the Bishops to come before him in private, and entered their
Assemblying, with a grave and princely Declaration of this his general drift;
By example of all Christian Princes, in commencements of their Reign,
establishing the Doctrine and policy of the Church; Henry 8. did it toward the
end of his Reign; Edward 6. altered more; Queen Mary reversed all; and Queen
Elizabeth settled it as now it stands; His happiness is to have no cause to
alter, but to confirm what he finds, and which so affects him, that he
entered into a gratulation to Almighty God, for bringing him into the promised
Land, where Religion was purely professed, and to sit amongst grave, learned
and reverend men, not as before, elsewhere, a King without State, Honor, or
Order, where beardless boys would yet beard him to his face; acknowledging now
the Government Ecclesiastical to be approved by manifold blessings of God,
increase of the Gospel, and a glorious Peace. But as nothing could be so
ordered, but may have additions, and in any State, (as in the body of man)
corruptions might insensibly grow, either through time or persons, of which
some complaints have pretended Reformation: His purpose therefore was, to try
the complaints and remove the occasions, if scandalous; or to cure them, if
dangerous; or, if but frivolous, to take so much knowledge thereof, as to cast a
Sop into Cerberus his mouth, never to ^ark more, to give factious spirits no
occasion of boasting, and to redress what should appear fitting, without any
visible alteration.

And in particular the King signified, The Kings private Demands.
he called them alone, about some points, to be satisfied himself concerning
the Book of Common Prayer and Service.

Excommunication in Ecclesiastical Courts.

Providing of able Ministers for Ireland.

First, Confirmation.
in the Book, [confirming of Baptism] as if without it the Sacrament were
invalid, then were it blasphemous.

Secondly, for the use; at first indeed upon occasion, that Infants being
baptized and answering by their Patrini, it was necessary they should be
examined at years of discretion, and confirmed by the Bishop with a Blessing
and Prayer; but abhorred it as a Popish Sacrament and courleration of Baptism.

About Absolution, Absolution.
that there being only two kinds, General and Particular; all Prayers and
Preaching import an Absolution; the other is to be applied to special parties,
after a scandal and repentance are resolved.

Thirdly, Private Baptism; if private for peace, so did the Primitive Church;
if for persons, none ought but a lawful Minister; and therefore was earnest
against Women and Layicks.

Excommunication.
To consider the matter, whether executed in light causes and too often? In the
persons; why Laymen, Chancellours and Commissioners do it? why not the
Bishops, with the Dean and Chapters, or Ministers, or Chaplains?

Ireland.
This for Ireland was referred to a consultation hereafter.

Confirmation.
The Arch Bishop showed the Antiquity of Confirmation from the Apostles, till
of late some particular Churches had rejected it: he declared the lawful use
thereof; and affirmed, that the Church of England did not hold Baptism
imperfect without it, or added any thing to the virtue and strength thereof:
this he manifested by the Rubricks in the Communion Book before Confirmation.

The Bishop of London said, It did not depend only upon Antiquity, as in
Cyprian, Ep. 73. and Hierom. adversus Luciferian. but was one of the particular
points of the Apostles Catechism in express words, Heb. 6. 2. and so did Calvin
expound that very place, which was read and approved.

That we made it not a Sacrament or Corroboration; and yet the King was of
opinion, it might rather be entitled Examination with a Confirmation.

Absolution.
It was cleared from all abuse or superstition, the Minister does but pronounce
Absolution in general, after the Confession; that in the Communion Book there
was another particular and personal Form of Absolution for the Visitation of
the Sick; and that the Confessions of Augusta, Boheme, Saxon, which be there
cited do retain and allow it, and so does Calvin approve such a kind of
Confession and Absolution.

Private Baptism.
That the Administration by Women and Layicks was not practiced of the Church,
but inquired of by Bishops in their Visitations and censured; and although the
words in the Book might seem doubtful, yet the Compilers did not so intend
them, and yet propounded them ambiguously, (perhaps) that it might thereby pass
in Parliament, and in case of necessity only, and was so, agreeable to the
practice of ancient Church, as Acts 2. where three thousand were baptized in
one day; impossible for the Apostles to do themselves, or improbable, and
besides them there were no Bishops or Priests; and Tertullian and Saint Ambrose
in Ephesians. 4. are plain in that point; laying open also the impious opinions,
who think there is no necessity of Baptism; not, as if without it God could not
save the Child; and the case being put as uncertain, if not baptized; but, if
baptized, an evident assurance, and so rather to ground upon Christ's promise,
than by omission upon Gods secret judgments.

The King replied, That the place Acts 2. was an act extraordinary, the Church
then unsettled and ungrounded, now stablished and flourishing; that he
maintained necessity of Baptism; as to the place of Saint John, Nisi quis
renatus fuerit ex aqua, etc. was meant of Baptism; and that fourteen Months
ago, he did argue in Scotland against his Divines there, for ascribing too
little to that Sacrament; so that (said he) a pert Minister asked him, if it
were so necessary, that being omitted, the Child should not be saved? He
answered, No. But if you be called (though in private) to baptize him, and
refuse, I think you shall be damned.

But he concluded, Necessity of Baptism to be necessary by lawful Ministers,
and none other, and yet utterly disliked Rebaptization, though after either
Women or Laics.

Here the Bishop of Winton affirmed, that to deny baptizing by private persons
in case of necessity, crossed all Antiquity; that the Minister is not of the
essence of the Sacrament, yet is he of the essence of the right and lawful
Ministry thereof; the commission of Christ, Matthew. 28. 20. Go preach and
baptize.

Excommunication.
The King asked, Whether the Name might not be changed, and yet the censure
retained? or whether another coercion equivalent?

He was answered, that it had been heretofore often considered, but Queen
Elizabeth resolved to be Semper eadem, and not to alter what she had settled.

The King professing, That though he lived some time as a Ward, under Puritans,
yet since he was of his Sons age, (the Prince sitting by) he ever disliked
their opinions* though he lived among them, he was not of them.

Opus primae diei.
The perfect Conference.
The Bishops, Deans, and Doctors, (and a Scottish Minister Patrick Galloway was
admitted) and Reynolds, Sparks, Knewstubs, and Chaderton.

The King told them all the intent of the Conference, meet for every King at
his entrance to the Crown; Not to innovate the established Government, which by
long experience he found was accompanied with singular blessings five and forty
years, as that no Church upon the face of the earth flourished more than this
of England. But first to settle an uniform Order therein. Secondly, to plant
unity, for suppressing Papists and other Enemies to Religion. Thirdly, to amend
abuses, being natural to bodies Politic, and to corrupt man, as the shadow to
the body, which once being entered, have motion like a wheel set going; and
because complaints had been made, he thought best to summon the gravest and
most learned, to hear what could be said; and so wished the Oponents to object.

They four kneeled down, Opponents.
and Doctor Reynolds the foreman, after a short Preamble gratulatory,
signified his Majesty's summons, by virtue whereof these appeared, reducing all
matters disliked to these four Heads.

1. That the Doctrine of the Church might be preserved pure, according to Gods
Word. 2. That good Pastors might be planted to preach. 3. That the
Church Government might be sincerely ministered according to Gods Word. 4. That
the Book of Common Prayer might be fitted to more increase of piety.
In the first, Doctrine.
that the Book of Articles of Religion concluded 1562. might be explained where
obscure, and enlarged where defective, viz. Acts 16. the words are these, After
we have received the Holy Ghost, we may depart from grace: which seem to be
contrary to the Doctrine of Gods Predestination and Election in Article 17.
both these words might be explained with this addition, yet neither totally,
nor finally; and that the nine Assertions upon a conference heretofore at
Lambeth, might be inserted into that Book.

Secondly, where it is said in Article 23. that none should preach or
administer Sacraments in the Congregation without lawful calling; he said,
implied, a lawfulness for any man out of the Congregation to preach, etc.
though he had no lawful calling.

Thirdly, in Article 25. touching Confirmation, grown partly of the corrupt
following the Apostles, being opposite to those in the Collect of Confirmation
in the Communion Book, Upon whom after the example of the Apostles; argue
(says he) a contrariety each to other; the first confessing Confirmation to be
a depraved imitation of the Apostles; the second, grounding it on their
example, Acts 8. 19. as if the Bishop in confirming children, did by imposing
his hands, (as the Apostles do in those places) give the visible graces of the
Holy Ghost, etc. therefore he desired that both the contradictions might be
considered, and this ground of contradiction examined.

The Bishop of London first desired his Majesty, That the ancient Canon might
be remembered, Schismatici contra Episcopos non sunt audiendi.

Secondly, that if any of these parties were in the Number of the 1000.
Ministers who had once subscribed, Answer.
and yet petitioned against it, they might be removed, according to a very
decree of an ancient Counsel, That no man should be admitted, to speak against
what he had subscribed, and contrary to a statute, 1. Elizabeth.
to speak against the Liturgy and discipline established, alleging what Master
Cartwright had confirmed, that we ought rather to conform to Orders and
Ceremonies to the fashion of the Turks, than to the Papists,

Concerning falling from Grace, the said Bishop said, Falling from grace.
that very many Men neglecting holiness of Life, presumed of persisting in
Grace, laying all their Religion on Predistination, if I shall be saved, I
shall be saved, a desperate doctrine, wherein we should rather reason
ascendendo than descendendo, Thus, I live in Obedience to God, In love with my
Neighbor, I follow my vocation, etc. I trust God has elected me, and
predestined me to salvation: But contrariwise they use this argument, God
has perdestinated and chosen me to life, and though I sin never so grievously,
I shall not be damned, for whom he once loves, he loves eternally. Whereupon
he showed what was the doctrine of the Church of England, briefly, That we must
receive Gods promises as they are set forth generally in Scripture, and do that
will of God, which is expressly declared in Scripture.

The King wished that the doctrine of Predestination be tenderly handled, lest
on the one side Gods Omnipotency might be questioned, by impeaching the
doctrine of Predestination, or on the other, a desperate presumption might be
averred, by inferring the necessary certainty of standing and persisting in
grace.

To the second it was answered, none but a Licensed Minister might preach,
Licensed Ministers.
nor administer the Eucharist or the Lords supper, and for private Baptism (the
King said) he had ordered already.

The third point was observed, to be of Curiosity or Malice, Confirmation.
because the Article (there read) These five commonly called Sacraments,
Confirmation, Penance, Orders, etc. are not to be accounted Sacraments of the
Gospel, being such as have grown partly of the corrupt following the Apostles,
etc. Insinuates, that the making of Confirmation to be a sacrament, is a
corrupt imitation: But the Communion-Book makes it to be according to the
Apostles example, which being read, the King concluded it to be but a Libel.
Now for the ground thereof, it was not so much founded on the places in the
Acts, but upon Heb. 6. 2. where it is made a part of the Apostles Catechism,
which was the opinion of the fathers, and of Calvin and Fulk, the one upon
Hebrew 6. 1. the other upon Acts 8. 27. where (with Saint Austin) he says, We
do not mislike that ancient Ceremony (of imposing of hands for strengthening and
confirming such as had been Baptized) being nothing else but a prayer over a
Man to be strengthened and confirmed by the holy Ghost, or to receive the gifts
of the holy Ghost, as Saint Ambross says; alluding to Heb. 6. 2, etc. Nor
(says he) is it their opinion, Confirmation to be unlawful, but rather because
they have not the use of this in their own hands, every Pastor in his Parish to
confirm, for then it would be accounted an Apostolical institution. And indeed
Doctor Reynolds seemed to grant, replying, that some diocese of a Bishop had
609, Opponent.
Parish-Churches (as London,) it was inconvenient to commit confirmation to him
alone, as impossible to examine all them.

It was answered, Answer.
that the Bishop usually appoints his Chaplins or Ministers to examine them,
and none are otherwise confirmed but by testimony of the Parsons or Curats,
where they are bred and born; and Saint Jerome says, that the Execution was
indeed restrained to Bishops only, ad honorem potius sacerdotii, quam ad legis
necessitatem. Ecclesiae salus in summi Sacerdotis dignitate pendet; cui si non
Exors quaedam, et ab omnibus eminens detur potestas, tot in Ecclesiis
efficerentur schismata, quot* sacerdotes. It was used anciently, partly to
examine children whether they had been baptized or no, for primitively baptism
was administered in diverse sorts. In Nomine patris et filii, etc. others In
Nomine patris Majoris, et filii Minoris, as the Arrians did; some, in nomine
patris per filium, in Spiritu sancto; others not in the name of the Trinity,
but in the name of Christ, etc. Whereupon Catholic Bishops were constrained to
examine them, who were baptized in remotis. The King concluded, as none should
confirm, so none to preach without the Bishops License.

Doctor Reynolds complained, Opponent. Catechism.
that the Catechism in the Common Prayer Book was too brief, and Nowells was
too long, requested one uniform, and none other. It was thought reasonable, the
King saying, That in Scotland every one well affected, or thought to the son
of a good man, Answer.
set out a Catechism, and what was received in one Congregation, was never
accepted Orthodoxall in another, adding this gromical Canon conclusion, First,
that old intricate questions might be avoided in the fundamental Instructions
of the people; Secondly not to be such a departure from the Papists in all
things, as to be therefore in error, because we agree in some.

Then Doctor Reynolds moved for a new Translation of the Bible, Opponent.
Translation of the Bible.
the old ones of Henry the eighth, and Edward the sixth, being corrupt;
Instanced in Galathians 4. 2^. Psalm. 101. 28. They were not obedient, For not
disobedient. Psalm. 106. 30, etc.

The King complained thereof, and the worst to be Geneva, the Marginal notes
thereof were partial, untrue, seditious, and traiterous, as Exodus 1. 19. the
note allows disobedience to Kings, And 2. Chron. 15. 16. The note taxes Asa
for deposing the Mother and not killing her. That errors in matters of faith
may be rectified, that matters indifferent might rather be interpreted and a
gloss added, concluding rather a Church with some faults then an Innovation;
and surely says he, if these be the greatest matters, I needed not your
complaints.

Doctor Reynolds complained against publishing some Books unlawful, Opponent.
instance that, De jure Magistratus in subditos, published of late by Ficlerus
a Papist, and applied against Queen Elizabeth, for the Pope.

Bishop of London said, Answe^.
That the Author de Iure was a great disciplinarian, whereby it appears what
advantage these Sects afforded, to the Papists, who mutatis personis, could
apply their own arguments, against Protestant Princes.

That for other Books lately admitted, viz: Disputes between Secular Priests,
and Jesuits, the King told Doctor Reynolds, He was a better Colledg-man, than
a Statesman, and willed him and His associates to know, they were permitted by
order of Counsel Table, whereby their schism and his Majesty's title handled,
and the title of Spain confuted; and wherein this State was cleared of putting
Papists to death, not for Religion, but Treason. And thus much concerning
purity of Doctrine.

The second general point. Opponent.
Pastors to be Resident and Learned.

The King had ordered the Bishops to be careful herein, Answered.
but as subita evacuatio was per^culosa, so subita Mutatio. That there were
more sufficient divines, than Maintenance, which must be first provided; young
ignorant Ministers to be removed, if old, death must make void for better;
Jerusalem could not be built in a day.

It was conceived, that Lay-Patrones presented such, as liked their humor and
faction, the Law admitting any mean Clerk, and if the Bishop opposed, a quare
impedit is sent against him.

Some moved to settle a praying Ministry another while, for there are many
excellent duties in the Ministers, Absolving the Penitent, Praying for and
Blessing the People, Administering the Sacraments; but now it is concluded into
one only duty, preaching, often time indiscreetly to the prejudice of divine
service, being usual rather to walk in the Churchyard, than be at the service.

The King said it was most necessary to plant by preaching, but in a Church so
long established in faith, only the Hypocrite placed all his Religion in the
Ear, as an easy passage, but Prayer expressed the hearts affections, and the
true devotions of the mind, puts us to overmuch trouble. There ought to concur
in prayer, an unpartial consideration of our own estates, a due examination to
whom we pray, an humble confession of our sins, hearty sorrow, and repentance
not severed from faith. In the mean time that Homilies might be read; every Man
that can pronounce well, cannot perhaps indite well; to which the Adversaries
confessed. They were told of the Pulpits, made by them Pasquils, a lude custom
to traduce.

Thrird and fourth general heads mingled together.
Here indeed Doctor Reynolds skipt over the third point into it, Subscription.
urging Subscription as an Impeachment to a learned Ministry, and desired not
to be exacted; their reason, The books Apocryphal, enjoined in the Common
prayer book to be read, were in part erroneous. Instanced Ecclus. 48. 10. That
Elias was to come before Christ, and so Christ not to be come, because (says
he) Ecclus. uses the very words of Elias in Person, which Malachi Chap. 4.
does apply to Elias in resemblance, which both an Angel, Luke 1. 17. and our
Savior, Matthew. 11. did interpret to be John Baptist.

He was answered with Sir Ieromes distinction, Canonici sunt ad informandos
mores, non ad confirmandam fidem. The King desired an even Order. Not all
Canonical books to be read in the Church, unless to be interpreted, nor any
Apocrypha at all, where any error, but such as were clear with the scriptures,
else why printed? As the Maccabees, excellent to make up the story of the Jews
persecution, but not to teach a man to sacrifice for the dead, or to kill
himself.

But the King finding them to insist so hotly against Ecclesiasticus, the place
being read, he showed who the Author was, then the cause why he did write it,
next Analyzed that Chapter, showing the precedents and consequents thereof,
lastly, exactly and divinely unfolded the sum of that place, arguing and
demonstrating, that whatsoever Ben Sirach had said there of Elias, Elias had in
his own person while he lived performed and accomplished; So that the Susurrus
at the first mention, was not so great, as the astonishment was now at the
Kings sudden sound and admirable interpretation, concluding, that the opposers
did ill, to impose upon a Man that was dead, a contrary sense; and (smyling)
told the Lords, what, trow ye, makes these men so angry with Ecclesiasticus,
without doubt, they take him for a Bishop?

2. The next objection was that old Crambe ^is posita. Jesus said to his
Disciples, when by the Original, he spoke to the Pharisees; but bearing a double
sense, Disciples was to be left out, or in a different letter.

3. The third Objection against Subscription were Interrogatories in Baptism
propounded to Infants; that out of Austin, Baptizare was credere.

The King said, Ego non intelligo.

Bishop Winton aiming at his meaning, showed the use thereof out of Saint
Austin, and the reason, Qui peccavit in altero, credat in altero.

It was seconded by the King, That the Question should be propounded to the
party whom it principally concerned, as (says he) by example of my self, to
whom Interrogatories were propounded, when he was crowned in his infancy in
Scotland.

Then Mr. Knewstubs fell out with the Cross in Baptism; first, as the offense
of weak Brethren, Romans 14. and 1 Cor. 8. the consciences of the weak not to be
offended.

It was answered, Distingue tempora and concordabunt Scripturae; then a Church
not settled, ours long flourishing; asking them, How long they meant to be
weak? Whether five and forty years were not sufficient? Then, who they were?
For it is not now required Subscription of Laics and Idiots, but Preachers and
Ministers; that it was rather doubted, some of them were not to be fed with
milk, being strong enough, if not headstrong, and thought themselves able to
teach all the Bishops.

Their Objections were, whether the Church had power to institute an external
significant sign?

Answered, It was used in Baptism only as a Ceremony, and as by their own
example, who make Imposition of hands in their Ordination of Pastors, to be a
sign significant; all our actions in Prayer are ceremonies significant; the
Jews to their Moses Pasover have added signs and words, Take and eat these in
remembrance, etc. Drink this in remembrance, etc. Upon which addition and
tradition, our Savior at his last Supper celebration used the same, as
approving that fact of theirs, and generally that a Church may insti^ute a sign
significant.

Doctor Reynolds confessed the use of the Cross ever since the Apostles, but
whether in Baptism, Quaere? It was used in Baptism in the time of Constantine,
who was no Papist.

Mr. Knewstubs said, Though the Church had power to add significant signs, yet
not to add where Christ had ordained but one; as not to add a private Seal to
the great Seal of England.

It was answered, that no sign or thing was added to the Sacrament, which was
fully and perfectly finished, before any mention of the Cross is made.

Then it was opposed, Opponent.
how far such an Ordinance of the Church was binding, without impeaching
Christian liberty.

The King told him, Answer.
He would not dispute that point, but argue as Kings speak in Parliament, Le
Roy s' avisera; adding, that it smelt rank of Anabaptism, saying, A beardless
Boy (John Black) in a conference I had with the Ministers in Scotland,
vouchsafed to say, He would conform to my Ordinances for Doctrine; but for
Ceremonies, they were left in Christian liberty to every man as he was more or
less illuminated of Gods Spirit; even till they grow mad with their own light:
but I will have one Doctrine, one Discipline, one Religion in substance and
ceremony.

They urged the stamping the Brazen Serpent to powder by Ezekias, Opponent.
because the people abused it to idolatry, and so it was abused in time of
Popery.

Therefore said the King, Answer.
It shall continue, because you say, it was abused in Popery to superstition;
it implies, it was well used before Popery, and so now.

Here the King remembered, that he had lived long with such men as these, but
never of them; they do so peremptorily disallow of all things, which had been
any way used in Popery. The Papists object us with Novelties, which truly I
cannot better answer, than to tell them, their abuses are new, but the good
things which they abused we retain, and forsake the novel corruption; for by
the same Argument we may renounce the Trinity, and all that is holy* because
abused in Popery.

What resemblance is there between the Brazen Serpent, a visible thing, and the
sign of a Cross made in the air? The Papists never ascribed any power or
spiritual grace to the Cross in Baptism; the material Crosses are by us
demolished, as you desire, which the Papists used to idolatry.

The third general Head Church-garment.
Then they objected the Surplice to be a Garment used by the Priests of Isis.
Surplice* Opponent.


The King smiled, Is it now borrowed from the Heathen, Answer.
which till now ye accounted a Rag of Popery? We are not in danger of Paganism
though of Papism. Antiquity always used different habits in divine Service,
principally white Linen; and he always desired not further to separate from
the Church of Rome in Doctrine or Ceremony, than she had departed from her self
and her Head Christ Jesus.

The fourth general Head Common Prayer.
Doctor Reynolds would not have these words, Of M^t^imony.
With my body I thee worship. Opponent.
They told me it was divine worship.

The King said, It was an usual English word, of Reverence, not to idolatry.
But Doctor, if you have a good Wife, do her to worship, and more too.

That nothing was more meant thereby, than as Saint Paul 1 Cor. 7. 4. that to
worship the Wife, is for the Man to appropriate his body to her alone; and as 1
Pet. 3. 7. To give honor to the Wife as to the weaker vessel. So to please
them was added honor to the word worship.

The Ring they did not except.

As for Churching of Women, called Purification, the King would not alter that
decent manner in matter or words, saying, Women of themselves are loath enough
to come to Church, therefore all good ways to invite them.

Fourth general Head.
Doctor Reynolds excepted against committing Ecclesiastical Censures to Lay
Chancellours, Discipline. Opponent.
seeing their Authority in Hen. 8. time was abrogated in Queen Mary's, and not
revived, and abridged by Bishops themselves, Anno 1571. ordering, that
Lay-Chancellours should not excommunicate in matters of correction; and Anno
1584, and 1589. not in matters of instance.

The King told them, Answer.
He had conferred therein, and would consider.

D. Reynolds desired to have Provincial Constitutions, 1 Cor. 14.
as the Clergy to meet once in three Weeks; first in rural Deanaries, and
therein to have Prophesying. Secondly, and if not there resolved, Acts 11.
then to be referred to an Arch Deacons Visitation: and so thirdly, to
Episcopal Synod, where the Bishop with his Prebytery might determine.

The King started at the word, Answer.
saying, They aimed at the Scottish Presbytery; which (said he) agrees with
Monarchy as God and the Devil; then Jack, and Tom, and Dick, shall meet and
censure me and my Council, and all our Proceedings. Stay, if once that
Government be up, we shall have work enough.

Sir, said the King to Reynolds, you have spoken for my Supremacy, and you did
well; know you of any that like of the present Ecclesiastical Government,
dislike my Supremacy?

He answered, No.

I will tell you a Tale, After Queen Mary had overthrown Edward 6. his
settlement of Religion, whereupon Mas. Knox in England writes to the Queen
Regent my Grandmother, a virtuous and moderate Princess, telling her, She was
Supreme Head of the Church, charging her in Gods Name to take care of Christ's
Evangil, and suppress the Prelates. But how long trow ye, held this? Even till
he and his Adherents were shuffled in, and understood matters of Reformation,
declined her Authority, assuming all Ecclesiastic into their own hands, and
according to more light wherewith they pretended illumination, made further
Reformation. How they dealt with my good Mother, not allowing to her breeding a
poor Chapel; but her Supremacy was not sufficient Authority: and how with me in
my minority, these times remember.

My Lords Bishops, I thank you that these men plead for my Supremacy now; they
think you too hard for them, but by appealing unto it, as if you were not well
affected; but I say, [No Bishop, no King] I speak not at Random; for I have
observed some of their Gang, to pray for my Person as King of England, etc. but
for Supremacy over all persons, they pass that over. If this be all you can
say, I Will make you subscribe, or hurry you out of England.

Finis secundi Diei.
The next day of Conference, appeared all the before-named, and also were
admitted the Doctors of the Civil Law, Sir Daniel Dunn, Sir Thomas Crompton,
Sir Richard Swale, Sir John Bennet, and Doctor Drury.

The Archbishop presented the King with a note of those points referred to
consideration, the alteration or rather explanation of them in our Liturgy.

1. Absolution or Remission of sins, in the Rubric of Absolution. 2. In
private Baptism, the lawful Minister present. 3. Examination with Confirmation
of Children. 4. Jesus said to them, in the Dominical Gospel, in stead of Jesus
said to his Discipes
The King reading the Common Prayer Book of Private Baptism; [They baptize not
Children] it shall be altered, They cause not Children to be baptized; and
where it is said, [Then they minister it] it shall be, The Curate and lawful
Minister present. Concluding, that he aimed at three things:

1. Words fit and convenient. 2. How things might be best done without
appearance of alteration. 3. To be practiced, that each man may do his duty in
his place.
The King said, High Commission.


1. The parties named in the High Commission were too many and too mean. 2. The
matters too base. 3. That the branches granted out to the Bishops were too
frequent and large.
The Archbishop answered, 1. That albeit the Privy Council were in, all the
Bishops, Judges of Law, and others, but their employment hindered their sitting,
unless supplied by meaner men, Deans and Doctors. 2. The fault may be mean,
that the Ordinary may censure; but often times the Delinquent might be so great
and so wilful, that the ordinary brand of the High Commission is needful.


And for the third, It was to be referred to consultation.

The King was showed the three Articles which are to be subscribed unto, viz.
To the Kings Supremacy, the Articles of Religion, and Common Prayer Book. His
Majesty said, Subscription was necessary to prevent Tumults in the Church, 2ly.
Because the Minister must answer for every Minister, for turpius ejicitur quam
non admittitur Hospes, 3ly. As a good means to discern the parties affection,
and to avoid confusion, and he that would be refractory deserved to be hanged,
praestat ut pereat unus quam unitas.

Touching the Oath ex Officio, the King prevented that old Allegation, Nemo
cogitur detegere suam turpitudinem, Ex officio.
said that civil proceedings only punished facts, but Ecclesiastical Courts
looked unto Fame and Scandal; that there was necessary the Oath Compurgator and
ex officio, with moderation in gravioribus criminibus; 2ly. In such of public
Fame, and to be distinguished, as in Scotland, where lying with a wench, though
but suspected, was made public, to all the states and people, at the stool of
repentance. And here the King described the Oath ex officio, the grounds
thereof, the wisdom of the Law therein, the manner of proceeding thereby, and
the necessary use thereof, In so compendious and absolute order, as the
Auditors were amazed; the Archbishop said he spoke by Gods spirit.

Then was committed to consultation,

1. For excommunication; the Name or censure to be altered. 2. For the high
Commission; the quality of the Persons to be named, and the nature of the
causes. 3. For Recusant Communicants; the weak to be informed, the wilful
punished.
The 4th thing consulted was, for sending Preachers into Ireland; He being (as
he said) there but half a King, over their Bodies, but their souls seduced by
Popery, no Religion, no Obedience; to send men of sincerity, Knowledge, and
Courage.

The last was for maintenance for the Clergy.

Then Master Chadderton requested, Opponent.
that the surpliss and Cross in Baptism, might not be urged upon godly
Ministers in Lancashire, lest they revolt to Popery, instancing the Vicar of
Ratesdale, a Man that doled the Communion bread at the Sacrament, out of a
Basket, every man putting in his hand for himself. Answerr
That letters should be writ to the Bishop there, but if they were turbulent
spirits, they should be enforced to conformity, and a time limited.

Master Knewstubs Opponent.
desired the same favor for the Godly Ministers in Suffolk not to be forced
against their Credits to the surpliss and Cross. Sir, said the King, have we
taken pains, and concluded of an unity and conformity, Answer.
and you forsooth must prefer the credits of a few private men, before the
public peace of the Church. The Scots Argument; because they had been long of
a contrary opinion.

Somewhat was said against their Ambuling Communions, and Master Chaterton's
sitting Communion in Emmanuel College* But finally, they all promised
conformity and obedience, and so parted that Meeting.

Chancellor Egerton, a wise and learned Counselor, wondering at the Kings
ready Disputes, expert and perfect in Divinity, said, That he had read, that
Rex est mixta persona cum Sacerdote, and now he sees the truth thereof in him.

A marvel to some, (in these our last times) why no more able men to be found
for them but four. I shall answer with a truth, and no marvel, That some years
after, when the Roles were examined, that were deposed, they were found to be
but nine and forty in all England; when in Scotland they were reckoned above
nine thousand; so great a stir could so few make here: or else they subscribed
to keep their Livings; and no wonder; they were ever loath to lose all, and many
of them knew how to turn.

And orderly afterward the King put forth two Proclamations, the one,
Proclamation for Uniformity.
To satisfy his Subjects for Unifomity in Religion, according to the
established Laws. And Doctor Abbot and others sent in Apostolical Embassy into
Scotland, to settle the Church and spirits of the Clergy there, as he had done
here, that every spirit led only with piety, and not humor, might be therein
satisfied.

The other Proclamation against Jesuits expresses, Against Jesuits.
That a greater contagion to our Religion was eminent by sundry persons common
Enemies to them both, namely, numbers of Priests, Seminaries, Jesuits,
abounding here, of such as were before and since our coming, and with greater
liberty than they durst have done; upon confidence of innovation in Religion,
and general Pardon at our Coronation, do exercise their Professions, and saying
Mass, and endeavoring to seduce the Subjects from their duty to us, and to
reconcile them to Rome. To prevent infection with Superstition, pernicious to
the soul, and corrupt against Allegiance, is to debar the People such
Instruments of infection; and they are Priests of all sorts, ordained in foreign
parts, prohibited here by the Authority of the Laws of this Land. And therefore
against such, they shall before the 19th. of March next depart out of this
Realm and the Kings Dominions, and not to return hereafter upon penalty of the
Laws in force to be inflicted without any favor. The Reasons and excuses for
this seeming severity toward that sort of Subjects is enforced from the peril
of his Person by late conspiracy of confusion, conceived by persons of that
sort only. And this may satisfy foreign Princes, proceeds from providence, to
prevent perils otherwise inevitable; considering their submission to foreign
Jurisdiction, seems to dispense at pleasure, with the power of their own
Sovereign, or strictest bond of loyalty and love, between a King and his
People. And though it is civilly considered personal respects to the now Bishop
of Rome, (in state and condition of a secular Prince) yet observing the course
and clame of that See, no Prince of our Religion and Profession can be assured
of continuance, unless by assent of other Christian Princes to a general
Council free and lawful, to pluck up those Roots of dangers and jealousies
arising about Religion, as well between Prince and Prince, as between them and
their Subjects; and also to manifest that no State or Potentate either has or
can challenge power to dispose of earthly Kingdoms or Monarchies, or to
dispense with Subjects obedience to their natural Sovereigns; in which
charitable action no Prince shall more readily concur his power, not only out
of particular disposition to peace with all States, but by such union, an amity
might be settled to resist the common Enemy.

Febr. 22. Jacobi I.

This did something allay them, Presbyters displeased.
but not the Presbyters [who by pens and preaching (says he) struck at the
very root of Hierarchy, so that it was a hard question, Hist. Gr. Brit. p. 10.
which of them were the most odious.] Truly both of them, Neither Barrel better
Herring, for the Papists wrought in private, and these that way also, besides
their pittyfull preaching.

And at this time died that learned Archbishop Whitgift, Arch Bishop Whitgift
dies.
a good and pious Man, whom Banckroft succeeded, no great friend to them, but
to satisfy their violence he is entrusted with their directory, a Manuscript
compiled as they gave out to startle the next Parliament, which they deliver to
the Archbishop, but he pretending to have lo^t it when it was called for, and
they without any Copy, devised another so different from the former, as being
afterward compared* the Parliament concluded that every new motion would alter
their Model ad infinitum, so unsettled they were then, and are to this day, as
never to be satisfied with any, as to our trouble and late experience has been
evident. And which this most reverend Whitgift foretold on his deathbed, the
miserable effects of their violence.

Et nunc domine ( said he) exaltata est Anima mea, quod in eo tempore succubui,
quando mallem Episcopatus mei deo reddere rationem quam inter homines exercere.

But indeed Presbyters had so bitten the King and his Kingdom, and now at his
coming it behoved him to quiet them, for as all knew it lay in his power to be
Head of the Protestant Professors, so upon this new access to these Crowns, it
was conceived he might alter all ancient Forms, upon a new score, who having
bit on the Bridle so long at home, it would concern him now, to keep the Reins
free, having entailed Precepts upon his posterity to that end, Instructions, as
frontlets and chains, real and lasting, and bequeathed to them as Legacies to
after age, forewarning his Son in his Basilicon Doron, not to wrest the Word of
God to self-appetite. So now therefore, he resolved, to frame his own and his
peoples affections to follow that true Rule of Scripture, which suffered under
several Interpretations: he therefore commended it to the choice, The
Translation of the Scriptures.
grave, and most learned of this Nation, and commanded them, as they would
answer at Gods Tribunal, to be careful therein, painful and just. They did
so, and we have that blessing amongst us as the most perfect Translation in
English of all others; not without Exceptions in that also from our Adversaries
the Papists and Sectarists.

The Scripture was writ in parts, the most ancient Language was Hebrew, the
most copious the Greek, and Latin the finest; but as the Hebrews in their time
accounted all Languages but their own, Lognasim, or barbarous: so then, that
others might come to the waters of life, we must (as Jacob) role the stone from
the Well, Genesis 19.
that the Sheep may drink of the waters of life; we could not read the Book,
Isay 29.
for it was sealed. And indeed whilst the dew lay on Gideon's fleece, all the
earth was dry: but near before the time of our^blessed Reconciliation by our
Savior CHRIST, Not of the Jew only, but of the Greek also, then God raised up
the heart of a Greek Prince (by descent and Language) Ptolomy Philadelph King
of Egypt, to procure the Translation of the Old Testament into Greek out of
Hebrew, which we call the Seventy Interpreters. The Greek Tongue made familiar
to most Inhabitants in Asia, by reason of their Conquests; and also understood
in many places of Europe and Africa; but yet not so acceptable to some, no not
of the Jews.

For not long after Christ, Aquila, Theodosia, Symmachus, and others translate
it again, these with the Seventy made up the Hexapla, and all together were
compiled by Saint Origin; yet as men they might have failings, which made the
Apostles themselves to leave them, when they left the Hebrew letter.

A few hundred of years after Christ, the Roman Conquests having mastered many
Nations, East, West, North and South, the Old Testament spoke Latin, Latini
Interpretes nullo `modo numerari possunt, too man to be good, being all from
the Greek; which moved Saint Hierom, the best Linguist and most learned of his
age, to translate the Old Testament out of Hebrew into Latin, most admirable.
Thus was it in Greek and Latin, before that the faith of Christ was generally
embraced in the Roman Empire; but afterward most Nations under Heaven followed
their Conversions not by voice only, but by the written Word. So then followed
Gothic, Arabic, Beda into Saxon, Vallus into French, and after two hundred
years, Charles the Fifth, Sur le nome Prudente, and John Trevisa about Richard
2. his time, into English. The Gospels also by many, and afterward we had it
in Henry 8. his time in English; that all men may say, As we have heard, Psalm
48.
so have we seen.

The Church of Rome of long time would not admit them vulgar, in the
Mother Tongue of any Nation, but only in Latin, until of late, permitted
only to some Professors of Papistry by license of their Confessor, who must
be sure to be soured with the Leven of their Superstition.

And would you think now at this time of Translation, that our own Brethren
were better content with the ancient English, so long (say they) in use,
without any more Supervising, alteration or quaint perusal.

To answer them it was said, That all ancient Translatours did review their
former Works, and so got credit even with the Jews, as accurately done. So did
Origin, joined with the Hebrew Original, and the Seventyes Translation. And
Saint Austin exhorted Saint Hierom to a Palinodia or Recantation. I am sure the
Papists have least cause of offense from us: How often have they altered their
Service-books? Of late Pius Quintus did; so that every several Bishop had a
different Officium.

These were the justifiable Reasons that moved King James to command this
Translation of such men as might say of themselves with Saint Hierom, Et
Hebraeum sermonem ex part didicimus and Latinum pene ab ipsis incunabilis. Nor
was it hastily huddled up, (as it is said, the Seventy did it in seventy days)
but it was done over and over again, the pains of seventy times seventy days,
out of Originals, Hebrew, Greek, Latin; consulting with the Translators,
Commentators, of Chalde, Hebrew, Syrian, Greek, Latin: nor neglecting the
several Translations of all the Nations of Europe, until now that it comes out
most perfect.

The Psalms of David turned into Meeter, Psalms translated.
usually sung in our Churches, are the very same done into the Court English
then of King Edward 6. days, by two or three godly men, but not learned, who
took them from the Latin Translations commonly read in our Liturgy; these
Psalms the King wished might then receive more proper Language, and more
congruous with the Text.

Himself afterward versified some, so did others very acute and learned (such
particular Psalms proper to their affections) but the whole body was afterward
done by one, and the phrase not pleasing some peoples humors, (who were versed
in the old, and mostly gotten by heart) they could never be admitted public
reception by command to be bound with the Bible.

If fame has nor over-spoken our Hierarchy of his time, there were not other
soils that yielded either so frequent flocks, or better fed, and went not on
more happily in those high steps of true blessedness, to save themselves and
others in the main helps of tender Pastures and still waters; by the one I mean
an inuring of the people to the principles of Orthodox Doctrines, by the other
an immunity from factions, and disturbance of the public peace of the Church.

It was the Kings observation, That partly the miscarriage of our People into
Popery and other Errors, was their ungroundedness in the points of the
Catechism. How should such souls be other, than turned about with every wind
of Doctrine, that are not well ballasted with solid informations? From whence
it was that the King gave public order for bestowing the later part of the
Religious Day in familiar Catechizing.

It was the ignorance and evil disposedness of our Cavillers that taxed this
course, Catechizing commended.
as prejudicial to Preaching; yet in truth, the most useful is Catechetical;
this lays the Grounds, the other the Walls and Roof; this informs the judgment,
that stirs up the affection; What use is there of those affections that run
before the judgment? or of those Walls that want Foundation? And when that was
in use, I have heard it confessed by some, that have spent the greater half of
their aged life in the station of Gods holy service, they repent nothing so
much, as not bestowing more hours in this Exercise of Catechism, and might
justly quarrel their very Sermons, and wish the greater part of them had been
thus exchanged for this speaking conference. Those other divine discourses
enrich the brain, and the tongue at best; this settles the heart; these but the
descant to the plain song. And if herein Ministers be too much curious to
satisfy the roving appetite of the tickling ears of curious Auditors, their
favor will be no better than injurious. So may you observe an indiscreet
Schoolmaster, whilst he affects the thanks of an overweening Parent, mar the
progress of a forward child, by raising him to an higher Form and Author, ere
he have well learned his first Rules. Heat of zeal to hear, is as natural heat
to the body; there is no life of Religion without it; but as the kindest heat,
if it be not tempered with a due equality, wastes it self and the body too, so
does zeal, not moderated with discretion. It is hard to be too vehement in
contending for main and evident truths, but litigious and immaterial verities
may soon be over-striven, for needless seeking a scruple of truth, to spend a
pound of peace.

The Church of England, in whose motherhood we had just cause to pride our
selves, has in much wisdom and piety delivered her judgment of all necessary
points in so complete a body of Divinity, as all hearts might rest therein, not
their truths only, but their sufficiencies; the voice of God in holy
Scriptures, the voice of the Church in her Articles.

As for her Rules, Forms and Dress, in Discipline, let it be examined whether
the Luminaria magna, the Bishops were so severe, as to introduce antiquated
Orders, or to impose novel Ceremonies, rather did they institute and
discontinue some, though of use, yet superfluous, offensive to weak capacities,
whose judgments could not concoct such fulsom matter, though palliated
heretofore under lively names of Order and Decency.

And yet see what Sir Walter Ralegh said then, prophetically writing the
effects after such Ceremonies should cease.

The reverend care ( says he) which Moses the Prophet and Servant of God had
in all that belonged even to the outward and least parts of the Tabernacle,
Ark, and Sanctuary, Hist. of the World.
witnesses well the inward and most humble zeal born toward God himself. page
249.
The industry used in the framing thereof, in every and the least part thereof;
the curious workmanship thereon bestowed; the exceeding charge and expense
thereof in provisions; the dutiful observance in laying up and preserving the
holy Vessels; the solemn removing thereof; the vigilant attendance thereon, and
the provident defense of the same, which all Ages have in some degree imitated,
is now so forgotten and cast away by this super-fine Age, by those of the
Family, by Anabaptists, Brownists, and other Sectaries, as all cost and care
bestowed and had of the Church, wherein God is to be served and worshipped, is
accounted a kind of Popery, and as proceeding from an idolatrous disposition;
insomuch that time would soon bring to pass (if it were not ^^sisted) that God
would be turned out of Churches into Barns, and from thence again into Fields
and Mountains, and under Hedges; and the Officers of the Ministry (robbed of
all dignity and respect) be as contemptible as those places; all Order,
Discipline, and Church Government left to newness of opinion, and men's fancies;
yea, and soon after, as many kinds of Religions would spring up in Parish
Churches within England; every contentious and ignorant person pleasing his
fancy with the Spirit of God, and his imagination with the gift of Revelation;
insomuch as when the truth, which is but one, shall appear to the simple
multitude, no less variable than contrary to it self, the faith of man will
soon after die away by degrees, and all Religion be held in scorn and contempt.
Which Distraction gave a great Prince of Germany cause of this Answer to them
that persuaded him to become Lutheran.

Si me adjungo vobis, tunc condemnor ab alis, si me aliis adjungo, a vobis
condemnor. Quid fugiam video, sed quid sequar, non habeo.

The time was come the first Anniversary Celebration in England with religious
Rites and sacred Ceremonies of the unfortunately fortunate Nones of August,
noted in Red Letters in the Calendar, Gowries aniversarie day celebrated.
to represent the blood of many thousand Martyrs spilt of that day, by
Dioclesian in Rome; but now to be distinguished with golden Letters in ours, in
memory of two renowned Kings in these Kingdoms; the one receiving life, the
other escaped death, on this day; the Nativity of King Oswald, who united the
Crowns of England and Scotland, which were severed afterward for many Ages,
and who in the end died a Christian Martyr, and sealed it with his blood; the
other King James, miraculously preserved from Gowry's Conspiracy, Anno 1600.
and who now again unites these Crowns: and therefore we may change the old
spell of the Martyrs, Quintum fuge into Quintum cole; if not for the Genesis of
that one into life, yet for this others Exodus out of the Chamber of death.

And as this King never failed of the day Tuesday, weekly, to hear a Sermon, so
neither of the Annual time unto his death, kept holy by him, and all his good
Subjects: and the truth of the Conspiracy sufficiently recorded heretofore, See
1600. and 1608.
and shall be hereafter confirmed, Anno 1608. Though our Historian died it
seems of a contrary faith in that, himself being evenly conform to Gowry's
loyalty, Hist. gr. Br. pa. 12.
Affectiones facile faciunt opiniones; for he passes it over with this Odiism,
That Gowry assaulted him, or he Gowry.

About this time a Commotion was stirred up by some Commoners against
engrossing their Ground; Comotion of some Commoners.
when the King chanced to be invited in his hunting Journey, to dine with Sir
Thomas I. of Barkshire, and turning short at the corner of a Common, happened
near to a Countryman, sitting by the heels in the Stocks, who cried Hosanna
to his Majesty, which invited him to ask the reason of his Restraint; Sir
Thomas said, It was for stealing a Goose from the Common. The Fellow replied, I
beseech your Majesty be Judge, Who is the greater Thief, I for stealing Geese
from the Common, or his Worship for robbing the Common from the Geese? By my
Sale, Sir, (said the King to Sir Thomas) Ise not dine to day on your Dishes,
till you restore the Common for the poor to feed their Flocks. Which was
forthwith granted to them, and the witty Fellow set free, and care soon taken
to quiet Commotions.

The Plague ceasing, which hitherto bounded all men's expectations and persons
at a distance; the people now flock up to London, to take view how the King
would settle Laws and Constitutions afresh for the people. Parliaments
beginnings.
A Parliament was expected, (the peoples Idol in those days) which the King
considered, according to the power and interest of Lords and Commons therein;
and which thus grew up into a Body.

After the period of the Saxons time in England, Herald one of the great men
got power, and put himself absolute, the rest of the Satrapas call in Wi^^iam
Duke of Normandy, (an active and fortunate Prince against the French King) the
Duke leads over hither many the younger Sons of the best Families of Normany,
Picardy, and Flanders: and getting this Kingdom by the Sword, he shared out his
Purchase, retaining to himself a Portion in each County, and called Demenia
Regnt, ancient Demeans, Crown Lands.

He assigns to others his Adventurers, suitable portions to their qualities,
retains to himself dependency of their personal Services, and were styled
Barons Regis, Freeholders.

As the King to these, so they to their followers, subdivided part of their
shares into Knights fees, and their Tenants were called Barons Comitis.

The Kings gifts extended to whole Counties, or Hundreds at the least; the Earl
being Lord of the one, and a Baron of the inferior Donations, to Lords of
Townships or Manors.

As the Land was thus divided, so was Judicature; each severally, from the King
to the meanest Lords, had their Court-Barons, yet perhaps Reddebant Iura by
twelve of the Jury, called Freeholders Court, who with the Them or chief
Lords were Judges.

The Hundred was next, whence Hundredus or Aldermanus, Jury were Judges, so
Lilburn pleaded.
Lord of the Hundred, wherewith the chief Lord of each Township judged within
their Limits.

The County or Generale placitum was next, Ubi Curiae Dominorum^probantur
defecisse pertinet ad Vice-comitem Provinciarum.

The last was Generale placitum apud London, universalis Synodus, Parliament of
King and Barons only.
the Parliament of England, consisting of King and Barons only, who ruled
affairs of State, controuling all Inferiors.

So were there certain Officers of transcendent power for executing (not
bounding) the Kings will, those were Steward, Constable, Marshal, heretofore
fixed in Fee to Families; they (as Tribunes) grew too bold, and their power was
lessened after the death of that daring Ea^l of Leicester slain at Evesham.

Henry 3. by hard experience of his Father, lessened their power, by examining
their usurpations over Regality, being become Tot homines tot Tyranni.

Then began the favor of Kings to the Commons in Parliament, The Commons taken
into Parliament.
and they to join with the Peers, from whence it became the wisdom of Princes,
how to manage this Government, and to maintain this Form, Lest some of this
Body knit under one Head should swell and grow monstrous.

And Monarchy may sooner groan under the weight of Aristocracy, as it often
did, than under Democracy, which till now it never felt nor feared. The Actions
of which singly are inconsiderable, after many Conjunctions grow at last into
one great perfecting power, or into Destroying Factions, like smaller Brooks
falling into some Main River.

The Parliament of England, Of the Parliament of England.
of long time, and at this present, was come to be a Convention of the Estates
of the Kingdom, assembled by the King, of Bishops, Peers, and Peoples
Commissioners. They sat in two Senate-Houses, or Chambers, named a Higher and a
Lower.

The Higher (called also the House of Peers) the Bishops and Peers, viz. Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, and Barons sit together; with whom sit the Judges of the
law, for their advice, not voice.

The Lower House (called also the House of Commons) is constituted of Knights
of the Shire; two Elected of every Shire, and of Cities and Incorporations, one
or more Burgesses. The day and place of Assembly is appointed by the King, and
adjourned, removed elsewhere, and dissolved at his pleasure.

The Lords or Peers are called by writs transmitted to them under the Kings
hand. The Commons, by the Kings writ out of Chancery.

The writ to the Peers runs thus, The writ to summon the Peers.
James by the Grace of God, etc. To the most reverend father in Christ (so he
styles the Bishops) Cousin, (if he speaks to the Peers) for as much as by the
advice of our Council, upon some diffident and urgent affairs, us and the
State, and defense of our Kingdom of England; and the Church of England
concernant; We have ordained that our Parliament be held at, etc. there to
consult and Treat with you and the rest of the Prelates, Nobles, and Heads, of
our said Kingdom of England. We strictly charge and command you on your faith
and love (if to the Bishops) by your fealty and Alleagance (if to the Peers)
wherein you stand bound to us, that considering the difficulty of the said
affairs, and the dangers iminent, laying aside whatsoever excuse, you be
personally present on the said day and place with us, and the rest of the
Prelates, Nobles, and Heads, to treat and give your advice, touching the said
affairs; and this as you tender us and our Honor, and the safety of our said
Kingdom and Holy-Church, and dispatch of the said affairs, may you in no wise
omit (if he writes to the Bishops) to warn the Dean and Chapter of your
Church, and the whole Clergy of your Diocese, that the same Dean and
Archdeacons in their proper persons, and the said Chapter by one, and the
same Clergy by two sufficient substitutes, having plenary and sufficient power
from the said Chapter and Clergy, be personally present on the said day and
place, to consent to these things, which then and there by the favor of the
divine Clemency, shall happen to be ordained by the Common advice of our
Kingdom. Witness ourselves, etc.

The other writ to the Sheriffs and Mayors of the Cities and Corporations, is
thus. The King to the Sheriff Greeting. For as much by the advice and consent
of our Council (and so goes on as above) and there to confer and treat with the
Prelates, Peers, The writ to summon the Knights and Burgesses.
and Heads of our Kingdom. We strictly charge and command you, that by
proclamation made in your Shire, upon the receipt of our writ, you cause two
Knights, with swords by their sides, the most sufficient and discreet of the
Shire, and of every City of that County two Citizens, and of every Borough two
Burgesses of the most discreet and sufficient, to be freely and indifferently
chosen by such as shall be present at the Proclamation, according to the form
of the Statutes on that behalf set forth and provided; And the Names of the
said Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, to be inserted in certain Indentures, to
be drawn between you and them, that shall be present as such Elections, whether
the persons so chosen be present or absent; And then to come at the same day
and place, so that the said Knights have full and sufficient power for
themselves and the Communalty of the said Shire, and the said Citizens and
Burgesses for themselves and the Communities of the Cities and Boroughs
respectively from the same, to do and consent to such things, as then and there
shall happen by Gods assistance to be ordained by the commune advice of our
Kingdom, concerning the affairs offered, so that by your neglect therein, the
said affairs in any case remain not undone. Notwithstanding we will not that
you or any other Sheriff of our Kingdom be chosen.

At the day and place they meet at the Church first, then at the
Parliament-Houses, orderly in their Robes, with solemn gate, such as might
increase in the people, the authority of their siting.

Then the King enters the Upper-House, and either in his own person, or by the
mouth of his Chancellor, declares the weighty causes of their Assembling, in
Contemplation whereof, he desires their advice, to communicate their Counsels,
(in doubtful matters, most certain.)

That himself be present at these consultations, needs not, but only as often as
he sees good. There is no necessity after this, unless in the end of the
Session, to add the strength and force of Laws, to their results.

The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in the Lower House, are Man by Man called
forth by their Names, by some one delegated by the King, and each is made to
take the Oath of Allegiance, Oath of Allegiance.
heretofore was this. I will keep true faith and Allegiance to James by the
grace of God, etc. King, His Heirs and successors: Him and them I will defend,
to my utmost strength, and with the hazard of my life and fortunes, against all
conspiracies and attempts against his Person, Crown, and Dignity.

And lest any should dream of a Consortship in Government, there was superadded
the Oath of Supremacy in these words.

I A. B. do utterly testify and declare in my conscience, Of Supremacy.
that the Kings Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and all
other his Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical things or causes, as Temporal; and that no foreign Prince,
Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate has, or ought to have, any Jurisdiction,
Power, Superiority, Pre-eminence or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual
within this Realm; and therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all foreign
Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities and Authorities; and do promise that from
henceforth I shall ^ear Faith and true Allegiance to the Kings Highness, his
Heirs and lawful Successors, and to my power shall assist and defend all
Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences and Authorities, granted or belonging
to the Kings Highness, his Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the
Imperial Crown of the Realm.

Thus obliged to their duty they choose a Speaker, whom they accompany to the
King, whose Election they desire him to ratify, whom the King usually is
pleased with, which done, the Speaker in his own and the House of Commons name
gives thanks, and beseeches, That the Lower House may use their Privileges and
freedom of debating; That if any therein shall happen to be more earnest in his
own opinion, his Majesty will vouchsafe not to take it ill, nor be angry, and
that they may have access to the Kings Majesty or Higher House, as often as
matters require* which leave being granted, they are dismissed.

Both Houses have free liberty to debate of matters propounded by the King, or
touching making or abrogating Laws, and to determine; to commit to writing what
is to be transmitted to each other by Messenger; whereto if upon debate had,
there ensue an assent by Votes, the consent is noted upon the top of the Bill
in this form, amongst the Lords, Les Seigneurs ont assentes; among the Commons,
Les Communes ont assentes: but if they differ, both Houses (not seldom) meet,
or else principal persons chosen out of them, to confer together in a
commodious place for their meeting in the Painted Chamber; there the Commons
standing and uncovered, with great observance, receive the Lords, covered and
sitting, and there they confer; if they discord, that business comes to
nothing; but if they agree, they present it to the King, which if he allows, he
writes, Le Roy le veult, and so, as by a Soul infused into a Body, it receives
life, and becomes an effectual Law, forthwith to be promulgated to the People;
but when the King refuses to approve it, he writes on the top of the Leaf, Le
Roy s' avisera; sometimes he denies it in terminis, and thereupon are reputed
dashed.

The sacred matters the King permits not to be handled by Parliaments,
Ecclesiastical matters.
but Synods, unless (it may be) for the force of Laws from Parliamentary
Authority, which they cannot so fully obtain from their divine verity. The
Deans, Archdeacons, Procuratours for the Chapters, as also for every
Arch-Deaconry, the former being delegated by the Suffrages of the Prebendaries,
these of the Ministers, meet in a place assigned to debate touching them, where
having first chosen a Prolocutor in the name of the Clergy, they determine
concerning Heads of Religion, Ceremonies, and other matters belonging to the
Church; as also granting of Subsidies to the King; whose Results
notwithstanding, are not obtruded on the Seculars to be observed with the
Authority of Laws, until (as abovesaid) they be allowed by assent of King and
both Houses, being provided, That Civil hands should not intermeddle in these
affairs.

Our Chronicles tell us, That Queen Elizabeth expostulates with the Parliament,
for that they had appointed a Fast without her advice, and were not restored to
her favor* but upon obtaining of Pardon.

Both Houses have respectively their peculiar Privileges.

To the higher House, Lords Privileges.
not only to give counsels and to assist in making Laws, but likewise to
exercise the power of Judicature, and so of imposing Oaths in the more weighty
causes, as corruption of Judges and Magistrates, and in last Appeals, which yet
to bring back to examen, without the Kings permission and Patent, (the Lawyers
say) is praeter-legal, nor do they so, unless the Judges of Law sitting by.

The House of Commons have Privileges of supplicating and craving Right, Lower
House.
or else the Accusers part, never challenged to it self the Office of Judge,
save within their own Walls, and on their proper Members; and that extended no
farther than penalty of Imprisonment, or Mulct; never having any right of
pressing an Oath; and therefore in a Statute the House of Commons say, That
seeing Parliamentary Judicature belongs to the King and Lords and not to the
Commons, that they might not be obliged contrary to Custom to give Judgment.

If any doubt touching the Election of their Members, it was heretofore
determined by the Lords House, or by the Judge of the Kings Chancery.

If any of them had departed from the Houses without the Kings leave, and both
Houses also, he was convened before the Kings Council Table, or Kings Bench, to
undergo the penalty, and was not punished at the discretion of his own House of
Commons.

But they have Privilege first to debate and determine of levying money among
the People.

This was the temperament of King, Parliament, and People in proper parts, not
harming each other; Harmony of all.
for the Kings supreme Authority and Sword is as a sufficient power to
vindicate the Laws from the Factions of the Grands and popular Tumults; whilst
in the mean time, the Lords with that chief Authority wherewith they are vested
of Judicature and Legislation, put a curb, on one hand to the Kings Tyranny (if
he extravagate) on the other, to the tumultuating populace; and in semblable
manner, the People, by that their power of accusing whom they please, and of
granting or denying moneys, are in a sufficient capacity to retrench the
licentiousness of the Nobility, and of the Kings Counselors, and break the
Kings impetuous incroching on the public.

The Laws have exceedingly provided, That the freedom of voting and debating be
not hindered, through fear of insolent persons; therefore none may come into
either of their Houses, with a Sword, or armed.

The Members and their Servants not to be arrested for Debt, or offenses,
though of a mean alloy, and if any so attached, he may not be free, but by a
Writ out of the Chancery.

Seldom, and that upon weighty cause, would Kings create offense to so
venerable an Assembly; however it has so fallen out, that excellent Princes upon
too great provocations have reprehended the Senate, and punished some Offenders,
convening them before the Judges of the Kingdom, imprisoned, fined, and put to
death sometimes.

Thus (by past) stood the state of Parliaments, when the King came in, King,
Queen, and Prince ride in triumph.
and calls one in March; the King, Queen, and Prince some days before rode from
the Tower to his Palace of White Hall, in such Triumph as the several Pageants
at each convenient place, with excellent Oratory, assured them the affections
and duty of his Subjects, as they did some days afterward when the like
occasion presented them in state to this Parliament.

And as usual with all Sovereigns his Predecessors, First Session of
Parliament.
themselves or Chancellor, sweetens the Members with some Rhetorical Oration,
to the purpose of calling that Assembly; and this the King undertakes now, as
best able of any Prince his Predecessors, or any other Assistant, for wit or
wisdom to compare with him: and therein he lays open his heart to both Houses,
in a very long Speech. But because it is in print, and bound with the Volume of
his Works, I shall adventure to abreviate here, for some light to the Reader,
in this History which follows. But then, in this, as in other his most eloquent
and graceful Speeches hereafter, where you meet with any of his, to turn
Martial his Apostrophe upon me.

Tu male jam recitas, incipit esse tuus. And first, he discovers his real
constitution and thankfulness in three Forms and Reasons of his Convention of
them. The Kings speech in Parliament abreviated.


In the first he renders to them (the Representatives of his People) his
Princely thanks, for their affection in receiving him in his Right to the Crown.

The other two, 2, 3.
he describes by the effect of his Actions, and shows them the blessing of his
Person, in their outward Peace with his Neighbors, with whom he found this
State imbroiled.

Secondly, Peace and Unity in Religion and Manners.
Peace within, issuing not only by his lineal descent from Henry 7. in the
union of the two Houses of Lancaster and York, but also the union of these two
Kingdoms, illustrated in the conformities of Religion, Language and Manners; in
their security of salvation, encompassed with a Wall of Water, and therefore,
Quae Deus conjunxit nemo separet. And he being the Husband, Head, and Shepherd,
advises them to a joyful Union, by comparison of this blessing in the Union of
the petty Principalities, heretofore of this Nation, into one Kingdom; as also
the composure of diverse Duchies in the entire Monarchy of France, those being
happy though conjoined by the Spear of Bellona; but we, the greater blessing,
being bound up by the Wedding-Ring of Astrea, having an appearance of
perpetuity in the blessing of h^s hopeful Issue, and his profession of true
Religion, which he distinguishes from the Catholic Papist, and also from
another Sect (rather than a Religion) which he calls a Puritan Novellist,
differing from Truth in a confused Form of policy and parity insufferable.

He acknowledges the Roman-Church to be our Mother Church, defiled with some
Infirmities, as the Jews Church before Christ Crucified* But as not wishing a
sick man dead, but his body to be purged, Excusable in the Laics, either as
well minded subjects, inured thereto by birth and custom of Age, or young by
evil Education, and therefore not to punish their Bodies, for the Errors of
their Minds.

As for their Clericks, their doctrine and practice insufferable; The
Arrogancy of the Popes Supremacy in the One, and Murdering Kings in the
other. Otherwise he does reverence Antiquity, in the points of Ecclesiastical
Policy, and so cleers himself from Heresy in Faith, or Schism in Government.
But with this Caution to all, as he is a friend to their Persons, so an Enemy
to their Errors. Advising the Bishops, by their Exemplary Life to convince the
others doctrine.

The third Reason of calling this Parliament, in the action of his
thankfullness is, first, in making Some Laws, by preserving the weal of the
Kingdom, and in discretion, of not making too many, because In corruptissima
Republica plurimae Leges; Secondly in execution of them, by the Judges and
Magistrates; whom he advises not to utter their affections in that Office, of
Hate to a Foe, or Love to a Friend, fear to offend the Great, or pity to the
misery of the meaner, but to be blind in distinction of Persons, Handless for
bribes; and therefore describes them, three principal qualities, Knowledge to
discern, Courage and Sincerity to execute.

And thus having told them the three causes, tending only to his thankfullness
but in diverse forms. The first by Word, the Other by Actions, he concludes
himself to be Inutilis servus; His felicity consist^ng in their prosperity; and
gives them his Apology for three things, expected from him by so many;
advancement of Honor, preferment of credit, and reward in Land. In all he has
been reasonable and honorable, for refreshing some persons that were Members of
a Multitude, and if his infirmity has exceeded, He blames the Importunity of
Suitors, which experience, time, and labor shall recover, to teach his Subjects
not to crave, nor he to grant.

The Parliament unused to Princely Eloquence and Learning withal, Union with
Scotland intended.
contracted their dutyfull affections to his Eminent virtues, and willingly
understood the Kings aim, to unite also the two Kingdoms; which was soon put
forward by proclamation of his Title of Great Britain, our coins, all Ensigns
of honor quartering this Conjunction of crosses, Red cross for England, and
Saint Andrews white for Scotland.

And the Parliament by act, Commissionate eight Lords and twenty Commons to
treat with other Commissioners Scotchmen, for the honor and profit of both
Nations.

The King thus far settled with his Parliament and people, not without wonder of
all our Neighbor Nations, Ambassadors for Peace.
having lain at watch for conveniencie and honor, to piece with so potent a
Prince, the advantages alike to either.

They came almost together, The Constable of Castile from Spain, and another
from the Archduke, Rory Duke of Solia from France, to treat of Peace,
Barnevelt from the Netherlands. Solia was a gallant Man, an excellent Courtier
as they are all. His business needed no other policy of State, but to
congratulate the Kings peacable and happy Possession, for they had a Leiger in
Scotland, that came in with the King. But the other two were Enemies, and were
to treat for establishing a firm Peace, which was granted, Co: and ch: pa.
and do doubt they might make up of their Masters bounty to be so soon
dispatched, for France mightily opposed, and with little cunning of our Counsel,
the Spaniards dealt their golden Pistols to hit the mark. And as they lay
equally ready, so their desires for Convoy hither, came together and had order
accordingly. Sir Robert Mansell Vice Admiral for the Narrow-Seas attended at
Graveling for the Spaniard. And his Vice Admiral of the Fleet Sir Ierom Turner
at Calais for the French, who coming first disputed the choice, and desired the
Admirals ship, but being told that he was commanded by Commission for the
Other; Monsieur in much disdain, put himself in the French Passage-boat, and in
a brave, bore his flag on the Top. Mansel commands Turner to shoot a warning
and after to hit, who took in his flag; but complained at Court, where his
faction was powerful: yet the Justice and honor of that old Custom and
Authority, maintains his Act against them all, being in himself besides, a
gallant brave Commander.

The Puritan was much troubled to be ranked with the Papist in the Kings
Parliament Speech, and to be termed so: and somewhat they said too saucy, and
therefore were to expect more cause to chaw the cud* for the King proclames all
Conformity to the form of Gods Service, Proclamation to conformity in
Church Discipline.
established in Doctrine and Discipline to Gods Word, and the Primitive Church;
that the Conference of late at Hampton Court concluded no cause of alteration,
notwithstanding the fiery pretended Zelots renewed the Question in Parliament,
and had been satisfied by the Kings Speeches and otherwise; that particular and
personal abuses are remediable other ways than by general alteration. That all
shall conform and have warning till the last of November next, o^ otherwise to
dispose of themselves or Families, to other meet persons in their places, July
1604.

These men were now stark mad, and intelligence hereof they send to their dear
Brethren in Scotland, that they should be enforced also to conform to the utter
destruction of their Sion there. To qualify this News, another Proclamation
comes out in September after, against such calumnious surmises. That the King
will not alter that Form of Government, proper for their constitution, without
Counsel there; and so refers men's ^xpectation to the general Assembly to meet
at Dundee in Scotland in July after.

It was usual with the Presbyters in Scotland to have a general Assembly once a
year, Assembly of the Church in Scotland in spite of the King.
and oftener, pro re nata, upon any urgent occasion. The last was a little
before the Kings coming hither, 1602. And the next this appointed at Aberdene
this year, and therefore then adjourns that Meeting, (unto which he especially
had an eye, as mistrusting their ill humors) to this Summer, 1604. And now also
prorogues it to a longer day by Proclamation in Scotland. Notwithstanding
thirteen of them convene at Aberdene, and in spite of the Council Authority,
they formallized their Judicature by constituting a Moderator, a Clerk, and
other essential Members. The Privy Council there send a Messenger accompanied
with a Herald of Arms, to discharge and dissolve their Meeting. These holy
Fathers in this Sanhedrim, protested, They would not, nor could, give way to
the Kings sacrilegious power usurped, which properly belonged to the Church
virtual the Assembly, and so sat still till they pleased, and after appointed a
day for the next Assembly. The King hears of this, and commands them to be
cited and punished.

These men undanted, appear with a Protestation, a Declination from the Kings
Council, and appeal to their own next General Assembly, as the sole and
competent Judge; and were therefore pursued criminally before their Lord Justice
General upon the Act of Parliament, 1584. for Treason.

Some of them acknowledged their fault, the rest (Zelots) were convict ad
terrorem, and banished, and after upon submission, were restored to better
Benefices.

The excellent Acts and Laws in this Session prorog^ed to the fifth of
November, Hist. Gr. Brit. p. 27.
I find our voluminous Historian passes over, excepting against their number
too tedious for his brevity, being unwilling to mention any thing of so much
honor to the King, though he can waste time and paper to tell you, that the
blessing of his Initiation Peace and Plenty, brought idle people to Luxury;
Roaring-boys, Bravadoes, Roisters, and makes it a fault in the King, that he
breeds his People no better.

The Parliament began the 19. of March, 1603. and continued until the 7. of
July 1604. and then prorogued unto the 7. of February.

In this Parliament they made a Recognition of the lawful descending of the
Crown to the King, his Progeny and Posterity.

Commissioners of England and Scotland for to treat of the Union.

That no Bishop should assure Lands to the King.

Former Statutes against Recusants to be executed.

Diverse other Statutes concerning the City and several Towns Corporate, as also
other Statutes for the good of the Land.

And conclude with a Subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage of Wools, etc.

The Kings second Son Charles, heretofore in Scotland created Duke of Albany,
The Kings second Son Charles created Duke of York.
Marquess of Ormond, Count Ross, and Lord of Ardmannoth, is now this year
created Duke of York, by the girding of the Sword, Cap and Circlet of Gold put
upon his Head, and golden Verge into his Hand, to him and his Heirs males for
ever, with the Fee of forty pounds per annum, out of the issue and profits of
that County. He is made by Patent* and witnessed by all the Lords of the Privy
Council and other Peers of the Realm at Westminster, the 6. of January, 2. Iac.
1604.

K. Edw. 3. by his Charter created Edward his eldest Son the black Prince Duke
of Cornwall cum feodo, to him and his Heirs the first begotten Sons and Dukes
of the same place; so that he that is hereditable Duke of Cornwall is Dux
natus, non creatus; and the first day of his birth is in Law presumed to be of
full age, and may sue out his Livery, as at one and twenty years; and this was
the first Duke in England; the reason may be, because the Norman Kings
themselves were Dukes of Normandy, for a long time they adorned none with this
Honor of Duke.

The Papists had very evil success in all their Designs heretofore against
Queen Elizabeth and her Religion, Powder Treason.
and were somewhat quieted, in hopes that the Kings reception hither, might
prove troublesome, and so proper for them to work in such waters: but the Kings
late Speech was desperately understood; for they being denied Toleration, plot
his and the whole States destruction, by blowing up all in the House of
Parliament; A story so horrid, and therefore so necessary to be communicated,
to the memorial of our Childrens Children.

The Parliament having been twice prorogued already, Powder Treason the story.
in regard of the Seasons of the year and the Terms; The time drawing near
their Sitting, upon Saturday ten days before, about seven of the clock at
night, a Letter sealed was delivered by an unknown Fellow unto a Footman of
the Lord Mounteagle, Son and Heir to the Lord Morley, charging him to give it
to his Lords own hands, who opening the same, found it without Date or
Subscription, and in Letters not easily legible, and the matter to him, less
intelligible; but as God would have it, he in this doubt, repairs herewith to
the Earl of Salisbury, principal Secretary of State, who also in some doubt of
the construction, the King being absent, in his return from Roiston, they
acquainted the Lord Chamberlain the Earl of Su^folk herewith, and after
consultation they joined the Lord Admiral, the Earls of Worcester and
Northampton, but stayed all manner of proceeding, until the Kings coming
Thursday night next after.

Salisbury shows it him. The Letter was.

MY Lord,
out of the love I bear to some of your Friends, I have a care of your
preservation; therefore I would advise you, as you tender your Life, to devise
some Excuse, to shift off your attendance this Parliament, for God and Man have
concurred to punish the wickedness of this Time. And think not slightly of this
Advertisement, but retire your self into your Country, where you may expect
the event in safety; for though there be no appearance of any s^ir, yet I say,
they shall receive a terrible Blow this Parliament, and yet they shall not see
who hurts them.


This counsel is not to be contemned, because it may do you good, and can do
you no harm, Anno 1605.
for the danger is past so soon as you have burnt the Letter: and I hope God
will give you the grace to make good use of it; to whose holy protection I
commend you.

The King conceived the Letter not to be contemned, the style quick and pithy,
not usual with Libells, and judged the words [terrible Blow this Parliament,
and not see who hurts them] to be meant by Gun-pouder, joining thereto the
other words [For the danger is past so soon as you have burnt the Letter] to be
meant sudden and quick danger, as the blaze of Paper by fire. This was the most
happy construction of [burning the Letter] which in truth, was only as the
ordinary advice in Letters of secrecy, to burn them, lest they should tell
Tales, or bring danger to the person receiving them.

However, at the next Meeting with the other Lords, it was determined to search
and view the Rooms of the Parliament-Houses, by my Lord Chamberlain, to whose
place it belongs, where the Vault under the Lords House was stuffed with Wood and
Coals, hired by Master Thomas Piercy, Kinsman to the Earl of Northumberland,
for his private use, lodging in the Keepers house, one Whineyard. Piercy was a
violent Papist, and Mounteagles Friend, who presently made judgment, that the
Letter might come from him: so that the care and further search was committed
unto Sir Thomas Knevet, a Justice of the Peace for Westmi^ster, who the night
before the Parliament, at twelve of the clock with competent assistance, at the
very entrance without the Door of the Lodgings, they seize in safety one Guido
Fauks, calling himself John Johnson, and Piercie's man, booted and dressed so
late. Then searching the Vault, and removing some Billets, they found six and
thirty Barrels of Powder, and after in Fauks his Pocket three Matches, a Dark
Lanthorn, and other Implements, nay, the Watch, therewith to tell the Minutes
for Execution. All which he soon confessed, and that had he been within, they
should all together have found the effects of sudden destruction.

About four of the clock Knevet presently acquaints the former Lords, who arise
and tell the King, that all was discovered, and one man in custody. Instantly
the Council convene, examine Fauks, who of a Roman resolution, refuses to
discover any Accomplices, owns the Plot himself, moved only for Religion and
Conscience, being a Papist, denying the King to be his lawful Sovereign, but
an Heretic.

But the next day carried to the Tower, and threatened with the Rack, his Roman
guise visibly slackened, and by degrees he appeared, relenting, and so
confessed all.

That a Practice in general against the King for relif of the Catholics was
propounded to him about Easter was Twelve-moneth beyond Sea, in Flanders, by
Thomas Winter, and after in England was imparted to Robert Catesby, Thomas
Piercy, and John Wright, and Catesby designed the way to blow up the
Parliament, Fauks his Conf^ssion of the Design.
because (he said) as Religion was suppressed there, Justice and Punishment
should be there executed.

Piercy hires a House near the Parliament House, and began our Mine, December
11. 1604. The Workmen were these five, and after that another, Christophor
Wright: the Mine wrought to the very Wall was so thick, that we took in another
Labourer, Robert^Winter; and whilst these work, Fauks watched Sentinel, always
with Muskets and Arms, rather to die than be taken.

But being half way through the thick Wall, they heard a noise on the other
side, removing Sea-coals in the Cellar adjoining, which so pat for their
purpose, Piercy hired Coals and Cellar for a Twelve-moneth, and so saved their
other labor, and fitted the Cellar with Wood and Powder.

That about Easter the Parliament prorogued till October, they all dispersed,
and Fauks retired to the Low Countries, to acquaint Owen with the Plot, and
returned about September, and withdrew into the Country till October 30.

That the same day of Execution, some other Confederates should have surprised
the Princess Elizabeth, at the Lord Harington's in Warwickshire, and proclaimed
her Queen.

He confessed, that others were privy to this Conspiracy. Sir Everard Digby,
Ambrose Rockwood, Francis Tresham, John Grant, and Robert Keys.

The next apprehended was Thomas Winter, who in some seeming compunction and
sorrow, Th. Winter's Confession of the Plot, discovery and success.
wrote his voluntary Confession.

That in the first year of King James to this Crown, 1603. I was sent for to
come up to London to John Wright at Lambeth, (called Faux Hall) where he first
informed me of this Pouder-Treason, to blow up the Parliament, that the nature
of the Disease required sharp Remedy, and so we agreed; and my Design was to go
over to Bergen-op-Zome, to petition the Constable of Castile, ready there to
come over Ambassador for his Catholic Majesty, by whose means here the
Catholics might have favor; and there I met Guido Fauks, and brings him over
to Catesby about Easter Term, and met also behind St. Clements Strand, with
Piercy and Wright, where we take Oath of secrecy, hear Mass, and receive the
Sacrament, (and so sorth, as Fauks has confessed) only we resolved to convey
their Powder by degrees unto Catesby's house at Lambeth, and so to be brought
over by Boat when the Mine was ready, and received one Keys as a trusty man,
for our purpose.

In the time of their Mining, they framed their Plot into some fashion, what to
do for the Duke as next Heir, the King and Prince Henry blown up, Piercy
undertakes with his Confederates to seize the Duke at St. James, whilst most
of his Servants might be about Westminster, and with Horses ready at the
Court-gate, to horse him away into the Country, whilst most men amazed at the
Blow, the Duke might easily be mastered.

And for the Princess Elizabeth in the Country, some Friends gathered together
under color of Hunting, near my Lord Harington's, might seize her to Catesby's
house, which was not far off, at Ashby, and he undertakes for that.

They provide for Money and Horses, and to save as many Catholic Lords, as
could be advised to forbear the Parliament. Next, that foreign Princes could not
be enjoined secrecy, nor obliged by Oath, nor were they sure that such would
approve their Plot; if they did, yet to prepare so long before, might beget
suspicion: the same Letter that carried the News of the Execution, might
entreat for assistance and aid.

That Spain his motion (like a large Body) was too slow, in his preparations in
the first of Extremities.

France too near and dangerous, who with Holland shipping, they feared most.

And because the charge of the work hitherto, lay hard upon Catesby, they
called in Sir Everard Digby, who frankly lent fifteen hundred pounds to the
business, and Mr. Francis Tresham two thousand pounds, and Piercy promised all
the Earl of Northumberland's Rents, which he would seize, near forty thousand
pounds, and ten Horses.

And because they were informed that the Prince would be absent from the
Parliament, they resolved of more company to seize him, and to horse him away
on the other side of the Thames, and let the Duke alone.

Two days after this discourse, being Sunday, comes news to Thomas Winter of a
Letter to Mounteagle to advise him to absent from the Parliament, which Letter
was carried to the Earl of Salisbury; Winter tells this to Catesby and Tresham,
whom they suspected: but all forswear the Letter, and resolve to see the issue,
which they feared would fail of their purpose; but on Monday, Catesby resolves
to go to Ashby, and Piercy to follow.

Tuesday early comes the younger Wright, and tells Winter, that he is going to
call up the Earl of Northumberland at Essex house, where they both find one
Lepton got on hors-back at Essex gate, which was conceived to seek out Piercy;
but Winter going to White Hall, finds the Gates shut, and the way to
Westminster guarded; and being told that a Treason was discovered to blow up
the Parliament, he hasts to his Horse and gallops down to Catesby to
Dunschurch, the place of Rendezvous. On Thursday they meet there, seize Arms at
the Lord Windsors, and that night to Master Stephen Littleton's house, one of
their number; when news came that Catesby was burnt by accident of drying their
Powder, Littleton advises Winter to fly, he would not, till he might see his
Friends, Catesby's body, and bury it; but finding him reasonable well, with
Piercy, Wright, Rockwood, and Grant, they all resolved to keep together, to
fight and die; when the Country came in, both the Wrights killed, Catesby and
Piercy with one Bullet, and Winter wounded and taken.

This was his Confession and true, but the whole story was thus interwoven.

The News spread abroad of this Accident, The story p^t together in brief.
being on Tuesday morning the fifth of November, and the first day of
Parliament; Winter and the two brothers Wrights hasten out of Town; for Catesby
and Piercy were gone the morning before, and all of them toward their
Rendezvous in Warwickshire, toward Coventre; where the very next day (about
the hour that Fauks was taken at Westminster) John Grant with others his
companions (all Papists) broke open Benock's Stable, (a Rider of great Horses
in that County) and carried away all, being eight of them; and so both this
company, as also those which fled out of London, met at Dunchurch, Sir Everard
Digby's house, on Tuesday night, having appointed a Match of Hunting the next
morning, according to their former plotting.

But finding their treachery prevented, and not prevailing by a private
villainy, they now resolve to practice public Rebellion, to make up their
wickedness any way. And first, grounded their cause, Religion; with some
provisions of Ammunition, Army, Powder, and Horses, they roved up and down to
gather company; by whose example it was possible, some other such like in other
Counties might join Forces considerable to raise a Rebellion: of themselves,
never in number above eighty Serving-men and Hors-boys, who were watched hourly
for fear of quitting their Masters quarrel; and so wandering through these
Counties of Warwick and Worcester, were by the Sheriff of Worcester, taken,
killed, or dispersed about Habbuch, Stephen Littleton's house.

Strange were the Accidents which brought the Country upon them; for as yet,
the Kings Proclamations had not reached thither, nor was their Treason
discovered to them. But the Riot of Grant forcing the House for the Horses, was
an insolency pursued with Hue and Cry among the Commons, that the Country rise
to know the reason. Sir Fulk Grevil the elder, was then Lieutenant of
Warwickshire, whose wisdom soon apprehended the danger to be the Indices of
Rebellion; instantly seizes Ammunition and Arms of all; about him either absent
from home, or doubtful, and with such further directions, that a poor Smith
got hold on Winter, who was rescued by his company, and sixteen taken by the
Townsmen, and by the Sheriff Sir Richard Verney sent Prisoners to London.

Sir Richard Walsh of Worcestershire pursues them to Littleton's house, as
aforesaid, and there makes a stand, sends a Trumpet to command obedience to
him, as his Majesty's Minister and Sheriff, and not knowing more of their
Treason, than was visible by the Tumult, promises to intercede with the King,
to spare their punishment of Death. They as best witnesses to their own
consciences and high demerit, return him in scorn, That he must get more help,
ere he be able to defend himself.

And whilst thus at parley without, the principal of them within, drying two
pound of Powder, far enough from the Chimney, yet a Spark flew out, and fell
amongst it, blew up another Bag-full (but not fired) and so maimed and disabled
Catesby himself, Rockwo^d, Grant, and others of greatest account, thereby made
unable of forceable defense, and wonderfully amazed, with horror of conscience
thus to be met with, by mischief of their own Mineral, ( In quo peccamus, in
eodem plectimur) as forthwith falling down on their knees, prayed to God for
pardon of their sins, opened the Gates, and desperately seeking their own
destruction; Catesby and Piercy back to back were killed with one shot, and
both the Brothers Wrights, and others slain; Winter, Tresham, and the rest
taken alive, were sent to the next Gaol, and so up to London, and were met with
by such a concourse of people out of the City, as the like were never seen*
wise and weak, women and children, wondering at these Monsters.

Tresham in the Tower died of a Strangury; the two Winters, Grant, Rockwood,
Digby, Fauks, Keys, and Bates, were each of them at several times and places
arreigned, condemned, and executed as in case of Treason. To disjoyn them in
their Designs.
These labored in the Mine. These were afterward engaged to them. Esquires.
Robert Catesby Robert Winter
Gentlemen.
Thomas Piercy Thomas Winter John Wright Christop. Wright
Guido Fauks Thomas Bates, -- Catesby 's Man.
Knight.
Sir Everard Digby,
Esquires.
Ambrose Rockwood Francis Tresham
Gentleman.
John Grant, Robert Keys.


The second Session of this Parliament prorogued till the 5. of November, and
being on the fourth day met again, they enlarged other excellent Laws against
Papists; wisely discerning, how that creeping Monarchy of Rome, Second Session
of Parliament.
by her Arch-Instruments the Jesuits had already planted five Schools, as fit
bates in diverse reformed states, intending so to tempt those well-believing
people, with that old forbidden Tree of knowledge, as they might sin
desperately against their Sovereign before they knew it. But the Parliament
enacted the Anniversary Commemoration of this day to be observed for ever, with
thanksgiving to God for this delivery, of which a Man may hardly assure any
long continuance; Are we bound more to obey it, than the statutes of God
Almighty for solemnity of several Festivals, which all Christians observe, and
we only neglect? And asscribing the discovery of this Powder Plot to the
divine spirit of the King, by his Interpreting the dark phrases of the Letter
to Mounteagle, Three entire subsidies and six fifteens.
They gave to the King three entire subsidies and six fifteens together, with
four subsidies of four shillings in the pound granted by the Clergy, amounting
in all to four hundred fifty and three thousand pounds.

And Caecil for his good service was Created Earl of Salisbury. Several Acts.


The Acts in this Session were these.

Certain Persons attainted of the Gunpowder Treason and their Estates
Confiscate.

An Act to prevent and avoid dangers of Papists Recusants.

To avoid the City and Court, unless Inhabitants here disabled from Offices,
nor to practice Law, nor Physic. Penalty one hundred pounds, wonderful
strickt.

Act for free Trade of all Merchants to Spain, Portingal and France as well as
others, that have Incorporate Charters.

Against Misdemeanors of Attorneys and Solicitors of the Law.

Act for a New-River-water to be cut from Chadwell, and Amwell springs in
Hartfordshire to London.

And the King grants the People a General Pardon, with the usual Exceptions.

And now also was framed a form of Oath, called an Oath of Allegiance for
distinction of good Subjects in General from unfaithful Traitors, but
especially to make separation of the Popishly affected, yet with Natural duty
unto Sovereignty.

And the Oath was thus in effect. The effect of the Oath of Allegiance.
That King James is lawful King of this Realm; That the Pope may not depose
him, or dispose of his, Nor authorize any other Prince to invade him, or to
discharge any of his Subjects their Allegiance; or to bear Arms against him:
And that, notwithstanding any Act by the Pope, or other authority, he will bear
faith and allegiance to his Majesty, and will disclose all Treasons and
Conspiracies against him, and does abhor as impious; that any Prince deprived
by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered; That the Pope nor any other has
power to absolve this Oath, and renounces all pardon to the contrary, without
any equivocation, or mental reservation whatsoever, so help him God, etc.

And accordingly sundry both Priests and Laiks did freely take the same, Taken
by Papists.
when suddenly comes over a Breve from Pope Paulus quintus Inhibiting utterly,
all Papists from taking the same, rather to endure all Torments, nay, death it
self, Rome, October 1606. The Popes Bull against the Oath.
And the next year another Breve confirming this, September 1607. And
accompanied with a Letter of Cardinal Bellarmine unto George Blackwell the
Archpriest of the English, being then in some bonds, whom therefore the
Cardinal suspected, would take the same as he did.

To all these the King most learnedly gives answer, The Kings Apology and
Preface to take the oath.
and in six days compiles and publishes in print, an Apology for that Oath,
and in a week sets out a Monitory Preface, to that Apology, and solemnly
presents it by Ambassy to the Emperor, and to every King and State in
Christendom, as a peculiar concernment to all, and each of them in the due
temporal Obedience of their Subjects. And herein the King instances Examples of
several Emperors, requiring Obedience from Popes, Creation of Popes, ordaining
their Seat and Dignities, and of all Bishops, with Anathema, against all such
as disobeyed their Sentence, as also deposing of Popes.

Hereupon the Venetians maintained that doctrine in their writings, Justified
by foreign Princes.
and put it in Execution. The Sorbons did the like in France. And those writers
of their own that opposed it, were so over-lashed, as that they were corrected
and castigated by Men of their Religion, Becanus his book corrected by the
Cardinals of Rome; Bellarmines book burnt at Paris: Suares his answer, burnt
also in France. Certainly, by this his Majesty's premonition, Kings and Princes
had a more perfect discovery into the injury offered to them by the Pope in the
points of their temporal power, and it followed to be thoroughly disputed in
Christendom by this occasion of the King.

This the King did for the present. But there was a swarm of busie-heads, that
measured the mysteries of State, by the rule of their own conceited wisdoms,
gave Arguments to suppress the Popish practices by Executing all their Priests.
The reasons may be gleaned out of their rash opinions.

That a dead Man bites not, that mercies offered for a desperate Malefactor, do
but enlarge his adventures against King and Country. That a hard hand
suddenly remitted, is seldom by the rude people interpreted to the best sense.
No hope of reformation, where there is no confession of the fault; and to banish
them, may be supposed a mere shift to rid the Prisons of those, whom Conscience
could not condemn of Crime: whilst Justice seems to sleep, the time serves to
raise factions; for fearful Spirits by sufferance grow insolent and cruel.

And to the Exceptions of their small Number it was argued, that Union in a
prepared conspiracy, prevails more than Number.

If that the Oath of Supremacy heretofore, choked not their presumptuous
imagination, nor now can the temporal power of the King contained in the Oath
of Allegiance preserve us, or deter them. A Popish Priest his Character is a
disloyal Renegado. Delinquents in lesser degrees, may challenge easier
punishments, and so be encouraged. The penalty to be executed on them, they
scandal, by pretending the conversion from the Kings Exchequer to Our private
purse. That being restrained will prove like Bonner and Gardner in the time of
Queen Mary, seeing most men write good turns in Sand, and bad in the Marble.

That the Jesuits divide the English into four Sects. Jesuits divide the
English into four sects.
Themselves first; and assume a full fourth part to their property; and of that
part, they subdivide into two portions, viz. The rigid non-Conformists, and the
Church-Papists. The Second they allot to the Protestants, who detain say they,
some of their Relics. The third and largest was left to the Puritans. The last
to the Politician senza di^, and senza anima. The first then being assuredly
theirs, the last we will afford them also; and therefore the safest way to
prevent Combination, is to make them hop headless.

The Presbyter indeed would hang them all; but this Counsel most unchristian.

To answer them it was urged. Their opinion refuted.
That although death be the end of Temporal misery, it is not the grave of
memory: Justice may execute the person; but his opinion made public, it is not
subject to the sword: where poison is diffused, through the veins of good and
bad blood, Evacuation is better than Incision. Clemency is divine, and works
supernatural effects, though they merit by suffering: and though Bellarmine
and Parsons, provoke them to thrust their finger into the fire, by refusing the
Oath of Allegiance; yet the wisest of them, had rather see others act, then
themselves feel the smart.

That Garnet lamented, that he should not be enrolled as a Martyr, because no
matter of Religion was objected; yet he would gladly have survived that Glory,
if any such hopes had remained. The English exceed the Romans in zeal of
Papistry, and are naturally better fortifyed to endure death; If so that terror
prevails not, Religion and Conscience less. Visne muliebre Consilium, said
Livia to Augustus; let severity sleep, and try, what the pardoning of Cinna
will produce. That death of Priests, See before anno pa. 1542. pa. 9
assures more to their Sect, then ever their words could persuade: and though
such are but counterfeit Martyrs, yet will they be otherwise so reputed by
those, that lay their Souls in pawn, unto their doctrine, with whom multitude
of voices, cry down our contraries, for the Gate of their Church is wide, and
many enter therein.

And as uncharitable are these, that would imprison them perpetually; And
Imprisonment as bad.
and that the means to catch them, was to have good Intelligence beyond Sea and
at home; Sir Francis Walsingham, had of his, so active, that an English
Seminary could not stir out of Rome, Spain, or Flanders (their several
Nurseries) without his privity; and so forewarned, they may be caught at our
ports, and removed to prisons: and if they escape there and go disguised, yet
they may be disclosed by many, if the punishment were not death, but only
immuring in dead walls.

The penalty of Recusants in a stock, would pay the charges.

Perdat fiscus, ut capiat Christus. Here we find extremes in both Councils;
Best Counsel, to convince them by Preaching.
certainly, there is a medium; neither Execution, nor civil destruction (for
perpetual Imprisonment) renders a Man civily dead, a better way may be, if we
could hint it.

And why not thus. Let Preachers use the spirit against them, not as usual to
wast an houre-glass, to skirmish against government and discipline. How can we
draw others to our Church, without a foundation of our own, not like undiscreet
Dogs to bark at all, but to distinguish; A child that sucks Popery from the
breast, must needs speak the voice of Papists.

It was the Kings saying and distinction.

A great cause of continuance of Papistry in common people is, That being
fuller of Pagentry than Doctrine, and the old sent of Roman perfume; The common
obedience of coming to Church, more expected, than the instruction of private
families, or by public Catechizing; The first Elements are to be learned at
home, and were orderly contained in the Book of Common Prayer, by instruction
first, and then Confirmation of the Bishops. This excellent foundation laid by
the fathers of the Church, should not be despised by their children. In former
times Ministers haunted the Houses of worthyest men; Countrey-Churches with the
best of the Shire; Prayer, and preaching hand in hand together: then Papists
smelled rank; therefore for shame, they resorted to our Churches and Exercises.

This was the Counsel then, Anno 1606.
but start-ups with intemperate zeal and indiscretion fore-ran the authority of
the Magistrate, censuring whatever agreed not with their conceits, and now a
days we find the effect.

The King removes to Greenwich, Leptons (...) to York (...) back.
where amongst the ranting Riders at Court, one Io: Lepton of York Esquire, and
the Kings Servant, made Matches of Horsmanship with the most in Court, and to
approve his skill and strength for a good Wager, rode five several days
together between London and York, and so back again the next; for May 20.
Monday he set out from Alders-gate at three of the clock in the morning, and
came to York between five and six at night: the next morn sent him to London:
at six and seven the next morn he set out to York, and came thither at eight;
and so within half an hour the same time performed it: and the last day came
also to Greenwich to the King by nine of the clock, as spritely and lusty as at
the first day, to the wonder of all, till another do the like.

The King of Denmark out of singular affection to his Sister Queen Anne arrives
in England, King of D^^mark land^ (...) Graves-end.
and anchors at Gravesend, where King James boards him unexpected, and brings
him a Guest to Greenwich, for a Month, with such entertainment as Peace and
Plenty could possibly afford: and so curious he was, to take a view of things
within his Level about London, that disguised, sometimes he took that
advantage: but most unwilling to visit the Tower, when he found it a Prison,
though from thence he rode in triumph through London, presented with Pageants
and costly complements, to show him the wealth and love of this People.

He might be shy to shut up his Person, Princes for^^^^ their liberties by
coming into another Kingdom without leave.
having by the Law of Nations, submitted his freedom, by entering the bounds of
another Prince without leave. The Earl of Flanders found the effects, when in
his return from thence, to possess his Inheritance of the Kingdom of Spain, and
being by storm cast upon our Coast, King Henry 7. disputing some unkindnesses
formerly received, (not usual with welcome Guests) the Earl suspecting the
danger was fain to yield to all the Kings demands, which was hard in one point,
being to deliver up the Countess of Warwick, and other Fugitives resident in
Flanders, that took Sanctuary in his Country, and so had leave to depart. The
other and worse success may be from Mary Queen of Scots, who forfeited her
freedom by entering into England, and afterward her life, by pretense of
Treason, as you have heard before, though indeed she wrote to Queen Elizabeth
for admittance, but hastily landed without leave.

The Earl of Northumberland, Henry Lord Mordant, and Edward Lord Sturton, not
coming to Parliament, according to Summons by Writ, were more than suspected of
the Powder Treason, and were committed to the Tower: the Barons were fined in
Star Chamber, and after some durance paid the money and were released. The
Earls of Northumberland and other Lords confederates in the Powder Treason are
committed.
The Earl being deeply engaged, was fined there also thirty thousand pounds,
and imprisonment during pleasure, (as all such Delinquents are) which severity
of Fine toward him was thought more extreme than usually, since the erection
of that Court, he continuing Prisoner till 1619. and then paid but eleven
thousand pounds in all: the fate of that Family evermore false to the Crown, as
Sir Iocelin Piercy was used to say, Seldom Treason without a Piercy.

Camera stellata belonging to the old Palace at Westminster, Of the
Star Chamber beginning and ending.
and the 28 Henry 8. called the Starred Chamber, then, as now, had one great
Star affixed to the Roof, and one over the Door. The Court seems to have
beginning from the Statute of 3 Henry 7. cap. 1. It is ordained, that the Lord
Chancellor, Treasurer, Privy Seal, or two of them, calling to them a Bishop
and a Temporal Lord of the Kings Council, and the two Chief Justices of the
Kings Bench and Common Pleas, or other two Justices in their absence, should
have power to punish Routs, Riots, Forgeries, Maintenances, Embraceries,
Perjuries, and such like, not sufficiently provided for by the Common Law. But
Queen Elizabeth enlarged the number of the Judges. And so now it was honored
with all the Kings Privy Counselors. See Powel's At. Acad. And though
Delinquents were severely censured in terrorem Populi, yet there was usually a
day after every Term where they met to mitigate the Fines and Punishments
afterward to a reasonable sum and Penance. This I put to memory, because that
Court is suppressed for ever by the late long Parliament.

There was much ascribed to the Kings wisdom, in the discovery of this Powder
Treason; but the Jesuits had a note of Cecil's name in their Register; not
against them as a Day-labourer, that carried some few stones or sticks, but the
Master Workman whose foreign and domestic Engineers wrought in this Mine of
discovery. And therefore was he calumniated with many contumelious Papers and
Pasquils, dispersed like Job's Messengers, one at the others heels.

He takes time to consider, whether to begin a warfare of words, against those
with whom disputes are endless, because their end is clamor, until it was fit
to express himself in clear terms; lest any of these clouds which are unjustly
cast upon him, might darken the brightness of his Masters royal mind, which
has been always watered with the mildest dew of Mercy and Moderation.

Amongst many he undertakes one directed to the E. of Salisbury.

1. Therein, The Letter.
they acknowledge the late Design most inhumane and barbarous, attempted by
undertaking Spirits, more fiery and turbulent than zealous and dispassionate,
to the general stain of the State of their catholic cause in the eye of
corrupt judgments, not able to farm away the fault of the Professor, from the
Profession it self, which abhors the fact, more than any Puritan does.

2. They accuse him the Primus Motor, to determine the ^ooting out all memory
of their Religion, by Banishment, Massacre, Imprisonment, or some such
insupportable pressures; or else, the next Parliament to decree more cruel and
horrible Laws against them.

3. They threaten, that there are some good men for continuing their Religion,
and for saving of many Souls, resolve to prevent it, though with assured Ruin;
and admonish him, that five have severally undertaken his Death, by Vow upon
the blessed Sacrament, if he continues his daily plotting against them.

That not any of them know the other, for preventing discovery; the first shall
attempt by shot, and the rest follow, and all of them glory in their own
sacrifice, to prevent the general calamities of Catholics, which by his
transcendent Authority with the King is more than expected.

They tell him, that for the easier digestion of the Danger, two of the
Attempters are so weak, they cannot live three months; the other three so
distressed, for being only Catholics, that their grief dulls any apprehension
of death.

4. As for themselves that admonish, they know no other means to prevent it, he
being the Match to give fire to his Majesty, to whom the worst they wish is, to
be as great a Saint in Heaven, as he is a King on Earth. And conclude, Where
once true spiritual resolution is, the weak may take sufficient revenge of the
mighty.

A. B. C. D. etc.

His Answer.
1. That the Panegyrical Oration of Pope Sixtus Quintus, preferred the Murder
of Henry 3. of France, before the act of Judith to Holofernes, by which Gods
people were delivered; only the Papists make ill interpretations where it
fails in execution, (for otherwise, Faelix scelus virtus vocatur) and many
other Authors maintain deposing Kings. And wonders, that those who employ such
seditious Spirits, have not by definitive Sentence (wherein the Pope is
supposed not to err) explained their assumed power over Princes, for security
as well of those which acknowledge his Superiority, as of others which do not
approve his Jurisdiction, that Subjects may know their distance of fidelity to
either.

As for the former practice by Excommunication, it deprives only from
spiritual graces, without so gross an usurpation as to destroy their being in
nature. The Writ it self, De Excommunicato capiendo, and others such, proceed
rather from the goodness of such Christian Kings to work better obedience to
the Rules of the Church, than from the power of Excommunication. All Cen^ures
of the Church having left life untouched, Sive Ethnicus, sive Publicanus. Many
Heathens teaching this Rule, Bonos Imperatores Voto expetere oportet,
quoscunque tolerare. He marvels at those dark Writings published upon this
Accident, against such as shall attempt against Princes by private Authority,
but leaves it a tacit lawfulness by public Warrant, like their gross
Equivocation so extolled at Rome, though it sunders all humane conversation.
Saint Austin refuses the Priscilian Heretics in their Equivocation, Cord
creditur (says he) ad Iustitiam, ore fit confessio ad salutem, etc. breaking
out into expostulation, O fontes lacrymarum! How shall we hide our selves from
the displeased face of Truth.

2. That these Calumniations are like Adam's Fig-leafs, unable to cover their
shame; for as he sought a covering, Non quia nudus, sed quia lapsus; so is it
their fault, not their fear, to cast imputations upon Prince and State, Sed
pereuntibus mill figurae. So Nero set Rome on fire, and after laid the blame
on Christians. The pecedent Reigns of the two late Sisters of different
Religions, more blood in five or six years of the first, than in five and forty
of the second.

Has this King showed any print of bloody steps, rather qualified than added
severe Laws? And appeals to their own consciences (judge and witness) whether
the fury of this Treason, inflaming many against Catholics (the nature of
sudden peril) hardly admits just distinction) has committed any one act of
blood or cruelty, under color of public safety, Nam crudelit as si a
vindicta, justitia est; si a periculo, prudentia. Nay, the King pronounced in
open Parliament after, Not to condemn the general for particulars, as a Prince
of peace and mercy, deferring execution, which Theodosius, wishing, Se potuisse
potius mortuos a morte revocare.

As for the imaginary Power of the Lords of the Council, and himself of the
Quorum, he takes it as an honor to receive not only injury, but persecution
in so noble a society, who know that Counselors for Kings stand for thousands
or hundreds, as he pleases to place them. Their greatness growing from humble
endeavors, their merit from gracious acceptance; and though they borrow his
name as the Boutefeu to make him the Mark of their malice; yet such as judge,
the spirit of the Pasquil will hardly imagine, but that this Faction follows,
only the body of Authority, neither head nor members, but also the Church and
Commonwealth, which like Hippocrates Twins, have long wept and laughed
together. His greatness being only in the eye of envy, of those, which ground
their faith upon weak principles, if they imagine his distinction (a matter (he
says) of so small consequence) can clear them free, from contriving higher
practices.

3. To the Protestation, that the five Assassinators having their feet so near
the grave, their ghostly Father deserves less thanks to send them thither with
Hempen Halters and in bloody Coffins, not the marks of Rome, Heathen nor
Christian; for Victories were scorned, which were barbarously gotten, Mixed is
vene no fontibus. And the Arms of the Primitive Church were Tears and Prayers.
But such Recusants as do discover these pernicious spirits will discern the
darkness and danger of that Religion lapped up in implicit obedience; the
Conscience and Treason growing up as close together as the Husk and Corn in one
Ear: to eat their God upon bargains of blood.

Those that are full of grief (as is said) for being R^cusants, Plus tristitiae
quam poenitentiae, more that their Plot failed, than that it was intended.

Counselors are Sentinels over the life of Kings and States.

The Laws which punish the Branches of all Treason are derived from Parliaments
of two hundred years in force, and so are our Laws made, not by a few, much
less by any one.

4. As for himself, with whom they condition to leave off his Plotting against
Recusants; The Husbandman overcurious of Winds and Clouds, neither sows nor
reaps in season. So that Servant that becomes awful of his Sovereigns Enemies
for power or envy, deserves not favor nor protection.

That the King has not taken up wisdom of Government upon credit, but carries
still the Iethro of order in his own bosom, disposing the mean causes to the
Rulers over hundreds and fifties, reserving the greatest to the greatness of
himself.

And freely professes, though he does not participate with the follies of the
Fly, upon the wheel of fortune: yet is he so far ambitious of his Masters
favor, as to be not so much his creature by the undeserved Honors he holds
from his Majesty's grace and power, as in desire to be the shadow of his mind:
toward whose royal Person, he glories more to be honest and humble, than to
command in any other Calling.

And to say, that men resolved to die are Masters over others lives, such power
has the least Spider by permission; and if so, that the days of his life were
in their hands, to take from him some months of joys; so, more years of
sorrow: but he believes not, that the Mountains shake when the Moles do cast,
nor thinks he, to purchase a span of time, as for the fear of any mortal power,
Aut Deo, aut Patriae, aut Patri Patriae deesse. Magistrates who converse with
variety of spirits, Anno 1607.
must undergo Tempests. And their Glasses being done, that glory which makes
worthy men live for ever, their Heirs shall inherit after them. And therefore,
Suadeat loquent is vita, non oration. Besides, Romes powers are discovered, her
Towers taken, and it is suspected, that she will play so long with the temporal
powers of Kings, as their work will break down her walls; so therefore it ill
becomes their servants to slacken, for fear of malice; the Evening and the
Night shall come upon them naturally, one after another; their faith shall
ascend before them, and their good fame shall follow after. Et hic ^aculum
fixit.

This next Session of this Parliament, The union argued.
the Union was revived, by motion of the Kings Solicitor Sir Francis Bacon, to
have the Scots naturalized by Act of Parliament: after many subtle Arguments on
both sides pro and con, and to allay the heat, the King convenes both Houses
before him at White Hall, where, with an excellent method, he recounts all
their former controversed Arguments, and concludes with Reasons undeniable, for
unanimous consent to admit of the Union. But to avoid their tedious Disputes; I
shall only abbreviate the Kings Speech, in answer to all.

He distinguishes his desires; The Kings Speech in answer to their Arguments.
the Union which he seeks is of Laws and Persons, such a Naturalizing, as may
compound one Body of both Nations, Unus Rex, unus Grex, and una Lex. He
unravels their intricate Arguments, and sweetens them with his intentions.

1. That all hostile Laws should cease, because the King of England cannot war
with the King of Scotland.

That community of Commerce is necessary, He being no stranger, but descended
of their ancient Kings; It were improper for him, to be their natural
Sovereign, and the Nations strangers to one another, and being both under the
same Allegiance, ought to have more freedom, and better respect, than
Frenchmen and Spaniards.

2. They all agree, that they are no Aliens, then must they be allowed to be
natural. That there was a difference, the Ante and Post-nati of either Kingdom,
and therefore his Proclamations gave notice that the Post-nati were
naturalized, by his accession; but he confessed, that Judges may err in that
opinion, who told him so; so may Lawyers on their side, but bids them beware of
abusing either, lest they endeavor to disgrace King and Laws, who have power
when Parliaments are not, to try them for Lands and Lives.

3. That there were some flatterers, and would prefer the Ante-nati upon a
jearing pretense, to have their merit preferred in his service. Mel in ore, fell
in cord. But they shall know, his Prerogative can prefer at his own pleasure,
to any Dignity, though he is willing to restrain himself, for respects to the
English. He urged it as a special mark of Prerogative, to endow Aliens with
freedom; and where the Law is not therein clear, Rex est Iudex, he being Lex
loquens, supplying the Law where it wants; thus he speaks as skillful in the
dues of Sovereignty, intends not the pressure upon their love, but with
convenience to both Kingdoms.

The inconveniences as from Scotland, are pretended to be; 1. An evil affection
in them to the Union. 2. The Union to be incompatible. 3. The gain small or
none.


Why then is there talk of Union?

They allege Reasons of the first, from the body of their Act, To remain a free
Monarchy, and not alter Fundamental Laws: and yet it was urged heretofore, The
Scots greedy of this Union, to attain to the substance and end. These are
contradictions; but for their free Monarchy, he hopes they mean not that he
should set Garrisons over them, as the Spaniards do, over Sicily and Naples; He
need not do so, who governs them by his Pen and his Council-commands; and his
Chancellor there can govern their Tongues too, not to speak as ye do, what and
as long as ye list, without contradiction?

1. He tells them the Laws of Scotland, those of Tenures, Wards, Liveries,
Signiories, and Lands, are in effect drawn out of the Chancery of England,
brought by James the first, (who lived here) and differ only in terms.

2. The second, are Statute-laws, to which he wishes, they would be no
strangers.

3. The Civil Law, brought out of France by James the fifth, to supply the
defects of the Municipal Laws. In these respects the Laws alike, why not the
People?

First, it is an Objection of yours, that the King in Scotland has not a
Negative Voice in Parliament; he tells them, that the Form of Parliaments
there, inclines nothing to popularity: their manner is, by Proclamation, to
bring in their Bills to the Master of the Rolls, by a prefixed day; then to the
King, to be allowed by him, and then given to the Chancellor, to be
propounded, and no other. If any man offers otherwise, the Chancellor corrects
him, and being past the King confirms them, rasing out what he does not
approve, and if this be a Negative Voice, he has one.

Secondly, that which seems so incompatible, is the Union of the French and
Scots; He assures them, it was a League only, between the Kings, not the
People; the occasion was, that England and France at one time solicited a
League offensive and defensive against each others Enemies. The reasons went
for England, being our Neighbors, of one Continent strong and Powerful
Nation, and so more security the Amity with England, than France, far off
beyond Seas, and hazarded to Accidents of relief.

Then, they who argued for France, alleged that England ever sought to conquer
Scotland, and therefore never can be Friends. The remoteness of France claims
no Interest, and therefore more Constant and Faithful, and so it was concluded
on their part. But then it was concluded merely Personal from King to King,
and to be renewed by their Ambassies; And so it was in his Mothers time, and
without consent of Parliament, else it would seem a League of the People. And
in his time when it came to be Ratifyed, least it should appear In odium
Tertii, it was by Him left out, in respect of his Title to England.

3. Who is so ignorant as can not see the profit and commodity to England by
this Union, is there not Gain by Wales, is not Scotland greater? Lands, Seas
and Persons added to Greatness; certainly Two made One, makes them Greater and
Stronger. He desires Union for the Empire of England, and for their security,
to condescend to reasonable Restrictions, And he will never say, what he will
not promise, nor promise what he will not swear, nor swear what he will not
perform. Post-nati confirmed.
And so dismisses them.

But, although the Parliament could not be drawn to it presently, yet not long
after, it wrought upon the Judges of this Kingdom, that the chief Justice Coke
confirmed the Post-Nati in Calvin's Case and Title; And adjudged for him also,
by that reverend Statesman Chancellor Elsmere, and all the Judges likewise in
the Exchequer Chamber, whose opinions do much confound our Adversary, bewailing
the Cause.

[That of such stuff Judges are made, who can model their Presidents to any
shape.] H. G. B^. page: 41.


And yet all that this Session could be drawn to do, was to repeal the Laws of
Hostility between both Nations, and so confirmed in Scotland, from the fourth
of Henry 5. of England, and from 1 James 1. of Scotland. Some excellent Acts
were concluded this Session, which I refer to the statutes in print.

But because the Judges in that time are complained of, Judge Nichols his true
justice.
as too partial for the Kings commands; Let me aeternize the memory of Judge
Nichols of the common pleas. His Predecessor in his Circuit Assize for the
County of Northampton had reprieved a Felon, indicted before him, and found
guilty by the Jury and condemned, but reprieved by him upon some observation of
the weakness of the Evidence. This Judge dying, Nichols appointed for that
Circuit, continues the Prisoners reprieve. And the complaint came to the King,
who urges the Judge by letters for Execution, which yet he refused. His just
excuse was, That if his Predecessor who heard the Evidence, thought good in
Justice to grant his reprieve, It became not his Conscience now, to condemn
him; seeing he never heard the Evidence at all. And that it was part of his
Oath, to do right, notwithstanding the Kings letters. 18. Edward 3. This man
therefore the King owned to be a wise, learned, and just Judge, for though he
might (perhaps) have given just Judgment, it could not be true Justice.

Licet aequum statuerit, hand aequum fuerit. Heretofore Proclamations had been
by Queen Elizabeth and King James against the excessive repair of persons of
quality out of the Country to London, G^ntry flock to London.
by neglecting their duties at home, in their respective service to the Common
weal, the decay of Hospitable Neighborhood and relief of the poor. Besides, the
more room made for them, crowded the Mechanic and Tradesmen, into narrow
habitations, and dear rents, pestering most houses with Inmates, Infections and
sickness, the Country, Towns, and Buroughs unpeopled, trade decayed.

But these commands not obeyed, The wisdom of State was assured, that the cause
taken away, the effects would follow.

The restraint of New-buildings might necessitate the Gentry, Proclamation in
restraint of new buildings unless of Brick.
to keep to the Country, for want of lodgings, at easy rates in London, And
such as should be, were prescribed heretofore, a form of Brick upright, to save
Timber, so much wanting, and to beautify the streets, incroached upon with bay
windows, and eaves hanging over, that even joined with the opposite Neighbor,
upon old or new foundations, a Custom of freedom in after times of loose
liberty, which destroys the beauty of buildings.

And now necessity enforcing a farther Obedience, this proclamation has these
Limitations, No new buildings in London, or two miles about, but upon old
foundations; And such as have been erected, within five years last past,
contrary to former Proclamations (which were to be pulled down) shall
nevertheless be disposed (by Officers appointed) for tenements to the poor, or
for their benefit, and hereafter offending to be pulled down; No House to be
divided hereafter, into several Tenements, nor any Inmates received, to make
another family.

These prohibitions, were referred to the Aldermen and Justices of Peace, and
this was in October 1607. When the plague ceased, and the fresh gang of the
Country came huddling, to keep Christmas at London.

Our Caluminator that swells his Book with malicious observations and false
quotations, Anno 1608.
refers this to 7. Iac. 1609. and belyes the restriction, to be pulled down
[though (says he) not taken notice of in seven years after] for this
Proclamation commands the Aldermen and Justices in their diligent view,
perambulation, and inquiry, to certify the Kings Council every Term, or their
neglect to be censured, Hist. Gr. B^it. p. 49.
punished and removed from the Peace, as unworthy.

[Whereby ( says he) many not heeding the Proclamation, laid out their whole
Estates upon little Hovels, and building fair houses upon new foundations must
either purchase them anew, or pull them down, and both to their ruin.]

Name me one that was repurchased; Indeed, such as offended in this last were
to be fined or pulled down. And truly the commands were so necessary, so
wholesome, so beautiful, and so exemplarily public, that very few offended,
and such as did, deserved due punishment, yet this is scored upon the King, as
a Crime in State, which he foresaw would come to pass, as now in these days we
find the effects to be pitied, the very ruin of this City and Suburbs.

The Lord Treasurer Dorset died suddenly at the Council Table, L. Treasurer
Dorset dies.
his Disease an Apoplexy, (which gave way to Cecil Earl of Salisbury to succeed
him Treasurer) this Dorset was Thomas Sackvile, Son and Heir of Sir Richard
Sackvile of Buckhurst, who came from the Temple a Barrester, and was created
Baron Buckhurst by Queen Elizabeth, and by King James Earl of Dorset, 1605. and
Knight of the Garter.

About this time a further discovery was made in Scotland, George Sp^ot a
Conspirator with Gowry, his story and execution.
concerning the truth of Gowry's Treason by Attainder of another of the
Conspiratours. The Treason was attempted the fourth of August, 1600. (as before
remembered) and though there followed sundry Suspicions, and Examinations of
several persons supposed Abettors and Contrivers then, yet it lay undiscovered,
tanquam e post liminio, until this time, eight years after, by the
circumspection principally of the Earl of Dunbar, (a man of as great wisdom as
those times and that Nation could boast of) upon the person of one George
Sprot, Notary public at Aymouth in Scotland, from some words of his, sparingly
and unawares expressed, and some Papers found in his house, whereof being
examined, with little ado, he confessed, and was condemned and executed at
Edinburgh, 12. August, 1608.

A Relation I conceive, not common, but in my hands to be produced, and written
by that learned Gentleman Sir William Heart, then Lord chief Justice in
Scotland, and principal in all the Acts of Judicature herein.

And first Sprot confesses, His Co^fessions.
that Robert Logane late of R^stalrig, was privy and foreknowing of John, late
Earl of Gowry's treasonable conspiracy. That diverse Letters were interchanged
betwixt them therein, July 1600. which Letter James Bour, called Lord Bour,
Servitour to Restalrig, (employed by them and privy to all) had in keeping, and
showed them to Sprot in Fast-castle. That Sprot was present when Bour after
five days absence, returned with answers by Letters from Gowry, and staid all
night with Restalrig at Gunnesgreen, and rode the next morn to Lothian, where
he staid six days, then to Fast-castle, where he abode a short space.

That Sprot saw and heard Restalrig read those Letters to Bour, and all their
conference there annent, who said, Though he should lose all in the world, yet
he would pass through with Gowry; for that would as well content him as the
Kingdom.

That Sprot himself entered into conference with Bo^r therein, who feared, that
it would be dear to him, and prayed Sprot for Gods sake not to intermeddle; for
he feared, within few days the Lord would be landless and liveless.

That he had these Letters of Restalrig and Gowry, which Bour had in keeping
and were copied out by Sprot, and that the original Letters were in his Chest,
when he was taken into Custody.

These and other depositions written by James Primrose Clerk of the Kings
Council, and subscribed, George Sprot.

Present.

Earl Dunbar, Earl Lothian, Bishop of Ro^s, Lord Schone, Lord Hallyrood-house,
Lord Blantire, Sir William Heart, Lord chief Justice, John Hall, Patrick Gallow
ay, Peter Hewet, Minister of Edinburgh, and subscribed with all their hands.

Several other Examinations are attested under his hand with this Protestation,
That being resolved to die, and hopes to be participant of Heaven upon
Salvation or Damnation of his Soul, that all that he had deposed were true in
every point and circumstance, and no untruth in them.

August 12. Sprot was presented in Judgment upon Panel in the Talboth of
Edinburgh, His Trial.
before Sir William Heart Lord chief Justice, assisted with these persons.

Alexander Earl of Dunferling Lord Chancellor, George Earl of Dunbar Lord
Treasurer, John Archbishop of Glasco, David Bishop of Rosse, Bishop of
Galloway, Bishop of Brechin, Earl of Crawford, Earl of Lotharine, Lord
Abernethe, Lord Balmerinoth, Lord Blantire, Lord Burly, Sir Richard Cowburn,
John Preston Colonel General, Sir John Skew Register.

He was pursued by Sir Thomas Hamilton Knight, Advocate to the King, for
Enteries of the Crimes contained in his Indictments, as follows.

George Sprot Notary in Aymouth, You are indicted and accused; for as much as
John sometime Earl of Gowry, having most treasonably conspired in the month of
July, 1600. to murder our gracious Sovereign, the Kings most Excellent Majesty;
and having imparted that devilish purpose to Robert Logame of Restalrig, who
allowed of the same, and most willingly to be partaker thereof: the same coming
to your knowledge at the times and in the manner particularly after mentioned,
you most maliciously and treasonably concealed the same, and was art and part
thereof.

And first, in the month of July 1600. after you had perceived and known, that
diverse Letters and Messages had past betwixt the said John Earl Gowry and the
said Robert Logame of Restalrig, you being in the house of Fast-castle, you saw
and read a Letter written by the said Restalrig with his own hand to the said
Earl Gowry.

MY Lord, etc.
At the receipt of your Letter, I am so confuted, Restalrig's Letter to Gowry,
that I can neither utter my joy, nor find my self able to requite your
Lordship with due thanks: and be your Lordship assured, that in that matter, I
shall be as forward for your Honor, as if it were my own cause: and I think
there is no Christian, that would not revenge that Machiavilian Massacring of
our dear Friends, though with hazard of Life, and Lands, and all. My heart can
bind me, to take part in that matter, as your Lordship shall find proof. But
one thing your Lordship must be circumspect and earnest with your Brother, that
he be not rash in any Speeches, touching the purpose of Padua.


And a certain space after the execution of the said Treason, and after the
Treason.
the said Logame having desired the Lord of Bour to deliver to him the said
Letter, or else to burn it, and Bour having delivered to you all Tickets and
Letters, which he then had either concerning Restalrig or others to sue them,
(because he could not read) you abstracted them, and retained the said
Writings in your own hands, and diverse times read them, containing further, viz.

MY Lord, Other Letters to Gowry.

you may easily understand, that such a purpose cannot be done (as your
Lordship intends) rashly, but with deliberation.

And for my self, it were meet to have the men your Lordship spoke of ready in
a Boat or Bark, and address them, as if they were taking pleasure on the Sea,
in such fair Summer time.

And for your Lordship, either to come to my house Fast-castle by Sea, or to
send your Brother. I shall have the House very quiet, and well provided, after
your Lordships advertisement, and none shall have access to haunt the place,
during your abode here. And if your Lordship doubt of safe landing, I shall
provide all such necessaries as may serve for your arrival, within a
flight-shoot of the House; and persuade your self, to be as quiet here, while
we have settled our Plot, as if in your Chamber: for I trust, and am assured,
we shall have word from them your Lordship knows of, within few days, for I
have a care to see what Ships come by.

Your Lordship knows, I have kept up Lord Bothwell in my house quietly, in his
greatest extremities, in spite of King and Council. I hope if all things come
to pass, (as I trust they shall) to have both your Lordships at a good Dinner
ere I die. Haec jocose.

To animate your Lordship, I doubt not, all will be well, for I am resolved
thereof, doubt nothing on my part; Peril of Life, Lands, Honor and Goods, yea
the hazard of Hell, shall not affray me from that, yea though the Scaffold were
already set up.

The sooner the matter were done the better, for the Kings Buckhunting will be
shortly; and I hope it will prepare some dainty cheer for us, to live the next
year. I remember well, that merry sport, which your Lordships Brother told me,
of a Nobleman at Padua, for I think that, a Parasceue to this purpose.

My Lord, think nothing that I comm^t that secret hereof to this Bearer; for I
dare not only venture my Life, Lands, Honor, and all upon his credit; but I
durst hazard my Soul, in his keeping. I am so persuaded of his fidelity; And I
trow, (ask him if it be not true) he will go to Hell gates for me, and he is
not beg^iled on my part to him; and therefore I am persuaded, this will give
him trust with your Lordship in this matter, as to my self. But I pray you,
hasten him home with all speed, and charge him not to take a wink of sleep till
he see me again, after he returns from you. And as your Lordship desires in
your Letters to me, so say I to you, either rive or burn this Letter, or return
it back again to me, with the Bearer, for so is the fashion, I grant.

Restalrig.


And albeit by the Letter (all his own hand) you knew the truth of the said
treasonable Conspiracy, and Logain's foreknowledg and guilt thereof, like as
you were assured of diverse Letters received by him from Gowry, and by his
Answers to the same purpose, and by sundry Conferences, betwixt Logain and Bour
in your presence and hearing, concerning the said Treason, as well in July
preceding the Attempt thereof, as at diverse other times shortly after; as
likewise by Bour revealing the same to you, who was employed ordinary Messenger
by Logain to Gowry, whereby your knowledge and concealment and guilt was
undeniable:

Yet for further manifestation thereof, as also his (...)
about July 1602. Logain showed unto you, that Bour had told him, that he had
been somewhat rash to let you see a Letter, which came from Gowry to Logain,
who then urged you to tell him what you understood by the same. You answered,
that you took the meaning thereof to be, that he had been upon the counsel and
purpose of Gowry's Conspiracy; and that he answered you, the worst he had done,
was his own; but if you would swear to him, never to reveal any thing of that
matter to any person, it should be the best sight that ever you saw; and in
token of further recompense, he gave you twelve pounds of Silver.

Nevertheless albeit you knew perfectly the whole practice and progress of all
the said Treason, from the beginning to the end; as also by your conference
with Bour and Logain, who lived until the year 1606. or thereabout, and so by
the space of six years you concealed the same, and so was in art and part
thereof, and ought to suffer under pain of high Treason. To the Token that you
have not only by your depositions subscribed by you, and solemnly made in
presence of diverse Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council, and the Ministers of
the Borough of Edinburgh, of the Dates of the fifth, fifteenth and sixteenth
days of July last past, and tenth and thirteenth of August instant, confessed,
every Point, Head, and Article of the Indictment abovesaid, but also by diverse
other Depositions subscribed by you, you have ratified the same, and to seal
the same with your blood.

Which Indictment Confesses the Indictment.
being read openly, before Sprot, was put to the knowledge of the Inquest; he
confessed the same in every point to be true; and therefore the Indictment was
put to the Inquest of the honest, famous, and discreet persons, Jurors names.
viz. William Trumball of Ardre, William Fisher Merchant and Burgess of
Edinburgh, Robert Short there; Edmund Iohnston Merchant and Burgess there,
Harb. Maxwell of Cavons, Ia. Terment of Lint-house, William Trumbill Burgess of
Edinburgh, George Brown in Gorgy Mill, Io. Huchinson and Io. Jews Merchants
and Burgesses of Edinburgh, Ia. Somervil and William Swinton there, Io.
Cruneson of Darlton, Thomas Smith and Io. Cowtis Burgesses of Edinburgh.

Which persons of Inquest, sworn and admitted, and reading over the same
Indictment again, in his and their presence, the said George Sprot confessed
the same to be true.

Whereupon the said Sir Thomas Hamilton Advocate asked Act and Instrument. And
therefore the Inquest removed to the Inquest-house, and elected Herbert Maxwell
to be their Chancellor or foreman. Verdict.
And after mature deliberation they all re-entered again in Court where the
said Foreman declared the said George Sprot to be guilty, Sentenced as a
Traitor.
filed, and convict of Art and part of the said Treason, for which the said
Justice by the mouth of the De^ster of Court, by Sentence and Doom ordained the
said George Sprot to be taken to the Market-Cross of Edinburgh, and there to be
hanged upon a Gibbet, till he be dead, and thereafter his head to be stricken
off, and his body to be quartered and demeaned as a Traitor, and his head to be
set up upon a prick of Iron upon the highest part of the Tolboth of Edinburgh,
where the Traitor Gowry and other Conspirators heads stand, and his Lands and
Goods forfeited, and escheated to our Sovereign Lord the Kings use.

Extractum de Libro Actorum Adjornalis S. D. N. Regis per me D. Iohannem Coburn
de Ormeston Mil. Clericum Iusticiarii ejusdem generalem, sub meis signo and
subscriptione Manualibus.

And so was Sprot conveyed to a private house, remaining at his meditations,
and afterward conferred with the Ministers, confessing all aforesaid, with
extreme humiliation and prayer.

Afterward ganging up the Ladder, Executed.
with his hands loose and untied, he was again put in mind of his Confessions,
and for the greater assurance thereof performed an act mavelous, promising by
Gods assistance to give them an evident token before the yielding up of his
spirit, A mavelous sign of guilt.
which was, when he had hung a very good while, he lift up both his hands a
good height, and clapped them together three several times, to the wonder of
thousands Spectators.

And for the more confirmation, Abbot Bishop of Canterbury being present.
George Abbot Doctor in Divinity and Dean of Winchester, after Archbishop of
Canterbury, was present, both at his Examination and Execution, and has
published in print the same Writings, observation and particulars, verb^tim, as
aforesaid, which I can produce also.

I was obliged in honor of the truth to be thus particular, to take off the
horrid crime with which our Adversaries load the memory of King James; and if
as yet not satisfactory, I may conclude with Saint John's Apocalypse, Qui
sordescit, sordescat adhuc.

And yet I am enforced to complain against a late Historian, who says, History
of the Church of Scotland, p. 509.


Sprot's Depositions seem a very fiction, a mere invention of his own brain.

And why? Because (says he) Sprot did not show the Letter.

How came it then to be recorded, as aforesaid? And concludes against himself.

However (says he) Sprot remained constant in his Confession, and at his dying
when he was to be cast off the Ladder, promised to give the beholders a sign
for confirming them in the truth of what he had spoken, which also he performed
by clapping his hands three several times after he was cast off by the
Executioner.

What can be more to convince for the truth, that he was guilty?

In this fourth Session, the King intends the Creation of his son Henry
Prince of Wales, and for that and other occasions craves supply of his wants,
The Kings disbursments already.
proceeding from his great disbursments, discounting with them his receipts of
three hundred and fifty thousand pounds subsidies due to his Predecessor, 60000
l.
with his redeeming the Crown lands morgaged in the year 1598. 19000.
by her, to the City of London for sixty thousand pounds. 17428.
His expense also of nineteen thousand pounds to the Soldiers in Ireland,
11000.
the late Queens funeral charges seventeen thousand four hundred twenty and
eight pounds. 107428.
His and his Queens Journey hither 11000l. Besides the King of Denmarks
reception, entertainments of Ambassadors hither, and sending others abroad.
These were reasons just and Noble to work into the hearts of obedient, and
obliged people; but wrought not with them.

The Secretary of State for Scotland, The Scottish Secretary Balmerino's
treacherous Letter to the Pope.
Sir James Lethington, Lord B^^merino, being now sent hither with letters from
that Council, was suddenly surprised with some Questions from the King. The
occasion.
Cardinal Bellarmine had not long before published an answer to the Kings
Apology, Charging him with inconstancy, and objecting a Letter that he had
sent to Pope Clement the eighth from Scotland, wherein he recommended to his
Holiness, the Bishop of Vaison for obtaining the dignity of a Cardinal, that so
he might be better able to advance his affairs in the Court of Rome.

The King meeting with this passage in Bellarmines-Book, presently apprehended
his Secretary somewhat Popish, to shuffle such a Letter to the Pope, and the
King signing it amongst others which he usually sent to the Dukes of Savoy and
Florence. The Secretary now come and soda^nly demanded if ever he had written
any Letter to the Pope, he answered, he had by his Majesty's Command. At which
the King bending the brow of Anger, the Secretary fell down and craved Mercy,
Professing that his meaning was by that Letter, to purchase the Popes favor in
advance of his Majesty's title to England.

Then the King remembered the challenge made by Queen Elizabeth 1599. unto the
Secretary of such a letter, which said he you then denied, and procured Sir
Edward Drummond (who was accused for carrying that Letter) to come into
Scotland, and abjure the same. The Secretary in great perplexity, made his
excuse with his good meaning, and craved pardon of God and the King, for his
and Drummonds perjury. He was instantly Committed to his Chamber, and so to the
Council Table, who urged his Crime as the ground of all conspiracies since the
Kings coming into England, that of the powder Treason and puritans
Combinations. The Secretary in great humility answered. Curae leves loquuntur,
Ingentes Stupent. My Lords I can not find words to express my sorrow, for my
offense against my gracious Sovereign, when I call to mind his Majesty's
favors, raising me from the dust to a fortune, by my Honorable preferment, and
thus to fail of my duty, and fall into such a degree of falsity. Ah! peccavi in
Coelum and terram. My offense is insupportable and impardonable. Only his
Majesty's rare Piety, singular wisdom and sincerity, is sufficient to throw all
possible guilt on me without any doubt of the Kings, Innocence; if nothing but
my life, and all I am can expiate so great a Crime, fiat voluntas Dei and
Regis. I humbly submit and take my death patiently.

The Chancellor Egerton declared, 1609.
That it was the Kings pleasure to remit his Trial to the Judges in Scotland,
He is sent p^isoner to be tried in Scotland.
and to be conveyed thither a Prisoner, The Sheriffs attending him from Shire
to Shire. In the mean time he did Pronounce him deprived of all places, Honors,
Dignities, and every thing else that he possessed in England.

And thus conveyed to Scotland, His indictment.
he is committed to Faulk-land Castle, and so to his indictment. That in 1598.
by instigation of his Cosen Sir Edward Drummond a Papist, he had stolen and
surreptitiously purchased the Kings hand to a Letter written, and sent by Sir
Edward, and directed to Pope ^lement the eighth, in favor of the Bishop of
Vaison, for his preferment to be a Cardinal, shuffling in this letter amongst
others, that were to be signed, filling it up with Styles and Titles to the
Pope, and sealed it with his Majesty's signet (which was entrusted to him as
Secretary) to the indangering his Majesty's Honor, Life, Crown; and Estate, and
the subversion of true Religion, and the whole Professors thereof.

He acknowledged that his offense admits no defense: for however he conceived
that the keeping of Intelligence with the Pope, His confession,
might advance his Majesty's Succession to the crown of England, yet knowing
his Majesty's resolution never to use any crooked course, but to rest upon Gods
providence and his own right; therefore he entreated all that were present, to
bear witness of his confession and true remorse for his offence^ Only he craved
liberty to protest, That he never intended an alteration of Religion, nor
Toleration of the contrary, but conceiving some good might have been wrought
thereby at that time, and to promote his Majesty's right, Concluding that not
to make more trouble to the Judges, he had confessed the truth, and wished as
God should be merciful to his own soul, that the King was most falsely and
wrongfully charged with the said Letter, etc.

The Jury were Noblemen his Pares five Earls, four Lords, And sentence.
and six Knights, who gave Verdict of his guilt of Treason and of art and part
of the whole treasonable Crimes contained in the Indictment. Anno 1609.
And ready for Execution he was reprieved by intercession of the Queen in
England, and returned to Faulkland Prison, and afterward licensed to his own
house in Balmerinoch, where his sickness increased of grief, and there he dyed.

He was accounted a Person of abilities sufficient for his places in Session
and Council, Is reprieved and dies.
whose conscience stretched out to his gain* and possessing much of the
Churches lands, was a constant Enemy under hand, to the Kings desire of
restoring Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to the Bishops. And such end befalls
false servants.

However this Man died repentant of his fact, King James a merciful Prince,
and restores his son in blood.
and evermore acknowledging the Kings grace and mercy, which not only was thus
far expressed in favor to him, that once had been trusted by the King, and who
in truth seldom lessened his royal disposition to any of his Creatures, without
great cause to the contrary, so not long after his son was restored in blood
and honor with the like grace as formerly to his father. And he also afterward
a like ungrateful wretch, And he a traitor also to King Charles is also
pardoned.
to his Sovereign King Charles, and for an infamous Libel which he framed and
dispersed against his Majesty, was by his Peers in Scotland, condemned to dye
as a Traitor, To whom this merciful Prince the inheritor of his fathers
glories afforded his Sovereign balm of mercies; this Balmerino also not only
reprieved, but pardoned under the great seal of that Kingdom, which he received
upon his knees at that Council Table, with the highest magnifying the Kings
mercy, the humblest acknowledging his and his fathers infinite obligations, by
which they both stood for ever engaged to the service of the Crown. In so much
(the Records say) the whole Council recommended him, And proves an ungrateful
wretch to his blessed Master.
as a Person so highly resenting this grace of the King, that by his own
protestation inducing their Confidence, He was become a Mark of the Kings
mercy, and as new-molded and made fit for the future; No doubt an humble
Subject for his Sovereigns choice Service. And yet this Man ^ot long after,
proved the Contriver and the most malicious Prosecutor of such conspiracies, as
may be said to be the forerunners of that Kings miserable and final
destruction. I cannot learn whether he be living in this sin, and so as yet
spared for Gods mercy, or unrepentant dead to his Judgments sure and sudden.

But to our business in Scotland. In the next Assembly at Glascow, The Bishops
in Scotland enlarged their power.
the Bishops took upon them to enlarge their own authority in the
Administration of all Church affairs, And yet not willing to make any change
(though by the Kings command) without brotherly approbation of the Ministers,
They assemble together and consent unto Articles of Government and power of the
Bishops. In which Assembly the Popish Lords supplicate for absolution and to
subscribe to the confession of faith. Huntley did so, and returned to his own
County, Arroll went about it too, but suddenly fell into such confused terror,
as offering violence upon his own person,, he was spared by his intercession of
tears and prayers, not to be forced against the reluctance of his Conscience,
who in truth of all that sect, showed evermore much of tender mind, to
endeavor satisfaction to himself, and so received more civility from the
Church ever after. Angus was most averse and had leave to banish himself into
France, where he died at Paris some years after.

There had been a good progress in Scotland for quieting the Clergy, and
renewing the repute of the prelacie. And therefore the Archbishop of Glascow,
with the Bishops of Brigen and Galloway, having audience of the King in
relation to the affairs of the Church of Scotland.

Told them with what care and charge he had repossessed the Bishoprics out of
the hands of the Laity and other sacreligious pretenders, Scots Bishops
consecrated in England,
and settled them upon reverend Men as he hoped worthy of their places. But
since he could not consecrate them Bishops, nor they assume that honor to
themselves, and that in Scotland there was not a sufficient Number to enter
charge by Consecration, he had therefore called them into England; that being
here consecrated themselves, they might give ordination at home, and so the
Presbyters mouths stopped.

For they had maliciously and falsely reported, that the King took upon him to
create Bishops and bestow spiritual Offices, which he never did, always
acknowledging that Authority to belong to Christ alone, and whom he had
authorized with his own power.

One thing admitted dispute The Archbishops of Canterbury, Who ordain others
at home
and York, always pretended Jurisdiction over Scotland, and so now this
consecration might be taken as a voluntary subjection to this Church. But
therefore London, Ely, and Bath, performed it to them, and they ordained others
at home, And carried back Directions for a High Commission Court also, for
ordering of causes Ecclesiastical, which were approved by their Clergy, and
put into obedience.

From these good Men, Council Table ordered.
The King fished out the behaviors of his Council there; and therefore to
settle them in terms of honor and state at their Table, they were to convene
twice a week, and None to stay in the Room, but Counselors, nor any
solicitations there. But being come instantly to take their places sitting, not
standing, unless they pleaded for themselves, and then to rise and stand at the
end of the Table, (for they were wont to quarrel and to cuff, cross the board.)
No Counselor to be absent four days without leave of the rest. Each single
Counselor to be Justice of Peace in all the Kingdom, and to preserve respect
to their places they should not trample the streets on foot, but in Coach or
Horseback with footcloths. This brought some esteem to that Board, who before
were bearded by every Kirk-Iohn, or Lay-Elder.

And after this posture of Governing, The Earl of Orkney committed.
Patrick Stewart Earl of the Isles Orkney and Yetland was sent for, to humble
himself to imprisonment: A Custom also which was settled in the Council, to
command any Malignant, to be in Ward by such a day, or else to be horned Rebel

This great man* (at home) is there humbled before the Bishop of Orkney, and is
by him examined, (so soon is the Kings ordinance obeyed.)

His Crimes grew up from his poverty (made so by his own riot and prodigality)
which now he seeks to repair by shifts of Tyranny over the people, under his
Command; and being by the Bishop reported so to the Council, he was committed
to Prison, until the pleasure of the King deals further, in Mercy or Justice.
But to exercise that Nation by degrees of punishment, he was afterward
released and returned home to better behavior, wherein he became for the
future so faulty, that two years after he was executed.

We have hinted heretofore the Kings business at home, High commission-Court.
which in truth was his wisdom to wade through. To suppress the traiterous
designs of the Papists, and to settle the fiery dispositions of the
Schismatics; for the first, their own violent progression in their late
Pouder-plot, drew upon them public laws of chastisement. But these Other,
(alas) their Motion now not so violent, yet perpetual, and the more warily to
be dealt with. And because no disputes, Arguments nor Policies could reduce
them, therefore the spiritual High-Commission-Court took some course,
moderately to regulate their Insolences.

Busy this Parliament had been in disputes, of the Common and Civil Laws; The
first strained to such a necessitary power, as in short event, would mightily
qualify the other to nothing. Besides, this Session sat long and supplied not
the Kings wants, wasting time (as ever sithence) in seeking Grievances. The
Session seek for grievances.
To palliate the Lower House, some Messages had informed his necessary
expenses, and to both Houses, the new Treasurer (late Earl of Salisbury) opened
the emptiness of his Office. And at last the King speaks for himself, at a
Meeting at White Hall. He spoke well, and now prolix, which yet I must present
thus long. Perfect Spe^ches open the times and truth to posterity, against our
Carping Adversary; I need not quote his pages, take his whole History
passionately and partially distempered, throughout.

The King forgets not their late loving duties, and therefore recompenseth them
with a rare present, Hist, G^. B^. ubique.
a Crystal Mirror, the heart of their King, which though it be in Manu
Domini, so will he set it, in oculis populi.

The principal things (says he) agitated in this Parliament were three. First,
The Kings Speech to both Houses:
Your support to me. Secondly, My relief to you. But the third, How I would
govern, as to former constitutions, or by absolute power.

He begins with the last. That Monarchy is the supremest thing upon Earth, Of
his Government.
illustrated by three similitudes. First out of Gods word, You are Gods.
Secondly out of Philosophy, Parens patriae. Thirdly out of Policy, the Head
of this Microcosm Man.

For the first, The attributes of God; Creation, Destruction, Reparation, to
judge and not be judged, and to have power of Soul and Body; so of Kings; and
can make of Subjects as at Chesse, a pawn to take a Bishop or Knight, to cry up
and down their Subjects, as their coin; And as their Soul and Body to God, so
to the King, affections of the Soul, and service of the Body. And he justified
the Bishops late Sermon of the Kings power in Abstracto, to be true Divinity.
But then as to the general, so to exhort them, how to help such a good King as
now they have, putting a difference between Power in Divinity, and the settled
state of this Kingdom.

For the second, fathers of families had Patriam potestatem, vitae et Necis,
for Kings had their original as heirs from them, planted in Colonies through
the world. And all laws allow Parents, to dispose of children at pleasure.

For the last, The head judges of the Members, to cure or cut off. But yet
these powers are ordained ad correctionem, non ad destructionem: and as God
destroys not, but preserves nature, so a father to his Children, a Head to his
Members.

But then he distinguished the state of Kings in Original, and of settled
Monarchs. For as God in the old Testament spoke by Oracles, and wrought by
Miracles, yet after the Church was settled in Christ, and a cessation of both,
he governed by his revealed Will, his Words. So Kings beginning by Conquest or
Election, their Wills, Laws, and being settled in a civil policy, set down
their minds by Statutes, and at the desire of the people, the King grants
them; and so he becomes Lex Loquens, binding himself by a double Oath; Tacitly
as King, and expressly by his Oath at Coronation, a Paction with his People, as
God with Noah. If otherwise he governs them, a King turns Tyrant; Either govern
by Law, says the widow to Alexander, A^t ne Rex sis. There needs no Rebellion
against evil Kings, for God never leaves them unpunished.

And concludes, That to dispute what God may do, is Blasphemy; but Quid vult
Deus? is Divinity; so of Kings; Sedition in Subjects, to dispute a Posse ad
Esse. He professes, Reason for his Actions, and Rule for his Laws.

He dislikes not the Common Law, Common Law and Civil.
favorable to Kings, and extends his Prerogative; To despise it, were to
neglect his own Crown.

The Civil, serves more for general learning, and most necessary for commerce
with Nations, as Lex Gentium; but though not fit for the general Government of
this People, yet not to be therefore extinct, not to prefer Civil before Common
Law, but bounded to such Courts and Causes as have been in ancient use, as the
Courts Ecclesiastical, Admiralty, of Request, reserving Common Law as
fundamental, Prerogative or Privilege, King and Subject, or themselves, Meum
and Tunm.

No Kingdom in the World governed merely by Civil Law; their Municipal Laws
always agree with their Customs.

God governed his People by Laws, Ceremonial, Moral, Judicial; Judicial only
for a certain people and a certain time. Example, If Hanging for Theft were
turned to treble restitution, as in Moses Law, What will become of the middle
Shires, the Irishry, and Highlanders? If fundamentally be altered, Who can
discern Meum and tuum? It would be like the Gregorian Calendar, which destroys
the old, and yet this new troubles all the Debts and Accounts of Tra^^ick and
Merchandise. Nay, the King avows, by it he knows not his own age, for now his
birthday removes ten days nearer him than it was before that change.

And yet he desires three things to be cleared in the Common Law, and by advice
of Parliament.

1. That it were in English: for since it is our Plea against Papists for their
language in Gods service, an unknown Tongue, ( Moses Law being written in the
Fringes of the Priests garments) so our Laws; that excuse of ignorance may not
be, for conforming themselves thereunto.

2. Our Common Law is unsettled in the text, grounded upon Custom, or Reports
and Cases, called Responsa Prudentum: Indeed so are all other Laws (save in
Denmark and Norway, where the Letter resolves) the circumstances making
variations, that therefore so many Doctors Comments, so many different
Opinions; the Judges themselves disclame and recede from the judgment of their
Predecessors, the Parliament might set down Acts of Confirmation for all times
to come, and so not to depend on uncertain opinions of Judges and Reports; nay,
there are contrary Reports and Presidents.

The same corruption in the Acts of Parliaments (which he called Cuffing
Statutes) and penned in diverse senses, and some penal, which no man can avoid,
disagreeing from this our time, yet no tyrannous or avaritious King would
endure.

3. For Prohibitions, Prohibiti^^^
he has been thought to be an Enemy to them, he wishes that each Court might
have limits of Jurisdiction certain; and then, if encroached upon, Prohibitions
to issue out of the Kings Bench or Chancery; and so to keep every River within
his proper banks. The abuse and overflowing of Prohibitions brings in most
Moulture to their own Mill.

The King had taken it in task, in two or three several Meetings before, and
after a large Hearing, he told them, Ab initio non fuit sic. And therefore
ordered each Court to contain themselves within their own bounds. That the
Common Law be sparing of their Prohibitions also, and to grant them,

1. In a lawful form, but in open Court only. 2. Upon just and mature
information of the Cause; for as good have no Sentence, as not Execution.
He instanced in a poor Ministers Case, thereby enforced to forbear his flock,
becomes non-resident, obtains a Sentence, and expecting the fruit is defrauded
by Prohibition, like CHRIST'S Parable. That night shall his soul be taken from
him. Tortured like Tantalus, gaping for the Apple, it is pulled away by
Prohibition. And concludes, with the difference of true use, and abounding in
abuse, to be considered.

The second general Ground, 2. Grievanc^^ how to present them.
Grievances are presented in Parliament as the Representative of the People,
the highest Court of Justice, but concerns the lower House properly.

The manner, opportune in Parliament or inopportune as private men; but then,
not to be greedily sought for, nor taken up in the streets; thereby to show,
that ye would have a show made of more abuses, than in truth of cause; not to
multiply them, as a noise amongst the People. So that, at the very beginning of
this Session, each one multiplied and mustered them, as his Spleen pleased.

He therefore thanks them, for that these finding many such Papers, stuffed up in
a Sack, rather like Pasquils than Complaints, proceeding more from murmuring
spirits, they made a public Bone-fire of them all; a good effect of an ill
cause. So to take care to prevent the like; lest the lower House become the
place for Pasquils, and may have such Papers cast in, as may contain Treason or
Scandal to the King and his Posterity, the ancient order was to be openly and
avowably presented to the Speaker first.

He confesses, that they are just and faithful to their Trust, to be informed
of Grievances; and acknowledges, that his public Directions and Commissions
may be abused in the Execution, and he not informed but by them.

He advises them, not to meddle with the main points of Governments, Not to
meddle with his Office.
his craft, Tractent fabrilia fabri. He being an old King, six and thirty years
in Scotland, and seven years in England; and therefore there needs not too many
Phormio's to teach Hannibal; he will not be taught his Office; nor are they to
meddle with his ancient Rights received from his Predecessors, More majorum.
All Novelties are dangerous.

Lastly, not to call that Grievance which is established by a settled Law, and
to which to press the King is misduty in the Subject, knowing before hand he
will refuse them. If not convenient, amend it by Parliament, but term it not a
Grievance. To be grieved at the Law, is to be grieved with the King the Patron
of the Law; and he allows them to distinguish between a fault of the Person and
the Things. For Example.

The High Commission is complained of; High Commission.
Try the abuse and spare not, but do not destroy the Court of Commission, that
were to abridg the Kings power. And plainly he resolves; seeing that Court is
of so high a nature, to restrain it only to the two Archbishops; heretofore
common to more. Nor shall any man be to him more Puritan to complain, as well
out as in Parliament, of defects therein, only, grieve ye not at the
Commission it self. He desires them, that their Grievances savor not of
particular men's thoughts, but rather rising out of the peoples minds; not of
the humor of the Propounder; that man's passion will easily discover him.
Petitions also, though they be general, are so to be distinguished.

The third general Cause concerns himself, which he always leaves hindmost, 3.
The cause of calling the Parliament.
(and had left it to his Treasurer) being distrustful, naturally less eloquent
in his own concernment. That this Officer had already accounted to them of the
Kings Havings and his Expendings, which he hopes they acknowledge as a favor,
to be particularly acquainted with his State. His Predecessor seldom afforded
the like.

Duty he clames of them; one of the branches being to supply their Sovereign;
but the quantity and time proceeds from their loves; and therefore disputes not
a Kings power, but what, with their good wills; and wishes them, as he, to
avoid extremes; for if they fail in the one (Supply) or in the manner of Levy,
both he and the Country shall have cause to blame them.

And as the secular Nobility are hereditary Lords of Parliament, The quality
how to give.
and the Bishops live neuter, Barons of the same, and give but their own; but
the lower House being the Representative of the Commons, give for themselves
and others, and so may be the more liberal: yet if too much, they abuse the
King and hurt the People; which he will never accept; their true love being the
greatest security to any wise or just Prince.

So they need not the fear of that Item by one of their Members, In giving too
much to endanger your Throats-cutting when ye came home. He loves freedom of
Gift with discretion. He never labored for their Voices to that end, detesting
to hunt for Emendicata suffragia. But then, as not to give him a Purse with a
Knife; So not to excuse and cloak their particular humors, by alleging the
Poverty of the People: To such persons, though he will not be less just, yet
not in reason to gratify them when it may come in their way, to want him.

He heard that it was propounded whether the Kings wants ought to be relieved
or not? Certainly, though it may seem his particular, yet being Parens Patriae,
and tells them his wants; nay, Patria ipsa, by him speaks to them; for if the
King wants, the State wants; and therefore the strengthening of the King, is the
standing of the State; and woe be to him that divides the weal of the one from
the other.

And as a rich King is but miserable over a poor People; The quantity.
so a potent People cannot subsist, if their Kings means maintains not his
State, being the sinews of War and Peace: and it grieves him to crave of
others, that was born to be begged of. And if he desires more of them than ever
any King did, so has he juster reason than any King had.

And in particular, the accession of more Crowns in him, so the more honor to
Subjects, and the more charge.

His fruitful Issue, which God gives him for their use, of great expense; and
yet Queen Elizabeth notwithstanding her Orbity, had more given her than ever
any of her Predecessors.

The Creation of his Son draws near, for whom he says no more, the sight of
himself speaks to you.

That he has spent much, His expenses.
but yet not to be spared; the late Queens Funeral; the solemnity of his and
his Wives entry in this Kingdom; the Triumph through the City, and his
Coronation; Visus of Princes in person; and the Ambassadors of most Potentates
of Christendom; could he in honor of the Kingdom do less than bid them welcome?

But if they will imbound his Supplies, to the case only of War, so upon the
point, notwithstanding his intern Peace, he is to send supply of Forces to
Cleves, both in respect of State, and cause of Religion: his Pensions, the late
Queens old Commanders of Berwick; besides his pretty Seminary of Soldiers in
the Forts of this Kingdom, and also the cautionary Towns of Flushing and Brill,
beyond Seas; his uncertain charges in Ireland; the last years Rebellion brake
forth there of extraordinary charge, and a constant Army, which he dares not
diminish, till this Plantation take effect, the great Mote no doubt in the
Rebels eyes.

His expense in Liberality (objected) has been given amongst them, Reasons for
his liberality.
and so what comes from them, returns amongst them. It Is true, had I not been
liberal to my old Servants Scotish-men, you might suspect me ingrate to you my
new subjects, and yet assures them, his bounty has been twice more to English.
So then to his shame be it, of your house that said, Your Silver and Gold
abounded at Edinburgh; but I wish him no worse than to be bound to live only
upon the interest thereof, and but few of you that I look in the face, but have
been Suitors for Honor and Profit. That vastness is past, Christmas and
open-tide is ended with him. He had made Knights by hundreds, and Barons by
scores; he does not so now, and will do so no more.

They need not now to reminde him, the sight of his children as a Natural Man,
bids him be wary of expense. As for himself, he challenges any one far meaner,
to be less inclinable to prodigal humors, of unnecessary things.

What he has said may move each member to spare him so much as they would
spend on a supper, cast away at Dice in a Night, or bestow on a horse for
fancy, that may break a Leg or Arm next morning.

Conclusion, Conclusion.
freeness in giving graceth the gift; Bis dat qui cito dat; his debts increase
till his supply. All eyes of foreign statutes are upon this affair. Either they
are unwilling to help him, or his state desperate not to be repaired, or that
they part in disgrace with the King, or he in distaste with the Parliament, our
reputations were bred abroad and at home, the abilities of retribution to
Neighbor Princes of good or harm, works much respect. A King contemned brings
War, too late then to be supported, things foreseen are soon remedied.

Meddle not with too much business at once, qui trop embrasse, rien estreint.
And recommends to them necessary things. Religion. 1. Religion
Papists increase, as if some New plot, the feminine sort so proud that (as men
say) they are not to be meddled with. It is surer to remove the Materials of
fire, then to quench it. Nam levius laedit quicquid praevidimus ante. He means
not stronger Laws, but better Execution. Nor does blood and too much severity;
severe persecution makes but the gallantness of many men's spirits (more than
justness of the cause) to take a pride, to die in repute of Martyrs.

To clear some obscure doubts in taking the oath of Allegiance, who ought to be
pressed therewith. Let all Recusants be presented without exception, and
brought under the law. To wink at faults is neither Honor nor Mercy, in a King;
but to forgive after Trial, may be Mercy; dividing them in two Rancks; Old
Papists, Queen Mary's Priests, and those that never drank other, than what they
sucked of their Mothers milk. Secondly, Or such as do become Apostates from our
Religion upon discontent or idle humor, new form as a new fashion: he pities
the first, if good and quiet Subjects and may be civil and conversable. But for
the other Apostates, they must expect no favor but Justice, and so that these
Papists be no longer concealed.

In the Commonwealth. The Commonwealth.
He recommends the framing some New statutes for preservatives of Wood, which
was the worse liked of you the last Session, because I put you upon it then, so
necessary as not to be without it. It concerns their Esse; the most Necessary
Elements, Fire and Fuel: Their Been Esse, decay of Wood, decay of Shipping.
The security of this land is from the Sea as a wall, and by the Sea, wealth,
Out-going and In-coming of commodities. If you will add pleasure Hawking and
Hunting, some of them may be of his mind in that too, and prefer Game almost
destroyed. He thought them but little, for their last law annent Partridges and
Phesants, that every Farmer may destroy them in his own ground. So that if my
bread fly over the hedge to his close, they are at his pleasure, the only
remedy to cast a Roof over all my ground, or put his Vervels on all Partridges,
as on his Hawks, so to be known by his Army.

And for their law against stealing of Dear or Conies. After their tedious
discourse and prohibition, they conclude with restriction only to stealers in
the Night, Like the Lacedemonian Law against theft, not forbidding it, but to
do it cunningly, whereupon the foolish Boy suffered the Fox to gnaw his heart
through his breast. Like the lesson of the Canon; Si non cast, tamen caute.
Exclaims also against the Gentlemen, that hunt not for sport, but ravenly with
Nets and Guns destroy the Game.

And ends as he began, the mirror of his heart.

1. Which may be abused with a false light, to mistake or misunderstand him. 2.
Not to soil it with foul breath, and unclean hands; not apt to pervert his
words, with corrupt affections, like the toll of a Bell to some men's fancying,
what it tincketh, that he thinks. 3. Glass is brittle; if it fall to the
ground it breaks; to contemn his heads, is not to conform to him. But he hopes
with Gods blessing all things will end well: so farewell.
And for this the Kings good Counsel to his Lawmakers, they rewarded him with
one Subsidy and one fifteen, which came to one hundred and six thousand, one
hundred sixty and six pounds.

These times of plenty entice the Gentry to spend at London, where the
concourse of people raised the house rents, Prices, Markets, and robbed the
Country of their commerce in the Neighborhood of the wealthy Housekeepers,
for refreshing the poor, and discharging that burden which it brought upon the
Commons (as has been said.)

To restrain them, another Proclamation forbids all new buildings, Procl^mation
against ^ncrease of buildings about London.
within two miles of London; This and other the like Inconveniences, not giving
leisure to the Parliament to advise upon remedy, the Council Table took care to
rectify. And therefore hereabouts, began the frequent necessity of publishing
Proclamations, which were cunningly carped at, by such as could not endure,
that any Commands should come forth, without license of the Lower House.

And not only now and (heretofore) but from time to time during this Kings
Reign, the new buildings increasing in and about London were endeavored to be
suppressed, the chief Justice Popham and all other succeeding, resolved in
opinion, their great Nuisance to the whole Kingdom, like the spleen in Man,
which in measure as it over-grows, the Body wastes, the Country must diminish
if the City and Suburbs so increase; not bringing wealth, but misery and
surcharge to them and the Court, and therefore at Christmas the Gentry were
commanded into their Country, to keep Hospitality then and after.

Peace and plenty with us, Truce between Spain and the Netherlands.
taught our Neighbors to court their own necessities into a blessing also, and
humbled the High-spirited Monarch of Spain, to descend to a Treaty for a Truce
with his Rebell-Subjects, (held so in former days) the United provinces of the
Netherlands, which in much policy, he soon concluded, not with very religious
resolve on either part longto continue, for the Dukedom of Cleve descending to
nice point of dissension, between two neighbor Princes Pretenders, Brandneburg
and Newburg, The house of Austria quarrels his Interest also, and got hold of
the strong Town of Iuliers.

The French K. evermore near at hand, to draw back any advance to the swelling
greatness of Spain, Siege of Juliers.
was a ready friend to assist the Dutch, who liked no such Neighborhood, and K.
James, not unwilling to adjoyn his countenance, and forces out of the General
Interest of all states, to balance the over-powring of Neighbor Nations; he
being always more ambitious of hindering them, for invading one the other, than
under any pretense of Title, or revenge, apt to question or conquer upon any
others possession; and all three not staying any further dispute, or delay of a
Treaty therein, with a threefold Bond of an Army, besieges the Town, and with
little difficulty took it for the right owner.

But what other Interest, King James had in this quarrel, I know not, unless
upon the old score of affection to a kinsman of the Scots, and a suffering
Prince. The Duke of Guelders and Iuliers, Duke of Guelders and Juliers, etc.
his descent, and last of the race.
of whom this Duke was descended, had been ancient and Magnanimous Kings of
Saxonick-frizeland for many ages. The younger Brothers of that House, had been
Kings of England for near 600. years, until the time of Edward the confessor;
The first Counts of Holland, till Florus who was the last, were younger
Brothers of that descent. Amongst whom one William was the 26. Emperor of
Germany; The last Kings of Scotland by alliance were of the same house of
Egmont, to wit, the Grandchildren of the Lady Mary of Egmont, daughter to
Arnold of Egmont, Duke of Guelderland, which Mary was married to James the
second King of Scotland. And the Lady Margaret his sister espowsed to Frederick
the second, Count Palatine, from whence proceeded Frederick, who married the
sole daughter of this King James the sixth, for whose restoration all Germany,
and many other large Countries, have suffered very much, in the late years then
following.

I may add also the Lady Philippa of Egmont daughter to Adolphus of Egmont,
Prince of Guelderland, married to Renatus, Duke of Lorain, from whom descended
the Dukes of Lorain, who assume among their titles (without any Contradiction)
the qualities of Dukes of Guelderland, Iuliers, and Cleveland; and that by
virtue alone of the Alliance with Egmont.

But greatness submits to providence, the remainder of this royal blood is
lately Anno. 1654. wholly shut up in the veins of Prince Lewis Duke of Guelders
and Iuliers, Count of Egmont and Zutphen. His great Estate and Revenues
relinquishing in the Low Countries 22. years before his death, and sustained
himself only with the means of a petty Sovereignty in Lukeland in spite of the
Spaniard his mortal Enemy, but ranging abroad to seek relief and support
against his Tyranny, he died at Paris with this Epitaph.

Hic jacet Egmontos, Germano e stemmate Regum.
Cui mors plus peteret, quam sua vita dedit.
Huic ctenim Patrios quaerebat vita ducatus.
At mors nobilior regia sceptra dedit.
As for the Netherlands, The Netherlands sometime subjects to Spain.
It belongs not to me to judge of their duty to Spain, nor their division now,
whether Spain has injured them: certainly they were disloyal to him. He
pretends Absolute Sovereignty, They but conditional obedience. But without
dispute, Holland and Zeland belonged to the Lady Iaquelin of Henault, who to
save her own life was forced to relinquish her Estate; And Zutphen and Gelders
did of right belong to the Duke Arnold, who being Prisoner with the last Duke
of Burgundy, who died before Nancie, that Duke intruded upon his possession,
to the prejudice of Adolph his son and lawful Successor, the immediate cause
of the quarrel after.

But this siege of Iuliers was the last action of that fourth Henry Le grand of
France: for the next year succeeding: he was stabbed with a Jesuits impoysoned
knife, Henry the fourth King of France stabbed.
as his Coach stopped upon one of the Bridges at Paris. In the Junto of time,
when he had mustered all his forces, and ransacked together much Treasure for
some secret design, which the Spaniard feared might fall upon him. And it was
suspected for that cause only, that the politic Spaniards Interest sent him
out of the world far enough, 60000 l.
from prejudice of him, having but lately repayed to this Crown, what had been
lent his necessities heretofore by Queen Elizabeth, which came unto sixty
thousand pounds.

After five Sessions in six years time, Parliament dissolved.
the Parliament having wrastled with Sovereignty, which the King moderated by
often speaking to them Himself: and yet finding them more willing to dispute,
than to comply with his occasions, having on his part steered with all possible
judgment, to terms of reconcilement, between his undoubted Prerogatives, and
their Novell Privileges, (as he termed them) which rather increased, Arguments,
by their so often Meetings; He resolved therefore, to separate their
Conjunction, and to adventure on the other way, to do himself right, by his own
just reason, not to do the people any wrong, in the laws of their liberties;
and so dissolved the Parliament by Proclamation.

And now was performed, Henry created Prince of Wales, their dignities.
what the King intended last Sessions, to set forth his son Prince Henry then
of the age of fifteen years, now 16. And because he was the first Prince here
since Edward the sixth, we shall say somewhat of his dignity, the thirteenth
Prince of Wales.

The Kings eldest son and heir Apparent in England, was styled Prince, quasi
primum locum capiens post Regem. Privilege they had to wear Purple Silks and
cloth of Gold and Tyssue in his apparel or upon his horse 24. Henry the
eighth: but King James had repealed all laws and statutes concerning apparel
quarto Iacobi.

They had purveyance, as the Kings or Queens. He is admitted Maintenance, to
give Signs, Liveries, Badges to his Menials, as the King does: but for
enormities of that kind, several statutes of former Kings abridged them, until
12. Edward the fourth. He may have as many Chaplains as he will.

The King by Common Law may have aid-money of his tenants by Knights fee, as of
Soccage. That is, to make his eldest son Knight, and for marriage of her
eldest daughter, (He at fifteen years of age, She at seven (says Fitz-Harbert)
the sum of money at the Kings pleasure till 25 Edward 3. who restrained it,
viz. of every Knights fee, See before Knights Bachelors Anno 1603.
holden without mean rate 20. shillings of every 20. pounds Land, without mean
in Soccage 20. shillings, and so rata pro rata of lands in Soccage, and for
lands of the tenure of Chivalry according to the quantity.

To compass his death, or violate his wife is Treason, 20. Henry the eighth,
and before the statute, the ancient common law in that case. He and other the
Kings children, Les Enfants du Roy, born beyond Seas, shall inherit here.

He had many Privileges since 12. Edward, whose device it was, to draw the
Welsh to acknowledge the Kings Eldest son Edward of Carnarvan to be their
Prince. But 27. Henry the eighth, there was a general resumption of his
privileges, as to Pardon Treasons, Murder, Manslaughter, Felony; power to
make Justices of Oyre, Assize, and Pea^e, Jail-delivery, etc. so from
thenceforth he had only Name and Title, but no other Jurisdiction then should
be granted by his letters patents. He is invested with a Garland upon his head,
a gold Ring on his finger, and a Virge of gold into his hand, to him and his
Heirs the Kings of England for ever, as Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester, To
sit at the right hand of the Cloth of Estate in Parliament. He shall not find
pledges for profecution of any Action.

Cook calls him Omni, Nomine, Numine, Magnus, by Destiny, Name, and Providence
of God the greatest. Yet he is as a Subject, and shall be sued by action, and
in token of subjection he bears upon his Arms, the three plumes arg. with this
old Saxon word Ich. Dien. I serve. Gascon, chief Justice in the time of Henry
the fourth, did commit the Prince, who would have taken a prisoner from the
Bar in the Kings Bench, which the King justified. So much premised.

The King gave his son also the honor of Knighthood, Aid money.
to make him capable to dine with the King, and had Ayd-money of the people. An
ancient Custom from the Norman Conqueror and never till now disobeyed with any
regret, which indeed came but to twenty one thousand and eight hundred pounds.
And together he was also created Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, Earl of
Chester, etc. with all possible luster that the father could express.

But however our Historian takes upon him to pry into the Kings Heart, H. Gr.
Br. pa. 52.
and (though inscrutable) devises a damnable and dangerous jelousie from the
father, against the most incomparable Excellent merit of this his first born
son. [When afterward the father saw him (says he) too high mounted] in the
peoples love, and of an alluring spirit, to decline his paternall affections to
him, and bring him to the low condition he fell in, may be the subject of my
tears (says he) not of my pen. False suggestions to be impoysoned.


Hic homo erubescit timere Caesarem, Ecce! Behold this Author, Court, and chapter
of King James pa. 84.
This Man, Mecenas names him, Hic homo, this fellow, shames not to traduce his
Sovereign King, For he lived his Subject. And here begins his traiterous
intention, to wound the Kings sacred memory, (as much as in him lies) with a
suspicion of the death of this excellent Prince; which another wretch says,
[was done with Poyson] but of the truth we shall speak anon, when we treat of
his natural death, not long after; yet we are told [What his fatherly care had
been to match him with the Infanta of Spain, but after some Traverses, in a
Treaty it was declined] when in truth it was otherwise to my knowledge, Hist
Gr. Br. pa. 52.
for I can produce the letters from Sir Dudly Carlton, then Ambassador at
Venice, to the Lord Treasurer Salisbury, Nearer Intention for Prince Henry to
match with Spain.
being an Account to the King how to advize the choice of a Wife, from the
Protestant Princes, wherein after a large Narrative of their Interests and
particular Characters; he concludes. Thus far I can confidently Counsel his
Majesty, seeing his Religious resolution is fixed to Princes of the reformed
Churches. But since I have been over-bold to balance the weight of his
Majesty's sacred Intentions with my too much freedom, in the concernments of
such eminent Princes, and the hazard of my person in the quality I carry here;
I beg of your Lordship, not to suffer these Avisoes to see other light, then
the light fire.

And was it likely, (which our Historian inferrs a little before) That after
the Powder Treason, the Murder of the French King, his Majesty's speech in
Parliament, and the Excellent Acts against Papists, he must hunt for a daughter
in law from the farthest part of Christendom? what his second son Prince
Charles did after upon the like score, See after anno 1624.
we shall in due time and place observe.

The former passages of Jesuits, Papists persecuted by Pens.
gave cause to all good Christians, to abhor their villainies, and set on work
the spirits of the penmen, (such as they were) most sharp set against them
all, that professed the Romish Religion, and to work they went on all hands.
The Papists to palliate such Actions as painted out the Jesuit in his devi^^sh
likeness. The Puritan of the reformed Churches, to pick quarrels with all
Catholics alike, and those disputes were spread abroad in several Pamphlets
and Pasquells, the Jesuit had friends to pay us, Two for One.

A zealous Churchman of ours, Sutcliffe Doctor of Divinity procures a Patent
for erecting a College at Chelsey near Westminster to consist of a Provost and
20. Fellows, to be chosen by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of
London, and the Universities Vice-Chancelors for the time being; Chelsey
Coledge founded and why?
Intentionally for able men in School divinity, to answer and propose against
our Grand Adversary Romanists.

The affections of the people were so pregnant to this purpose, that in short
time the Doctor had collected their free contributions of seven thousand
pounds, whereout he disburses three thousand pounds, in the building, and buys
land of two hundred pounds rent per annum, with the remainder. And himself
becomes the first Provost, and after his death Doctor Featly, Slaughter, and
Wilkinson (men of singular learning) successively. So then it was S^tcliffe
that sunck his own fortune to raise this fabric, and not Bancroft the
Archbishop of Canterbury, who died this year, and much abused in his Character
by our Chronicler. Nor did the King afford it more countenance, H. Gr. Br. pa.
53.
then wisely to give way to men's wild fancies, especially when it took fire
with the Puritan, for himself soon foresaw, that the witty Jesuit would wish no
better sport, then to press us to death with printed Pasquells in place of
serious controversies; of which yet, (no doubt also) but Bellarmine had more
Books to spare us, then his own budget full.

Another reason. (for I must be bound to bundle up Arguments, satisfactory to
the Reader, in answer of Calumnies throughout the Hystorian, which makes this
book thus bigg)

The other cause, The Title of the land, upon which the College is erected, was
passed then by Howard Earl of Nottingham for years, at seven pound rent and a
fine, when in truth after the Earls death the 12. Iac. It came to light that
the interest was in his Widow during her life (and forty years after) whom the
Lord Mouson mary's, and as her Administrator sells the interest to Duke
Hamilton, whose delinquencie and death, leaves it to this State. And now 1654.
disposed for a Garryson or a Prison, until a good Customer for sale, puts it
to better use. So then you see, the cracked title besides, broke the neck of
this new College.

We are fallen upon the Kings first favorite, The Kings favorite Mountgomery.
Hist. Gr. Brit. p. 54.
with our Hystorians observation, That as Queen Ann had hers, he had his; she
loved the Earl of Pembroke, he the younger brother, whom he created Earl of
Mountgomery. Men of Considerable descents, though of no fame in their merits,
especially the last, of whom (he says) [the King not finding suitable to his
humor, his fancy ran upon another young Gentleman] But the man is mistaken,
for though the King was no quareller, yet he hated a Coward, and turned
Mountgomery out of his affection, for being switcht by a mean Gentleman
(Ramsey) a Scot, at a public Horse-race. Though this favorite was urged to
revenge, and backed by the English, forty to one to defend him: He basely put
it up to his death, and the dishonor of a Gentleman. What his after merits were
to his end, let the world judge; he living to full age, and having had his
opportunity and choice, to become an honest man.

Indeed the King was never without favorites, but changed them often into one
more close and intrinsic, who served the turn for a Notable Skreen of envy,
between him and his Subjects, upon whom the people (as they never fail) might
handsomely bestow complaints, through his Masters faults. So Carr succeeded
him, and his story follows hereafter.

The splendour of the King, See 1612. Masks and Comedies at Court.
and Princess with the rest of the royal issue, the concourse of strangers
hither from foreign Nations, the multitude of our own people from all parts of
our three Kingdoms gave a wonderful glory to the Court, at this time, the only
Theater of Majesty; Not any way inferior to the most Magnificent in
Christendom; Prince and people increasing in honor and wealth. And it was
prudentiall in state to set it forth, with all moderate additions of Feasts,
Masks, Comedies, H. G. Br. pa. 54.
Balls and such like, which our squeazie stomacht Historian (it seems) could
never example in any part of his reading, and therefore sets his Gloss of
reproach upon the King and them, but very favorably (forsooth) [as not thereby
to provoke himself to stain his innocent paper.]

I shall not trouble the dispute how far they were politickly used in the
Roman Commonwealth and Monarchy, Discussed.
how far tolerable in Christian Kingdoms and States. They are necessary
Mirrors, wherein men's Actions are reflected to their own view. Indeed some men
privy to the uglyness of their own guilt, have been violent, not only to crack
but to break in pieces all those Looking-glasses, least their own deformities
recoyle, and become eye-sores to themselves.

We were wont to call them Theaters, representing in little the Entrance, Acts
and Exits of Man, where we may behold Language, Manners, and Behavior the
best; the matter good for Imitation, bad to shun, to teach virtue, reprove
vice, and amend manners, tempering the mind for good impression, or defect in
most of our youth, thrust into devotion without polite manners, forceably
taught on the Stage; where virtue is somewhat more seen to a mortal eye, with
admiration, not to enforce men (spite of Humanity) to serve God with
austerity, not Jubilation.

This Crystal (fullied by time and malicious reports, not without some
shadows of piety, and counterfeit dress to amuze the world for a truth) has
been cleared up to the view by several Pens, though by King James at that time,
little valued for his own content, unless as Splendidae Nugae for the dress of
Court-like recreations, but evermore with so much wit as might well become the
exercise of an Academy. And thus much of plays.

But stay, Our Adversary a Poet and play-maker.
It is come to my knowledge, that our squeamish Informer was bred up a Poet,
frequently a Rymer and Composer of plays, not without exceeding delight in
himself to be so styled, though a mean one: but indeed since the reformation of
them, the trade fell to decay, and he turned -- trot any way to get money. Such
another was A. M. who whilst he kept within the compass of that Dialect did
well, and commendably; but turned another professor, and ended his days
miserably. He went to Bed, as I am credibly informed, well in health, but
disguised with drink, his usual custom, and was found in the morning, his head
hung over the Bedside, his hand leaning on the boards, it seems grovelling for
breath, being choked with loathsome blood and phlegm, foaming at his mouth, his
tongue bleeting out, not able to call for succor of such, as lodged in the
next room: so was he drencht, in drink and death.

In this year 1611. was collected a Contribution of well affected Subjects
called Loan-money being lent upon Privy Seals, Contribution-money.
an ordinary use and custom of all former Sovereigns, 111046. l
in time of necessity of their Prince, or state affairs and no New device,
which now amounted unto One hundred eleven thousand forty and six pounds,
which was repayed back to diverse, especially to such as craved satisfaction by
money, Defalcation or Composition for other considerations, Satisfactory.

There are sundry ways and means to make men rich, Suttons Hospital founded.
and commonly not so concealed, but it happens within the Ken of some
acquaintance. But here we had one Thomas Sutton meanly born and bred, but some
subsistence by marrying a widow at Barwick far short of wealth. It is
rumoured, onelybecause of some probability, (for other we have none) that he
bought a Freight that came thither out of a Dutch Pirate, who (it seems) could
not stay to make better market; And therein was found concealed Treasure in
some Cask: his first advance; which he so increased by Interest and purchases,
as having no heir, he designed a pious foundation at Hallingbury Bowcher in
Essex; but afterward purchased the Charter House near Smithfield London of the
Earl of Suffolk, enriched it with diverse dependances of lands and Tenements,
for which he paid in hand 13000 l, and procured Letters Patents to erect The
Hospital of King James founded in the Charter House in the County of Middlesex,
at the proper cost of Thomas Sutton Esquire, for maintenance of eighty decayed
Gentlemen Soldiers, a chamber and diet, and 8. l a piece pe^sion annually and
a cloth-Gown in two years, with a free School for Scholars, Chamber Diet and
Apparel, to be governed for the present by the Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord
Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Bishops of London and Ely, chief Justice, and
Justice Foster, the Attorney general, Dean of Paul's and Worcester, a Master of
the Chancery, and four more Gentlemen his familiar friends, and Thomas Brown
the first elect Master of the Hospital, and this for ever, and as any
Governors die, the Major party to Elect another.

Besides he gave in Legacy so many thousands, as it did astonish all men in
those days, how he came by so much wealth.

Since the Kings absence, Absurd Excommunication and unchristian in Scotland.
the Papists were for these last three years much increased in the North parts
of Scotland, and complaints made of the funeral Obsequies of the Lord Oglevy
and Gight after the Popish rites. And though (as before remembered) some care
had been for reducing the Earls Huntley, Angus, and Arroll. Yet of late Huntley
returning from England, pretends some commands from the King, to mitigate
Ecclesiastical proceeding on his behalf, which encouraged the others, and the
rest of their Profession, openly contemning the Church Censures. The Assembly
therefore had sent petitions to the King, for further authority to suppress
these Inconveniences.

The Kings answer was, That Huntley had no such warrant from him, but
pretending that he had kept all injunctions prescribed him, except that of
communicating with the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which the King thought
fit for the present, to referr to the Council for time of conforming; but if he
did persist, his Majesty would account of him as intending the head of a
faction, and therefore rather to root him out, than to nourish his follies by a
preposterous Toleration. They were therefore confined unto several Cities ten
days together, there to hear Sermons and admit of conference, and to forbear
Papist-priests companies, that the sons of Oglevy and Gight should be committed.

This prescription too strickt, The three Earls revolt.
the three Earls revolt and therefore an Assembly was called by the Kings
Command, (for so of late they were regulated not to convene of themselves) and
the Names of Papists enrolled were found Numerous, and Huntleys faction in the
North were of the most. He being cited, appears not nor sends any excuse, and
therefore by the Assembly is excommunicated, and the sentence pronounced
public, and no absolution to be given by any offers of his whatsoever, and the
like against Angus, Arrol, and Semple. This was too rigorous and unchristian,
the Church being open to all Penitents.

And truly the inconveniences being examined from that time by the Churches too
frequent Excommunicating of many persons fugitives, for Capital Crimes.

The Kings Christian consideration herein, was signified to them by his
Commands.

That their Sentences of that kind were far abused from the first pious
policy of institution, for such persons as have been cited before
Ecclesiastical judicatures for capital cases, and dare not compeir for fear of
Life, are yet excommunicated as Persons contumacious, when only their fear may
excuse their absence, and really cannot be judged Contemners of the Church.

And in truth the Venetian Padre Paulo in his Treatise, So was Padie Paulo
Popis^ly excommunicated.
did learnedly confute the Popes sentence against him, for not appearing in a
Cause of Heresy, only upon his just fear he pretended, and had his Appeal
justified by all good Christians, and indifferent men.

We may resemble the Scots Courses therein, to the Muscovites manner, who if
he be offended with any man, commands him to send his head in a Charger, even
so they, will the offender to come into Court and be hanged, which no Penitent
would do, rather to suffer sentence than to hazard themselves into Presbyters
handling, a second Inquisition, and so in truth their Church suffers under
scandal and contempt. And accordingly their Assemblies were afterward reduced
to conform to Reformation herein.

The Clergies Arguments somewhat Canonical (if as the Pope they cannot err)
That the Churches form may not be changed, which terrifies the common Man from
their Crimes. But then let them be answered from the principal end of such
Censures (especially Excommunication) which was reclaiming, not confounding of
offenders. The principal use having no place, that other Secondary Ends ought
not to be respected. The case of fugitives; How could the Censure avail to
their reclaiming, they being absent from admonition? Men in such a Case truly
sorrowful for their sinnee and sentenced, are in truth bound up by the Church
whom God has loosed. But that Church evermore expressed their hot zeal of
excommunication by their firebrand Execution, the pretended Sanction of their
Sion.

The lustrous ray and beam of Sovereignty, Earl of Eglington illegally adopts
an Heir to his Honors.
was entrenched upon by the Heir of the Earl of Eglington in Scotland, being
adopted so from him, that had no Successor of birth, or kindred. This man was
Sir Alexander Seaton, a Cousin Germain, and with this Proviso by will, That he
and his children should take the Name, and use of the Arms of the House of
Mountgomery. This bold bearing came to the disquisition (I remember) in our
Heralds office, of which, Garter, principal King of Arms, informs the King as
an ill President, for though Noblemen may dispose of their lands, they cannot
alienate their honors from the Sovereign fountain of all honors in his
Kingdoms. And so Sir Alexander was unlorded, till the Kings grace gave him
Creation, some years after the honors of Eglington only.

The King was had in high esteem, Arminius and Vorstius their Heresies.
to be not only Rex pacificus in temporal affairs, but Nutricius Ecclesiae in
spiritual relations to the Church, yet very tender to meddle in politics of
Neighbor Princes, unless by Envoyes and Ambassies of Brotherly advice. But for
the state of the Church Reformed, he was pleased to take upon him Defensor
fidei with tongue, pen, and sword, if need were.

And there^n he gave his reasons for every Christian King to have an Interest,
though in Aliena Republica.

And in his hunting progress, Vorstius his blasphemous Books.
having met with two Books of Conradus Vorstius, who had the degree of Doctor
of Divinity at Leyden in Holland, the one Tractatus Theologicus D^o, dedicated
to the Landt-grave of Hessen, dated 1610. the other his Exegesis Apologetica,
dedicated to the States 1611. Upon this latter book, The Kings message to the
States.
He dispatches commands to Sir Ralph Winwood his Ambassador Lieger, and
Counselor in the Counsel of State in those Countries, in his Name to declare
to the States General, Not only his Majesty's high resentment of the Monstrous
Blasphemies and horrid Atheism therein, worthy to be burnt, and the Author
punished; but also his infinite displeasure, Arminius.
to have him succeed Arminius (such another Monster lately dead) Divinity
Reader in that University. And though he has recanted his former Atheistical
opinions; it was too slender Satisfaction, for so foul an Enemy to the Essence
of the Deity.

The States General in answer, The States Answer.
do most humbly acknowledge his Majesty's Princely assistance until this time
for preservation of their bodies, rights and liberties, against their powerful
Enemy, introducing the Inquisition and constraint of their consciences in
matters of Religion. That the Curators of the University of Leyden, by custom
of that foundation, have the charge to settle that Lecture, and did elect, and
send for Vorstius in Anno 1610. from Steinford a Town of the County of
Tecklenburgh (the first that cast off the yoke of Papacy in Germany, and so
continue) where he was Professor fifteen years, and for Learning much admired
by Prince Maurice Landt-grave of Hessen, as worthy of preferment in any
University in his Country.

And their Message was seconded from his Excellency Prince Maurice, and the
State of Holland in his behalf, who notwithstanding had opposition by some;
against whom and all others accusers, he challenged the dispute, but they never
appeared.

The next Month six Ministers accused him of false and unsound doctrine, and
disputed it with him, before the Curators and six other Ministers, in full
Assembly of the States of Holland, who all of them adjudged the Election
lawful, Further accusations.
and the man full of merit.

The next Month after that, And proceedings therein.
Certain Articles came over thither and dispersed in printed Pamphlets, to
which public declarations were made by the States; that Vorstius should be
ready to answer the intention of the States, being to permit no Profess^rs, but
according to the Religion reformed and grounded on Gods word, and that if his
Majesty were well informed, he would in his high wisdom, prudence, and
benignity conceave favorably of their proceedings, they being confident that
this business is managed with all due reverence, to his Majesty's serious
admonition, as becomes them, 1 October. 1611.

In the time of these Transactions, Books of Vorstius Heresies.
Vorstius gives aim for his Books to be brought hither; accompanied with an
other De Apostasia sanctorum, and a Letter of the Author Vorstius to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, avowing the doctrine therein to agree with the
Church of England, and so that Book intended to fire the next Neighbors with
this fuel (Non solum paries proximus jam ardebat) was, by order, publicly
burnt at Pauls-Cross and both Universities.

The King continuing the Hunt to Unkenell this Fox, The King writes again
against them all.
writes himself to the States, That notwithstanding his Ambassadors
propositions, They proceed to provide a place for that Corrupted Person, and
with Protection and License to print his Apology dedicated to the States,
impudently maintaining those former Execrable Blasphemies; forewarning them of
the corrupt seed, of the late Arminius that Enemy of God, and of both their
Infections, dividing their Contrymen into factions so opposite to Unity, as
must needs bring them to ruin; Remembers them of his forewarnings, by the
effects since of Arminius his tenants, and their distractions bred from thence,
shows themthe impudency of one of his Secretaries, Vorstius his Book and
Letter. If these be not motives, he prophesies the rent of their Nation, the
curse of God, and Infamy to our Religion, wishes to have Vorstius suffer the
fire, least his poison which denies the Eternity and Omnipotency of God,
should invenome their youth, corrupt their souls, and hazard the safety of
their State; And threatens them if they fail in his Councils, he will be forced
to protest and separate from the Union of their Churches. Westminster 6 October
1611.

The States notwithstanding hasten their own resolutions, Vorstius is preferred
Professor of Divinity.
and Vorstius was settled in the Chair of Professor, nor did these Letters cool
their affections, which heightened Sir Ralph Winwood to make this remonstrance,
viz.

My Lords, if ever the King of Great Britain his Master, has merited of the
states (with great favors and royal assistances themselves with all
gratitudes have acknowledged), Sir R. Winwoods speech concerning Vorstius.
surely then in these his letters of zeal and piety for establishing that
Relion only within their Provinces, which England, France, Germany have
mutually embraced, not regarding otherwise the Persons or Profession of
Vorstius or Heresies of Arminius, but as by them Religion to be sophisticated
or dipraved by the schisms of Arminius, or the fancy of Vorstius, new devised
sects of several pieces of all sorts of Heresies, His Tenen^s
ancient and modern, and these are they.

Out of his Annotations.
That God has a Body, Page 210, 212. 232* 237. 308. 441. 271.
so as we take a Body in the Largest sense.

They therefore speak not circumspectly enough who say that God is altogether
as unchangeable in his will, as he is in his Essence. We cannot read, That the
substance of God is simply immense, nay quite contrary.

No Magnitude is actually infinite, and therefore God is not.

That every event of things were precisely set down from eternity, there needed
not then that continual inspection and procuration, which nevertheless is every
where attributed to God.

They who teach, That there is in God Universal knowledge in genere answer more
fully, but so as they likewise confess, that there be more causes of Certainty,
in the visions of things present, then in the vision of things future
contingent.

Al things which he has decreed and determined ^no modo and actu, he does
after such his determination exactly know them; But this cannot be confirmed of
all and every other thing, which are or come to pass being considered severally
and ^y themselves, because they have their existence, not only successively in
time, but also contingently and oft^times conditionally.

Out of his Apology.
That the Fa^^er has a certain peculiar being, Pa. 38. 43.
or as it were all immitted and ^ounded essence.

That there are really certain internal accidents in God, Cap. 16.
in the very fore-electing mind and will of God.

In the sixteenth Chap. He dissents from the received opinions of Divines,
concerning the Ubiquity of Gods presence.

In the nineteenth chap. Pa. 999.
He attributes to God magnitude and quantity.

These being in part his opinions, whom they had chosen in the Chair at Leyden,
he conjures them to beware, Ne quid Respublica detrimenti capiat, The disciples
of Socinius seek him for their Master. He is a bird of their own feather, let
him go, Et dignum sane patella Operculum, and your own Students at Leyden 56.
of them by their Remonstrance but the last year to the States of Holland,
besought not to be compelled to receive him, who is convinced of his Errors, by
the Divinity Colleges at Basil and H^ydelburgh, by evidence out of his own
writings.

These reasons with the general petitions of all Ministers, (except of
Arminius) may no doubt prevail.

And withal he tells them, that his Majesty moves them to set down some
certain Reglement in Religion, to restrain licentious disputations, and
absolutely to depress the liberty of prophesying, so much recommended by
Vorstius in his Epistle to the States, of his Anti-Bellarmine, so much boasted
of.

And remembering them of their Valiances in defense of their liberties of
Consciences for forty years wars, they would not now make their actions
Example for the Sect of Arminius; Conclusion,
to proclaim that wicked doctrine of Apostasy of Saints.

And concludes that Religion is the Soder of Amity between his Majesty and
Them; wherein if they grow cold, their friendships will freeze.

After six weeks delay, though prosecuted for an Answer, they tell him, How they
have deliberated upon all former passages, and thank his Majesty for his
affection to their Country and preservation of the Reformed Religion, and did
thereupon order, That Vorstius should not be admitted, nor is but as an
Inhabitant; and unless he can clear his accusations, The States of Holland and
West freezeland before February next, (the time of their meeting) would then
decide the difference.

And thus much was all what could be done, in respect of inconvenience and
distaste to the principal Towns of those Provinees.

This being all, and in effect worse then nothing, And Protestation.
Winwood resolves to Protest, and did in their public Assembly.

He begins (like the Advocates in France, with a Latin sentence out of the
Scripture.) Si peccaverit in te frater tuus, argue eum inter te; si audiverit
te, etc. si non adhibiruum atquae alterum, etc. si non eos; dic Ecclesiae, and
so recounting the Kings favors to them, the whole matter of Vorstius and the
proceedings thereupon, concludes for those reasons he does in his Majesty's
Name, protest against the receiving and retaining of Vorstius, and against the
violence offered unto the Alliance, betwixt the King and Them; founded on the
Reformed Religion which they have violated, of which his Majesty is so
sensible, if reparation be not speedily made, as his Majesty will further
declare to the world in print.

To this they Answer, States Answer.
That however his Majesty has not as yet received contentment in the business
of Vorstius, as he might expect, but at the Assembly in February next, his
Majesty shall receive entire satisfaction.

The time come, and the Assembly continuing their settlement of Vorstius, The
Kings Declaration against Vorstius.
the King imprints a Declaration, giving his reasons very learned in many
particulars, why he engaged In aliena Republica.

The glory of God, See more in the Kings works.
The Christian charity to his Neighbors and Allies, especially toward the
Household of faith, The impoysoning of their youth, Quo semel est imbuta recens,
servabit odorem Testa diu; and the Apostle Saint John, in that respect, Ne
dicas illi Ave; and answers all objections and excuses for Vorstius, with this
Maxim, that even in doubtful questions, Men are naturally inclined co choose
the evil, and leave the good, as Du Bartas says of the destruction of Sodom.

De peur qu'en Offensant des saints l'oreille tender,
Ie ne les semble plus enseigner, que reprendre.
For fear of offending good peoples Ear,
I rather teach then with them forbear.
Then the King falls upon his Books, And against his Books.
especially His modest Christian answer, and first in his Preface it is
observed, how in love he is with himself and his Nickname, Purus putus
Evangelicus, a mainly pure Gospeller: and indeed the ancient Heretics called
themselves Catharoi; and another Sect, the Anabaptists, Puritans; from whence
all our Pr^cifians in these latter times, who fancying to refuse conformity,
with the orders of our Church, borrow that Name: and Gospeller is assumed by
many, yet more usual in Hungary and Bohe^e, where are infinites of Sects,
agreeing only in Unity, against the Pope.

As for this Book; His Arguments are either sophistical or frivolous, abusing
the fathers: and he extracts diverse questions thereout, thirteen in Number,
with his resolve on them.

Wherein the King notes the others cunning to maintain them: and how he easily
proves Quidlibet e quolibet, (as the old Heretics Arius and Samosatenus
usually did) and so leaves all to Gods will, and the States discretion, as they
will answer it before God. And though Vorstius died not long after, his tenants
increased to a high distemper in that State. But what the King desired to
suppress in this Man, Legate and Whithman burnt for Her^sie.
gave example for him to punish in others under his own power: and therefore in
this year came to the Stake a Couple, the most damnable Heretics; Edward
Whithman burned at Lichfield; and Bartholo^ew Legate in Smithfield London,
somewhat applying to the Ranters of these our times 1654. Legate held these
opinions.

That the Creeds Nicene and Athanasius, do not contain the true Christain faith.

That Christ is begotten and made.

That there are no Persons in the Godhead. Legates Heresies.
That Christ was not God from everlasting, but began to be God when he took
flesh of the Virgin Mary. That the World was not made by Christ. That the
Apostles teach Christ to be man only. That there is no generation of God but
of Creatures. That this Assertion, God to be made Man, is contrary to the rule
of faith, and monstrous Blasphemy. That Christ was not before the fullness of
Time, except by promise. That Christ was not God, otherwise then an Anointed
God. That Christ was not in the form of God, equal with God, that is, in
substance of God, but in righteousness and giving salvation. That Christ is not
to be prayed unto.

Whitemans Opinions were in effect these, come of Ebionites, Whitemans Heresies.
Cerinthians, Valentinians, Arians, Macedonians, Simon Magus, Manes, Manichee,
Photinus, and Anabaptists, and of other Heretical, Execrable and unheard of
opinions.

That there is not the Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Deity. That
Christ is not the true Natural son of God, perfect God of the same substance,
Eternity and Majesty with the Father in respect of his Godhead. That Christ is
only Man and a mere creature, and not God and Man in one Person. That Christ
took not humane flesh of the substance of the Virgin. That, that promise, the
seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head, was not fulfilled in Christ,
etc. And that God had ordained him, the said Whiteman, to perform his part in
the work of the salvation of the world. These and the rest were written,
subscribed, and by him delivered to the King 9. Martii 1611.

Thus in those times Heretics took some pains to prefer themselves to the
Devil. Adamites Incests.
But now a days we sport our souls away; Amongst many strange Ones, I wonder
most at this meriment of the Adamites. Picardus was the first that possessed
silly people, with the perfect State of Adam, placed them in an Island for that
purpose which he called Paradise, caused them to walk n^ked, and called them
Adamites. Horrible sins were committed by them under that pretense, promiscous
whoredoms, and Incest at their Service; and when their Saint-Minister
pronounces the word Crescite et Multiplicamini et replete terram, the ^ights
are suddenly extinct, and without any respect to Alliance or kindred, they
mingle like brute beasts; and their wickedness we ^ied, the lights are tinded,
and they returned to their service. But now with more Infamy their Innocence
will be li^hted; they sp^re not openly to act in the face of Heaven at Noonday.

I know Our Adversaries the Romanists, Wald^nses ^in (...).
lodge this device upon the ancient Waldenses, poor harmless souls havocked by
the Armies of the Military, Anno 1612.
mercyless Papists; Adamites, says One, that went naked (an affront to Nature)
Indeed poor men rather Nudati than Nudi, forced thereto by the Popes Legate,
who at taking of Cariassone in France (whither these people swarmed) granted
them Life on condition that the Males and Females should pass by his Army stark
naked.

I may be censured by some, I may be c^nsured by some.
how unusefull it might be to imprint to the public these damnable opinions:
but in that I may be justified by Examples of the Fathers mentioning such
Heresies, and of Councils and Declarations from time to time, against such
Tenants.

The next Favorite [a new-come young Man] was Robert Carr a Scotish-man of no
Eminency, Robert Carr a favorite.
But a Gentleman by his bearing Gules, on a Cheviron Arg; 3. Mullets, Sable; in
the dexter point of the Escocheon, a Lion, passant gardant Or. And yet himself
remembered the King in his Letters (hereafter his fall) of his Ancestors merit
(of which truly I have not read.) This Man had been Page of honor to the King
in Scotland, and so may be the first and last original Actor on the Theater of
his family. The beginner as an excellent workman in bringing his Tools and
making his Materials; but his own Ruin by basely degenerating from what his
Master had made him in short time, giving end to the structure.

In truth he became the first Favorite, That is one whom the King fancied
merely for his fashion; upon no other score: and it was enough for the present,
his Master sufficiencies needed no other instructions, only to choose him apt
for impressive Marks of honor, better becomes the Sovereigns Creation, than to
be made so to his hand.

And therefore after Knighthood he was soon Baron of Brandspeeck, Viscount
Rochester, and had the Garter to boot. And we are told [the King took much
pains to teach him Latin, Hist. Gr. Br. pa. 55.
as a most needful Improvement unto a capability of his affections] but this
his opinion sents more of a Poet, than a Courtier.

[And so mounted by the wings of Love more than merit (he says) the Earl of
Salisbury, Treasurer, casts many Mists to damp his passage] and tells the old
wives tale [of 1000l. a gift to the Viscount, which was spread upon a Table in
Silver, and the King invited thither, which Mass of money so amazed his
Majesty, that the half thereof was concluded too much for any Man.]

Amongst these passages [of fancie] in the King, Queen Mary of Scotland her
corpse inte^red at Westminster Anno 1586.
he forgot not that of fame, for his Mother, what she had been and where
interred enough has been said, but not sufficient for him to do until he had
removed her Corpse from Peterborough, (where she had been buried) and brought
her with all solemn magnificence into a statelier Tomb at Westminster, which
could not well become his Predecessor to admit, though (perhaps) repenting the
stain of her honor and sex in the Act of her execution, but left it (a
piaculous Act no doubt) for her own son to perform, who yet in this has his
bane from the Author, Hist Gr. Br. pa. 62.
[that for all his anger at her death, his clamor was closed up with a large
Pension from Queen Elizabeth] and Patrick Gray his Ambassador to implore for
his Mothers life is now belyed in his grave, [as the greatest Instrument to
hasten her death] with a Label in his mouth of the writers own devising.

Mortua non Mordet. The King mindful of matching his only daughter the
Princess Elizabeth, Prince Palatine a suitor to Princess Elizabeth.
had made several overtures the year before, amongst the Protestant Princes of
Germany. And for the better, fixed upon Frederick Prince Elector Palatine, who
at this time came hither to consummate the Marriage.

But in the midst of his wooing he was accompanied with mourning, Prince
Henryes sickness and death vindicated.
by the death of Prince Henry. Of him somewhat more must be said, Not that his
Excellent merits needs other Memory, than public fame, and of us silence of
the grave. Yet we must ravel into his disease ere we come to vindicate his
death which an Author basely labors to lode his father with, and that [by
impoysoning.] Hist Gr. Br. pa. 72.


Prince Henry was born at Sterling Castle in Scotland, February 1594. the first
son to King James and Queen Anne.

His breeding apted his excellent inclination to all exercises of Honor, and
Arts of knowledge which gave him fame, the most exquisite hopeful Prince in
Christendo^.

In the nineteenth year of his age appeared the first symptom of change, from
a full round face, pleasant disposition, to be paler and sharp, more sad and
retired, often complaining of a giddy heavyness in his fore head, which was
somewhat eased by usual bleeding at the Nose, and that suddenly stopping was
his first distemper.

He retired to his Palace ^^ Richmond pleasantly seated by the River Thames,
(thoughnow destroyed into rubbish) which invited him to learn to swim in the
Evening after a full supper, the first immediate pernicious cause of stopping
that gentle flux of blood, and so putrefying might engender his fatal Fever.

He used violent exercises: for at this time he rode to meet the King at Bever
in Lincolnshire in two days, near a hundred miles, in extremity of Summer.

There and at other places all that progress he accustomed to feasting,
Hunting, Balloon, and Tennis, with too much violence. And now returned to
Richmond, in the fall of the leaf he complained afresh of the pain in his head
inclining to feverish, and then, for the rareness thereof, called the new
disease.

The tenth of October he took his Chamber, and began Counsel with his Physician
Doctor Hammond, three days after he fell into a Looseness, fifteen times in a
day.

Then removes to London to Saint James his Palace, contrary to all advice,
allowing himself too much liberty in a great match at Tennis in his shirt, with
the Palsgrave and Count Henry of Nassaw, lately come over upon fame to see him.

And on Sunday the 25. of October fell into sudden sickness, fainting with heat
and headache, that left him not whilst he had life, takes his bed in great
drought and little rest.

The next day increasing, high Pulse, ill Urine, Doctor Mayern prescribes him a
Glister, after which he rose and very cheary, but looked Pale, dead sunk eyes,
and great drought, and therefore Mayern and Nasmith advised to let him blood,
but the other Physicians disagreeing, it was unhappily deferred.

The fourth day of his sickness, comes Doctor Butler that famous Man of
Cambridge, he approved of what had been done, consented to what should be given
to him, and hopes of Recovery.

This Evening two Hours after sun, set, appeared a Lunar Rainbow, Lunary
Rainbow,
directly over the House, which was held Ominous.

The six and seven days increasing his Disease.

The eighth, the Physicians bleed the Median of his right Arm eight ounces,
thin and putrid: after which he found ease, and was visited by the King, Queen,
Duke, Palsegrave, and Sister.

The ninth worse than before, Doctor Atkins assisted their opinions, That his
disease was a Corrupt putrid fever seated under the Liver in the first passage,
the Malignity by reason of the putrefaction (in the highest degree) was
venomous.

The tenth, increasing Convulsions and Fevers, Mayern advised more bleeding,
but the rest would not; applying Picheons and Cupping-Glasses to mitigate the
pain.

The eleventh small hopes, His ^^aplains continuing daily devotions with him,
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Doctor Melburn Dean of Roch^ster, with whom
the Prince daily prayed.

The twelfth no hope, The King with excessive grief removes to Kensington
house: All imaginable helps, Cordialls, Diaphoretick, and quintessential
spirits, and a water from Sir Walter Ralegh in the Tower, all these by consent,
administered without

And so he died at eight a clock that night Friday the sixth of November 1612.

The Corpse laid out, the fairest dearest and well proportioned, without any
spot or blemish. His Corpse viewed.


The next day, solemnly appointed for Imbowelling the Corpse, in presence of
some of the Council, all Physicians, Chirurgions, Apothecary, and the
Palsgraves Physician. And here follows the very Copy of their view under
their Hands.

The Skinn blackish, but no way spotted with blackness or pale marks, much less
purpled like flee bites could show any Contagion, or pestilentiall venom. His
kidneys, Hips, and Thighs full of redness, his Belly (because his continual
lying upon his back) swollen.

The Stomach whole and handsome without any taint.

The Liver marked with small spots above, and small lines below. The
Gallbladder full of wind, The Spleen blackish filled with black blood, The
Kidneys without blemmish.

The Midrife under the Film or Membrance, containing the Heart spotted with
black redish color by reason of brusing.

The Lungs blackish, with spots full of adust blood, corrupt and thick, they
concluded an extreme heat, the Throat and Tongue covered with blackness which
was clest and dry.

The hinder Veins (Piamater) swollen, abundance of blood more than natural.

The substance of the brain fair and clear, the other parts by reason of the
convulsions, resounding, benumings, and of fullness, choking the Natural heat
and destroying the Vitalls by their Malignity, have conveyed him to the Grave
without any toaken or accident of poison.

In quorum fidem presentem relationem manu propria subsignavimus septimo die
Novembris.

Mayern, Atkins, Hamond, Palmer, Gifford, Butler,
It is added, that his admirable patience in his sickness might deceive his
Physicians, never dreaming danger. His Urine showed none, but the state of his
grief lay closely rooted in his head.

He dyed in the rage of a Malicious Extraordinary burning Fever.

And was Interred at Westminster 1612. Interred at Westminster.


His Motto's, Pax mentis, Honestae gloria. Iuvat Ire per altum.

He was comely tall, His character.
five foot eight Inches high, strong and well made, broad shouldred, a small
wast, amiable with Majesty, Aborn Hair, long faced, broad forehead, a peircing
grave Eye, a gracious smile, but with a frown, daunting.

Courteous and affable, naturally shamefast and modest, patient and slow to
anger, merciful and judicious, secret of any trust, even from his youth. His
courage Princelike, fearless, noble, and undaunted; Saying, that nothing should
be impossible to him, which had been done by another; Religious and Christian.

He was never heard to swear an Oath; and it was remembered at his funeral
Sermon by the Archbishop, that he being commended by one for not replying with
passion in play, or swearing to the truth, he should answer, that he knew no
game or value to be won or lost could be worth an Oath.

To say no more, such and so many were his virtues, that they covered the
semblance of sin.

But think what we will, False suspicion of poison.
one that sucks venom says [he was anatomized to amuse the world, and to clear
the impoyson as a Court trick to dawb it over.] Hist. G. Br. pa. 64.
We are like to have much truth from such a prejudicate Penman.

The Prince Palatine and Maurice Prince of Orange (by a Deputy) were installed
Knights of the Garter this Christmas. Prince Palatine m^ried to P^inc^ss
Elizabeth.
And in February following the Marriage with the Princess Elizabeth, was
solemnized with all pomp and glory, together with the peoples hearty
affections, ^a. 65.
expressed in their Ayd-mony (Contribution he calls it) for her Marriage, which
is a due debt or ancient Custom, and no [absolute thing] whether or no that
[the obedience of the subject had been ripe (or rotten) thereto] and it came to
twenty thousand and five hundred pounds.

And in April after he returns with his Bride through the Netherlands to his
own principal City Heidelbergh in the Palatinate, from whence his finite
miserable banishment took beginning in Anno 1613.

A Scottish Baron one Sanquair having wasted his own, Sanquair a Scottish Baron
hanged for murder.
pieced up his Patrimony by marriage with another, an heir in England; and
having worn out hers also, with the death of his Lady, He seeks to save the
poor remain, by sparing it abroad, a Custom of Gallants taken up to salve
their credit, which (they say) Parsimony disparages, unless from home in foreign
soil, and ere he went over, His fate was to try mastery, with Turner a Master
of defense in his own Art, wherein Sanquair had much of knowledge, but more of
opinion.

Turner was the most of skill in that Profession, whom the Baron challenges at
three hits, and enforced upon him the first of three, with overmuch conceit
and clamor of his Scots companions to over-Master the best in England, and him
in his own School too in the face of some Scholars; an affront to all. The
man sensible of his credit more than conscience, in Malice to do mischief,
opened his Body to the advantage of his Adversary, who too near pressing it
home, Turner takes it on his Breast, being sure thereby to pop Sanquire in the
eye, so deadly, that he dashed it out. The Baron guessed at this evil hap by his
own Intention, to have done worse himself. But by Turners regret of this
mischance, they parted, patience perforce.

At Paris the King pittyed his loss, a great defect to a handsome gallant, and
asked him why the man dyed not that did it. This Item the Devil so drove into
his fancy, that hastily brings him home again, where he hired two of his own
kindred, Gray and Carliel to kill him, which they did basely, by a brace of
Bullets in his own House White-Fryers, And all three got time to fly. The one
taken in Scotland, the other on Shipboard, and the Barons head praised at a
thousand pounds; he fearing thereby to be forced into Justice, thought it safer
to throw himself into the hands of Mercy, by presenting it; and so represented
by the Bishop of Canterbury, he might appear an object of pity. But the wound
was universal, and the bloodshed not to be wiped off, but by his death
ignoble as his Act, the Halter; equal guilt had even punnishment, all the
three Gallows.

Some difficulty there was, how to proceed with the Baron, who first came in,
for Carlisle and Gray being Principals, and not as yet convict, the Law could
not proceed to the Trial of Sanquair being but Accessory. But then the other
two flying, they were outlawed, and so attainted of felony, and then the
Accessory was tried: for there are but three kinds of Attainder, by Outlary,
Verdict or Confession. See after in the case of Weston for impoysoning of
Overbury, who stood Mute sometime; that while, the Accessaries could not be
convict Anno 1615.

The next Month brings to the Grave that excellent Statesman Treasurer Cecil
Earl of Salisbury. Treasurer Salisbury dies.
He was descended from the Sits^lts in Hartfordshire (Vorstegan sa^es, from
Cecilii the Romans) they suffered some persecutions in the time of Henry the
eight and Queen Mary. His father William came into favor by Edward the sixth,
who gave him Knighthood, His Fat^ers descent,
and took him to his Counsel and in the Office of Secretary of State, but in
some obscurity afterward under his Sister Mary, was restored again by Queen
Elizabeth in the same trust, so soon as she was settled in her Crown, and by
degrees increases him to honor; And preferments.
First Baron of Burleigh, Then Lord Treasurer and Knight of the Garter, he died
Chancellor of the University of Cambridge Anno 1598. and was intombed at
Stanford; Leaving two sons. The Elder Thomas then Lord President of the
North, and by King James created Earl of Excester, and privy Counselor of
State. He died some years after, discreet and honorable, whom the world could
never tax with any taint.

This other son Robert was a true inheritor of his fathers wisdom, Earl of
Salisburies preferments.
and by him trained up to the future perfections of a judicious Statesman.

After his Knighthood by Queen Elizabeth, the first employment from Court (for
he was not at all bred out of it) sent him Assistant with the Earl of Derby,
Ambassador to the French King. At his return she took him second Secretary
with Sir Francis Walsingham, after whose disease he continued principal, and so
kept it to his death, Not rel^nquishing any preferment, for the addition of a
greater; A remarkable note, which few men of the Gown could boast off. His
father lived to see him thus far settled in these preferments, and afterward
Master of the Wards and Liveries.

These he held to the Queens death, being in all her time used amongst the men
of weight, as having great sufficiencies from his father who begat them also.

Those offices here in public, with perpetual Correspondence by Emissaries of
his own, made him capable of reception with King James, who was advised by him,
how to be received of his people: His merits certainly appeared to his Master,
that added to his former preferments, even to the day of his death, as first
Baron Essenden, Viscount Cranburn and after Earl of Salisbury, Knight of the
Garter, and Lord Treasurer of England.

It behooved the King to bestow on him the weight of that staff, His Merits.
the Coffer then in some want, which was not likely soon to recover, but to
increase debt, by the charge of a treble Court of King, Queen and Children, and
therefore many ways were devised to advance the Revenue, particularly in that
of honor for Knights, Court and chapter King James pa. 12, 13.
Baronets, which was not this Earls only design [as some will have it] Nor of
Somerset hereafter [as another says;] But it was began a little before this
Lords death, Hist. Gr. Br. pa..76*
as will follow hereafter.

I know what some have surmized, to prejudice his Memory if it were possible,
who with little pains may be sufficiently vindicated, and his Merits amply
related; being of somewhat concernment to me, to speak my own knowledge, again,
to enlighten the dark shadows that always wait on shining merit.

But all his care and pains not able to fill the Coffers, so much exhausted,
and the Estate in a Retrograde consumption, He did before his death (not usual
with Courtiers) present his Patent of Master of Wards at the Kings feet, and so
the whole benefit became the profit of the Crown.

By former constitutions of this Realm, Court of Wards how erected and
established.
all the Lands of this Nation, held by two Tenures by soccage or by Knights
service by the Plough to free us, or by the sword to defend us, and who so
died, Court of Wards how erected and established.
leaving an Heir within age, unable to do this Service, his Heir and Lands fell
both to the protection of the Sovereign. And this in ancient time was
promiscuously carried in the Court of Chancery, until the middle of Henry 8.
when this Court of Wards was first erected. Since which time the Masters
thereof, by favor of the Sovereign, did accustom (as a bounty of State) to
grant unto Noblemen, the Kings Servants, and their own followers, both the
marriage of the body, and the Lease of the Lands, for a third penny, of their
true value; which also in several relations, by frequent Orders and
Declarations of that Court in print, have been altered and changed, till now of
late the whole Court and quality thereof is absolutely dissolved as a grievance
too burdensome, for a free State and people, anno 1648.

He endured some time of sickness and died in his return from the Bath, at
Saint Margarets, at Master Daniels house in May, 1612. and was entombed at his
Manor of Hatfield a princely seat in Hertfordshire.

His death opened the doors for the King to dispose his Place of profit, His
Offices disposed to others. Suffolk Lord Treasurer, Rochester Chamberlain, Sir
W. Cope Master of the Wards, and the Favorite made Secretary.
the Treasurership upon the E. of Suffolk, whose office of Lord Chamberlain
fell to the Favorite Viscount Rochester; the Wards to Sir Walter Cope, who
lived not long to enjoy it, being of weak constitution, careful and painful
in his duty, of great experience in the affairs of Court and State, bred up
first under Burlegh, and at his death delivered up to his son Sir Robert Ce^il,
with whom he continued the most exact Confident and counselor to the end of
his days.

And the Favorite also was made Se^retary of State, belike for some sudden
improvement of his Latin Tongue, which his Master is said to teach him.

His Confident was one Thomas Overbury, Sir T. Overbury his story.
a man of good parts, a Student of Lincolns Inn, lately returned from Travel;
besides, it was Carr's first principle (and no mean one) to please the English,
by entertaining them his Domestics; for having not many Kindred or Friends to
lean upon, he might be forced to stand upon his own strength, and the kindness
of strangers.

This Overbury, had most strickt friendships with Carr, A Friend to Rochester.
lately created Viscount Rochester) and therefore soon knighted; and if we may
credit his own vaunt, (being indeed insolent) he would brag, that the Viscounts
advance in business of Court, and Secrecies of State, proceeded from him, which
he managed, and made common.

And the knowledge of this coming to the King, he tenderly blamed his Favorite,
for such freedom in his Masters affairs. This advice made him less communicable
in those Mysteries, which Overbury took ill, and with scornful resentment told
Rochester, that indeed he deserved to be better employed than to attend as his
Tutor.

And therefore he desired to have the Honor and Preferment of an Ambassy Leiger
then intended abroad, D^sign'd Ambassador,
as best fitting his good parts, (and greater pride, of which he had
sufficient) to present the Kings person; conceiting perhaps, that the power
which he usurped, in the Visco^nts affection, would work some regret upon him;
which Overbury knew how to master for a better advantage.

But when Rochester had wisely considered, that there would be no great loss of
so loose a Friend* and that Overbury, though an Osier of his own planting,
would not be wrought in any purpose, but to his own self-pride, hastily put the
Design forward, drew up his Instructions, (with some Additionals of Overburies,
(for I copied them) and this being in earnest, then Overbury would not go,
Refuses to go.
for which high Contempt the King and Council sent him to the Tower.

It Is true, some Months before, Rochester made Court to the Countess of Essex,
(who did not, that loved a Lady*) which Overbury misliked, upon no score of
Religion or Virtue, but to balance with his ambition and vanity, and to
obtrude any Copartnership in his friends affection, especially of the House of
Howards, whom mortally he hated upon private malice; for to some men's knowledge,
he would scornfully report (not long before) that she was won by Letters of his
inditing (which I have read) and by that means, endeavored to bring them to
Bawdery, the beginning of all their future ruins, as you shall hear the next
year.

The Kings expense brings him to account with his Exchequer, The King wants
money.
where his Exits increasing the In-comes, he intends better husbandry to piece
out his Expenses; and having taken into his Household Sir Arthur Ingram a
Merchant bred, Sir Arthur Ingram.
who by his wit and wealth, came to be his Cofferer, the vast expense of the
state keeping the Treasury dry, his abilities discover the cunning craft of the
Merchant; for the Customers had cozened the King, engrossing by that means, the
wealth of Trading, which was therefore raised to an higher Farm. The same use
was made at Court, which he taught the Green-cloath by Retrench, and he is
called by Sir A. W. Court and Chapter page 87.
therefore [an evil Bird that defiles his Nest] (what is he then who defiled
the Court, that gave him breeding, defamed the King that gave him bread?) The
King put this course in practice at Court, (somewhat differing I confess) in
the Line of Ascent to the Household preferment, which rises by order and
succession) and this man a stranger in Court stepped in, to discover the
concealments of the Green-cloath also; and when this Tide had its Ebb, it
returned again to his wonted channel; and it is true, the King shifted the fault
upon his Favorite, an ordinary fate, which often accompanies them to bear the
burden of their masters mistakes, which yet was but an experiment, proper
enough for the L. Chamberlain Rochester to put in practice, whose creature he
was.

But we may not forget our good Lord of Essex, our digression most necessary to
his story, which was thus:

There was, amongst other persons of Honor and quality in Court, E. of Essex
and his Countess, Car and Overbury their stories intermixed.
a young Lady of great birth and beauty, Frances the Daughter of Thomas Howard
Earl of Suffolk, married in underage unto the Earl of Essex, now become a
forward stripling, she two and twenty, and he three and twenty years; of him
common fame had an opinion (grounded upon his own suspicion) of his
insufficiency, to content a Wife.

And the effects of this Narration (with the sequel of his life and
conversation, with his second Wife) is so notorious, as might spare me and the
Reader our several labors, for any other convincing arguments.

But with the first, when both were of years, to expect the blessing of the
Marriage Bed, he was always observed, to avoid the company of Ladies, and so
much to neglect his own, that to wish a Maid into a mischief, was, to commend
her to grumbling. Essex, as they styled him, and increased the jealousy of
such men, whose interests were to observe him, that he preferred the occasion
himself for a Separation; and which indeed from public fame, begat private
disputation amongst Civilians of the legality thereof, wherein those Lawyers
are boundless.

This Case followed the heels of a former Divorce, Lady Rich divorced.
fresh in memory, between the Lord Rich and his fair Lady, by mutual consent;
but because Mountjoy Earl of Devonshire married her, whilst her Lord lived,
the King was so much displeased, as it broke the Earl's heart; for his Majesty
told him, that he had purchased a fair Wife with a foul Soul. But this of Essex
was a different Example, when you seek to parallel them together.

And therefore we may with more charity to truth, not admit such hasty credit,
as to believe, [that now the Kings delight was only for the love of the
Viscount (who is supposed to be in love with the Countess of Essex, Hist. Gr.
Br. page 68.
and upon no other score) to command the Bishops to sue out a Divorce from her
Husband] which in truth was done with ample Reasons and legal Geremontes.

And because the Nullity gave freedom to either, and so the means of her
after-marriage, with Rochester, the sad occasions of all the sequel mishaps; I
have with some diligence labored out the truth precisely and punctually, as it
was acted and proceeded by Commission Delegative, Anno 1613
not easily now, otherwise to be brought to light, which the Historian passes
over briefly, as unwilling to spend time, to set down truths, when it makes not
for his turn; Hist. Gr. Brit. p. 69.
for this Author had been Essex his Man, and turned away by his Lady.

Upon Petition of the Earl of Suffolk and his Daughter Frances, to the King.

That whereas his Daughter Frances Countess of Essex had been married many
years unto Robert Earl of Essex, in hope of comfortable effects to them both;
^. of Suffolk petitions for his daughters divorce.
that contrariwise, by reason of certain latent and secret imperfections and
impediments of the said Earl, disabling him in the rights of Marriage, and most
unwillingly discovered to him by his Daughter, which longer by him to conceal,
without remedy of Law and the practice of all Christian policy in like cases,
might prove very prejudicial.

And therefore prays.

To commit the cause of Nullity of Matrimony, which she is forced to prosecute
against the said Earl, to some grave and worthy persons, by Commission under
the great Seal of England, as is us^ally, etc.

Which accordingly was granted unto four Bishops, Delegates in commis^ion.
two Privy Counsel ours learned in the Law, and unto four other Civil Lawyers,
with clause to proceed, cum omni qua poterint celeritate and expeditione
summarie ac de plano sine strepitu, ac figur a judicii, sola rei and facti
veritate inspecta and mera aequitate attenta.

And with this clause also, Quorum vos praefati Rev. Patrem Cant.
Archiepiscopum, Reverend. Patrem Land. Episcopum, and Iul. Caesar. Mil. aut
duos vestrum, in ferenda sententia in^eresse volumus. But for some Exceptions
concerning the Quorum, by the Commissioners in the words, Sententia esse not
interesse; A second Commission was granted, and adjoined two Bishops more, with
this Quorum. Quorum ex vobis praefat. Reverend. Patrem George Cant. Archiepisc.
Ioh. Land. Episc. Tho. Wint. Episc. Lancelot Eliens. Episc. Richard. Covent and
Lich. Episc. Ioh. Ross. Episcop. Iul. Caesar. Mil. Tho. Parry Mil. in ferenda
Sententia, nos esse volumus.

Upon this the Countess procures Process against the Earl, to answer her in a
Cause of Nullity of Matrimony.

The Earl appears before the Commissioners, by his Proctor, The Countesses
Libell against her husband.
and she gives in her Libell, viz.

That the Earl and the Lady six years since in January, Anno Domini 1606. were
married, her age then thirteen, and he fourteen; and now she is two and twenty,
and he three and twenty years old.

That for three years since the Marriage, and he then eighteen years old, they
both did co-habit as married folk in one bed, naked, and alone, endeavoring to
have carnal knowledge each of others body.

Notwithstanding the Earl neither did, nor could ever know her carnally, he
being before and since possessed with perpetual incurable impediment and
impotency, at least in respect of her.

That the Lady was and is apt and fit, without any defect, and is yet a Virgin,
and carnally unknown by any man.

That the Earl has confessed oftentimes to persons of great credit, and his
nearest Friends, that he was never able carnally to know her, though he had
often attempted and ^sed his utmost endeavors.

And therefore prays the Commissioners upon due proof hereof, to proneunce
for the invalidity and nullity of the Marriage.

The Earl by his Proctor denies the said Contents, Contestatio lit is negative.

His Answer is required by Oath, by second Process, Essex's answer.
where in open Court his Oath was administered with so great care and effectual
words, to mind him of all circumstance, as the like has been seldom observed.

The Earl viva voce confesses the Marriage, and circumstance, (as in the
Libell) and were not absent above three Months, the one from the other, in any
of the said three years.

That for one whole year of the three, he did attempt diverse times carnally to
know her; but the other two years he lay in bed with her nightly, but found no
motion to copulation with her.

That in the first year she showed willingness and readiness therito.

That he did never carnally know, but did not find any impediment in her self,
but was not able to penetrate or enjoy her.

And believes, that before and after the Marriage, he found in himself ability
to other women, and has sometime felt motion that way.

But being asked, whether he found in himself a perpetual and incurable
impediment toward her?

He answered, that in two or three years last he has had no motion to her, and
believes he never shall, nor that she is apt as other women: and that she is
Virgo integra and incorrupta.

And confesses, that he has often before persons of credit confessed thus
much.

Notwithstanding this his Oath, she produced sundry Witnesses of the Marriage,
time, age, co-habitation at bed and board, as before in the Libell, etc.

So then, that period of time limited by the Civil and Canon Law, proved his
co-habitation and co-dormition for consummation.

The next was, that notwithstanding she remained Virgo integra incorrupta; but
because the Earl believed not, the Lady to be fit and apt for copulation;
therefore the Council desired, Matronas aliquas probas and honestas side
dignas, and in ea part peritas dominas assignari ad inspiciendum corpus dictae
dominae.

Whereupon it was decreed, that six Midwives of the best note, and ten other
noble Matrons, fearing God, and mothers of children, out of which themselves
would choose two Midwives and three Matrons, She is to be insp^cted by Ladies.
and out of which the Delegates did select five, ut sequitur.

Tunc Domini, viz. Arch. Ca^. Land. Eliens. Covent. and Lich. Caesar, Parry,
Dunn, Benet, Edwards, habita inter eos privata deliberatione ex numero
matronarum praedict. elegerunt,

The Lady Martha Terwhite, wife of Sir Philip Terwhite Baronet.

Lady Alice Carew, wife of Sir Matthew Carew.

Lady Dalison, wife of Sir Roger. Et in supplement casu earum impedire.

The Lady Anne Waller, Widow.

Et ex obstetricum numero, etc.

Margaretam Mercer, and Christianam Chest.

Et assignarunt procuratorem dictae dominae Francessi ad sistendum cujusmodi
inspectatrices, coram Reverend. Patre Episcop. Land. Caesar, Dun, etc. Inter
caeteros nominat. isto die, inter horas quintam and sextam post meridiem
juramentum in hac part subdituras, atque inspectione facta fidiliter
relaturas, earum judicium, juxta earum scientiam and experientiam, etc. Coram
dictis dominis delegatis, sic ut praefertur assignatis, quam cito fieri possit,
ante horam quartam post meridiem diei Iovis prox. alioquin ad comparend. hoc in
loco coram Commissariis dicto die Iovis inter hor as quartam and sextam post
meridiem ejusdem diei, earum judicium in hac part tunc relaturas, and
interessendum diebus, hora and loco respective praedict. ad videndum
inspectatrices praedictas, juramento in hac part onerari; nec non quibuscunque
aliis diebus hora and loco per dictos dominos Commissarios nominat. dictis
inspectatricibus adreferend. earum Iudicium assignatum.

Accordingly between the hours of that day, were presented before the
Delegates, the said Ladies, sworn, ad inquirend. and inspect.

1. Whether the Lady Frances were a woman apt and fit for carnal copulation,
without any defect that might disable her to that purpose? 2. Whether she were
a Virgin unknown carnally by any man?
Whereupon they went from the presence of the Commissioners into the next Room,
where the Countess was, accompanied with the Council of both sides, into which
Room was no entrance but at one door, whereat the Council presently came forth,
and only the Countess left with the Ladies, who after some convenient time
returned their report under their hands. The Commissioners having first
sequestered from their presence the Council on both sides, (who had been present
in all these passages) and all other persons except the Register, that so the
Ladies and Midwives might more freely deliver their secret Reasons, etc. though
it was not fit to insert them into the Record.

And this is in sum their Relation.

1. That they believe the Lady fitted with abilities to have carnal copulation,
who repute
and apt to have children. 2. That she is a Virgin incorrupted. her a Virgin,

And to corroborate all this, the Countess in open Court produced seven women
of her consanguinity. and so do seven more ^adies.


That in as much as the truth of all was best known to her self, she might by
virtue of her Oath discover the same, and her Oath should be no farther
regarded than as it was confirmed by the Oaths of those her Kinswomen.

The Law presuming, that such kindred should be best acquainted with the inward
secrets of their Kinswoman.

In order, the Countess had an Oath administered to her, with all, with all the
like grave admonition as before to the Earl. And so she affirmed:

That since the Earl was eighteen years old, for three years he and she had
lain in bed, etc. as in her Libell.

And then the seven noble women, viz.

Katherine Countess of Suffolk, Frances Countess of Kildare, Elizabeth Lady
Walden, Elizabeth Lady Knevet, Lady Katherine Thin, Mistress Katherine Fines,
Mistress Dorothy Neal her Kinswomen, being charged to speak without partiality,
they did all depose, that they believed the same was true.

1. And in particular, that post plenam pulvertatem utriusque, they both
endeavored copulation.

2. That notwithstanding, ability on her part, per inspectatrices, she remained
a Virgin incorrupted.

3. That the Earl had judicially sworn, that he never had, nor could, nor
should ever know her carnally.

The Law being this, that impotentia coeundi in viro howsoever, whether by
natural defect, or accidental means, whether absolute toward all, or
respective to his wife alone; if it precede Matrimony and be perpetual, as by
Law is presumed, when by three years continuance, after the man's age of
eighteen years, there having been nil ad copulam, the Marriage not consummated,
and the Law allowing the said proofs, etc. was abundantly sufficient, to
convince the said Earl of impotency.

Because Canonum statuta custodiri debent ab omnibus, and nemo in actionibus,
vel Iudiciis Ecclesiasticis, suo sensu, sed little authoritate duci debet.

The Judges Delegates therefore gave this Sentence.

Idcirco nos, etc. in dicta causa Iudices Delegati and Commissarii Christi
nomine (primitus) invocato, and ipsum solum Deum, oculis nostris praeponentes
and habentes, deque and cum consilio Iurisperitor. cum quibus in hac part
communicavimus; Sentence of Nullity,
matureque deliberavimus, praefat. dominum comitem Essex, dictam dominam
Franciscam, ob aliquod latens, and incurabile impedimentum perpetuum,
praedictum contractum, and solemnizationem praecedens, citra solemnizationem
and contractum praedictum nunquam carnaliter cognovisse, aut carnaliter candem
cognoscere potuisse, aut posse, and eundem dominum comitem, quoad carnalem
copulam cum eadem domina Francisca, exercend. omnino inhabilem and impotentem
fuisse and esse:

Pronunciamus decernimus and declaramus praefatum praetensum Matrimonium, sic
inter praedictum vir^m Robertum Devereux comitem Essex and praedict^m
praenobilem foeminam Franciscam Howard, de facto contractum and solemnizatum,
omniaque ex inde sequentia, ratione promissorum, omnino invalidum, ac nullum
nulla fuisse, and esse, viribusque juris caruisse and carere debere, atque
nullo and nullis, and invalido and invalidis, ad omnem juris effectum; etia^que
pronunciamus decernimus and declaramus, dictum matrimonium praetensum, omniaque
exinde sequentia cassamus annullamus and irritamus; memor atamque dominam
Franciscam Howard, ab aliquo vinculo hujusmodi praetensi Matrimonii inter eam
and dictum dominum Robertum comitem (ut praefatur) de facto contracto and
solemnizato liberam and solutam fuisse and esse, and sic tam liberam and
solutam insuper pronunciamus, decernimus and declaramus; eandemque dominam
Franciscam ab eodem domino comite Essex, quoad vinculum matrimonii praetensi
praedicti, omniaque exinde sequentia liberandam and divortiandam fore debere
pronunciamus and sic liberamus and divortiamus, eosdem quo ad transitum ad
alias nuptias conscientiis suis in domino relinquere, per hanc nostram
sententiam definitam; sive hoc nostrum finale decretum, quam sive, quod fecimus
and promulgamus in his scriptis.

And the Records extant, do mention the proceedings (you see) modest, legal,
parallel with any former of like kind, wherein the Civil Laws are boundless;
and this strict form and manner had no room for corruption.

And the Commissioners that agreed to the Sentence were four Bishops, Signed by
sufficient men.
Winchester, Lichfield and Coventrey, Rochester, and Ely.

The Civilians were three Knights, Caesar, Parry, and Dunn.

And though thus sufficient, yet are they noted [ for private men for the
purpose, and that Kings will never want such ministers in corrupted times both
in Church and State.]

The common people were offended with the Canons, and wished, that Essex might
have as many Women to aspect him for his sufficiency; That he might have
justified himself upon others, or have had Physicians (by art) to certify his
natural impediment, or whether impedimentum maleficii (being accidental)
praesumatur praecessisse, vel potius subsecutum fuisse matrimonium contractum
and solemnizatum? Whether they ought post praeceptum Iudicis, to co-habit
together, saltem per aliquod temporis spatium arbitrio Iudicis moderandum, for
further trial.

Indeed the Archbishop Abbot took upon him the quarrel, Archbishop Abbots
Arguments against the Nullity.
who (in truth) in the Civil Law was least able) his Doubts and Queries were
dispersed, and got some credit with the Clergy, whilst the Civilians (with
much civility, if not fear) of his authority amongst them) forbore to give him
answer, till the King himself took the pains to pull him down.

The Bishops Arguments were six.

1. That all controversies concerning the Church are comprehended in the
Scripture, and Marriage is there accounted sacred. 2. What Text does warrant a
Nullity after Marriage, Propter maleficium versus hanc? The Scripture, indeed,
makes Nullity, Propter frigiditatem, Matthew. 19. 12. Some born chaste, some made
Eunuchs, some made so by grace. 3, 4. What Councils or Fathers, or stories
either Greek or Latin, have ever mentioned Malesicium versus hanc, until
Hircanus, Rhemensis Episcopus, four hundred years after Christ? 5, 6. Essex is
found defective, for whom we are bound to use two Remedies, Eternal and
Temporal.
For the first, Non ejicietur, nisi per orationem and jejunium.

For the second, Corporeal Medicines. But the Earl has had none of these.

The Answer.

To the first, Answered.
It is a preposterous Puritan Argument without some better distinction or
explanation: for, the Orthodox, consider all controversies in points of Faith
and Salvation. Nullity of Marriage cannot be one, and therefore the consequence
fails.

2. If the Scriptures want a Nullity, Propter frigiditatem, then all the means
which may make him frigidus versus hanc, must be comprehended; for, why does
our Church condemn Marriage of a man with his sisters daughter? or of two
sisters, but ut paritate rationis? for none of them are in terminis prohibited
in Scripture, and so all the other unlawful matches, for ascending or
descending in points of Consanguinity, quia par est ratio.

The like is in this case; for although Christ spoke only to three sorts of
Eunuchs, yet, Ratio est quia non potest esse copulatio inter Eunuchum and
mulierem; and therefore Saint Paul tells us, It is not Conjugium sine
copulatione.

I conclude therefore a paritate rationis, that Christ did comprehend under
these three sorts, all inability, which does perpetually tually hinder,
copulationem versus hanc; whether natural or accidental. For what difference is
there, between the cutting off the hand, and being made impotent thereof?
Amputatio and Mutilatio membri, being the same in Civil Law.

It being sufficient unto moderate Christians to believe out of Gods word. That
marriage is null, sine copulatione; and those words, quos Deus conjunxit, are
never found in Scripture, where et erunt eis, does not proceed, viz. And they
two shall be made one flesh.

But however the impediment be, whether universal or versus hanc, or born so,
or by violence, or by disease, or ineptitude, that is ever par ratio, he is
Eunuch versus hanc and omnes alias. Seeing to him only she was married.

To the third and fourth; There may be something to this purpose, or aliquid
analogum, with a paritate rationis.

Besides; it is an ill argument to say, that therefore it is not lawful,
because Fathers nor Council, do not mention it.

5. The same answer to the fifth; for till the four hundred years after Christ
(perhaps) that devilish trick was not discovered, and we know, ex malis
moribus bonae leges.

And this, in dispute, is only a question of Order and Policy; For the
essential point of Matrimony, cannot be accomplished sine copula.

6. The Devils have power over the flesh, and to exempt us from the power of
Witchcraft, was never maintained by any learned man; and why not of
Protestants, as well as of Papists?

Remedies perhaps, have been used by themselves, but Non interest Repub. nec
Eccles.

And so to satisfy his conscience, this pains was taken with the Archbishop,
ut cum conversus fuerit, confirmet fratres suos.

In fine; The Countess marries Somersct.
both Parties freed to their second choice, the Countess the fifth of December
marries the Viscount, lately made Baron of Brandspick and Earl of Somerset, the
tenth Earl; the first being made by Maud the Empress: And Overbury in the Tower
hears of this jollity, and himself in durance, threatens Somerset (No, says
our Adversary) writes to him, humbly imploring. Another (such like) pens the
Letter thus.

Right Noble and worthy Sir, H. Gr. Br. p. 72 Hist. Na^. chapter 28.

YOur former accustomed favors, and also late promise concerning my present
deliverance, has caused me at this time, by these lines to solicit your
Lordship, and to put you in remembrance of the same, not doubting that your
honor is at all forgetful of me, but only (by reason of my imprisonment)
being possessed of diverse dis^^ses^ would for my bodies health and safety, taste
of the felicity of the (...) air; In which cause, if your Lordship please to
commiserate my present necessities and procure me my speedy deliverance, I
shall not only stand much the more obliged to you, but also acknowledge you the
preserver of my life.


Such stuff as this makes up the matter as they would make us believe, but in
truth; he threatened Somerset with some discovery, which was construed to be
secrets of Love, or State, or both. Not without monstrous defaming her honor,
by Message and writing, [filthy base woman, they were best look to stand fast]
which begat fury in her and subtilty in Somerset, least Overburies Malice,
should break forth, to both their sufferings, and so trouble their whole
fortunes.

To prevent mischief to the One, Overburie designed to be de^troyed.
and continual defame to the other, combining with the rest. It was resolved by
her to destroy him; which she first intended by assassination, and dealt with
one Sir David Wood (an ill-looked red-bearded Scot) whom Overbury had prevented
of a suit, valued 2000l. But his cowardice, not conscience, fearing to engage,
she and they plotted the impoisoining of him in prison, as the story intends to
discover in particular.

This Spring seizes Northampton for death. Earl Northampton dies.
He was brother unto the late Duke of Norfolk, who suffered for his Attempts of
Marriage with the Queen of Scots (as before remembered) then a Prisoner here in
England, which might be some motive for the King to consider the advance of
this Man and that Family, which he did, by preferring the Dukes second Son to
be Earl of Suffolk 1603. and by restoring the Dukes Gra^dchild Thomas Earl of
Arundel 1604. as aforesaid, and by particular preferments of this Henry, who
was more wedded to his book than to the Bed, for he dyed a Bachelour.

He was accounted wise and learned, a cunning Statesman, and for all these
abilities, out of the Kings great affection to Letters, especially being
concentured in a Noble person, at his first accession hither, His preferments
to honor.
he the rather advanced him in succeeding Creations, as Baron of Marnhill, Earl
of Northampton, then Privy Counselor, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, Lord
Privy Seal, and Knight of the Garter, and elected Chancelour of the University
of Cambridge.

He had plentiful for his single Life, and to spare for his friends. In his
expense, not over frugal, maintaining his Port the most remarkable (like the
ancient Nobility) in his family and dependents of any Lord then or since his
time.

He assisted his Nephew the Earl of Suffolk, by his designning, and large
contribution to that excellent Fabric Awdleend.

He built that Noble Structure at Charing Cross, Northamp. House, and presented
it a New years gift to his Cousin German the ^ Walden, Suffolks eldest Son. And
yet left his other Cousin the E. of Arundel, the rest of his estate, so to
appear to the World his equal distribution to such even kindred.

He was pious, and gave good testimony thereof in his life, built that handsome
Covent at Greenwich, and endued it with Revenue for ever, for maintenance of
decayed Gentlemen Bachelours, a competent number; and for Widows also
considerable.

He died in April, Anno 1614. full of years and honor, and suspected more
Catholic than some will think reasonable, though in the form of a Church
Papist (as some lately do publish) and to be a Setter in the monstrous Murder
of Sir Thomas Overbury, though the Lieutenant of the Tower Yelvis in his
Examinations and Confessions cleared him, which suspicion is since grounded
upon the interpretation of his Familiar Epistles to the Earl of Somerset, and
indeed but bruited since his death. And where no proofs precede, we may be
sparing to not him so Noble a Person, with that, or any other Infamy.

About these times, the humors of young Gallants, not brooking the peaceable
conditions of our Kingdoms, and neighbor Nations, Against Du^lls.
took upon themselves to quarrel with each other, and to fight it out in Duels
upon slight occasions, and very frequent; which induced his Majesty to publish
a severe Edict against private Combats and Combatants, their Seconds,
Accomplices, and Adherents, for prevention of those heavy events whereto worthy
familics become obnoxious, by the odious and enormous impieties inevitably
subsequent thereupon;

Intending by that time, that the most proper Remedies have qualified the
distemper of il-disposed minds, and that audacious spirits have smarted for
incompetent desires; the false colors and pretenses of erring Custom, have
both been counterpleaded and corrected by reforming severity. By that time, I
say, that Passion has been put into the right course of submitting to
discretion and caution, has wrought it self at leisure, into as constant a
form and habit of conforming to obedience, as self-will took in former times to
plant false principles; the greater part will easily discern, That there is
greater reason to reprove those that offer Challenges of madness, than to tax
those of Cowardice that abstain out of duty.

And therefore those that should conceive themselves to be behind in the least
respect of point of honor should repair to the Marshalls Court, who were
instructed and prepared as well for the cleansing of all green wounds, as the
healing of old Ulcers that shall appear to them.

Hereupon occassion was soon given and taken in a Duel of Priest and Wright,
for writing and carrying the challenge, and an information against them in Star
Chamber, by a charge of Sir Francis Bacon, Attorney General, and though the
persons were but mean, yet they served for example to the great; the Dog to be
beaten before the Lion, the one a Barber Surgeon, the other a Butcher.

This eloquent Orator divided his charge into four branches.

1. The nature and greatness of the Mischief. 2. The Causes and Remedies. 3.
The Justice of the Law of England, which (says he) some think defective
herein. 4. The capacity of this Court, where the Remedy is best to be found.
1. For the first, when Revenge is extorted out of the Magistrates hands into
private men, presuming to give Laws to themselves; It may grow from quarrels to
banding, so to trooping, then to tumult and commotion, from private persons to
families and alliances, and so to national quarrel; and subject the State to
inflammations and convulsions, and herein Offenses of presumption are the
greatest, and this to be done by the aurorae filii sons of the morning, young
men full of hope and towardness.

2. The Causes no doubt, a false imagination of honor and credit; bewitching
Duels, Species falsa, against Religion, Law and virtue. That men now adays had
lost the true Notion of fortitude and valor; the one, Fortitude, distinguishing
the grounds of quarrels, whether they be just and worthy a man's life, being to
be sacrificed to honorable services, good causes and Noble Adventures, Expense
of blood is as the expense of money, not to be profuse in either, upon vain
occasion.

For the Remedies. Four things may be effectual for repressing the depraved
custom of Combats.

First, The State to abolish it: for then every particular person thinks
himself thereby acquitted his reputation; when he sees it an insult against
Sovereign power. Like unto the Edict of Charles the ninth of France against
Duels, That the King himself took upon him the honor of all, that were grieved
or interessed for not having performed the combat, when he shall see the rule
of State dis-interest him of a vain and unnecessary hazard.

Secondly, This evil must not be cockered. The compounding of quarrels is grown
so punctual by private Noblemen and Gentlemen, who is before hand, and wholly
behind hand. It countenances Duels, as if therein somewhat of right.

The most prudent, and best Remedy may be learned out of the Kings
Proclamation. The false conceated humor must be punished in the same kind, In
eo quis rectissime plectitur in quo pe^cat, such men to be banished the Kings
presence and excluded the Court for certain years, to be cast into that
darkness, not to behold his Sovereigns face.

Lastly, We see the Root of this offense is stubborn, for it despises death
the utmost of punishments, and therefore these men to be executed by Law
without all remission. The severity of France had been more, where by a kind of
Marshal Law established by the King, the party surviving was instantly hanged,
their wounds though bleeding, least a natural death should prevent the example
of Justice. Or, if not so to do, but with greater lenity, yet of no less
efficacy, which is to punish by fines in Star Chamber the middle acts and
proceedings, which tend to the Duel.

3. Now for the Law of England. It is excepted against in two points.

Not to difference between an infidious and foul murder, and killing upon fair
terms, as they term it.

The other, Not providing sufficient punishment for contumely of words, as
thely, and the like.

These novelties are thus answered. The Law of God makes no difference, but
between Homicide voluntary and involuntary, which we term Misadventure, and for
which there were Cities of Refuge.

Our Law has a more subtle distinction. The Will inflamed, and the Will
advised; Manslaughter in heat, and Murder upon Malice or cold blood. The
Romans had restrained this privilege of passion, but only where the Husband
took the Adulterer in the manner. Yet Cain enticed his Brother into the Field
and slew him treacherously; but Lamech vaunted of his Murder, To kill a young
man, and if it were but in his hurt. So as the difference is between Insidious
and Presumpt^o^s Murder, these of Cain and Lamech.

Greece and Rome had not this practice of Duells. It is said, fas est and ab
host doceri.

There was a Duel between two eminent persons of the Turks, and one slain; the
Council of Bashaes reprehended the Other, How durst you undertake to fight one
with the other? are there not Christians enough to kill? Did you not know, that
whether of you were slain, the loss would be the great Seigniours?

It Is true, we find Combats before an Army amongst the Romans, which they
called Pugna per provocationem; between Generals themselves, or by their
license to others.

So David asked leave when he fought with Goliath; And Ioab when the Armies met,
gave leave, Let the young Men play before us.

And of this kind was that famous example in the Wars of Naples, between the
Spaniards and Italians, where Italians prevailed.

The second combat is a Judicial Trial of Right introduced by the Goths, and
the Northern Nations, and more ancient in Spain.

But yet a wise Writer says, Taliter pugnantes videntur tentare Deum, quia hoc
volunt ut Deus ostendat and faciat Miraculum, ut justam causam habens Victor
efficiatur, quod saepe ^ontra accidit. Nay the French folly in this kind, had
it in Toleration, never authorized by Law; but of late punished with severe
rigor.

As for the supposed defect in our Law for Lies and fillips, words of denial
and flea bites, to murder a man; Solon's Answer satisfies, That he had not
ordained Punishments for it, not imaging the world so fantastical to take it
so highly.

The Civillians say, that an action of injury does not ly for it. Indeed
Francis the first of France, gave the ly to the Emperor, and in a Solemn
Assembly said, That he was no honest man that would bear the ly.

The Laws of England had only these degrees of injury, Slander, Battery,
Maime, and Death. But as for a fillip, Consalvo said, A Gentleman's honor
should be De tela crassiore, of a strong warp.

Now for the power of this Court to censure; Presidents have been in the Minor:
Whartons case Plt. where Acklam, Defendant, servant to Elleckars, was fined for
carrying his Masters challenge but by Word of Mouth.

And it was concluded to prosecute in these cases against such,

As shall appoint the field though the sight be not acted,

Send challenge in writing or message.

Shall deliver either of them.

To accept or return them.

To be a second.

To depart beyond Seas to combat.

To revive a quarrel by s^andalous bruits or Pasquils.

Counselors of Quarrellers.

And that a Man may in those cases be as well fur de se, as felo de se, if he
steal out of the Realm to fight, he does, Machinari contro Corona^

But let us remember Scotland. We have forewarned the Earl of Orkneys
mis-behaviour in Scotland, which of late so increased as he was again sent for
and committed. Having rioted most of his Estate, Rebellion in Orkney.
the remainder was mortgaged to Sir John Arnots, of whom the King purchases his
Interest, by which means he might the better give relief to the distressed
Tenants from oppression.

The Earl now in Dunbarton Castle, with a Noble a Day pension for his
Maintenance, had information how his Estate with his Castles Kirkwall, Birsay,
and other his Houses and Lands in the Isles were rendered to the Kings
Sheriffs; He endeavoring first to escape, but not effecting, sends his base
Son to get forces, and to expulse the Possessors.

He does so, with some loose people assaults Birsay, and takes it, wherein he
puts a Garrison of thirty men, and hastens to Kirkwall, seizes that also.

This Insurrection comes to the Kings knowledge, and hastens Commission to the
Earl of Caithness, Lieutenant of those bounds; who with his Canon recovers the
Castles in 6 weeks, and those within made Prisoners. Robert Steward the Earls
base son, and four more principal Actors, were arraigned at Edinburgh, conv^ct,
The Earl convicted,
and hanged.

The Earl as Accessory, came to Trial, being indicted for causing his base son
to surprise Kirkwall and Birsay, inciting the people to Rebellion, and
detaining the Castles treasonably against the Kings forces.

He was allowed Prolocutours (Lawyers) of the best esteem, who deny the Libel
(as they call it) but the confession of his base Son, and Others, with his
missive Letters written to one John Sharp, for detaining those Castles, and a
charter of certain Lands assigned by him to one Patrick Haloro, and executed,
for assisting the Rebels; the Assize of Jury, being his Peers, Earls and Lords
found him guilty of Treason, and he presently executed at Edinburgh.

The end of Patrick Earl of Orkney, his descent.
Son to Robert Stewart one of the base Sons of King James the fifth (for he had
others) This Robert was at first Abbot of Holy-rood-house, for diverse years.
After the forfeiture of Hepburn Earl of Bothwell, and the obtaining those
Isles, he exchanged the Abbacy with the Bishopric of Orkney; and so became
sole Lord of the County. Patrick succeeding to an elder Brother, and grown a
Courtier, involved himself in great debts which enforced him the more tyrannous
over the people, to recover his wants.

At Glasgow was apprehended Oglevy a Jesuit, Oglevy a Jesuit, his Examinations.
lately come from Gratts, by command of his Superior in that College. He
answered peremptory to the Commissioners questions, professing not to prejudice
others by any Confession. Their torture to enforce him to impeach others, was
to debar him sleep for some time, until he was forced falsely to accuse any
body, which he, after repose, would deny again.

The King was displeased with such forms to men of his profession, and if no
crime could be proved but his Calling, and saying Mass; they should banish him,
not to return on pain of Death; but if his practice had been to induce the
people to rebellion, and maintained the Popes power transcendent over Kings,
and resused the Oath of Allegiance, they should leave him to the Law.

But with all they were to urge his Answer to these Questions.

1. Whether the Pope be Judge in Spiritualibus over his Majesty, and whether in
Temporalibus, if it be in Spiritualia? 2. Whether the Pope has power to
excommunicate Kings (such as are not of his Church) as his Majesty. 3. Whether
he has power to depose Kings after his excommunication, and in particular his
Majesty. 4. Whether it be no Murder to kill the King so deposed? 5. Whether He
has power to assoil subjects from the Oath of their native Allegiance to his
Majesty.
He answers in writing,

To the first Affirmative in Spiritualibus. But whether in Temporalibus he is
not obliged to answer to any but a Judge of Controversyes of Religion, the
Pope, or one by his Authority.

To the second affirmative, and that all persons baptized are under the Popes
power.

To the third, He will not declare but to a lawful Judge of Religion.

To the rest, ut supra.

He could not be moved by threats, but rather railed at the Oath of Allegiance,
as damnable and treasonable against God; and so came to Trial of Life, but was
told over night, That he was not to be tried concerning his profession, but for
his former Answers to the Questions, which he may recall and crave mercy: but
this he utterly refused.

And so was impannell'd, grounded upon the Acts of Parliament, against such as
declined the Kings authority, or maintained other Jurisdiction, and upon his
former answers.

He protests, not to acknowledge the Judges nor Judgment Lawful: for if it be
Treason here, it should be so in all other Kingdoms, which is not. Your Acts of
Parliament are made by partial men, and of Matter not subject to their forum,
for which I will not give a fig. The King has no Authority, but derivative
from his Predecessors, who acknowledged the Popes Jurisdiction; if the King
will be to me as they were to min^, he shall be my King, if otherwise, I value
him not. And for the reverence I do to you, bare-headed, It is ad redemptionem
vexationis, not ad agnitionem Judicii.

That the Jury were either his Enemies or his Friends, if Enemies they could
not sit upon his Trial; if Friends, they ought to assist him at the Bar; That
what he suffered was injurious, and not Justice; he had not offended, nor would
crave Mercy. My Commission (said he) was by command of my Superior, and if I
were abroad, I would return hither again, and repent only that I have not been
so busy as I should, in that which you call Perverting of Subjects, and I
call, Saving of souls; I do decline the Kings authority, and will do it still
in matter of Religion, the most of your Ministers maintain it; and if they be
wise will continue in that mind.

As for that Question, Whether the King being deposed by the Pope, may be
lawfully killed? Doctors of the Church hold the Affirmative not improbably, and
as it is not yet determined, so if it should be concluded, I will die in the
defense. And (now) to say, It were unlawful, I will not to save my life.

His insolent speech was shortened by the Jurors quick return, who found him
guilty, and had Sentence of Treason, and to stop his railing, was after Noon,
the same day, hanged at Glasgow.

He was a desperate second Ravilliack, and ready in that devilish doctrine of
deposing and disthroning Kings, which he urged the more (he said) as consonant
to the Kirk Ministers tenants. And that nothing troubled him but to be taken
away ere he had done that which all Scotland and England should not have
prevented, and had it been performed, no torments would have been by him
refused.

So then we see the cause of his Execution. For the King professed, Never to
hang a Priest for his Religion.

The opening of the Spring gave opportunity to sundry families of England,
Plantations in America.
to prepare themselves for planting in America, Upon no great encouragement of
profit, or pleasure, by any former Voyages of the English, into those parts;
but people and trade increasing here, they would unburthen this State with
foreign adventures.

The Design was for New England a part of America, Hist. gr. Br. p. 75.
in the Ocean Sea, opposite to that part of America, in the South Sea, which
Sir Francis Drake discovered in his voyage about the world, and named it Nova
Albion.

But he was never employed thither, as a Discoverer or Planter upon this part
of America, taking the coast from Cape Florida, in twenty degrees, (North
Latitude) North-East-ward to Cape Britain. Between the Degrees of Latitude,
from 20. to 45. King James granted Letters Patents, being about fifteen hundred
miles, but to follow it aboard near two thousand miles.

And all this Coast from Cape Florida of twenty Degrees to five and forty, was
first discovered by John Cabot, Cabot.
with six sail of ships, who had his Patent from Henry 7. Anno 1442. about the
time that Columbus discovered the middle part of America, for Ferdinand and
Isabel of Spain, and is called the West Indies.

The first Colony from England was with Sir Walter Ralegh, Virginia.
assisted in company of Sir Ralph Lane, and Thomas Heriot, that learned
Mathematician, Anno 1584. who in honor of Queen Elizabeth named it Virginia,
leaving there sixteen men, which were brought home by Sir Francis Drake, in his
return from his West India Voyage a year after; and this part is contained from
Florida to the Chesiopech Bay.

The next Northward is a part of Land to which Sir John Popham Lord Chief
Justice sent, New England.
for Discovery and Trade, 1606. but no success returned, and since it is called
New England.

Then the Land adjoining Northward was discovered by Captain Gosnold,
Elizabeth's Isles.
all that coast being studded with broken Lands, and called by him Elizabeth's
Isles.

Then you come to Cape Cod, and to the discovery of Captain Weymouth's Land,
and large River, and so forward to other Plantations, sithence of the English,
so far as Cape Britain.

Then to Nova Francia, Nova Francia.
the Colonies of the French, which Land in truth they have engrossed, as being
elbo-room for all, and which ends at Cape Race; the Lands spreading from thence
directly Northwards, and named New Foundland, until you sail into the Frozen
Sea, where Davis, Basin, and Hudson, made large Discoveries, many thousand
miles.

But to our business, this year 1614. Captain Smith intended for New England,
with two ships, not to plant, but to take Whales and other fish, and to trade
for Furrs, and so returned.

And presently from Plymouth, he went out again, with one ship, and Michael
Cooper with five from London, accompained with four more from Plymouth, partly
to trade and plant.

And indeed these people for Planters were suspected notorious Schismatics,
Brownists, Anabaptists, Families of love, and the like, under such notions, so
together, and here and there strewed over with a spice of Protestancy, but by
the general name of Puritans, which term included good and bad in their
distinct kinds, truly and ingenuously distinguished into the Puritan Knave,
and the Knaves Puritan: but in truth, all of them (of the first rank
especially) Enemies to the Hierarchy of our Protestant Profession in the Church
of England.

And away they would go, for elbo-room to model a new Church Government, such
as hereafter should happen; for God knows, they were so diversely affected, that
as yet they could conclude of none, nor ever would agree to any.

It was not impossible also, but those Factions there might breed into
extremes, and become hereafter Nurseries for all Non-conformants of Church or
State, with some prejudice to this Government at home.

And therefore then, there was a restraint for the present only, until by
examination of some of their Principals remaining behind, a better account
might be assured, concerning those that are sent before, for whose good
behavior there, these were responsible here, and so they had leave to go.

And in a word, at that time, and until these later days, most of the violent
pretenders for Plantations, either Governors or Assistants, here, in their
several Courts, were a company of cunning contrivers, who abused the honest
Adventurers, and of long time came loss to them in all their returns.

The Kings bounty had stretched beyond the liberty of his Treasure, Baronets
created.
which he timely took up, and was free in rewarding merit by Honor of
Knighthood, upon such whose Estates were not answerable in value to other
Gentry, before whom they were to take place of precedence. Hist. gr. Br. p. 76.
And therefore it was designed (twelve months since) by the late Treasurer
Salisbury, to create a degree of Knight Baronets, to precede all Knight
Bachelors, being the earnest suit of themselves, Court and Chapter King James, page
12.
ninety persons in all of good Birth and Estates; and each of them (except two
and twenty) were then Knight Batchelors: and this to my knowledge, for I copied
the List of them, before it was presented to Salisbury: and as true, that his
exception thereto was, that it would discontent the Gentry. To which themselves
replied, that it would rather satisfy them, in advance of dignity before
others, who now come behind those meaner men, whom indeed the King was forced
to dubb, for his Honor and some merits of theirs, having no other reward or
money to spare, and therein not much too blame, to oblige them that way; and
Salisbury dying, it was now established; the design having martial reference to
Honor and Arms, the Prerogative of every Sovereign, as in former Presidents of
all Christian Princes and States Monarchical and Republics, especially upon
distress of any Province or place, for support or defense thereof.

And herein, other Princes exceed in example, and never quarrelled by any; as
in Germany, Spain, France, Italy, Venice, and must it now be a crime in this
King, in the settlement of his Inheritance here, to take leave to advance the
creation of one single Order? A new erect distinct Title, with those Privileges
to them and their heirs for ever. Place before all Knights Bachelours and of
the Bath, (and all Bannerets, but they are not in being) to be impleaded by
addition Baronet, and the Title Sir, and their wives Lady, the King shall not
create any degree under the dignity of Baron that shall be superior or equal to
them, no more to be made, but the full number of two hundred, until some of
these die, but the younger sons of Viscounts and Barons (by Decree of the King
and Council upon controversy) were adjudged to take place before them, and
that their heirs males at one and twenty shall be knighted, and shall leave
either in a Canton in the Coat of Arms, or in a Scutchion at their Election,
the Arms of Ulster, Argent, a Hand Gules, their place in the Kings Armies to be
in the gross, near about the Kings Standard, for defense thereof.

Nor was this done but in the like example or noble way, for each Baronet to
maintain thirty Footmen for three years at eight pence per diem each Soldier
in service of the Kings Forces, for the establishment of the Province of Ulster
in Ireland, not as yet emptied of Rebels, which came unto one thousand nine
hundred and five pounds a piece. And it was their own humble suit afterward to
compound the expense, at a certain value, and to put the charge in general upon
the King: and I know he lost by the bargain, the Composition came but to ninety
eight thousand five hundred and fifty pounds, and cost the King much more.

And for the honor of their degree and memory, it may not be amiss to insert
in order of precedence in their Roll, threescore and eight of them being
Knights already, and two and twenty Esquires.

Suff. Nicholas Bacon. Lanc. Richard Mollin^ux. Glam. Thomas Mansell. Leic.
George Sherley. Glam. Io: Stradling. Derb. Francis Leak. Suss. Thomas Pelham.
Lanc. Richard Howton. Wilt. Io: St: John. Linc. Nicholas Sanderson. Suss. Io:
Shelley. Cistr. Io: Savage. Essex Fr: Barington. Leic. Henry Barks, Esquire Ebor.
Will: Wentworth, Esquire Westminster. Richard Musgrave. Norf. Henry Hobard. Cestr. George
Booth. Camb. Io: Peyton. Suff. Lion: Talmage, Esquire Not. James Clifton. Lanc.
Thomas Gerard. Staff. Walter Aston. Norf. Ph: Knevet. Essex Io: Wentworth.
Ebor. Henry Belaser. Ebor. William Constable, Esquire War. Thomas Lee. Rutl. Edward
Nowell. Hunt. Robert Cotton. Cestr. Robert Chalmond, Esquire Devon. Edward Seymer,
Esquire Lanc. Moyell Finch. Oxon. Anthony Cope. Linc. Thomas Mouson. Linc. Thomas
Vavisor. Derb. Thomas Gresly, Esquire Gloc. Paul Tracy, Esquire Ebor. Henry Savile.
Derb. Henry Willoughby, Esquire North. Lewis Tresham, Esquire North. Thomas Brudenell,
Esquire Linc. George St: Paul. Linc. Philip Terwit. Linc. Roger Dallison. Linc.
Edward Carr. Linc. Edward Hussy. Norf. Lestrange Mordant, Esquire Essex Thomas
Bendish, Esquire Carm. Io: Wynn. Gloc. William Throgmorten. South. Richard Worsley.
Bedf. William Gostwick, Esquire War. Thomas Puckering, Esquire Camb. Nicholas Sands.
Ebor. Fr: Wortley. Ebor. George Savile. Derb. William Kneveton, Esquire Norf.
Philip Woodhouse. Oxon. William Pope. Rutl. James Harington. Staff. Richard
Fleetwood, Esquire Oxon. Thomas Spencer, Esquire Lanc. Io: Tufton. Camb. Samuel Peyton.
Norf. Ch: Morrison. Kanc. Henry Baker. Essex Roger Apl^ton, Esquire Kanc. William
Sedley. Kanc. William Twisden. Kanc. Edward Hales. Kanc. William Moynes. Essex
Thomas Mildmay, Esquire Essex William Maynard. Buck. Henry Lea, Esquire Wilt. Edward
Gorges. Essex Harbottle Grimston. War. Thomas Holt. Some. Io: Por^man. Linc. Io:
Wray. Berk. William Essex. Ebor. Marmaduke Wivill. Wilt. Fr: Englefield. Staff.
Io: Pessel, Esquire Essex William Aloff. Worcester. Edward Devereux. Dev. Thomas
Ridgeway. Cornw. Renald Mohune. Essex Paul Baning. 68 Knights. 22 Esquires. 90
These afterward. Doneld. Thomas Blaxton, Esquire Chester Rowland Egerton, Esquire
Norf. Roger Townsend; Esquire
It is well known that Queen Elizabeth left her Coffers empty, The Kings want
of moneys, and the reason.
and her Revenue not ample; for in Treasurer Burghley's times, the profit of
the Kingdom (besides Wards and Duchy of Lancaster). was one hundred eighty
eight thousand, one hundred, ninety and seven pounds per annum; and the
Payments one hundred, ten thousand six hundred and twelve pounds per annum. In
which Payments these were constant per annum.

The Household forty thousand pounds Ordinary, and now increased necessarily,
almost treble.

The Privy Parse two thousand pounds.

The Admiralty thirty thousand pounds.

1. For support, this King was to proportion his issues, with his Revenues,
both certain and casual. 2. By abating or reforming the excess of his Household.
3. By raising moneys, and improving the Crown Revenues.
For the first, he could not well tell how to begin that Lesson, for coming in
hither with an increment of expense, Himself, Wife and Children, and a large
Train of old Servants to be new rewarded, the Marriage of his Daughter very
lately, which expense in that amounted unto near an hundred thousand pounds,
and her Atd-money came but to twenty thousand and five hundred pounds. Expense
of the Princess Elizabeth's marriage.
And that we may see the Charge and Expense of this Marriage in particular, I
shall set it down. lib. For the Palsgraves Diet at his standing house 6000 For
his Diet at his Instalment of the Garter 4000 For Diet at his Marriage 2000 For
Lodgings for his Servants 830 To the Wardrobe for Apparel for the Princess
Eliz. L. Hay Master of the Wardrobe. L. Harington.
6252 For furnishing her Chamber 3023 Apparel and Necessaries for her to my L.
Harington 1829 Jewels and Apparel for her Servants 3914 To diverse Merchants for
Silks, etc. 995 The Lords Mask at her Marriage 400 For the Naval Fight of
Fireworks on the Thames at her Marriage 4800 More Fireworks on the Thames at
her Marriage 2880 To Sir Edward Cecil as Treasurer for her Journey from hence
to Heidelbergh, and for her Purse 2000 For settling her Iointure, and charges to
some of the Gentry to go thither and to take the Assurance 800 For her
Transport to Flushing 5555 Totale 53294 Paid over to the Palsgraves Agent for
her Portion 40000

The Total is ninety three thousand two hundred ninety and four pounds. 93294.
l.


These Expenses put the King to consider of the best means of Recovery, so that
several ways were proposed to make his Disbursments answerable to his In-comes,
Propositions of Retrenchments of
and the way was; the first work of Ordinary good Husbandry, and might well be
expected from a Paterfamilias, yet it would not for the present, Rebus sic
stantibus, become this King, whose fame and honor (as all other Sovereignties,
so his in particular) stood more upon Reputation than profit; and therefore he
(according to the magnificence of Royalty, Honoraries.
left that consideration, and he had done reasonable well, if not too much, for
satisfying his Train.

His second way was, to consider of his great expense of Household, Household.
now enlarged into several Courts, King, Queen, Prince, and Nursery; and these
being looked into, he was forced (contrary to the royal and largest heart of any
his Progenitors) to come to Retrenchment; and truly in this, he was advised to
use the means of mean people, and others subordinate, Ingram and others.

And first he removed by Proclamation a number of useless persons of his own
Nation, that unnecessarily depended upon the bounty of his Court, and returned
them home again.

Then he proportioned to each Court their expense, particularly rated for
personal Diet and Dependence, Livery and Wages, Charge and Salary.

And this was done without public complaint of any pressure upon the people
(as has been usual heretofore to Parliaments, and by them redressed) but
prudently considered, and so referred to the Council Table.

In ancient time the Household was regulated by Book-order, and continued so to
Henry 8. when Cardinal Wolsey (for more honor to that Christmas King of
immoderate expense) settled it, and so remained a groundwork to this present
time, being now so corrupt, as that new ways were proposed, in effect to put
down Tables, and to allow Attendance-money, as France does; or else by setting
up the Hall again, to the best, first, and most magnificent Order, that so
being spent in public to the Kings honor, the secret waste of Chamber-diet,
and purloining prevented; for out at the Court back-doors, most of the meaner
houses at Westminster were maintained with food and firing, the stealth of
under-chamberers.

We all know what excess was usual in our ancient Retinue and Servants with
blue coats and badges, especially respecting the Garter of St: George, who were
now ordered to lessen their number, and afterward to fifty Gentlemen, and no
more, to each Knight of that Order, heretofore an excessive number, to vie it
out who should bring most.

And to reform himself from the excess of his royal heart in gifts and rewards,
The King restrains his former bounties.
he published Orders and Articles in print, in what manner his pleasure
restrained his bounty, and what natures he was willing to grant. Having been
liberal to the Scots, whom he brought with him, men of the greatest eminency at
home, thereby to bind them here with Freehold Lands, as also with English
Tithes; for what held the great Gascoign Iean de Foix firm to the Crown of
England, but his Earldom of Kendall here. A neglect in Queen Elizabeth, to draw
the chief Nobles (...) into England by exchange, or gift of Lands to have (...)
them Freeholders here: she might then have spared two (...) her Wars.

(...) indeed the Kings gifts in Land to the Scots, unthankfully (...)
^^^ttingly they sold, conveying that Treasure into Scotland, (...) his great
Design of uniting them here, became frustrate. (...) we find, how many of them
not so engaged, have turned (...) ersaries to his Posterity.

And I remember well, not a penny given then, freely to the Scots, but gave
alarm to every part of Englands Discourse; Notes, Copies of all privy Seals,
for money given, and so showed then in Parliaments. Yet no noise of what the
English had, though ten times more.

But his free hand having stretched his purse-strings, there was a free
Benevolence A Benevolence
considered of, from such good Subjects as in hearty affection to their
Sovereign, were willing to contribute, and did, the Lords and others, by which
he might have experience how they could serve him, that served themselves so
well, the building up of their own fortunes and factions, had been their
diligent studies, and his service but the exercise of their leisures. And this
Benevolence came but to fifty two thousand nine hundred and nine pounds out of
their purses. Which yet madded the ill-minded men, Hist. gr. Br. p. 78.
[ Pillars to the Kingdoms Liberties] always plotters to the Kingdoms
Miseries. Who being ashamed to be outdone in honesty and honor, they justly
drew upon themselves a Mark of Malignancy; and so needed not otherwise to be
noted, [ by giving in their names] as is pretended. And yet they would be
meddling, devising poor Arguments to pretend it, [ against Subjects Liberties]
though accustomed evermore by examples of all former Sovereigns.

But to tell our Historian how ancient the custom of Benevolence has been,
ever since the Statute of 20 Henry 8. that united Wales and England together,
and to send their Members to sit in Our Parliament, where a motion being made
in the House of Commons for a Benevolence to be freely given to that King, an
honest Knight (for a Welsh County) made answer. Mr. Speaker, This word
Benevolence is a pretty Word, but I understand it not; Yet sure it is something
His Highness should have: If it be so, in Gods Name let him have it; the sooner
the better; and so may deserve thanks, else it will not.

Thus it was then, Hist. gr. Br. p. 78.
but now it is held to be [ Against Law, Reason, and Religion] and Injustice
and Impiety to be accepted.

And because his whole Reign was necessitous, and the want of money for him to
be liberal, was his disease; I think fit to say somewhat here, in excuse to all
the future ayms and ends which he took to get money, which answers the third
way of Improvement.

There was much ado in Council to advance the Crown by several ways of
Improvement. By grants in Parliament, wherein the King made some Trial; so be
it examined from former examples, whether or no, their bounties exceeded his
Merits? Some advised him to fall upon Acts of Resumption, of Lands, Offices and
Annuities, unadvisedly or profusely bestowed by his Predecessors, or himself,
upon undeserving persons; which have been usually done by former Presidents of
Princes, Ubi necessitas Regis cogit. But this his Noble heart disdained. Indeed
it was wicked Counsel to work upon his Necessity, thereby to make him odious to
his meritorious Servants and good Friends.

Did he ever do, as others, Henry 3. to his Subjects, of whom one says,
Quicquid habuerunt in Esculentis, et poculentis; Rusticorum, er^im, Equos,
Bigas, vina, victualia ad libitum cepit.

He made trial of Voluntary Lones, or Benevolence by Privy Scal, which was
neither burdensome nor dishonorable, being so petit in the Purses of the
ablest Subjects.

But Compulsion I know of none, unless you call the Star Chamber S^ar-chamber.
to the account, the Mulct and Fines of great Offenders, and perhaps adjudged
by that Court to some value as the Crime deserved, which might be suspected in
favor for Support of the Kings occasions. Yet you will find, when such
happened, it was in the excess of unparalled crimes, not in other Courts of
Justice liable to examination or punishment; which as it was in Terrorem
populi, so now in these our later days being suppressed in favor and liberty
of the Nation, the wickedness of sinful man takes freedom to offend in such
horrid ways, that naught but some such extraordinary course of Justice can
possibly reform.

Pawning of Jewels and Plate had been frequent by all former Princes, Pawn of
Jewels,
and that not in ordinary ways, Aurum and Iocalia faenetri sancti Edwardi
Confessoris. Vasa aur^a, and diversa Iocalia.

Nay, Magnam Coronam Angliae. Yes, and Queen Elizabeth did it, and no more
need, than He; but he did not.

To assign Customs, and customs.
and pawn the next Subsidies to be granted, has been a device to draw on
supplies the sooner. Which he refused.

The Privy Seal Privy S^als.
indeed he made use of, but very moderately in comparison of former Presidents,
if you examine the Records and Rolls of willing Subjects bountiful assistance.

Compulsory Ways have been Presidents to necessitated Princes, exacted from
Merchants-Strangers, or to be committed to Prison, and the English Subject,
little better favored.

What will you say of Henry 8. Mulct upon commodities.
ten per centum of all Goods, Jewels, Utensils, and Land, extremely rated, per
Sacramentum Suorum? In that rank may be remembered a Custom, called Liberalitas
populi and Curialitas ex voluntate, nec de jure potest. But in the gathering by
Commissioners, such threats were used, as was little better than the violent;
and was customarily reduced down to Queen Mary; indeed Queen Elizabeth had a
little better cunning way to cozen them the more returning their bounty back
again, until they doubled the sum.

There is a Statute, To wait on the Kings service.
To compel Subjects to attend the Kings Service, which was repealed by Queen
Mary, and that again repealed by Parliament of this King, of which truly he
made no other advantage, than to send half a dozen refractory Puritans, that
troubled the State, of his errand into Ireland, and yet paid them good salary
for their pains, which had been usual heretofore in the like case, at their
own cost.

Trading themselves; I could show Presidents for this also, Ingross Trade,
of other Princes engrossing trade of Commodities; as one did, with all the
Wools at a long day, and a narrow price, and sold them over Seas with great
gain. The like of Tyn, Corn; nay, bind all men to trade their staple to one
certain place, and yet themselves to places of more advantage. And this was the
glory of Queen Elizabeth stooped unto, and took occasion to trade in, when the
gain was advantage, though but in StrongBeer.

Licensing Others also. and license.
It was so ordinary heretofore, to raise moneys by licensing Trade, non
obstante, Statutes and customs, as that those grew to high Complaints; yet
necessitated Kings, continued these non obstantes, non obstante. And this King
found them in Grants, for certain years in being, and made no further example
of them, unless transporting of a quantity of undrest White Cloths to the Earl
of Cumberland, and some others, and that upon good reason of State too.

Raising rates of Merchandise. By raising rates.
There will never want will in the Merchant to abuse each other, and gain to
themselves: and therefore as all Princes have occasion, and the increase of
commodities requiring, do raise the Rates; and this was done cum consensu
Mercatorum; but of late the just Prerogative imposed it, where the Merchants
gain might give way, if you could conceive it convenient, to their conscience,
ever to acknowledge any gain sufficient.

Causa honesta sit, ut necessaria ratio facili tempus idoneum.

Letting Customs to farm. Customs to Farm.
He did so; some murmured, grieving the Subject to pay Custom to the Subject;
but do they serve the King for naught? infinite gain; It was then wished, that
they should declare their benefit, and afterward become Collectors for the
King.

Queen Elizabeth, after she had raised Customer Smith from 140001. per annum to
420001. made him discount what he had got. This King did not do so; yet he did
better, borrowed money, and never paid it them. Besides they were always at
hand to be squeazed, and what his Successor failed in that way (being perhaps
surprised by death) the next long Parliament, did to purpose; ruined them all
upon old Scores.

And was it not time for King James so to do? We all know by the succeed, such
Contractors lost not by their Farm. By which we may be assured, how mightily
trade increased by the wise Government of this King, and no Text more certain
to prove it, than the Inter and Overloping of Merchants to get in to be
Farmers; so mighty was their gain, and so secret this their trade, as (but by
their Pride, profuse and stately comportment since, could never otherwise have
been imagined.

Liberties and Penalties; there have been Kings that have proclaimed, Quod omnes
Chartae irritae forent, nisi posteriori sigillo roborentur. Nay, Qui suis
volebant gaudere, innovarent chartas suas de novo; and this was done by
Commissioners, or by quo warranto against all.

And for penal Laws, though I know, that many Projectors advised, yet former
examples of this kind have evermore been fatal to those of the Quorum. But
this King declined it, at all.

Selling Offices had been done formerly, Sale of Offices,
not a King escaped it; to sell great Offices of the Crown and State, for years,
for life, under the Kings hands and seals. They lodge in the Record thus,
Chancelour, Chief Justice, all Keepers of Records, Clerks of Assize and Peace,
Masters of Game and Parks, and what else of profit or repute.

In France it is common, not one scapes, and in Spain as usual, and defended as
lawful; and there are some, that have prescribed them amongst the best Rules of
reigning Sovereignty, both Ecclesiastical and Temporal. It may be, that
Favorites and Courtiers, made bold with their interests in their Master to
receive their Rewards; But his own hands were ever closed from such corruption.

Sale of Honors; and Honors.
It was the ancient Power, and that legal, to call landed men to Knighthood or
fine; which he did, by favor and grace which he gave, truly I believe he was
no niggard in them too. But indeed, there being no Chivalry, or Deeds of Arms
in this time of peace to make men merit honors, those that had it (favorites
excepted) I rank in desert, and so of due reward) To others I confess, they
paid for it, and they were those off-hand Lords as were made Earls Earls.
together, that paid eight thousand pound a piece, and the pride of their
hearts never bogled at the purity of the Project, but swallowed down the
Corruption, without check of Conscience; and yet this I can tell, Some of them,
set their Sons to beg again, part of it, for their private expense.

The Baronets were created upon a better score, and both these without any plot
of State, as was feigned, and the designs upon the Earl of Salisbury for the
former, and upon Buckingham for the later; Baronets.
when in truth Pride and Ambition made the project their own. And in Gods name
let such pay the price thereof. And I know, as honest and discret as our later
times can boast of, molded other such designs for degrees of honor, to be
hereditary in tail, as Under-degrees to those already in use, which yet the
King for that present declined.

Coin and Bullion. By Coin and Bullion.
All men know, that Coin and Bullion in any State admit great wisdom in the
mannagement, and as many overtures were now offered, as could stand with
Justice or Customary Presidents. It was much urged to abate money, which was
never used by any, but as a last shift, full of dishonor, as in Bankrupts, and
a certain inconvenience to all Revenues of rents, and so to the King in that
particular, as the greatest Landlord, and so his disadvantage; which he
declined. Moneys being esteemed quantum in Massa, not altogether per sculptam;
and so hold esteem by their true value. Queen Elizabeth held it up from
abasement, which her great potent Enemy Spain could not do.

Then was advised Cambium Regis, Exchange.
an office ancient, until of late the Goldsmiths have engrossed it. Some
thoughts there were to make the Exitus exceed the introitus in Traffic, that
the unnecessary, nay useless commodities brought in (in old time accounted
Wines, Spices, Silks, and fine Linen) the Manufactures of out-lands, and sold
to us to a great value, even in Babies and Rattles, being the sad occasion
then, the great want of Bullion, not sufficient in Specie to pay the Lender in
principal. At last it was concluded to get advantage in the Coinage, either
simple Metal or Mixed, Coinage.
by which we see, that all Monarchs have, are, argento, and auro, and so was
coined only Farthings, least other stamp of more value should clog the Kingdom,
and a proportion was (together) coined, and do what this State could, Farthings.
was in few years counterfeited by our neighbor Hollanders, and many Firkins
filled by them, that the Farthing Office, was not able to rechange, upon the
rebate for silver, which yet the King continued till these late times called
in. Examine the inconvenience of Leaden and Copper Tokens, as great a benefit
now to Retaylors, then formerly to the State; but with much more inconvenience
to the Nation, being only utterable and current to each Retaylor, of his own
Mint and Mark.

He was forced to adventure upon the use of Parliaments, By Parliaments.
and to being with money, but not to build long upon their discusses, whereby
came that saying in common, as of no other Design, Subsidies granted,
Parliament ended, and therein the disadvantages he found; might well
distinguish him, and their less frequent calling from his Predecessor, and her
often invitation, and indeed discourage any Prince, that should next succeed
her.

The Disposition and Spirit of the times considered were not alike with him.
Her people ingenuous, and un-inquisitive, wrapped in innocence and humble
obedience. But in his time, their passions and disaffections had gotten loose
Reins, the snaffle in their teeth, contesting and capitulating; Reasons of her
actings were her own Will; for then she having just cause, to complain of
oppressions (as they did) they only conveyed them to her notice, and left the
time and order of redress to her Princely discretion. And yet when it was not
altogether concerning them, she would bid them meddle to amend their own
Manners; Nor were her Messengers choked, by any reproach, that came of such
errands. In his time, so much degenerate from the purity of the former, under
pretense of reforming and freedom, that their very inquiry extended to the
privacy of the King himself.

Nusquam Libert as gratior extat, quam sub Rege pio. Afflicting themselves to
search for mischiefs, and being found to scandallize the State with them.

How these were nourished and afterward fomented, the revolution of time has
made obvious to all men, and saves me the labor to set down the particulars.

It was no novelty then to applaud the former times, and to vilify the
present, for indeed her fame carried it current in a long continuance, to have
lived and dyed Royally and Victoriously, without the disquiet of the peoples
affections; and being but a Sojourner in the World in respect of her
Maiden-hood, might be, and was a blessing to her own times: the impression of
her good Government, besides her happy memory is not without some effect, which
does survive her; But this K blessed already with Royal issue, and whose
fruitful Bed promised increase, It was more proper and agreeable with him to be
studious, not only in the Transitory part of good Government, but in those
Acts, which are in their nature permanent and perpetual to his posterity,
rather to increase, than diminish the Advantages of Sovereignty, which he aimed
at, and for his part and time did perform, but it is a tender subject to discuss.
I have done.

Yet I may add a truth. That all the force and power of his Progenitors, and
all their merits and policies to boot (for more then an age before her) could
never borrow so much credit upon their Privy Seals, as she did during her time,
and left them all for this King to discharge, great and vast sums. Which shows;
that Necessities put her upon that piece of State, when neither her Exchequer
could afford relief, nor the urgency of her affairs endure the delays of
Parliaments assistance. For in truth, she had strained likewise from her people
in that way of Subsidies, more then ever any Prince (I will not say many) that
were before her.

She had the way to do it, by complaisance of a Princess; and he a King, not
affecting that Course, failed of such effects.

For he was by nature more reserved than popular, and had his virtues fitter
for estimation then Love, and did like a King; his soul being planted higher,
overshot such matter, as lay level to another eye.

And so (as I have said) some of these ways, to get money, was set a foot, this
year 1614. and upon several occasions in his reign after proposed, but not
effected.

In those times of Trade the Merchant-Adventurer usually transported Our
English Cloths, Merchants made friends.
white, undressed and undy'd, and the Dutch had gotten the Art by the end,
fitted and stretched them by their Knavery, and so returned them to us at high
rates; of this the Cloth-worker of London complains, which was soon remedied by
Proclamation, forbidding the transport; and to countenance that Corporation,
the King was feasted in their Hall, and made free of their Company, the rather
because their Cote Arms, the Thistle, is the Scots Emblem. And over went our
Clothes accordingly, dyed and dressed, which the Hollanders forbid to be bought
by them; and therefore dealt with our Fell-mongers, and got over Our Woolls,
and the Mystery of making Cloth.

Hereupon we proclaim and forbid the transport of our wools. The Quarrel
between those two Corporations, and their respective gain is by the Merchant
Adventurers complained of, and for mittigation of their Mischief, several
warrants for some thousands of Cloths were sparingly licensed by wisdom of
State, to be sent over, and so evenly moderating the mystery of Merchants that
cozen each other; and at their great Feast likewise the Prince was made free.

The King of Denmark makes a second visit to his Sister the Queen for fourteen
days, King of Denmarks second Arrival.
upon no business of State, only his affections to her, and jollity to
himself, with a Train of no more than half a hundred persons of honor, and
Noblesse, of his own breeding to the Dutch Diet and Drink, to which he was too
much inclined and oft-times had his load; for we were not wanting of our
boon-Companions, that waited on him for that purpose.

The Earl of Suffolk succeeding Salisbury in the Treasurership yielded his
Office of Lord Chamberlain of the Kings Household to his Son in Law Somerset, as
aforesaid, and he the Place of Secretary unto Sir Ralph Winwood, lately
returned from the Netherlands, where he had been Ambassador Lieger of a long
time.

The Summers Progress returns the King to London, where had been some muttering
of Overbury's death Overburies death discovered.
in the Tower, discovered beyond the Seas by the Apothecary's Boy that
impoysoned the Glyster, and having his Reward was sent out of the way to
Flushing, where he told the Tale to Trimball the Kings Agent there, by whom it
came to Winwood's knowledge, and so to the King, and by degrees to particular
Examinations, Confessions and Executions of all these, Weston an Apothecary,
Mistress Turner a Doctor of Physick's widow, Sir Iervis Yelvis Lieutenant of the
Tower, and Franklin, all accessaries.

But Weston being the principal actor, it was therefore his turn first to come
to the Bar, at the Hinstons Court in Guild Hall, where beyond Judge Cook's
expectation the man stood mute, notwithstanding all allurements and threats
that could be used, and so was returned to Prison; Cook informs the King, that
unless the principal be convict, the accessaries could not be tried; but by
continual cunning, and some fair promises of pardon, Weston put himself upon
his Country and was cast, condemned and hanged: Cook not content with that,
gets knowledge underhand that Sergeant Yelverton an obliged Servant to the
House of Howards, had advised this Counsel for Weston, not to betray any
parties. And this Tale was told by Sir Robert Cook from his fathers confession.

After all comes Somerset Somersets arreignment.
and his Countess, and both condemned: some that were then at their Trial, and
not partial, conceived in conscience, he might have been spared that Sentence,
and as himself says to the King, That he fell rather for want of well
defending, than by force of proofs; for I so far (says he) for sook my self and
my cause, as that I might be more condemned for that, than for the matter.

And because it was a story of evil fame, near and far off, I shall put it to
the test, in a brief Narratory, being pleaded before the Lord Elsmore,
Chancellor and High Steward for the Day, and most of the Peers at Westminster
Hall, May 1616. in this manner.

A Peer of the Land has this Privilege upon Treason or Felony, The manner of
arreigning Peers of this Realm.
indicted, to be tried by his Peers: the King by Letters Patents assigns some
sage Lord of the Parliament to be High Steward of England, for that Day of his
Arreignment, who before that time makes Precept to his Sergeant at Arms, to
warn to appear before him a certain number of Lords of the Parliament, twelve
at the least upon that Day at Westminster. At which time the High Steward shall
sit under the Cloth of State, and causes his Commission to be read, the same
Sergeant returns his Precept, and calls the Lords, who appearing by name, and
set, the Lieutenant of the Tower is called, and brings his Prisoner into the
Court to the Bar; the High Steward then declares to the People the cause, why
the King has assembled those Lords and the Prisoner, and persuades him to
answer without fear freely, and commands the Clerk of the Crown to read the
Indictment unto him, and to ask him if he be guilty or not? to which he usually
answers, Not guilty; and to be tried by God and his Peers. Then the Kings
Attorney and Sergeants at Law give Evidence against him; whereto, when he has
given answer, the Lieutenant of the Tower is commanded to return with the
Prisoner from the Bar, whilst the Lords do secretly confer in the Court
together, and then the Lords rise out of their places, and consult among
themselves, and what they affirm, shall be done upon their Honor without Oath.

And being so agreed, (or the greatest number) they return and take their
places again in Court; and the High Steward demands of the youngest Lord first,
if he that is arreigned be guilty or not? and so the next in order, and the
rest, each one, answering, I or No. Then the Prisoner is sent for to the Bar,
to whom the High Steward recites the Verdict of the Peers, and does give
Judgment accordingly, Stanford Pleas del Coronae, lib. 3. Poult. 188.

The antiquity of this kind of Trial by their opinion is grounded from Magna
Charta, but others take it to be more ancient, though there inserted Henry 3.
but was brought in by the Conqueror, being answerable to the Norman and French
Laws, and agreeable with the Customs Feudal, where almost all controversies
arising between the Sovereign and his Vassals, are tried per judicium parvum
suorum.

And if a Peer upon his Arreignment of Treason do stand mute, Judgment shall be
given upon his Indictment, and yet shall not be pressed to death, but saves the
forfeiture of his Lands, Statut. Westminster. Edw. 4. Dier 205. But if upon
Indictment of Felony, he may be mute.

The reason of Magna Charta aforesaid, is there expressed, where he is indicted
at the Kings Suit of Treason or Felony, the words being, (Nec super eum ibimus,
we will not pass or sit in judgment upon him, but by his Peers) but if an
Appeal of Murder, or other Felony, be sued by any common person against a
Peer; he shall be tried by common persons, and not by Peers, Stan. Pleas, lib.
3. Brook Trial, 142. But yet this Privilege has some restraint.

For an Archbishop or Bishop, Anno 1616.
though Lords of Parliament, in such cases shall be tried by a Jury of Knights,
and other substantial persons, upon their Oaths, because Ecclesiastics cannot
pass in like cases upon Trial of other Peers; for they are forbidden by the
Common and Ecclesiastic Laws, to be Judges of Life and Death.

You see the great regard the Law has to the word of a Peer, (heretofore) upon
his honor, and yet how many ordinarily break their Oaths in common?

And thus premised, we come to the case of Somerset and his Countess.

First, The Case pleaded.
therefore Sir Thomas Overbury for a time was known to have great interest and
strait friendship with the Earl of Somerset, both in his meaner fortunes, and
after; in so much, that he was in a kind of oracle of direction unto him, and
if you will believe his own vaunt, (being indeed of an insolent and Thrasonical
disposition) he took upon him, that the fortunes, reputation and understanding
of this Gentleman (who is well known to have an able Teacher) proceeded from
his company and counsel: and this friendship rested not only in conversation
and business at Court, but likewise in communication of business of State; for
my Lord of Somerset exercising at that time, by his Majesty's special favor
and trust, the Office of Secretary, did not forbear to acquaint Overbury with
the Kings Packets and Dispatches from all parts of Spain, France, and the
Low Countries; and this not by glympses, or now and then rounding in the ear
for a favor, but in a settled manner: Packets were sent, sometimes opened by
my Lord, sometimes unbrokened, unto Overbury, who perused them, copied them,
registered them, made Table-talk of them, as he thought good: so, the time was,
when Overbury knew more of the secrets of State, than the Council Table did,
nay, they were grown to such inwardness, as they made a play of all the world
besides themselves, so as they had ciphers and Iurgons for the King and Queen,
and great men of the Realm; things seldom used, but either by Princes or their
confederates, or at the Court, or at the least by such, as practice and work
against, or (at least) upon Princes.

But as it is a Principle in Nature, that the best things are in their
corruption the worst, and the sweetest Wine makes the sowrest Vinegar, so it
fell out with them, that this excess, as I may say of friendship, ended in
mortal hatred, on my Lord of Somerset's part.

It has been said, that Frost and Fraud ends foul; and I may add a third, and
that is the frien^ship of ill men, which is truly said to be conspiracy, and
not friendship; for it happened, that the Earl of Somerset fell into an
unlawful love, toward that unfortunate Lady the Countess of Essex, and to
proceed to a Marriage with her; this Marriage and purpose did Overbury mainly
impugn, under pretense to do the true part of a Friend, for that he accounted
her an unworthy woman; but the truth is, Overbury, (who (to speak plainly) had
little that was solid for Religion or moral virtue, but was wholly possessed with
ambition and vainglory) was loath to have any partners in the favor of my
Lord of Somerset* and especially not any of the House of Howards, against whom
he had professed hatred and opposition.

And that this is no sinister construction, will appear, when you shall hear,
that Overbury made his brags, that he had won him the love of the Lady by his
Letters and industry; so far was he from cases of conscience in this point.

And certainly, howsoever the tragical misery of that poor Gentleman Overbury,
might somewhat obliterate his faults, yet because we are not upon point of
civility, but to discover the face of Truth, for that it is material to the
true understanding of the state of this cause, Overbury was naught and corrupt:
in his commendation the Ballads must be mended for that point, which paint him
out other, and partiality must be blamed, which now a days favor him, in
malice to the memory of the ministers of these Times.

But to proceed, when Overbury saw that he was like to be dispossessed of my
Lords grace, which he had possessed so long, and by whose greatness he had
promised himself to do wonders; and being a man of an unbounded and impudent
spirit, he began, not only to dissuade, but to deter him, from the love of
that Lady; and finding him fixed, thought to find a strong Remedy; and
supposing that he had my Lord's head under his Girdle, in respect of
communication of secrets of State, (as he calls them himself) secrets of
Nature, and therefore dealt violently with him to make him desist, with menaces
of discovery, and the like: hereupon grew two streams of hatred upon Overbury;
the one from the Lady, in respect that he crossed her love, and abused her
Name, (which are Furies in women) the other of a more deep nature, from my Lord
of Somerset himself, who was afraid of Overbury's nature; and if he did break
from him and fly out, he would wind into him, and trouble his whole fortunes;
so as certainly it was resolved that Overbury must die.

That was too weak, and they were so far from giving way to it, as they crossed
it; there rested but two ways of quarrel, Assault and Poison.

For that of Assault, after some proposition and attempt they passed from it,
as a thing too open and subject to more variety of shame.

That of Poison likewise was an hazardous thing, and subject to many
preventions and caution, especially to such a working and jealous brain as
Overbury had, except he was first in their hands; therefore the way was, first
to get him sent over Seas, or into a Trap, and lay him up, and then they could
not miss the mark; and therefore in execution of this Plot, it was concluded,
that his pride should be designed to some honorable employment in foreign
parts, and should underhand by himself my Lord of Somerset be encouraged to
refuse it, and so upon contempt he should be laid Prisoner in the Tower, and
then they thought he should be close, and Death should be his Bail.

Yet were they not at their end, for they considered, that if there were not a
fit Lieutenant of the Tower for that purpose, and likewise a fit Under-keeper
of Overbury;

First, they should meet with many impediments in the giving and exhibiting of
the Poison.

Secondly, they should be exposed to note and observation, that might discover
them.

And thirdly, Overbury in the mean time might write clamorous and furious
Letters to his Friends, and so all might be disappointed.

And therefore the next Link of the Chain was, to displace the then Lieutenant
Wade, and to place Yelvis, a principal abetter in the impoysonment; to displace
Carew, that was under-keeper in Wade's time, and to place Weston that was the
Actor in the impoysonment.

And this was done in such a while, that it may appear to be done, as it were
in a breath.

Then when they had this poor Gentleman in the Tower, where he could not escape
nor stir; where he could not feed, but by their hands; where he could not
speak, or write, but through their trunks; then was the time, to act the last
Day of his Tragedy.

Then must Franklin the Purveyor of the Poison, in May 1613. procure five, six,
seven several Poisons, to be sure to hit his complexion; then must Mistress
Turner the lay-mistris of the Poisons, advise, what works at present, and what
at distance. Then must Weston be the Tormentor, and chase him with Poison,
after Poison, Poison in salt meats, Poison in sweet meats, Poison in Medicines
and Vomits, until at last his body was almost come by use of Poisons to the
state of Mithridates body, by the use of Treacle and preservatives, that the
force of the Poisons was blunted upon him; Weston confessing, That when he was
child for not dispatching, that he had given him enough to poison twenty men.

And because all this asked time, impoysoning from March 9. to September 14.
courses were taken by Somerset both to divert all the true means of Overbury's
delivery, and to entertain him with continual Letters, partly with hopes and
protestations, for his delivery, and partly with other fables and negotiations,
somewhat like some kind of persons, which keep in a Tale of fortune-telling,
when they have a fellonious intent to pick their Pockets and Purses. Until at
last, they hastened his destruction by an impoysoned Glyster, which wrought
into his intrails, and soon dispatch him. And this is the Narration of this
Art, which I have summarily recited.

Then comes his Countess The Countess arreigned,
to her Trial, guilty of too much contrivance and practice, though in Murder it
be crime enough; yet she confessed, that which could not be proved; and at her
Trial, she seemed drowned in a deluge of grief, being therein beholden to
Nature, that she could vent her self in tears; seeing that sorrow which cannot
bleed in the eyes does often festor in the heart, and so it appeared in her
excess; women can hardly do any thing without over-doing; feminine passions
must either not be full, or overflow: and indeed, she could not utter one word
in her own defense, which begat relenting, even in the Council that pleaded
against her, who otherwise take pride to force Arguments, making their Tongues
their Ware, and Eloquence their Trade. But her sorrowful silence needed the
less Rhetoric in them, to urge her guilt; or in her Judges, to consult the
weight of her crime.

These considerations moved the Lord Steward and Peers jointly, and both of
them condemned, reprieved, and
to move his Majesty for mercy, and for the present procured their Reprieve,
back to the Tower; but indeed, she was dead whilst living, being almost
drowned in despair, to work out her Repen^ance, for which cause principally her
life and his were enlarged, as conceiving it the worst of Justice to kill both
body and soul; and after long imprisonment and true and hearty penance nine or
ten years together, and no doubt Repentance also, they had liberty out of the
Tower in January 1621. and confined to the Country, after pardoned.
and at last their Pardons were procured, which in ^^uth, notwithstanding her
great Family and deserving Friends, was to my knowledge got but by inches, four
months before the Kings death, which was Anno 1624.

But in the whole Execution, where so many suffered, let the Prefacer to the
Pamphlet of Fables, The Court and Character of King James, See the Preface,
Court and Charact. King James.
pick out a greater President in any History more remarkable for exquisite
justice, than this of the King; wherein by the way, he may be allowed his own
even Conscience for justice and mercy both, which no doubt has found
acceptance at God his Tribunal in his behalf; and his Posterity in due time by
our Saviors merit shall be gathered together in the mystery of man's
Redemption.

And for the other Historian, Hist. Gr. Brit. p. 83.
let his memory be blamed for recounting so many untruths, and yet
hypocritically closes with this Gloss, [ Pardon (says he) the sharpness of
these expressions, for they are for the glory of God.]

I could say more in this and other unfortunate stories of backward times, but
I delight not ambitious pains in an useless description of miseries; I had
rather show you what Somerset, could say for himself, concerning his Land, much
more in doubt for his life, it being a piece of charity to the distressed, and
to the memory of the deceased: I shall not therefore conceal it, and the length
thereof.

May it please your Majesty,
BY this Gentleman your Majesty's Lieutenant, I understand of some halt you
made, Somerset's Letter to the King.
and the cause of it, at such time as he offered to your Majesty my Letters;
but soon after, your Majesty could resolve your self, and behold me nothing so
diffident of you, but in humble language petitioning your favor; Cabala, p. 1.
for I am in hope, that my condition is not capable of so much more misery, as
I need make my passage to you, by such way of intercession.

This which follows after, I offer your Majesty, though not as to your self,
for upon less motive you can find favor for me.

Now I need only move, not plead, before your Majesty, as my case does stand;
for what I seek to have done, follows, upon what you have already done, as a
consequence and succeeding growth of your own act.

But to the effect, that your Majesty may see, that there is enough to answer
those, (if any such there be) as do go about to pervert the exercise of your
Power, and to turn it from its own clear excellency, for to minister unto their
passions. I have presumed to this end to awake your Majesty's own conceit, upon
this subject, which can gather to it self better and more able defenses in my
behalf upon this view; for though the Acts of your Mercy, which are not
communicable, nor the causes of them with others, as derived from those sec^^
motives, which are only sensible and privy to your own heart, and admit of no
search or discovery, to any general satisfaction; and that under this
protection, I might guard my particular sufficiently; yet, my case needs not
hide it self, but attend the dispute with any, that would put upon it a
monstrous and heavy shape; though that I must acknowledge, that both Life and
Estate are forfeited to you, by Law, yet so forfeited, that the same Law gives
you the same power to preserve as it does to punish; whereby your Majesty's
higher Prerogative does not wrestle with it, nor do you infringe those grounds,
by which you have ever governed; so as the resistance is not great, that your
Majesty has for to give Life, and which is less in the gift of Estate; for
that, the Law casts wholly upon your self, and yields it as fit matter, for
exercise of your goodness. Once it was your Majesty's gift to me, so it may be
better not taken, than a second time given; for it is common to all men, for to
avoid to take that, which has been once their own. And I may say farther, that
Law has not been so severe, upon the ruin of innocent posterity, nor yet
cancelled, nor cut off the merits of Ancestors, before the politic hand of
State had contrived it into these several forms, as fitted to their ends and
government.

To this I may add, that that whereupon I was judged, even the crime it self,
might have been none, if your Majesty's hand had not once touched upon it, by
which, all access unto your favor was quite taken from me. Yet as it did at
length appear, I fell rather for want of well defending, than by the violence
or force of any proofs; for I so far for sook my self and my cause, as that it
may be a question, whether I was more condemned for that, or for the matter it
self, which was the subject of that days controversy.

Then thus far, nothing has appeared wherein your Majesty has extended for me
your power, beyond the reasonable bound, neither does any thing stand so in the
way of your future proceedings, but rather make easy your Majesty's favor for
my relief.

What may then be the cause that malice can pitch upon, wherefore your Majesty
should not proceed to accomplish your own work? Aspersions are taken away by
your Majesty's letting me loose, to the utmost power of Law, with the lives of
so many offenders, which yields the world subjects of sorrow, rather than
appetite to more blood; but truth and innocence protect themselves in poor men,
much more in Kings. Neither ever was there such aspersion, (God knows) in any
possibility, toward your Majesty; but among those, who would create those
pretenses, to mislead your Majesty, and thereby make me miserable. If not this
(whereof the virtue and use was in the former time and now determined) there is
not any but your pleasure.

It is true, I am forfeited to your Majesty, but not against you, by any
treasonable or unfaithful act; besides, there is to be yielded a distinction
of men, as in faults; in which I am of both, under the nearest degrees of
exception.

Yet your Majesty has pardoned Life and Estate to Traitors, and to strangers
sometimes the one, sometimes the other; nay, to some concerned in this
business, wherein I suffer; you have pardoned more unto them than I desire; who
(as it is reputed) if they had come to the test, had proved Copper, and should
have drunk of the bitter cup as well as others.

But I do not by this, envy your favors to any persons, nor seek I to draw
them into the yoke with my self, but applaud your Majesty's goodness, being in
that respect, in a nearer possibility to come at me.

Besides this, to Elvish your Majesty has given Estate, which is a greater
gift than Life, because it extends to posterity, who was the worst deserver in
this business, an unoffended instrument, might have prevented, Sir W. Elvish.
all after-mischief, who for his own ends suffered it, and by the like arts
afterward, betrayed it.

To this I may add, Tresham Sir Lewis Tresham.
in the Powder Treason, upon whose Successors I do not cast any of his infamy,
yet he preserved himself to posterity; so as what he or others suc^ as he, have
defrauded by the arts of Law, and whom their own unfaithfulness made safe, I
have much ado to hold by ingenuity and confidence. How may it be, because I
distrusted not your Majesty, or because it returned in your power from whom I
had it? is it in danger to be broken or dismembered? Let me hope that there is
nothing which by favor may be excused, or by industry might have been avoided,
that will fail me, where your Majesty is to determine. It is not I that thus
put your Majesty in mind oportunely; it is he that was your creature, it is
Somerset with all your honors, and envious greatness, that is now in question.
Kings themselves are protected from the breach of Law, by being favorites and
Gods Anointed; which gives your Majesty like privilege over yours as I took
from Doctor Dun in his Sermon, that the goodness of God is not so much
acknowledged by us in being our Creator, as in being our Redeemer, nor in that
he has chosen us, as that nothing can take us out of his hand: which in your
Majesty's remembrance let me challenge and hope for; for the first accesses of
favor, they may be ascribed unto ones own pleasing themselves; but that
appears to be for our sakes, and for our good, when the same forsakes not our
civil desires.

This Redemption I crave, not as to my own person, but with your benesits once
given; nor do I assume them very deep, for I have voluntarily departed from the
hopes of my Pension, Place, Office; I only cleave to that, which is so little
as that it will suffer no paring or diminution.

And as in my former Letters, so by this, I humbly crave of your Majesty, not
to let the practices of Court, work upon your Son the Prince; not fearing the
sufferance of my loss in that particular, so much (for I cannot lose it, but
willingly all with it) as for to take off the stage, that which in the attempt
may prove inconvenient.

And consider, I pray your Majesty, that my hope in desiring to pass these bad
times, was to be restored to my fortunes; others are made unhappy by me, if
otherwise; and then I lose my end: I speak of impairing, of changing, or
supplying, as of any other way, all such alterations and ruin are alike,
without I be worthy of your gift, and that I can be worthy of all, that Law can
permit you to give, or cast upon your Majesty by a more nearer Title, as it
does by this; I shall account them equal evils, that leave nothing, or a
patched and proportioned one, changed, or translated from one thing to another.

But if your Majesty have any respects to move you, to suspend your good
toward me, let that which is mine rest in your own hands, till that you find
all opposite humors conformed to your purpose.

I have done wrong to my self, thus to entertain such a doubt of your Majesty;
but the unrelenting of adversaries, which when you will have them, will sooner
alter, and that all this while, I have received nothing of present notice for
direction, or to comfort me from your Majesty, has made me to expostulate with
my self thus hardly; for God is my. Judge, Sir, I can never be worthy to be, if
I have these marks put upon me of a Traitor, as that tumbling and disordering
of that estate, would declare the divorce from your presence, lays too much
upon me; and this would upon both.

I will say no further, neither in that, which your Majesty doubted my aptness
to fall into; for my cause nor my confidence is not in that distress, as for to
use that mean of intercession, nor of any thing besides, but to remember your
Majesty, that I am the workmanship of your hands, and bear your stamp deeply
imprinted in all the characters of favor; that I was the first Plant ingrafted
by your Majesty's hand in this place; therefore not to be unrootod by the same
hand, lest it should taint all the same kind, with the touch of that
fatalness: and that I was even the Son of a Father, whose Services are
registered in the first Honors and impressions I took of your Majesty's favor,
and laid there as a Foundation-stone of that building.

These, and your Majesty's goodness, for to receive them, is that I rely upon;
praying for your Majesty's prosperity. I am in all humbleness,

Your Majesty's loyal Servant and Creature, R. Somerset.


I should not trouble you with the Marriage of the Lady Arabella Stuart and Sir
William St: Lady Arabella's marriage with Seymer.
Maure or Seymer, both of kin to the Crown, she by the Earl of Lenox in
Scotland, (as I have before said 1577.) and he Grandchilde to the third Son and
the Heir of the Earl of Hartford, created by Henry 8. whose Sister he married
1537. and by Edward 6. made Duke of Somerset, and his Protector, who styled
himself, [Edward by the grace of God Duke of Somerset, Earl of Hartford,
Viscount Beauchamp, Lord Seymer, Uncle to the Kings Highness of England,
Governor of the Kings Person, Protector of all his Realms, Dominions and
Subjects, Lieutenant General of his Majesty's Armies both by Sea and Land, Lord
high Treasurer, and Earl Marshal of England, Governor of the Isles of Gernsey
and Jersey, and Knight of the most honorable Order of the Garter, and bears
Gules, two Wings conjoined in Fess Or.] Yet all these Honors rather helped him
forwards to hop headless for Felony.

His third Son Edward was restored to the Earldom I Eliz. and this William his
Heir. And thus near the Crown, in all Sovereignties are needful to be narrowly
looked into for Marriage.

Queen Elizabeth did so, at a farther distance of danger, and her Father made
it Treason in his time; I say, I should forbear more mention, but that our
Detractor begins at her Death in the Tower, (where she was imprisoned, though
her Husband escaped) and says, [ That it set men's tongues and fears a work,
that she went the same way.] having almost in his last words before, told the
story of Overbury impoysoned in the Tower, Hist. Gr. Br. p. 90.
by which he now enforces belief, [ That her Death was so done for the Kings
interest] when in truth she died a year before, in September 1615.

There happened occasion: at Common Pleas to dispute the Kings power in
Commendams. The Case of the Kings right to Commendams.
The Church being void, and in his gift, whether he might give a Commendam to a
Bishop (either before or after his Consecration) during life or for years?

It was argued by Sergeant Chibborn against the King,

That the translation of Bishops was against the Common Law, his Text was the
Canons of the Council of Sardis.

That the King had no power to grant Commendams, but necessitate.

That there would be no necessity, because no need of augmentation of Livings.
No man being bound to be more hospitable than his means afforded.

And much more argument tending to overthrow the Kings Prerogative in cases of
Commendams.

This case was to be farther argued in the Kings absence by all the Judges,
which he thought to protract, until they consulted with him; Sir Fr: Bacon.
and so commanded his Attorney General to signify by Letters his pleasure to
all the Judges.

The Judges notwithstanding, at the day argue the Case, and return answer by
Letter to the King, That they held those Letters to be contrary to Law, and
such as they could not obey by Oath, and therefore had proceeded at the day
appointed, setting down the Case to be upon construction of two Acts of
Parliament, 25 Edward 3. and of 25 Henry 8. and now between Subjects for
private interest and Inheritance. That their Oath is, That in case any Letter
come to them contrary to Law, they are not to obey them, but to proceed to
Justice. And so they did the last Term, 27. April, 1616. The Judges subsign,
Cook, Hobert, Tansield, Warburton, Sn^g, Altham, Bromley, Crook, Winch,
Dodderidg, Nicols and Houghton.

The King returns them answer by Letter, Reporting himself to their own
knowledge, his princely care for justice to be duly administered to his Subjects
with all expedition, and how far he was from crossing or delaying the interests
of private persons. But on the other side, where the case concerned the high
Powers and Prerogatives of his Crown, he would not endure to have them wounded
through the sides of a private person; admonishing them of an ordinary custom
lately entertained, boldly to dispute the high points of his prerogative in a
popular and unlawful way of Argument, not heretofore usual. Making them
senceable, how weak and impertinent the pretense of their Oath was in a case of
this nature; as if the Founders of their Oath, His Predcessors, were so intent
in their zeal to be uncharitable to make a weapon to wound their Successors,
being an ordinary course to put off Hearings and Determinings, amongst private
persons Termly. And commands them peremptorily not to proceed further in that
Plea, till his return to London; there to receive his further pleasure by
himself; Your Oath being only for avoiding importunites to the Prince of
Suitors in their own particular.

The King come to London, The 'King and Judges meet, and examine; their Letter.
convenes them all to the Council Table; and himself takes in sunder the parts
of the Judges Letter, and their Errors in proceeding; both in matter and
manner. In matter, by way of omission, as commission.

When the Counselor shall presume to argue his Supremacy at the Bar, and they
not reprove his Insolency. Himself observing since his coming to this Grown,
the popular Sort of Lawyers most affrontingly in all Parliaments have trodden
upon his Pre^ogative; though neither Law nor Lawyer can be respected, if the
King be not reverenced; And therefore it became the Judges to bridle their
impudencies in their several Benches; especially the Courts of Common Law, who
had incroached upon all other Courts, High Commission, Councils in Wales, and
at York, and Courts of Requests.

For the Commission in Matter, whereas their Letter excepted against his
Majesty's command to be against the Law, and their Oath. He tells them,
deferring upon just and necessary cause is not denying or delaying of Instice,
but rather wisdom and maturity. Nothing more proper than to cousult with the
King where it concerns the Crown.

As for the Manner; The Kings absence before the Argument, and yet his resolved
return speedily; and the case, though lately argued could not receive Judgment
till Easter. Term after, as the Judges confessed.

And for them to say, that the case was private interest of party and party;
One of the Parties is a Bishop, that pleads for the Commendam only by virtue
of his Majesty's Prerogative. And that they could not prove any Solicitation of
either Parties for expedition.

And for the form of the Letter, it was undecent; besides to proceed, and to
return a bare Certificate, without giving reasons therefore

Upon this all the Judges fell down on their knees, acknowledging their Error,
and craving Pardon.

But for the Matter, the Chief Justice Cook entered into a Defense, That the
stay by his Majesty, was a delay of Justice, and therefore against Law and
their Oath, that as they meant to handle the Pleading, it should not concern
the King's Prerogative.

To which the King told him, That for them to discern the concernment of his
Prerogative without consult with him, was preposterous. And for those of Law
and Oath, he had said sufficient before. Therefore he required the Lord
Chancellour's opinion herein, whether against Law and their Oath?

The Chancellor excused himself as to that of Law, referring it to the opinion
of the King's Council; whereupon the Attorney General Bacon said,

That to put off the Day was no Delay of Justice, nor endangered their Oath;
for the King's Reasons were only, that it concerned his Prerogative, and
required therefore a stay for a small time; and advised the Judges, whether
this refusal of their did not rather endanger their Oath; which was, To counsel
the King when they are called: but to counsel after the matter is past, was a
simple refusal to give him Counsel at all. And all the rest of the Council
concluded with him.

The Chief Justice Cook excepted, That the King's Council should plead against
the Judges; being their duties to plead before them, not against them.

Whereunto the Attorney replied, That the King's Council were by Oath and
Office, not only to plead, proceed, and declare against the greatest Subject,
but also against any body of Subjects or persons, nay, were they Judges or
Courts, or House of Commons in Parliament; and concluded, That the Judges
challenge was a wrong to their Places, and appealed to the King, who was firm
for them.

The Chief Justice replied, He would not dispute it with his Majesty. The King
replied, Nor with my Council. So then whether you do well or ill, it may not be
disputed.

The Chancellor gave his opinion with the King, and his Council.

Hereupon the positive Question was put by all the Lords, Whether in a Case
depending, which the King might conceive himself concerned in power or profit,
and requiring to consult with them they ought not to stay proceedings?

All the Judges submitted thereto, only the Chief Justice excepted, saying,
When that Case should be, then he would do his duty.

But the Chief Justice of the Common Pleas said, For his part, He would always
trust the justice of the King's command.

But the Day drawing nigh, the next Saturday, for arguing the Commendams, the
King desired the Judges to express, Whether they would then argue upon the
Kings general power of granting Commendams, yea or no.

They all concluded, Not to draw into doubt his power, but to insist upon the
point of Lapse, which they conceived to be of a form different from former
Commendams; and concluded to correct the insolences of bold arguing the
Prerogative.

Judge Doderidge concluded for the King, That the Church was void, and in his
gift, and might give a Commendam to a Bishop, either before or after
Consecration, during Life or years.

The Judges being gone, the privy Council resolved that the Kings desire was
not against the Judges Oath, nor against the Common Law to require; and all of
them subscribed to the same.

This Dispute was publicly scanned and censured in favor of the Judges, and
on the contrary for the King, but the truth I have really extracted out of the
Records of the Council Table; That you may thereby see the true scope of those
times.

The State of Spain Spain and France cross Marriage with Savoy.
having little to do in Martial affairs; K. Philip the third, now in peace,
thought to spend some time in Treati^s, wherein he seldom failed of advantage.
The late French King Henry the fourth, had 3. daughters; the one married to the
Duke of Savoy; which the Spaniard misliking to have those Neighbors lately so
great Enemies, now to be linkt in love without his Interest, conceived it good
policy to indeer the young King Lewis of France in a cross Match, to his
Daughter Infanta Anna, and to marry his son Philip to the Princess Elizabeth;
the second daughter of Henry the fourth.

And thus those cross Nuptials might seem to cement the affections of the three
States, lately so imbroyled in War, which no doubt either of them had good
cause to accept; though it was said S. P. Q. R. Spain, Pope, Queen-Regent had
the chief hand, to undo the young King.

For the Father Henry the fourth, had made Wars upon the Duke of Savoy to
recover the Marquisate of Saluses, and this King of Spain under color to aid
the Duke (his Brother in Law) sent him Horse and foot of Spaniards. But the
peace concluded, by exchange of Saluses, with the Countries of Bresse and Gex;
the Spanish Auxilliaries, being muzled in warm quarters, at Carboniers,
Montemellion, Savillau, and Pignorell (the best places of Savoy, and Piedmont)
would not budge; no! though the Duke begged of them to be gone; but were
absolutely commanded the contrary by Count Fuentes, Viceroy of Millain, and so
staid, until that valiant Duke, in this danger very desperate, cut all their
throats.

Spain, in policy to revenge, pieces with France to disjoyn Savoy; upon whom he
had afterward many Treacherous Designs, as that Plot upon his Castle of Nice
(the Key of his Counties) when his Spanish Galleys lay at Villa Franca to have
seized all Savoys Issue.

And as it was usual with Princes in Peace and Amity, to congratulate
Nuptials; K. James congratulates their Nuptials by Lord Hay.
The Lord Hay was looked upon, as the most proper for this Errand into France.
In some measure, he had the Kings favor, his affection not at all. For Wise
Kings know how to do the One, and yet hide the Other; so mystical things are
Courts; this makes many men misjudge, That the Kings friendships made every one
a Favorite; and by often changing their Persons, was therefore held inconstant
in his passions.

This Lord, Lord Hay his Birth and breding.
born a Gentleman in Scotland by his bearing of Cote- Arms, Argent three
Escocheons Gules; Supported two country Swains, armed Plough Trails, The
crest, a Dove volant proper. His story was; that his Ancestors at Plough with
those Instruments their Geer, slew Malton an High-land Rebel, and discomfited
his Train; for which service, had so much Land, (barren Rocks) as a Pigeon,
cast off the fist, flew over, till she rested. And all this great purchase
could not keep him from seeking livelihood in France; where he was bred no
other than a Gens d' Arms unto Henry the fourth, but quitted that service in
hopes of better preferment of his own Sovereign.

And over he comes to meet the King at his entrance into England, upon
recommendation of the French Lieger in Scotland, who continued so here; and
presented Haies upon former knowledge in France. This, and his other good parts
(being well accomplished) hastened him higher in esteem, than others of his
Country, whose nearer attendance had merited more.

But, to boot, he sought out a good Heir ( Gup my Lady Dorothy) sole Daughter
to the Lord Dennie, and to fit him forward, after Knighthood he had honor; and
was made a Lord, for reasonable riches his wife brought with her.

In grateful acknowledge of his first preferment, he feasted the former
Ambassador (being lately returned extraordinary to this King) wherein he
exceeded the limits of an Entertainment which for that time was excused, as a
grateful Ceremony of a large Dinner.

The Scots were never very eminent with neighbor Nations, what credit they
had, came by the French to keep balance with Them and England; the increase
might heretofore be hoped for, when the union of these Crowns, should afford
the means to set them forth. And it wat prudential in the King to pick out one
of his Own, to splendor that Nation in our way of Peace and Courtship;
Ambassador* into France.
especially, when all was done at the Masters cost. For Haies was ever
reasonable poor, unless by repute of his first Match, which was not much while
her Father lived; and by his last, he had less; the great spirit of Peircie
Earl of Northumberland, though a Prisoner then in the Tower, disdaining the
Marriage, denied her a Groat to a beggarly Scot, as he called him.

This first Embassy was for no other end, than to congratulate; for certainly
he had no Commission nor Credential to make scrutiny for matching our Prince
with the other Sister, she being then too young, and overtures were then
thought on with Spain, and so it was advertised from Sir Dudley Charlton,
Ambassador at the Hague, that there was a fame spread of such as desire to
weaken the Kings correspondence with that State, That his Majesty was on near
terms of matching our Prince with Spain, Hist. Gr. Brie. p. 92.
and by an Adviso out of Spain, That this match had been there debated in the
Inquisition, and judged necessary.

And in truth the Lord Ross L. Ross sent into Spain.
was sent Ambassador thither (partly for that purpose) at this time also, upon
the like errand, to give joy to that King, for the counter-match of his Son,
and had his Instructions to feel the pulse of that Court concerning the same,
(for I waited on him nearer in his affairs, than any of his Train) and both
these Ambassadors sent away at the same time. It was remarkable how each of
them strove for the prize to out-vy in the vanity of these Voyages; the Baron
to his utter undoing, having no other helps but his own, when the other had it
from the Kings purse, and in truth, for this purpose to put down the English,
as in that great Feast at Essex-House, and many his Masqueradoes afterward at
Court, for he meddled not with the Tilt, as being no Swordman; but in the other
and such like, he never escaped to act his part.

Amongst many others that accompanied Haies Expedition, was Sir Henry Rich,
Sir H. Rich Baron of Ken sington, his birth and breding.
Knight of the Bath, and Baron of Kensington, afterward Earl of Holland,
natural son to the then Earl of Warwick; He took his initiation of expense,
from this journey, and continued the practice afterward to the weakening of his
(long time) unsettled fortunes, being forced through custom of the Court to
follow the other in all his fashions; and which infection, by after-custome,
became his disease also, and almost (not over-mastering) yet over-shadowing his
natural eminent parts, with which his inside was habited, and perspicuous to
such as afterward knew him.

Thus much I had occasion to say heretofore, to which has been exception; as
if I undertook him besides the Text, in a wanton pleasure of my own pen to
blazon his memory with the foyl of his friend.

Truly, it was not so! by any unequal disparity to pride out the other: For,
let me here take the freedom to speak more of him; who from henceforth being
received into public, and coming in by his own endeavors to the place of
Cap. of the Band of Yeomen of the Guard to the Kings person, a place of honor
and profit; and increasing with years and experience into some favor now, and
afterward in high grace and esteem with the succeeding Sovereign; was yet (I
must confess) in the fate of State and Court, circumvested now and then with
some prejudice.

And it may be uneasy for a stranger (not for me) to research with due
distinction into the Actions of his whole life succeeding (not to enliven him
by a line) whom envy heretofore, and now malice after his decease, have
endeavored to blemish more than his own former felicity did, or could any way
corrupt.

If we deduce him from his Cradle, we shall find him, as it were, begotten to
an inheritance of true Nobleness and Courtlike grace, in more real splendor
than others, that seemed to appear compatible with him, they being only made
so by hand.

His life indeed was intricate, sometime struggling with the by-paths-of
Sovereign-favour, and afterward of State Affairs. Which at last (and at worst)
infected him with the disease of the times, more malignant in his Counselors,
and other his Confidents, then in his own conscience or inclination; and so
drew him on by various disguises of subtilty, with the composition of his good
nature, till the remain of his life was involved into Engagements unstable; the
effects whereof smothered him in the uncouth deluge of destruction.

I have no adverse aim or end, on either side of these two Lords to embase the
freedom of my Opinion or Judgment, being tried into some purity of truth by my
own knowledge of the former. and of this other by more exact account, than by
most men, or by any other pen may be expected.

But I am not delighted to urge out this story of the Lord Haies, as not
willing to speak evilly of any person of his Honor, unlike Our Adversaries
that spare none; For we should know that virtue and vice are inherent in Man.

And as it becomes us to tell truth when we speak of their virtues, so with
modesty and compassion to discover their vices. Either of them being examples
for the future, that to imitate, this to shun. And I cannot but with
compunction remind, that the monstrous excess of the Belly and the Back, by his
first President, became then, the mode of those Times for great Persons (the
most part) to follow, and for ordinary people to put in practice, even to this
day, and may be feared, for ever hereafter.

The Sword being sheathed up in the Scabberd, Peace and Plenty brought the Law
into esteem, the only overruling power to set men (even) by the ears, and
make them the more quiet ever after.

But then Cases increased so common, that Conscience was troubled to reconcile
them, and made a Quarrel of Justice it self, between Sir Edward Cook Chief
Justice of Law, and the Lord Elsmore Keeper of the Conscience, who had the
better of the Cause, to the others ruin.

The Case was thus:

Sundry Citizens got Judgment in the Court of Common Pleas by a juggling Trick,
that staved off an opposite Witness; the Plaintiff nevertheless exhibits his
Bill in Chancery against the Defendants, who sit out Process of Contempt, and
refusing to answer, are committed to the Fleet. And for their Relief exhibit
their Bill in Star Chamber, against the Lord Chancellor Elsemore, grounded
upon the Statute of 4 Henry 4: ca. 23. That the Judgment given in the Kings
Court shall not be examined in Chancery, Parliament, or elsewhere, until it be
undone by Attaint or Error, etc. and so thereby he had incurred Praemunire,
and the Chief Justice Cook interposed, and encouraged the Complainants.

The Chancellor acquaints the King, who sends to Bacon Attorney General, Sir
Henry Montague, and Sir Randal Crew, Sergeants at Law, and Sir Henry Yelverton,
Solicitor; these men report back, That there has been a strong current of
practice and proceeding in Chancery after Judgment at Common Law, and many
times after Execution, continued since Henry the Seventh's time to this day, in
Cases where there is no other Remedy at Common Law; unto which the Judges are
peremptorily sworn.

And with this Sentence on Elsmore's side, the aged Statesman leaves the Seat
of deciding, and sits down himself to his devotions, leaving the Seal to be
born by Bacon. But the manner of the dispose is mis-told by the Pamphlet, Court
and Ch: p. 125.
[who makes it the Chancellour's heart-break to be rid of the charge] when in
ttuth, the Term come, and Elsmore sick, the King sent for the Seal, by
Secretary Winwood, with a gracious Message; That himself would be his Deputy,
and not dispose it whilst Elsmore lived to bear the Title of Chancellor, nor
did any one receive it out of the King's sight till he was dead, nor long after.

And because we may be assured of the Kings gracious favor to that grave
Chancelour, see what he says to him in two Letters following, writ every word
with the Kings own hand.

My Lord,
These shall first congratulate and thank God with you, for your recoverie, and
growing to health again, for which I protest to God I prayed every Morn and
Eve, since you was at the worst, as often as I prayed for mie self. And next you
shall be herebie informed, how senseable I am of that disgrace offered to that
Court of mine wherein you sit, especially at a time so unseasonable; It cannot
but be a comfort to you to know, how every Man censured the pertiallity and
barbarity of that action; and for my part, you may assure your self it shall
only be in your default of not informing me if I do not upon this occasion
free my self from fascherie of any such inconvenients hereafter, I mean of such
jarring betwixt my Courts of Justice; for I will wholly upon your information
and advice, what course to take in the handling of this business, assuring my
self, that your conscience and care for my honor and service, will set me in a
course, for making such an example in this case, as may settle good Government
in like Cases hereafter; and so I bid you heartily farewell.

Febr. 25. 1615. New Market. James Rex.


Thus the King writes then; and continued unto this grave Statesman such
gracious Favors and esteem to the last of his days, for a twelvemonth after
this letter, and not long before his death, he writes again.

To the Right Trusty and Right Well-beloved Our Chancelour of England.
My Lord,
The Letter I wrote the last year from this same Town unto you, proved so good
a Cordial for your health, as I am thereby encouraged to do the like at this
time; and as I both hope and pray for with the like success; I cannot but be
eztremelie sorry for your want of health; but I confess I am more sorry for
the evil conceit you have of your own strength, which makes me the more to
presume upon the good Operation of this Physic of mine, since, I am sure it
can work more upon your mind than any other worldly thing. The Greatness, of
your place, and the ability which God has given you to discharge it, to the
honor of God, and the great benefit of the Commonwealth, is a cause sufficient
to stir you up to be careful of your own health, and even to fight against
disease as far as you can; but when you shall remember how evil I may want
you, and what miss your Master shall have of you, I hope that reason will be
predominant to make you not strive, but conquer your disease, not for your own
sake but for his; of whom you may promise your self as much love and hearty
affection as might be expected from so thankful and kind a Master, to so honest
and worthily deserving a Servant; and so praiing God to bless this mie cure, I
bid you heartily farewell.

Febr. 9. 1616. New Market. James Rex.


Hereupon there was some appearance of his amendment, which the Prince
congratulates under his own hand.

My Lord Chancelour,
As I was very sorry, having understood of your dangerous sickness, so I do
much rejoice of the good appearance of your recovery, which Thomas Murrey has
declared unto me, and of the affection and caee you have of my person and of
mie Estate, for which you and yours shall ever find me most willing to give
testimony to the World, how much I respect those who are truly affected
toward me. I hope bie Gods grace to give you particular bie mie self, and that
God shall give you health and strength of body and mind, that the King, Queen,
and I, with this whole Kingdom: may long enjoie the fruit of your long, wise
and religious experience, which wishing from my heart, I end

New Market, Febr. 18. 1616. Yours, Charles Pr.


These being the last Letters, and thus assured of the acknowledgement of his
Masters favor toward his merit, he takes leave of this Life the fifteenth of
March following, 14. of Iac. 1616.

The Common Pleas, or Comunia Placita, is the Kings Court, or Bancus Communis,
Anno 2. Edw. 3. cap. II. so called, Quia Communia Placita inter subditos, or
controversies between common persons, it was now held in Westminster- Hall. But
in ancient times moveable, as appears by Magna Charta cap. II. And that upon
grant of that Charter, the Court of common pleas was erected and settled, and
one place certain, viz. at Westminster, wheresoever the King lay, and that
after that time all the Writs ran, Quod sit coram Iusticiariis meis apud
Westmonast.

Whereas before, the party was commanded by them to appear, Coram me vel
Iustitiaris meis, simply without addition of place; see Glanvile and Bracton,
the one writing in Henry the seconds time, before this Court was erected; the
other in Henry the thirds time, who erected this Court. All Civil causes, real
and personal are (or were in former times) in this Court according to the
strickt Law of this Realm. And by Fortescue cap. 50. it seems to have been
the only Court for real causes. The chief Judge thereof is called, Lord Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, accompanied with three or four Assistants or
Associates, who are created by Letters pattents from the King, and are
installed (as it were) upon the Bench by the Lord Chancelour, and Lord Chief
Justice of that Court. See Fortescue ca. 51. who sets down all the
Circumstances of their admission. The rest of the Officers are these; the
Custos Brevium, three Proto-Notaries, or principal Notaries, called also
Pregnotaries; Chirographer, Filazers in number fourteen, Exigenters four; Clerk
of the Warrants, Clerk of the Iuries, or Iurata Writs, Clerk of the Treasury,
Clerk of the Kings Silver; Clerk of the Essoines; Clerk of the Outlaws.

The Common Law is so ancient, Lex terrae, what?
we know not the commencement; Lex Angliae peculiar only to this Land. Of long
time following the Conquest, ever more quarrelled for enjoyment of ancient
Liberties; until Henry the third allowed English men English Laws, add in his
ninth year granted the great Charter, which himself infringed, and thereupon
followed forty years Barons Wars (as Histories style them) until in his fifty
two year, that Charter was again reviewed and compiled, and solemnly sworn unto
by succeeding Sovereigns.

The ground of which binds the King per Legem terrae, and what is this
Lexterrae? Leges Anglicanae fuerunt approbatae consensu utentium and Sacramento
Regum confirmatae. Lex facit Regem; attribuat igitur Rex legi, quod Lex
attribuit ei, viz. dominationem and potestatem; ubi non Lex, ibi non Rex. So
then Lex fecit Regem. Not so neither; Kings in England before Laws; but indeed
Communis Consuetudo Regni fuit Lex terrae.

This being the Law without commencement; as the Genius to all, and Parliaments
Statutes, Prerogatives of Princes, Customs of Counties, Cities, Buroughs,
Manors, are but the species of it. For general Customs made the Law,
authorities Parliaments, Limits Prerogatives and Customs, consonant or
disonant to Reason; so much for Communis Lex.

But in practice (say some) the Chancery is above Law, and yet duly examined,
that also is allowed per Legen terrae, as a species of that.

The reason thus. Cancelaria, what?


The Common Law grounded upon general Maxims, they might be too severe, or too
relax; and therefore necessarily requiring Equity, Secundum aequum and bonum,
and sanam cons^ientiam.

And this Chancelour notwithstanding limited by Law and erected by Law,
although it seems above Law. For

No Judge has Jurisdiction without some grant or commission out of that Court
under the Great Seal, which is entrusted to the Chancellor.

No Judge can hold plea without an Original Writ framed in Chancerie, and by
his appointment returnable before the Judges, and yet all these considered, the
King, the Law, the Chancery agree together.

The Chancerie then must needs be erected (subsequent) by the common Law, to
relieve and supply the Law in some cases, where the simple subject was cosened
by craft; ignorance, also may offend, without malice.

Moses Law, in diverse cases Political and Ceremonial, he could not decide
(uncleanness by touching the dead) but referred it to God.

The name of this Officer is, Dominus Cancelarius Angliae, a a Cancelour; do
but then quere what he might cancel?

Some say it is, Cancelare Iniquom legem comm^nnem, Iudicare secundum
conscientiam; but this is an error; will the Law give power to deface her self
that made it?

The Chancelour cannot stay the course of Law, but only injunct the person not
to follow the Law; not to cancel the Law; for notwithstanding this injunction,
if the party will sit out contempt, and proceed at common Law, the Judges
cannot deny him.

Indeed rhis Officer has his name of canceling the Kings Letters pattents, so
much of honor to the Law, as the other way had been dishonorable.

The nature of Letters pattents bind the King and his Successors, and all
Subjects, though unfit or unjust; the Judges of Law are co judge it void, but
cannot deface it nor the Seal, but the Chancelour, as a Judge of Law may, (but
not by his absolute authority) by his ordinary power and course of common Law,
is to judge of it, and to hold plea of it, and to call the party interessed by
process of Law, and so to repeal it by Judgment; and then cancel it: which no
person can do but

And this was done, Transversa linea circumducere vel conscindere aliquod
Edictum decretum contra Principem, aut jus Reipublicae impetrari; which
cancelling is made with Lines drawn across like Latices, and it is said that
Judgment seats were of old compassed with Latices, or Bars cross ways, to
defend the Judges and Officers from the prease of people, and yet not to hinder
their view. Chancells were so divided from the body of the Church, and
thereupon so called.

And the Lord Chancelour and Lord Keeper have one power, by Stat. anno 5. Eliz.

So then you see how, and for what he has his name.

And though his Authority be highest, yet it is given to him by the Law, and
proceeds in course of Law, not according to conscience, but Law.

That all Justice runs from the Supreme power; so by the Chancelour to all
Jurisdiction.

A man complains of wrong or sues for right in Chancery; from which Bill of
complaint issues a precept commanding the Defendent to appear at a Day; So then
a man may not be sued before he have a Writ or Breve from the Chancelour, a
singular regard to the meanest.

The very Writs of Chancerie are prescribed by Law, and a form registered in
Chancery, and if not accordingly issued out, the Judges will reject them,
called in Law, Abating of the Writ.

His Authority to judge, Authority in Judging.
is of two sorts, by common Law, or Positive Law, Potentia Ordinata, Process,
pleading judgment.

Potentia Absoluta; by Process according to the Law of Nature, viz. to send
for the party, to answer upon Oath; to examine, if he will not answer, yet the
Chancelour cannot condemn him in the cause for obstinacy.

Potentia Ordinata, mispleading on either part, may mar the matter, and the
judgment must be according to Law, however the Equity of the case fall out.

But if the pleading be by Absolute Power, though the party misplead, if the
matter be good, the Judgment must be by equity, and not as the pleading, be
either formal good or bad, or as the law will in the case.

The Question follows, whether, that conscience whereby the Chancelour be
simpliciter; and to be simplex conscientia, or Regulata? Viz. To be ordered by
course of Court, former Presidents? and if no Presidents; whether Reason in
codem respectu, may take cognizance of the cause? viz.

A rich Father to suffer an honest son to beg; or a rich son contrario? the
Chancelour cannot?

Hereupon we may conclude that his Authority judicial, both Ordinata, and
Absoluta Potestas, are limited by the Law of the Land.

For in the Ordinary he is tied to the strict rule of Law, and by the Absolute,
he is ruled (though not by the course of law) yet he is to deal per regulatam
conscientiam, but in any case not to contradict what Law has allowed.

But to conclude; his Absoluta Potestas, by what means he should find out
truth. Truly it is without limitation, only to be referred to his own Gifts,
and the grace of God that gives Wisdom.

Sir Francis Bacon succeeded Elsemere Lord Chancelour, Sir F. Bacon succeeds
chancelour.
though a wonder to some [so mean a Man to so much preferment] he was then
Attorney General, Co. and chapter pa. 126.
and as others by that placc, and in the usual way of preferment (time beyond
memory) come to high Office of Indicature, either there, or to other Benches;
and so did he. But his Mis-deeds afterward turned him out of all, and he dyed
poor and private. See Anno 1621.

And as his Genesis of preferment came to the chair of State, so the Exodus of
the Treasurer Suffolk in his Office, brought him to the Star Chamber, and the
Glory of the new Chancelour, Chairman there, to sit in censure upon him, and
so to set out himself in his Matchless Eloquence; which he did then by
Sentence, as the Mouth of the Court; as all others had done; Their abilities
affording them several ways and manners in that Court more particular, as
their Qualities concern them to distinguish.

So here also the Chief Justice Cook newly revived from the sad condition of
former disgrace for his too narrow inquisition upon the faults and fall of
Somerset. He now finding the Fate of Court-policy final in this Lord, and his
malice at Liberty to speak what he list; Parrallels this Lords Crimes with
other such corrupt Treasurers, raking Presidents of all former Predecessors.

Even from Randolphus de Britton; who was sentenced to lose all lands and
goods, but was restored to him, and fined 3000. 1. for misusing K. H. 3.
Treasure.

Such another was Treasurer of Ireland, Petrus de Rivallis, and of great
command also, high Chamberlain of England to Edw. 1. his Offenses were Bribes,
of all men, poor and rich; Religiosis quam de Laicis, fined and ransomed.

So did the Abbot and Moncks at Westminster, took out of that Kings Treasury
there, ad inestimabile Damnum Regis and Regni; For which these privileged
pretenders could not be exempt from Trial, and the Temporalities of the Abbey
seized for satisfaction; till which time of payment they suffered Imprisonment.

Nay, Walter de Langton Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield scapes not Edw. 2.
This Treasurer took bribes then, though small, but a hundred pound of the Earl
of Monteallo, ut amicus in agendis negotiis versus dominum Regem; lets him
escape Prison to do his bu^inesse; and given of free Will, and ex curialitate
sua; yet in those days it amounted to Extortion.

But he had Additionalls, having indicted John de Eugam of Tresgass, for the
Manor of Fisby, to which the King had title, and imprisoned him; and when
another Manor was conveyed to the Bishop for Courtesies done, diversas
curialitates, Eugam was set at liberty; but it seems the Bishops plea would not
serve his turn, That the King would rather punish by Imprisonment, than fine.

And those good times accounted it Bribery.

Again, the Bailiff of Oxford was committed for arrears of one hundred pound in
his account* and the Manor of Calcat conveyed to the Bishop for satisfaction,
yet because he was of pure Devotion discharged by the Bishop, these cases all
three were condemned of Extortion and Bribery, and the Bishop soundly paid for
it, by his purse and imprisonment.

In Edw. 3. He imprisoned William Lord Latimer with punishment and fine, being
in Commission to pay off the Kings debts, he compounded for eighty per centum,
and 30. for 40. by which says the Record, he turned it upon the King to be a
Bankrupt Compounder.

So did the Baron Nevil bought the Kings debts of the Army, and though he
pleaded that they forgave him the Remainder freely, yet was he fined.

Such like as these were brought Examples to raise the Offense of this Lord
Treasurer; of himself as of high birth, so most Noble, and without doubt
disdaining to commit base crimes; but whether the guilt of Sir John Dingly, one
of the Tellers in Exchequer, an intimate Servant to the Secrecies of Suffolks
Countess; or some necessity to make bold to borrow such sums as his Fabric
Awdle-End had need of; Or the vain and monstrous expense heretofore of that
family. All that could be (besides the necessity of Court-Fate) cast in his
dish, was the imbezeling the moneys lately paid by the States of the
Netherlands for redemption of the cautionary Towns Flushing and Bril; and he
fined thirty thousand pounds, and Dingly two thousand pounds, the Man deserving
to pay for all, it being of his designing.

But the Treasurer was from thenceforth for some time trusted to Commissioners.

At Midsummer after the King comes to Star Chamber, then intending to settle
his homea-ffairs, for his resolved journey into Scotland, which began the next
Spring, and therefore now the more to exalt the Seat of Justice, of which this
Court was most eminent; he discharges his duty to God and his people in a most
excellent Discourse, the character of his inward inclination to Justice and
Piety.

His MAJESTY'S SPEECH at his first coming to the Star Chamber.
He begins with Scripture. Give thy Judgments to the King, O God, and thy
righteousness to the Kings Son; the literal sense upon the Prophet David, and
his Son Solomon, godly and wise; the mystical sense upon God and Christ his
eternal Son, just and righteous; from which imitation all Governments,
especially Monarchies, have been established. Kings are properly Judges, and
sit in the Throne of God, and thence all Judgment is derived, from the King to
his Magistrates, not to them Privative but Cumulative. So the Council of Jethro
to Moses, the Judges were deputed for easier questions, the more profound left
to Moses. So, all Christian Kings govern; whereby appears the near Conjunction,
God and the King upwards, the King and his Judges downward; the King to settle
the Law of God, and his Judges, to interpret the Law of the King.

Thus a Jove principium, he comes to his Errand; I. Why he came not to speak
here in fourteen, years as his Predicessors have done often, especially Henry
7. from whom the King is descended doubly to this Crown, and so desires to
follow him, in his best actions? 2. Why he comes now?

For the first, Though he had been an old King, when he came hither, and well
practiced to Government, from twelve years of age, yet here he resolved with
Pythagoras to keep silence for seven years. That Apprenticeship ended; the
Impediment was the choice of some worthy Cause, betwixt King and some Subject,
or Subject and Subject. The one might seem partial as for himself, the other
oblique in favor of a party.

But twice seven years his whole Reign here brings him openly to speak now
publicly, concerning the reformation of Judicature in Westminster Hall, which
heretofore he had in part delivered in private occasions.

Dividing his Charge, 1. To himself; 2. To the Judges; 3. To the Auditory.


First, He protests that as Confirmation follows Baptism, so now he renews his
Oath of Coronation, in Justice and Law, the common Law of the Land. He never
pressed to alter, but (as in the union of his person) so he eudeavoured it
real, to conform Scotland to England, not this to that, anent the prophecy of
his Grandfather, Henry 7. That the lesser Kingdom by marriage would follow the
greater, not the greater the less; and therefore married his eldest Daughter
Margaret to James the fourth, the Kings great Grandfather. And so blames that
nice opinion, that the Union of Great Britain would alter our Laws, which he
ever declined, as a Maxim in matters of State and Policy, Innovation and
alteration makes it worse; that he was sworn to these Laws, and to alter them
had been perjury in him, Justice may be moderated by him with mercy, but in
matters of Justice he will be blind to partiality: to hasten Justice, never to
delay.

He distinguishes the Law; The Inheritance of King and Subject to be determined
by the Common Law, set down by our Forefathers, and expounded by learned men in
their Comments, and called Responsa Prudentum, or by Statute Law, and this is
Law of Inheritance.

The other Law, Gods Law, governs all, Common and Municipalls as Dependents;
and he complains of the neglect of Divine Laws, and disrespect to the Ministers
of the Church, which is the most pure, and nearest the primitive and
Apostolical Church in doctrine and discipline of any in Christendom.

Next to this is the Civil Law (the Law of Nations) It satisfies strangers, and
his own subjects in matters of Pyracy, Marriage, Wills, which Law he divides,
Civil and Canon, and complains of the contempt upon it, and concludes his own
charge, to maintain so to purge it from two corruptions. Incertainty and
Novelty to clear it to the people by advice of Judges, and to purge it of
Niceties introduced by Judges themselves. And so as the Pastor takes the
Sacrament himself, and then distributes, so he to them, least it be said, Turpe
est Doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum.

The charge to the Judges consists of three parts, To do Justice, Generally;
Indifferently, Fearfully. Generally, uprightly as to answer God, and the King
and punishment from either. Indifferently to all parties, King and Subject,
Subject and Subject, without delay partiallity, clean and incorrupt. Fearfully,
Not your own conceits, for you are no Law makers, but Interpreters. Jus dicere,
not Jus dare. For you have no voice in Parliament but to advise. And though
some Laws are obscure and may be better known to you by Books and Presidents,
yet their interpretations must be subject to common sense and reason, Ratio est
anima Legis, clear Law, or solid Reason.

But where the formality has no place, as in Denmark, the State is governed by
written Law, no Advocate or Proctor; only the parties plead and the Law is
read, and so sentence. He complains of our curious wits; Various conceits;
different actions; and several examples which breed questions in Law. But if
plain, it speaks it self, if otherwise (as inventions abound) they are to
enterprete and draw a good Minor of natural Reason out of a Major of direct
Law, and so will follow a true Conclusion; though common Law be a Mystery, and
your interpretation be not understood, yet by the reason of Logic and common
sense, it will be false. And as they are Judges and divided into Benches, so
they must confer, debate, not single opinions, per emendata suffragia; and thus
in general to their Office.

And as to their Limits.

First, Not to incroach upon Prerogatives of the Crown, deal not in difficult
questions ere you consult with the King and Council, otherwise, is to wound the
King through the sides of a Private person, and herein commends some of the
Judges, that of late rebuked and blunted the sharp edge, and vain popular
honor of some Pleaders at the Bar for meddling therein. The mystery of the
Kings power is not lawful to be disputed, which seems to wade into the weakness
of Sovereigns; diminishes the mystical reverence of them that sit in the Throne
of God.

Secondly, One Judicature not to invade upon others, unsit and unlawful, and
herein he inlarges himself. That besides Common Law there are Courts of
Requests, Admiralty, President and Council of Wales, of the North. High
Commission, and every Bishops Court. These shall keep their limits and bounds,
so the common Law shall not encroach upon them, nor they on that.

In Westminster Hall, four Courts; Two Civil, Common Pleas, and Exchequer; Two
Criminal, Kings Bench, and Star Chamber. The Common Pleas, is a Branch of the
Kings Bench, being first in one Court, and after the Common Pleas being
extracted, it was so called, as Pleas of private men. The other, the Exchequer
for the Kings Revenue, the principal institution thereof, and their chief
study; and as other things come orderly thither so to administer justice.

Keep you within compass, give me my right of private Prerogative, I shall
acquiesce; as for the Prerogative of the Crown, it is not for a Lawyers tongue,
nor lawful to be disputed. It is Atheism to dispute what God can do, his
revealed Will ought to content us, so is it contempt in a subject to dispute
what a King can, or cannot do; the Law is his revealed Will.

The Kings Bench is the principal Court for Criminal causes, and in some
respects it deals with Civil causes.

The Chancery, a Court of Equity, and deals likewise in Civil. The Dispenser of
the Kings Conscience, following the intention of Law and Justice, not altering
Law, nor e converso; It exceeds all Courts, mixing Mercy with Justice. Other
Courts are only for Law: and where the strictness of Law might undo a subject,
there the Chancery tempers it with Equity, and preserves men from destruction.

The Chancery is undependent of any other Court; only under the King Test me
ipso; from which no appeal, yet am I bound, so to maintain others, as this, not
to suffer wrong.

My Chancelour that now is, I found him Keeper of the Seal, the same in
substance with the other style. He is witness, my warrant was to him, to go on
according to Presidents in time of best Kings, and most learned Chancellours.

The duty of Judges is, to punish such as deprave the Kings Courts, and
therefore it was an inept Speech in Westminster Hall, to say, that a Praemunire
lay against the Court of Chancery, yet it should not be boundless, the King is
to correct it, and none else, and therefore the King was abused in that
attempt, and now commands that none presume to sue a praemunire against it.

As all inundations are conceived Prodigious by Astrologers, so overflowings of
the banks of Jurisdiction is inconvenient and Prodigious to the State; Let
there be a concordance and musical accord amongst you; keep to your Presidents,
authentic, not controverted, but approved by common usage of best Kings, and
most learned Judges.

The Star Chamber Court, has been shaken of late, and last year had received a
blow, if not prevented by a few voices. He descants on the name Star, a
glorious creature, next in place to the Angels; the Court glorious in
substance, compounded of four sorts of persons. The first two, Privy
Counselors, and Judges; wisd^m of State, learning in Law: The other two sorts,
Peers and Bishops; to give Greatness and Honor to the Court; the other of
Learning in Divinity, and the interest of the good Government of the Church. So
divine and humane Laws, Experience and practice in Government, are conjoined in
the proceedings of this Court.

No Kingdom without a Court of Equity, either by it self, as in England, or
mixed in their Office that are Judges of the Law, as in Scotland, and here in
England where the Law determines not clearly, there the Chancery does, having
equity, which belongs to no other Court; punishing Attempts, other Courts only
facts, and where the Law punishes facts lightly, as in Riots or Combats, the
Star Chamber punishes in a higher degree, as in Combinations, Practices,
Conspiracies: so being instituted for good, give it the more honor.

Keep your Courts in harmony; Judges are Brethren, the Courts Sisters, the
Muses: to differ breeds contempt to either, and disputes against each other,
turns pleas from Court to Court in circular Motion, Ixions wheel; the reason of
Multitudes of Prohibitions, causes are scourged from Court to Court, like
Tantalus fruit, near the Suitors Lip, never to his Taste, a delay of Justice
makes causes endless.

He tells them how he has labored to gather Articles, an Index expurgatorius
of Novelties crept into the Law; look to Plowdens Cases, and the old Responsa
Prudentum, if you find it not there, then ( ab initio non fuit sic) away withit.

To the Auditory he has but little to say; As he has confirmed his Resolution
to maintain his Oath, the Law and Justice of the Land. So he expects their duty
in observance of the Law, and divides their submission into three parts.

First, In general to give due reverence to the Law. This general he devides
also into three;

Not to sue but upon just cause;

Be content with Judgment to acquiesce as he will do, equal with the^^eanest
Subject.

Do not complain and importune the King against Judgment. It is better to
maintain an unjust D^cree, than to question every judgment after Sentence, as
you come gaping for Justice, be satisfied with the Judgment; but in Bribes
complain boldly; if not true, from you expect Lex Talionis; to accuse an
upright Judge deserves double punishment.

Secondly, In your Pleas, pr^sume not against the Kings Prerogative or honor:
if you do, the Judges will punish you; if they do not, I will them and you.
Plead not new Puritanical strains; to make all things popular, keep the ancient
limits of pleas.

Thirdly, change not your Courts, as if to mistrust the justness of your cause,
but submit where you begin. So he sums up all; The charge to his Self, Judges,
and Auditory; his excuse why he came not till now; why now.

And because of his custom to deliver a charge to the Judges of circuits; He
tells them now also, As they are Judges with him in that Court, so Judges under
him and his Substitutes in circuits; Itinerant to his people; a laudable
custom to go to the people in their Counties, as they come up to them at
Westminster Hall. That you go to punish, as to prevent offenses; charge the
Justices of peace their duties, take an account of them, and report their
Services to the King, for the King has two offices, 1. To direct; 2. To take
an account from them to his Chancellor in writing, and so to him.

Of these two parts, the Nisi prius is profit for them, and the other necessary
for him, therefore as Christ said, Hoc agite, yet and illud non omittite, and
commends the office of Justice of peace of high honor and repute.

They are of two sorts, good and bad; the good he will reward and prefer, being
as capable of his favor, as any about him whomsoever; the farther off in
distance of place, the more desert, and his providence must reach to the end of
his limits; the good are industrious; the bad idle; contemplative Justices are
of no use. And for the number, as many hands make light work, so too many make
slight work.

As to the charge, he will but repeat what he has said heretofore, Lectio
lecta placet, decies repetita placebit, anent Recusants and Papists, my greef
when they increase; there are three sorts of Recusants.

The first, such as will not be themselves, but their wives and families shall
be, and they shall appear at Church sometimes, enforced by Law, or for fashion;
these are formal to the Law, and false to God.

The second sort are Recusants whose consciences are misled, and therefore
refuse the Church, otherwise peaceable subjects.

The third are practicing Recusants; they will force all persons under their
power, and infect others, to be as they are Recusants; these are men of Pride
and Presumption.

His opinion can bear with the person of a Papist so born and bred, but an
apostate Papist h^ hates, such deserve severe punishment.

He is loath to hang a Priest for Religion and saying Mass, but if he refuse the
Oath of Allegiance, which is merely Civil, he leaves them to the Law, against
whom it is no persecution, but Justice; and the like against those Priests that
return from banishment; such also as break Prison; they can be no Martyrs that
refuse to suffer for their conscience; Saint Paul would not go forth, when the
doors were open, and Saint Peter came not out, till led by the Angel of God.

Then he concludes with the Ordinary charge against the numbers of Al^-houses;
too frequent buildings in and about London; and also the extreme resort of the
Gentry to the City; bids them countenance the religious Clergy against all
Papists and Puritans, and God and the King will reward their service.

Let us remind Scotland, It was eight years since the Marquess of Hun^l^y had
been excommunicate; upon hopes from time to time of his conformity and
reconcilement; but increasing insolences was lately committed, and as soon
enlarged by the Chancelour; underhand favoring too much the Papists. The
Church complain hereof to the King, the Marquess posts to England to palliate
his displeasure, but a Messenger meets him at Huntington with command to return
him home to Justice. Yet here he stays, until he receives new authority to
appear at Court, where he humbly submits and offers to communicate; But being
contrary to the Canons before absolution, a great debate followed, how to
hazard him to the Church of Scotland, lest by the way, he should recant, and
indeed, the King evermore endeavoring to rectify his conscience, and to
recover him to be a Proselyte.

The adventure was thus pieced, the Bishop of Catnes now at Court, must consent
in the name of the Scots Kirk, for the Archbishop of Canterbury to absolve
him, and the Form new devised so to do, in respect of the correspondency of
that Church with England.

The Scottish Church hears of this, and interprets that Act as an usurpation
upon their Rites, which the King is fain to excuse in a long Letter to satisfy
that curiosity; and lest he should seem to take upon him to palliate so great a
presumption of himself only. The Archbishop also gave his Reasons in writing,
without intrenching upon the independencies of so free, absolute, and entire
Authority of Sc^tland.

And withal, Huntley come home, must supplicate that Assembly, now convened at
Aberdene, for their confirmation and his submission, which was solemnly
performed.

And because it was about the end of the General Assembly, we shall shut it up
with inserting such Articles as may enlighten the Reader to the knowledge of the
Kings elaborate care and wisdom, in reducing perverse Jurisdiction to this
moderate issue, in conformity to the Discipline of the Church of England, by
which we may conclude the evident signs and hopes of a full recovery in time
from their peevish Hierarchy, which had been prosecuted in some measure, from
the very time that this King took Government to himself, and brought it before
his death to a semblable conformity with England, and might so have prospered
to perfection, had not their and our sins since set a period to us both.

1. That for more reverence of the holy Communion, the same should be
celebrated Kneeling, which always had been standing.

2. Not to be denied the Patient desperate sick in his Bed with three or four
of religious conversation to communicate with him.

3. The Sacrament of Baptism not to be longer deferred, than the next Sunday
after the Birth, and in necessity, in a private house by the Minister, and
publication thereof the next Sunday in the Church.

4. That the inestimable benefits received from God, by our Lord Jesus Christ,
his Birth, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and Sending down the Holy Ghost,
having been commendably remembered at certain days and times by the whole Church
of the world; every Minister upon these days should therefore commemorate the
said benefits upon those set days, and to make choice of several pertinent
Texts of Scripture to frame his Doctrine and Exhortations thereto.

And because Confirmation after Baptism stuck in their stomachs, and indeed the
King was unsatisfied therein, terming it a mere Hotch-potch, and not clear to
his apprehension. But yet thus much was concluded, That seeing the Act of
Confirmation of Children is for their good Education most necessary, being
reduced to the primitive integrity, the Minister shall catechize them after
eight years old, to rehearse the Lords Prayer, the Belief and ten Commandments,
with Answers to Questions in the small Catechism used in the Church. And that
the Bishop in their Visitations shall bless them with Prayer for their increase
of Grace and continuance of Gods heavenly gifts with them.

So much was done indeed, and presented humbly to his Majesty, with some
Reasons, why the same being novel to them, were not as yet inserted with the
Canons, which the King did not then otherwise press, as resolving to effect his
desire, at his coming personally into that Kingdom, when his presence should
satisfy with Reasons all scrupulous aversion.

About this time happened that difference in the Family of Sir Thomas Lake, one
of the Secretaries of State, between his Wife and Daughter, and the Countess of
Exeter, which involved him and his into ruin.

This Lake was a learned Gentleman, Sir Th: Lake hisstory.
brought up under Sir Fr: Walsingham, (that subtle Secretary of State) as
Amanuensis to him. And after good experience of his deserts, was recommended to
Queen Elizabeth, and read to her French and Latin, in which Tongues, she would
say, that he surpassed her Secretaries, and was so employed all her time, for
he was reading (as to quiet her spirits) when the Countess of Warwick told him,
that the Queen was departed.

But not long before she received him Clerk of her Signet. And he was chosen by
this State, in that Place, to attend King James, from Berwick. And so
sufficient he was, that the King made use of his present service, in some
French dispatches by the way that he came hither; which indeed Secretary Cecil
had reason to resent, as too much trenching on his Office.

And therefore craveed leave of the King, that he might not attend, beyond his
Month, to prejudice the other Clerks, which was excused, and he kept still at
Court.

These sufficiencies of his, enabled him in these times of gaining with much
repute and direct honesty to purchase large possessions.

And now the place of Secretary was joined in two Principals, Sir Ralph Winwood
and him, and so he continued with honorable esteem until malice and revenge,
two violent passions overruling the weaker sex, concerning his Wife and
Daughter, involved him into their quarrel, the chief and only cause of his
ruin.

He had by his Wife Sons and Daughters; his eldest married unto Baron Rosse (in
right of a Grandmother) the Son of Thomas Earl of Exeter, by a former venture;
this Baron therefore and upon Lake's credit, was sent Ambassador Extraordinary
into Spain, Anno 1611. in a very gallant equipage, with hopes of his own to
continue Lieger, to save charges of transmitting any other.

In his absence, here fell out a a deadly feud, ('it is no matter for what)
between the Lady Lake and her Daughters Stepmother the Countess of Exeter,
which was particularly described in a Letter, and sent from England to me at
Madrid in Spain, and because of my near relations in that Ambassie, I showed
the same to my Lord Ambassador.

A youthful Widow this Countess had been and virtuous, the relict of Sir
Thomas Smith Clerk of the Council, and Register of the Parliament; and so she
became Bedfellow to this aged, gouty, diseased, but noble Earl, and that
preferment had made her subject to envy and malice.

Home comes the Lord Rosse from his Ambassie, when he fell into some neglect of
his Wife and her kindred, upon refusing to increase allowance to her
senttlement of Jointure, which was promised to be completed at his Return.

Not long he stays in England, but away he gets into Italy, turned a professed
Roman Catholic, being cozened into that Religion here by his public confident
Gondamore.

In this his last absence, never to return, the Mother and Daughter accuse the
Countess of former incontinency with the Lord Rosse, whilst he was here, and
that therefore upon his Wifes discovery, he was fled from hence and from her
Marriage Bed, with other devised Calumnies, by several Designs and
Contrivement, to have impoysoned the Mother and Daughter.

This quarrel blazened at Court, to the Kings ear, who as privately as could
be, singly examines each party. The Countess with tears and imprecations
professes her innocence; which to oppose, the Mother and Daughter counterfeit
her hand to a whole sheet of paper; wherein they make her with much contrition
to acknowledge her self guilty, craves pardon for attempting to impoyson them,
and desires friendship for ever with them all.

The King gets fight of this, as in favor to them, and demands the time,
place, and occasion, when this should be writ? They tell him, that all the
parties met in a Visit at Wimbleton, (the Earl of Exeter's house) where in
dispute of their differences she confessed her guilt, desirous of absolution
and friendship, consents to set down all under her own hand, which presently
she writ at the Window, in the upper end of the great Chamber at Wimbleton, in
presence of the Mother and Daughter, the Lord Rosse, and one Diego a Spaniard,
his con^iding Servant.

But now they being gone, and at Rome, the King forthwith sends Master Dendy
(one of his Sergeants at Arms, sometime a Domestic of the Earl of Exeter, an
honest and worthy Gentleman) post to Rome, who speedily returns with Rosse and
Diego's hands, and other Testimonials, That all the said accusation,
confession, suspicions and Papers concerning the Countess, were notorious false
and scandalous, and confirm it by receiving their Eucharist, in assurance of
her honor and his innocence.

Besides several Letters of her hand, compared with this writing, concluded it
counterfeit.

Then the King tells the Mother and Daughter, that this writing being denied by
her, their testimonies as parties would not prevail, without additional witness.

They then adjoyn one Sarah Wharton their Chamberess, who they affirm, stood
behind the Hangings, at the entrance of the Room, and heard the Countess read
over what she had writ. And to this she swears before the King.

But after a Hunting at New Park, the King entertained at Wimbleton, and in
that Room, he observes the great distance from the Window to the lower end, and
placing himself behind the Hanging, (and so other Lords in turn) they could
not hear a loud voice from the Window; besides the Hangings wanted two foot of
the ground, and might discover the Woman if hidden behind. The King saying,
Oaths cannot deceive my sight. And the Hangings had not been removed that Room
in thirty years before.

Nay, more than all these, the Mother and Daughter counterfeit a Confession in
writing of one Luke Hotton, that for forty pounds the Countess should hire him
to poison them, which man, with wonderful providence was found out, and
privately denies it to the King.

And thus prepared, the King sends for Lake, whom in truth he valued, tells him
the danger to imbarque himself in this quarrel, advising him to leave them to
the Law, (being ready for a Star Chamber business.)

He humbly thanked his Majesty, but could not refuse to be a Father and a
Husband, and so puts his Name with theirs in a Cross^Bill, which at the Hearing
took up five several Days, the King sitting in Iudgm^nt. But the former
Testimonies and some private confessions of the Lady Rosse, and Sarah Wharton,
which the King kept in secret, made the Cause for some Days of Trial, appear
doubtful to the Court, until the Kings discovery, which concluded the
Sentence, pronounced upon several Censures, Lake and his Lady fined ten
thousand pounds to the King, Anno 1617.
five thousand pounds to the Countess, fifty pounds to Hutton, Sarah Wharton to
be whipped at a Carts-tail about the streets, and to do Penance at St. Martin's
Church. The Lady Rosse for confessing the truth and Plot, in the midst of the
Trial, was pardoned by the most voices, from penal Sentence.

The King (I remember) compared their Crimes to the first Plot of the first sin
in Paradise, the Lady to the Serpent, her Daughter to Eve, and Sir Thomas to
poor Adam, whole love to his Wife (the old sin of our Father) had beguiled him;
I am sure he paid for all, which as he told me, cost him thirty thousand
pounds, the loss of his Master's favor, and Offices of honor and gain; but
truly, with much pity and compassion at Court, he being held an honest man.

Discontent among the Roman Prelates put the Ach-bishop of Spalato, Mark
Antonio de Dominis, Bishop of Spalato com^s into Englan^, flies back again and
(...) miserable.
to seek his peace against that Sea, by sundry overtures unto several Princes
in Italy, and otherwhere, Spanish and French; at last, he becomes tainted with
some opinions heretical to them, which either he believed, or took up such
Tenants for the present time, to prepare him a fitter Pros^lyte hereafter: and
finding no safe footing from the fury of the Pope and Conclave, he steals over
into England, and to please the King, pretends Conversion by his Majesty's
Works of Controversy, and quarrels with Bellarmine; however, it was though fit
to bid him welcome, and to prefer him to a Deanary of Windsor, and for better
support, with the Mastership of the Savoy.

This vexed Count Gondomore, the Spanish Lieger, who intending to tempt him, (as
the Devil does his creatures) with a bosom sin, that which they love, had
intelligence of his innate disposition to avarice, with this he tampers afar
off, and with leave of his Master, invites him to turn again, from this so mean
allowance, and take preferment in the Conclave, to be Spain's Pensioner there,
(as almost all are) with this assurance of the Cardinal's Cap, he was cozened
into the Court of Inquisition, and so to the Gaol, where he ended his days with
grief, and died a Protestant Professor, in malice to the Papist, or rather of
no Religion.

The late sudden Murder aforesaid of Henry 4. Marquess D' Ancre murdered in
France.
of France, left the Sovereignty to Lewis his Son, and his minority to be
supported by his Mothers Regency, and she in miscarriage, through too much
affection to her Favorite the Marquis D' Ancre (a mechanical Florentine, her
Countreyman) occasioned the Princes of the Blood to seek their freedom by
force, which lasted not long, after their several imprisonments; for the
quarrel rising high, and D' Ancre busied abroad, they plotted their business by
a bold Captain of the Gens d' Arms, De Vitry, and effected upon D' Ancre's
person with a single Pistol, at the instant, when he returned to the Palace,
the Loure in Paris, and his Corpse had no other Balm for their Burial than his
own blood, being dragged about the City by the Peoples rage, till the
dis-jointed limbs were left for Ravens.

King Lewis was young, and engaged before in his Mothers quarrel, but this
accident taking fire, as the Princes would have it, soon won their weak
Sovereign on their party, and in policy perforce, he owned the Action, as the
most convenient Justice, for quieting the Differences, and so the Government
taking hold on this occasion, turned to the other side, and had the better of
the Queens Faction, she being afterward led up and down the King's Army under
oversight, as a Prisoner, but showed to the People as if reconciled to her Son,
the chief Mover, having paid the account upon the execution of his person.

This for the present, which lasted by fits, Q. Mother flies out of France.
for some years, as her Faction took breath, until that excellent Engeneer of
State Policy, Cardinal Richelieu had put her into a jealousy of her own safety
at home, and so opened a Gap, whereby (as in stealth) she might get loose out
of the Kingdom: but Sovereigns leaving their Subjects are seldom sent for
again, and after much turmoil and tampering with several States, and Italian
tricks, she ended her days very poor in Germany in the City of Collen.

And Richelieu succesfull in all his policies, settled that Nation to his
death, in their due submission to Sovereignty, which broke out afterward Anno
1652. into like examples of former miseries.

The blessings of Peace and Plenty enthroning this King, The King's journey
into Scotland.
resolved him for a leasurely Expedition into Scotland, in the opening of the
last Spring, which was not performed this Summer season, partly to make good
his promise, when he took leave of his native Country, to give them a Visit
after some time of settlement in his new Inheritance. And in some policy it was
hastened now, to be out of the way of address from the Emissaries of the
French, (that unstable State) now in the height of diffension, whilst King
James and his Court were thus refreshed, from affairs and business here, in as
much prudence and splendor as the consideration of this Journey was necessary
to the Design; Hist. Gr. Br. p. 104.
which our Historian (with his Pasquil observations) [spends in ridiculous
Riot.]

But it was indeed, by his presence, to warm those cold Countries with the
beams of Majesty, and with his precepts to warn that rebellious Nation of their
feuds by example of their old French friends fresh miseries; to settle the
spirits of the factious Presbytery, in obedience to Episcopal Hierarchy; to
pass some Bills and Acts of Parliament; to regulate the exacting powers of some
Officers in trust; to give grace to the humble, and content to all.

And forthwith a Proclamation was advised in Scotland, and there published, of
the Kings Solomon- like instinct, to visit that Kingdom, and therein gave them
assurance, not to alter the Civil and Ecclesiastical Estate, but by reforming
abuses in Church and Commonwealth, and advised them to all accommodations to
bid him and his welcome.

These directions were accompanied with others of State, and amongst them for
repairing and orderly adorning his Chapel: and Officers sent out of England
with necessaries, and some Portraits and Pictures of the Apostles carved, for
the Pews and Stalls; but the People exclame at such sights, That Images were to
be set up; The Organs were come before, and after comes Mass.

The King was angry at their ignorance, and sent them word to distinguish
betwixt Pictures intended for Ornament and Decoration, and Images erected for
Worship and Adoration. Resembling such men to the Constable of Castile, who
being to swear the Peace concluded with Spain, and to be performed in the Kings
Chapel, where some Anthems were to be sung, desired, that Gods Name might not
be used therein, otherwise, he would be content with any thing else. So the
Scots Kirk can endure Dogs, Bears, and Bulls, nay, Devils dressings, to be
figured in Churches, but not the Patriarchs nor Apostles.

He come to Berwick in May, and there it was advised to prorogue the Parliament
to June 13. which gave the King time to progress through the Country, making
his entry in the special Burghs and Towns after the most magnificent manner,
and welcomed with all the expressions of cost and glory, that ever that poor
Nation had been put unto, that some effects might seem to make good the Scots
Rants of their good Country.

And because it has been since surmized that nothing was acted there, in order
to the service of that Nation; we shall trouble the Reader with some
particulars.

The King enters their Parliament, The Kings Speech in the Parliament of
Scotland.
with Rules for establishing Religion and Justice, and a regard to the
Ministers of both; for notwithstanding the many years Profession of
Reformation, numbers of Churches remained unplanted, and those that were,
wanted maintenance; advising that Commissioners might regulate a local stipend
to each Minister.

He remembered them of his continual care and pains heretofore and since, for
placing Justices and Constables, to preserve the Peace, and execute Laws, which
he said had been neglected by some, by the small regard showed unto them from
others of higher rank. But as he would have them know, such Officers to be of
honorable esteem, so none could deserve better at his hands than those that
countenanced them; and those others, Enemies to the Crown and quiet of the
Kingdom.

That he had long endeavored to civilize men from their barbarous customs,
having made some progress, by remove of the persons, or by extinct of their
Feuds, and in place thereof established Civility and Justice, and to his lives
end, he would never leave to do his best endeavors, until he might say of
Scotland, as one of the Emperors said of Rome, Inveni lateritiam, relinquo
marmoream. Indeed the Country affords more of Stone than Tile-shard.

They come to vote Commissioners upon the Articles of Religion, whom the King
commends, they refuse; and evermore Officers of State are suspected partial for
the King, and therefore they admit but of three, the Chancellor, Treasurer,
and Clerk of the Rolls.

They begin with the chiefest Article, First Article for the Kings Prerogative.
That what soever should be concluded by the King and the Bishops in matters of
external policy, should be an Ecclesiastical Law. Not that the King was against
the advice and assistance of a competent number of the grave and learned
Ministers, but to be overruled (said he) as in your former General Assemblies,
I shall never agree. The Bishops must rule the Ministers, and the King govern
both in matters indifferent, and not repugnant to Gods Word, and so that
Ariicle was formed and passe^.

Hereupon the Ministers mutiny, that their Discipline should be formed to all
the Ceremonies of England; and Struthers in his next Sermon condemning all
those Rites, prayed God to save Scotland from the same sin. And thus set on
they frame a Protestation to the King in Parliament.

First, against that Article, and therein if remedy be not provided, they shall
be forced to other effects, For freedom of their Church, and discharge of their
Consciences.

Their Reasons they reduce into Arguments.

1. Their Reformation, That the purity in Doctrine, Sacraments, Discipline and
Order thereof, has been acknowledged rather as a Pattern to be followed by all
Reformed Churches of Europe, than now to be put to seek it from such as never
attained to it.

2. That their General Assemblies formerly established to constitute and make
Canons will be utterly overthrown.

That hitherto their Church, nearest the divine and Apostolical Institution,
and so has lived long without Schism and rent, may now by introducing
Novelties be miserably overthrown.

That his Majesty's gracious assurance by his Letters this last Winter against
all alteration of Religion, and so has been intimated in Pulpits, when Rumors
were dispersed of intended conformity with England.

These they pray may be sufficient to warn the King and Parliament, not to
oppress their poor Church, and give grief to millions of men, that otherwise
would rejoice at his Majesty's presence. And so they resolve, that rather than
submit, they are prepared to incur censure, and to oppose.

This Protestation they commit to the most mad-headed man amongst them, one
Hewet; but some of the wiser sort, fearing the success, desire the Archbishop
of St: Andrews to suppress it.

He meeting Hewet, desires to peruse it, and blaming the man, keeps the
Writing, the other seizes the Paper, and thus striving in the next Room, the
King hastily comes out, and sternly fronts the Fellow, who falls down of his
knees, and craves pardon for the Protestation, professing never more to meddle
therein.

However, the King wisely suspecting some others of the same Frenzy, for the
present commanded that Article of the Kings Crown-prerogative not to be read,
till the policy of a fitter time; the rest of them being read and concluded,
the King takes his leave and loving farewell.

But the Bishops had warning to summon some principal Ministers, and with them
to meet him at St. Andrews, 10. of July, where the King greets them.

How great my care has been for the Church ( says he) since I had authority
and power to perform it, Five Articl^s proposed by the King.
your consciences cannot but confess; I need not tell you. I seek no thanks,
God knows my heart, for true worship of him, and decent order in the Church;
whilst I resolved of this Journey to visit you. I gave you warning to insert
some Articles into your Acts of the Church, those were anniversary
commemorations of Christ's blessings to man, as his Nativity, Passion,
Resurrection, Ascension and Descent of the Spirit; another, for private use of
both Sacraments; a third, for reverend administration of the Communion; and a
fourth, for catechizing and confirming children by Bishops. I was answered,
that they had not been moved in any of the Churches Assembly, and so I was
silent. And lately desiring but my Prerogative to be declared, in making
Ecclesiastical Laws, ye mutined, and protested against me. But I pass all,
amongst many other wrongs frequent from you.

The Errand I have now, is to know your Arguments, why the same ought not to be
granted? Reason shall ever guide me; and if my Demands are so, just, and
religious too, I will not be refused nor resisted. And with that browing upon
them with a full eye, majestical and stern, They all fell down on their knees.

The King went on, It is a power innate, a princely special Prerogative, which
Christian Kings have, to order and dispose external things in the outward
policy of the Church, as We with our Bishops advice shall think ^it. And Sirs,
( said he) for your approving or disproving, deeceive not your selves, Me ye
shall not. I will have my Reason not opposed.

They were all become new men, humbly besought they might confer, and so return
an uniform Answer, which in two hours space produces a Retition for a General
Assembly, wherein all his Majesty's Articles being proponed, Produces a
Petition.
they might with common consent be received. I, says the King, but what
assurance have I of their consenting? They protested, that they saw no reason
to the contrary.

But if it be otherwise, and your reason now, be none of theirs then, the
Articles refused, my difficulty the more; and when I shall hereafter put my own
Authority in use, I shall be pulpited, a Tyrant, Persecutour. Ye were wont so
to do.

All crying out, That none durst be so mad.

Yet experience tells me, ( says he) that it has been so; therefore unless I
be sure, I shall not grant your Assembly.

They craved the Archbishop of St: Andrews to answer for them: but he refused,
having been formerly deceived. At length they procured leave to assemble in
November next at St: Andrews.

Simson that subscribed to the Protestation, writes to his Brethren those
Articles, which he calls Tricas Anglicanas, the Letter-carrier was Catherwood,
who for his insolency to the Kings face, was committed, and after banished; and
Simson sent to Edinburgh Castle, where he lay till December.

And so the King returns to England, The King returns.
by the West parts; and at Dunfres had his farewell Sermon by the Bishop of
Galloway, which made the hearers heavy at their hearts.

The King gone home, the Assembly met, but willingly would have delayed their
Conclusion of the five Articles, till they might inform their Flocks of the
equity of them, and so they went away: which the King considers as an high
contempt, and breach of their promise, and commands the Bishops of St: Andrews
and of Glascow, precisely in their own persons to keep Christmas day next,
preaching of Texts according to the Time, and to discharge all Modification,
(advance) of stipends to any Minister for a year, unless only to such as have
submitted to the Articles, and in affection to the Kings service.

The Ministers thus curbed, and the Northern men being come up to Edinburgh for
their stipends, complain of their Brethren, their pride and insolency,
supplicate the Bishops to intercede and mitigate his Majesty's displeasure, and
so they did, and procured Letters from the King, for allowance of their
stipends.

And Mr. Simson was now released, Simson released.
professing his hearty reluctance for opposing his Majesty, setting his hand to
a Supplication which himself framed, with all submission. But his Brethren, not
liking any submission, but to their Assemblies or Synods, (his, being to the
Council) he sets out an Apologetick, glossing upon each word of his Confession,
and concludes, That whatever frailty or weakness had befallen him heretofore,
he hoped now to be like Peter, Qui ore negavit, and cord confessus est, and
never to betray the Lords cause with Judas.

The Jesuits do even so, fast and loose; neither tongue, hearts nor hands can
bind them, against their mental secret purposes. And yet there being some
hope, that matters might amend for the Church, and their frequent Synods
preparing for their better obedience; the Bishops procured the Kings consent to
another General Assembly to be at Perth, in August the next year.

This royal Progress of pleasure into Scotland and back again, gave leisure to
the King, and advantage to all Attendants, for preferment of their persons, or
other satisfaction for their services, by the freedom of their Masters bounty,
both to Scots and English.

Especially, to our new Favorite, now of two years growth in the Kings
affection. This man George Villiers G Villiers ^ Favorite, Duke of Buckingham
his story, De^cent.
of an ancient Family in Leicestershire, and bears (...). on a cross Gu. five
Escalops Or. His father Sir George Villiers begat him 1592. upon a second
venture Mary Beaumont, of noble extraction, whom for her beauty and goodness, he
married. By his first he had but one Son, rising no higher in honor than
Knight and Baronet, his disposition not court-like, and therefore enjoying
perhaps the greater greatness, self-fruition; yet in time he had preferment to
the Government of Ulster Province in Ireland. The other Sons were three, and in
order of Birth, but not in Preferment, John was Viscount Purbech, George Duke
of Buckingham, and Christopher Earl of Anglesey, and one Daughter Susan
Countess of Denbigh.

We are told, [that he came over by chance from his French Travels, Court and
Chapter K. James,
and sought his Preferment in Marriage with any body, but mist of a Match for
want of an hundred Marks] and so pieces him for the Court, (like the story of
Demetas Caparisons) borrowing of each one by piecemeal, to put him forward for
the Kings Favorite.

But the truth is thus, His Mother a Widow, was afterward married unto Sir
Thomas Compton, whose Brother the Lord Compton by chance falling upon a
wonderful Match for matchless wealth with the Daughter and Heir of Sir John
Spencer, Alderman of London, and her Father then lately dead, this Lord was
Master of all, which was of more than credible, and so might be enabled
bountifully to set up a Kinsman, without [ other help or Alms of the Parish.]

It was plotted long before, and Villiers sent for, to the same purpose, by
practice of some English Lords, to balance with the Scots, who by the help of
the last Favorite Somerset, and others of great affection with the King, had
the better of the poor English.

There had been a private Intertainment of a Supper at Baynards Castle by the
family of Herbert, Hertford and Bedford, and some others; by the way in Fleet
street, hung out Somersets picture at a Painters stall; which one of the Lords
envying bad his footboy fling dirt on the face, which he did; and gave me
occasion to ask my companion, upon what score that was done? He told me, this
meeting would discover. And truly I waited near and opportune, and so was
acquainted with the Design, to bring in Villiers, who was entered before.

He had need to be well backed, against enough that envyed his neerness, and
aimed by any affront to discountenance him, until he made them know that his
courage over mastered his sweetness. For having bought the place of Cup Bearer
to the King, and taking the upper end of the Board at dinner before some other
Waiter, which not his due, was told of it, and so removed; nor was it done with
overmuch kindness; for indeed the other was Somersets creature, who urging a
second incivility, Villiers gave him a Box on the Ear. For which the custom of
Court condemned him to have his hand cut off. And which Somerset, as then
Chamberlain, ought to prosecute the Execution, which he did. And here the Kings
pardon, without any satisfaction to the other party, made him suspected, a
budding Favorite. Who was indeed raised, with, or by Somersets ruin, so drew
envy, from him as his competitor, and from others his Friends compartners in
his fall, being then as one cast out of the passions of the King.

We shall find him come up degrees, and to stand firm in favor, to the death
of this King, and his second Master till his assassination.

The King minding to show his own power to raise him from nothing, and his will
to advance him for nothing, the others study therefore was the Kings
inclination, and so to leave on him, whose affection was sufficient to hold up
his head. He waited hard and close, his first years rising; but having removed
all the whole Line of Somersets lincks, (his Wives interests the Howards) being
boldly fixed in his Masters favor; he would adventure to take leave, but not
too long, to be absent. And so by degrees inured the King from his custom of
overtyring his Favorites, and at last, fortifies himself, by raising outworks
if in case of assault; His own marriage with an heir, the daughter of the Earl
of Rutland, rich and Honorable, twisting himself and his issue by
intermariages with the best and most noble.

For indeed the brouse boughs cut down, or removed to plain the stem. Our
favorite appears, like a proper Palm, besides the discerning spirit of the
King, who first cherished him, through his innate virtue, that surprised all
men. Henceforth preserments Villiers sudden great pre^erments.
came thick upon him; for the next Saint Georges day after his initiation,
brought him Knight Bachelour, and Gentleman of the Bedchamber. At new years
time Master of the Horse, and Knight of the Garter, and that Summer in August
1616. Baron of Whaddon, and Viscount Villiers; the beginning of next year, Earl
of Buckingham, and privy Counselor, and this Summer in Scotland, sworn there
also Counselor of that State. At Christmas after (that favors might be
recorded, Acts of time, and of affection too) he was created Marquess
Buckingham and Admiral of England, chief Justice in Air, Master of the Kings
Bench Office, and Steward of Westminster (places of profit) and Constable of
Windsor Castle. The largest was Duke of Buckingham sent unto him by Patent into
Spain, and last of all Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports. And so have we sommoned
him at once, with all these Titles, which came to him in time heretofore and
after.

These accumilations might no doubt astonish the Kitchen stuff conceit of Sir
A. W. Benefits imbroydered without the least vacancy or emptiness, Court and
Character of King James pa.
to any others workmanship. The hearts of Princes once dilated with affection,
cannot be satiable in the exercise of any narrow bounty, or little affection,
choice and love, begets the Gift, which act becomes fomented, even to be in
Love, with their own giving, and so to excess.

And thus have we put together this great Man, who was pieced up by degrees and
time.

He had many kindred, for his Family was ancient: Heraldry might blaze as large
fields of his Pedigree as need concern any subject to prove; were a Man
preferred to pensil his life, which I take boldness but to touch with shadows.

These were dispersed by time, into several Matches, with the Gentry, and what
strange or new device was it in him to raise them, that were near in blood (by
Noble and worthy) ways as he did? He made his two Brothers Peers; his Mother
and Sister Countesses, the one by Patent, the other by Marriage, the rest of the
kindred by his countenance, got means to live like their Births being a race
handsome and beautiful; Ime^n the females, descending of Villiers or Beaumont;
either matched with Peers or with the Sons and heirs of Earls, or with Knights
of plentiful condition; for he did not much strengthen his subsistence in
Court, but stood there on his own feet; the most of his Allies rather leaned on
him, than he sholdered up by any of them. And thus much, as a Preface to the
History of him, hereafter during this Kings reign; wherein his actions are
successively remembered.

But concerning his Mother, made a Countess. There are in England three sorts
of honorable women; 3 sorts of Noble women.
by Creation, Descent, or Marriage.

1. H. 8. created Ann Bullen Marchiones of Pembroke, before he married her. So
was Susan Widow, the Sole Daughter of the Baron of Abergaveny, created Baroness
de le Spencer, Cambden 63. 6. So also was the Lady Compton, wife of Sir Thomas
Compton, brother to the Lord Compton, made Countess of Buckingham, with the sea
of twenty pound per annum, 18. Iac. And also the Lady Finch a Widow, created
Viscountess of Maidstone, 21. Iacobi.

2. Noble women by descent, or to whom dignities descend as heirs, are said to
be honorable by Tenure; or those Heirs whose Ancestors were seized of an
estate descendable to them in their titles of Dukedom, Earldome, or Baronies,
or Heirs to Ancestors summoned to the Parliament.

3. And lastly, Noble Women are these, married to a Lord or Peer of the Realm,
though themselves, but in the State of Gentry.

Knights Wives are not of the Nobility. They are styled Ladies by the courtesy
of England, but not in Courts of Judicature.

So much for Noble Women.

In the Kings return out of Scotland, Occasion of the allhwance of harmless
pastimes.
the people took occasion to complain in common, and to petition in particular,
That the freedom of Servants and Laborers, was extremely enslaved by their
Masters pretended zeal and sanction against Idolizing (as was pretended) of
such days as ancient custom from General Councils, and the Church of England
reformed, even to that time* had appointed to be kept Holy. Whereby after the
^olemnizing of Divine service, the Servants and Workmen, were not usual to
discompany from their accustomed moderate Pastimes; such as the most rigid
(heretofore) could not justly but admit.

The King, not so over-affected to his own sports, that the sense of the
peoples sufferings, might take advantage by his Example, and so of Liberty in
the like (for much of his most serious affairs, were shadowed from the vulgar,
nay from the observing Politicque, by his own public Pastimes.)

But in truth it came to be a business of consequence, to consider, how the
intemperate zeal of our then rigid Reformers, (to countenance their own design
of deforming) struck at higher powers, through the peoples sides, in many
matters, so in this also.

For at first these pure conceited Men, quarrelled at the name of the Holy
seventh day, called then, as of old, Sunday, which they would have named
Sabbath, and thereafter would have it observed levitically, so strickt, as not
to gather sticks.

This being discussed in some Counties, the people forbore their Recreations.
Then the Reformers took the like exceptions against the peoples lawful
pleasures on Saints and Holy Days, and at last against all sports and public
Pastimes, exercises innocent and harmless, such were Leaping, Dancing, Running,
or any Mastery for the Gaol or Prize, May Pole, or Church-ale, as debauched
Idols.

In some of these Pastimes several Counties excelled, and to entertain
community with their Mirth, the Court Progresses, took delight to judge of
their wagers, in their journey to Scotland, which the people observing, took
occasion to themselves to petition the King in his return for freedom, and
leave to be merry.

And thus by this means, this Man's [ Monstrum Horrendum; the Church-mans
Maskarado] was begotten, and brought to allowance by command, in print to
justify the people in their lawful pleasures, though upon the Sunday after
service.

This year died Edw. Talbot, the 8. Earl of Shrewsbury, The death of Talbot E.
of Shrewsbury.
without issue; and therefore it descended upon George Talbot son of John Talbot
of Grafton, Esquire by Katherine his wife, Daughter of Sir William Peter's, heir
male of Sir Gilbert Talbot of Grafton second Son of John Lord Talbot, second
Earls of Shrewsbury, after the death of Gilbert and Edward Earls of Shrewsbury
without issue male, who was this next year 1618. admitted by King James the
ninth Earl.

But this man dying also without issue, the inheritance descended upon the
children of John Talbot, brother to this George; which John dyed and left issue
John now the eleventh Earl, 1652. He bears Gules, a Lion rampant, and a border
engraled. Or.

Sir Walter Raleigh wearied with long imprisonment, Sir Walter Raleigh rsleased
ou^ of the Tower.
and having there spent his time well in the History of the World, made his
petition more passable to the King, whose love to learning granted him, now at
last his Liberty; and not long after gave him leave to wander after a design to
the Western world, where he had been in several Climates before. The common
World wondering at this man's wit, who had a way to break Jests, though to
hazard his head again, for in a jear, he said, That his whole History had not
the like President, Of a Kings chief Prisoner to purchase freedom, and his
bosom Favorite to have the Halter; but in Scripture Mordecai and Haman;
meaning Himself and Somerset. To which he was told that the King replied, He
might die in this deceit, which he did, and Somerset saved.

But in truth, he had a reaching and roving mind from his first rise, His
voyage to Guiana.
and thereafter but a mean fortune, which he meant now to make up, out of
Adventurers purses for Gold-Mettal, from a Mine in Guiana, one of the Countries
of America; upon no other ground to win belief but a pound of the Ore which he
had from thence by the hands of Capt. Kemish his ancient Servant.

The King wondering at this man, why to hazard his future fortune upon the nice
dispute with the King of Spain, whose Territory he must invade at his own
peril of success, but yet gave him leave with his liberty, so be, that he
broke not the Kings bands of Amity, which he had strickt rules and order to
observe.

The French Lieger had been very earnest for his enlargement, French
Ambassador his Friend.
with much affection to his deserts, and some design of Policy against Spain,
wherein they two waded so far, as that the discovery came to the Kings ears
(not without intrenching (by the by) upon his Majesty's honor) and several
commissions from France, presented to him, to fit him to that purpose, wherein
he was warily watched, till it should ripen for further trial, and at the worst,
back-friends were to be put aboard, to bring him back again.

And having got Commission, His Commission
and thereupon a company of his own Countrymen they imbarque with him in a
Voyage thither, with a complete Fleet of twelve sail, and landed at St. Tomazo,
a Town of the Spaniards, killed five hundred men, sacked and burnt it; of five
of their Fleet, it may be said as of the old saying, They went up the River,
and so came down again; for the Design being the River Oremque in Guiana to
discover the Mine, at the foot of a Mountain, up in the Country they were
opposed by the Inhabitants, Spaniards and Natives, and so returned to their
company.

This expedition was grounded at the first only upon Kemish information, and
Expedition.
the Miscarriages that might happen was always cunningly resolved to light
upon him, for satisfaction of the Adventurers; To answer it to the King, his
intent was never to return; but by his own mannagement, and the obedience of
his Company, over whom he had commission of Life and Death; he dreamed of
nothing less then of a prosperous journey.

And now to frighten Kemish, Raleigh threatens him with the Kings displeasure,
Hist. gr. Br. pa. 115.
which to avoid, says the Storian [The poor man pistols himself] and so no
tales could be truly told.

He dead, the most minded forced their own and his return home, which he
intended any where else, and so some of their scattered ships with him, more
like a Prisoner than Commander, came safe to Kingsale in Ireland, from thence
to Plymouth, where no sooner on shore but he is taken into custody of Sir Lewis
Stukely, They return, and he in custody of Stukely
Vice Admiral of Devon, and conveyed to London, and so to the Tower, with whom
he deals for a sum of money presently delivered to him to escape with him into
France. Stukely yields to all, accompanies him by Water, where by the way to
Gravesend (the Design of Stukelyes treachery in that, and so it prospered with
him, being hanged afterward for clipping Gold) they were seized, committed to
the Tower.
and he brought into the Tower, and not many days after commanded to the
Kings-Bench-bar at Westminster before the Lord Chief Justice Mountague, where
he was questioned upon the Records of his former Arraignment at the City of
Winchester, and questioned at the K. Bench-Bar,
and in answer to that, he was asked what he had to say to his Sentence to die
like a Traitor.

His short defense was, Of being lately entrusted by the Kings commission over
the Lives of some of his Liege people; was soon replied unto, as insufficient,
and he had judgment to die the next day by the favor of the Ax; and ^xecuted.
which he said (smilingly touching it) Was a sharp Medicine, but a sound Cure
of all diseases, as it proved to him then in his Ague sit, in the Palace yard
at Westminster October. 1618.

It was indeed common discourse then that Raleigh knew of no Mine, Hist. gr.
Br. p^. 216.
nor was Kemish assured that the pretended Mine was of Gold, Discourse
co^c^rning his Design.
but that the piece of Ore, which he presented Raleigh in the Tower, was
falsified by dissolving some Gold therein, and he a better Chemist than Kemish
for that purpose. That both of them designed it so to be, thereby cozening the
world to get credit, and afterward to deceive the King to purchase his liberty.

But when Kemish came safe from the supposed Mountain, without any Mine, whom
Raleigh expected should miscarry in the way, and none but he could discover the
deceit, then was he destroyed by death, but by whose hand it may be suspected,
not by himself.

And truly these reports were more then [ a false visard to outface the truth
of his merit in that action, Hist. gr. Br. pa. 116.
and thereby to weigh down Raleighs miscarriage.]

At his death he endeavored to clear some points which he knew lay on the Deck
against him, His disloyal words of the K. undutiful language from Subjects of
Sovereigns, take deeper root than the memory of evil Deeds; so did the Marshal
Byron which cost him his head. Essex once told Queen Elizabeth, That her
conditions were as crooked as her carcass, Manebat alta mento repostum.

He said, Anno 1618.
his Accuser was a base runagate Frenchman, and perfidious, being sworn to
secrecy, yet he betrayed.

Secondly, To have had often plots with France.

He confessed, That he had been often solicited from thence, and that he
endeavored to escape thither at twice, and the last time being got as far as
Woolwich.

Thirdly, That the French Agent came often to him with Commissions from his
Master; but it was not accepted.

Much he said of these as to the public, and of more things as to private,
which he did not deny, but traversed.

So then there were other businesses of a second charge, and confederacy, which
made him liable to a new Trial; for Treason is so comprehensible, as to take in
even circumstances, and out of them to make such conclusions as the jealousy
of State shall interpret either for safety or Revenge.

But the prudence of the King would not hazard more, having sufficient upon the
old score; and because he could not in Law be judicially called to account for
his last actions, his former Attainder being the highest, and the last work of
the Law, whereby he was Civiliter Mortuus; The King was enforced (except
Attainders should become Privileges for all subsequent offenses) to execute him
upon the former.

And concerning Sir Walters recovery of Queen Anns infirmity, for which he
should beg a Boon, viz. [the re-examination of the Lord Cobham by four Earls,
and three Counsellors] It being urged by an Author in the innocence of his
cause, and ingratitude of the King; I shall answer as to my knowledge by the
relation of some Ladies of her Bedchamber, and of her Surgeons and Physicians
now living; That she was never cured of her disease, but by death that ends all
Maladies.

We are told [ That Sir Walter set out his design to the King, who discovered
it to the Spanish Lieger Gondamore, the Country, Town, Men, Ships, Ordinance,
and all, and he posted it to Spain, thence to the Indies, before that Raleigh
could get out of our River] and yet for all these tidings, supplies were not
come to defend the Town Tomaze.

We will confess that all these exceptions may be had under Sir Walters hand,
purposely so writ by him, to excuse the weakness (or wickedness) of the event.
For the truth is, the design though hatched in a corner, was published on the
house top, to purpose Contributers, otherwise he must conclude them Madmen or
Fools. Nay, I can produce under his hand and seal with a blank (for he left a
hundred) for other Adventurers to follow him, for which each one gave fifty
pounds to his Lady, and therein was set down as much as our Historian fathers
upon the King to Gondamore.

And that his own Conscience was satisfied that he deserved death before he was
brought up Prisoner from Plymouth, and so to endeavor his escape from Trial;
see but the close of his own Letter to Buckingham.

It was ( says he) that last severe Letter from the Lords for my speedy
bringing up, and the impatience of dishonor that put me in fear of my Life or
perpetual imprisonment, which animated me in my late and too late lamented
resolution to escape, if his Majesty's mercy does not pity my age, and scorn
the advantage of my guilt, if his Majesty does not make difference in offenses,
proceeding from a life-saving natural-impulsion without ill intent, and those
of an evil heart,

And if that your Lordship do not vouchsafe to become my Intercessour, whereby
your Lordship shall bind an hundred Gentlemen my kindred to honor your memory,
and bind me for all the time of my life, which you shall beg for me, to pray
for your prosperity, and to remain,

Your Lordships most humble Servant, W. Raleigh.


As to the value of that worthy Gentleman (from whose descent of blood I am no
Stranger) certainly we may yield to him as much or more then is described by
his Character, Hist. Gr. Br. p. 117.
But then those excellencies, [natural wit, better Judgment, and applausable
tongue, etc.] might in his long time of recess by imprisonment (through disuse
of men and business) become uncertain grounds to Fabric such Designs as the
natural man (not supplied with inward grace) usually aims at, and therein is
mostly deceived, such was he, his fate, and fall.

This year the King creates by Patent four Earls, Sidney Earl of Liecester, 4
Earls created for money.
Compton Earl of Northampton, Cavendish Earl of Devonshire, and Rich Earl of
Warwick.

Having paid the price, a good sum for their honors; so earnest some are, and
so ambitious of preferment, as what they cannot get by merit, they covet to
purchase with money, an infection newly crept into the distribution of honors,
not usual here with former Sovereigns.

The miserable condition of sinful man in sundry Examples of these present and
of former times, A monstrou^ murder in Cornwall.
should mind us hourly to beg of God preventing grace, least we fall into
Temptations of sin and Satan. Such have been the calamities of ages past, at
present are, and will be to come; Stories of Theft, Rapin^, Murders, and such
like.

One of wondrous note happened at Perin in Cornwall in September, a bloody and
unexampled Murder, by a Father and Mother upon their only Son, and then upon
themselves.

He had been blessed with ample possessions and fruitful issue, unhappy only in
a younger son, who taking liberty from his Fathers bounty, and with a crew of
like condition, that wearied on Land, they went roving to Sea, and in a small
Vessel Southward, took boot from all whom they could Master, and so increasing
force and wealth, ventured on a Turks Man in the Streights; but by mischance
their own Powder fired themselves, and our Gallant trusting to his skilful
swimming, got shore upon Rhodes, with the best of his Jewels about him; where
offering some to sale to a Jew, who knew them to be the Governors of Algier,
he was apprehended, and as a Pyrate sentenced to the Galleys among other
Christians, whose miserable slavery made them all studious of freedom, and with
wit and valor took opportunity and means to murder some Officers, got aboard
of an English Ship, and came safe to London; where his Misery and some skill
made him Servant to a Surgeon, and sudden preferment to the East Indies. There,
by this means he got money, with which returning back, he designed himself for
his Native County Cornwall. And in a small Ship from London, sailing to the
West was cast away upon that coast. But his excellent skill in swimming, and
former fate too boot, brought him safe to shore; where since his fifteen years
absence, His Fathers former fortunes much decayed, now retired him, not far off
to a Country habitation in Debt, and Danger.

His Sister, he finds married to a Mercer, a meaner Match than her Birth
promised. To her at first he appears a poor Stranger, but in private reveals
himself, and with all what Jewels and Gold he had concealed in a Bow-case
about him. And concluded that the next day he intended to appear to his
Parents, and to keep his disguise till she and her Husband should meet, and
make their common joy complete.

Being come to his Parents, his humble behavior, suitable to his Suit of
Cloths, melted the old couple to so much compassion, as to give him covering
from the cold season, under their outward Roof, and by degrees, his traveling
Tales told witn passion to the aged people made him their Guest, so long by the
Kitchen fire, that the Husband took leave and went to bed. And soon after his
true Stories working compassion in the Weaker Vessel, she wept and so did he;
But compassionate of her tears, he comforted her with a piece of Gold, which
gave assurance that he deserved a Lodging, to which she brought him; and being
in Bed showed her his Girdled wealth, which he said was sufficient to relieve
her husbands wants, and to spare for himself, and being very weary, fell fast
asleep.

The wise tempted with the Golden Bait of what she had, and eager of enjoying
all, awaked her hu^band with this News, and her contrivance what to do; and
though with horrid apprehension he often refused, yet her pewling fondness ( Eves
Enchantments) moved him to consent, and rise to be Master of all, and both of
them to murder the man, which instantly they did; covering the corpse under the
Cloths till opportunity ^o convey it out of the way.

The early Morning hastens the Sister to her Fathers house, where she with
signs of Joy, enquires for a Saylor that should lodge there the last night; the
Parents slightly denied to have seen any such, until she told them that he was
her Brother, her lost Brother; by that assured scar upon his Arm cut with a
Sword in his youth she knew him, and were all resolved this morning to meet
there and be merry.

The Father hastily runs up, finds the Mark, and with horrid regret of this
monstrous Murder of his own Son, with the same Knife cut his own throat.

The Wife went up to consult with him, where in a most strange manner,
beholding them both in blood, wild and aghast, with the Instrument at hand,
readily rips up her own belly till the Guts tumbled out.

The Daughter, doubting the delay of their absence, searches for them all, whom
she found out too soon; with the sad sight of this scene, and being overcome
with horror and amaze, of this Deluge of Destruction, she sanck down and dyed;
the fatal end of that family.

The truth of which was frequently known, and stew to Court in this Guise; but
the imprinted Relation conceals their Names, in favor to some Neighbor of
Repute and Kin to that Family.

The same sense makes me therein silent also.

We have heretofore observed the Constitution of the Dutch Netherlands in
favor of Vorstius and his Heresies, Barnevelt his design fitted for Rebellion,
preferred at Leyden 1611. where he had a way of Wit and cunning to work into
the peoples dullness, led on by countenance of sundry the powerful Ministers of
the Provincial States, that now his Tenants were preached for Orthodox, By
faction of Arminianism.
and believed as Gospel, being mixed with those of Arminius, whose repute
(following his death) Vorstius took up, and for the Masters sake, were
nicknamed Arminianism, then of a dozen years growth, infecting the Reformed
Churches, almost in each Country published in print, or fetched from thence, by
taint of young Studients.

King James took care to prevent both, by burning the One, if they came hither,
and forbidding the Other not to go thither.

Peace and Plenty with them bred up these Schisms into as many factions, the
old way to work designs and changes in State, both of the Gown and of the
Sword. The one mightily mastered by the wisdom of Barnevelt, the other
commanded by the power of the Prince of Orange. The Prince of Orange his
Opposite.
This Barnevelt, was worthily descended, and well-bred; his travels abroad and
Counsels at home, which his great age 70 years, gave time to ripen for
excellent advice in the Magistracy and Council in the Army improved by five
Embassies abroad, and thirty two Leaguers at home.

And it is counsel to some, whether conscience or ambition overruled his last
actions; but he made himself Head of a Faction, which got the name of
Arminians; a common custom with Opposers, to color their own designs by laying
infamy, or at least scandal upon their Adversaries; and this did the Prince do
to destroy Barnevelt, for envy and fear. The other finding the pulse of the
people to beat in a high fever of that disease, was forced for the present to
tack on that side, where he was sure to have hearts and hands to keep him up,
in a desperate state, otherwise to be overwhelmed in the deluge of Destruction.

Thus in some condition to balance the Prince with assistance of several the
Provincial States, of his opinion and jealousy; that if the power of the
Prince, Generalissimo of their Armies, were not limited, his greatness would
ere long increase without coutroul. And therefore by way of Counsel (for
pretended good of the Commonwealth) they did Confederate to leavy new
companies, far from view or suspicion of the Prince, whom Barnevelt kept close
to business of the public Council, with the States General; And so was it not
discovered until Midsomer, But then perfectly understood. The Prince in secret
with his Kinsman Count Ernest, and the best of his Confidents, leaves the Court
at Hague, gives Intelligence of his Design to Colonel Ogle Commander of the
Garrison at Utrecht (the place of the others greatest strength) who on the
sudden receives them in, surprise the Town and that State, in close Council.
And at hand had the Garrisons of Arnhem, and others to master that part, and so
other places of force, whom he suspected had favor with Barnevelts faction.

The snccess of this sudden expedition gave such authority to the Prince. that
being returned in Martial manner, he seized Barnevelt, Grotius, Hogenbert, and
other Confederates at Hague, and committed them to prison, upon pretense of
Treason; his power with the Army and interest with the States might do this and
more.

Not long after Lydenburgh, Governor of Utrecht imprisoned, stabs himself to
the death with his Trencher-knife; being assured that no innocence would
prevail against force and malice: Yet Hogenbert and Grotius had sentence of
miserable mercy, in perpetual imprisonment; the last of them got loose, being
conveyed out in a Chest, which his beloved wife plotted for his escape.

Barnevelt had friends with the State, and a strong faction with the people,
and though his Sentence pronounced him to the Scaffold, yet it lasted a long
Dispute, ere they brought him to the Block, which was not effected till May the
next year. His Sentence indeed made his Crimes capital, as Author and Accessory
of all former distempers in State, sum'd up to the height, and sufficient to
hang a thousand.

The multitude of Believers begin to murmur; to appease them and prevent
muteny, a National Synod was held at Dort, accompanied with sundry able Divines
of several Reformed Churches. King James in principal sent thither, Doctor
George Carlton Bishop of Landaff, Doctor Joseph Hall then Dean of Worcester,
Doctor John Davenport Professor Regius in the University of Cambridge, and
Master of Queens College there, Doctor Samuel Ward, Regent of Sidney College in
Cambridge, and Doctor Balcanqual a Scottish man (in particular to give honor to
that Nation.) But in truth, and in esteem they were all of them, (and so other
Foreign Divines of this Assembly) men of incomparable Learning in the Mystery
of Religion; but where appeared no Opponents, Dort Synod resolves against
Arm^nianism.
the Dispute found the less Difficulty, and their Conclusions for the present
silenced the Pulpits.

Yet private men took pains to search the Distinction. And as Opinion (the rule
of Conscience) binds every one, so from thence and since Arminianism has its
increase. The Divines of England, not being obliged to their opinions at Dort.

For first, This Synod was Foreign and National, and therefore as a Synod could
not bind us in England, unless it had been ratified, and imposed by Public
Authority here at Home.

Secondly, It was not an Episcopal Synod, neither was any Bishop President of
it, or actor in it (quatenus Episcopus) and therefore it was rather an Assembly
of ptivate Divines than an Ecclesiastical Synod, according to the rules of
ancient Ecclesiastical Discipline.

Thirdly, Our Divines concur not absolutely in Judgment with the Netherlands
in all their Synodical Conclusions.

For concerning that Article of Redemption, they write page 204. De mortis
Christi pretiocissimo merito, it a Statuimus, ut nec primitivae, etc.

The reverend Divines of Great Britain in these words deliver four things.

1. That they accord with the primitive Church touching the Article of
Universal Redemption. 2. That the promises of the Gospel ought to be proposed
universally to all men. 3. That whatsoever is offered or promised in the name
of Christ, to any person in the Church, is truly intended by God to be given
unto them, in such sort as his Word and Promises do outwardly sound. 4. It is
consequent upon the former, that the work of Redemption in respect of Christ
his Oblation and intention therein is common to all mankind, although many by
reason of their impediments do not actually receive them.
Now this resolution of Our Divines accords with the Articles and Doctrine of
the Church of England, but none of the Foreign Divines of that Synod were of
the same opinion, for they restrain this Redemption of Christ both in
application and Gods intentional offer merely and only to the Elect.

The Belgicke Confession is wholly confirmed by the Synod of Dort, as appears
in the Book of the Synod page 329. But the 30, 31, and 32. Articles of this
Confession teach, That the Presbyterian Discipline is of Divine institution;
and that all Ministers have equal Authority and Jurisdiction, and consequently
condemn Episcopal Government, and the Ecclesiastical Policy of Our, and all
other Churches, which embrace not Calvin's Plate-form of Lay Elders.

The ancient custom of convocating Synods, or meeting of Divines for comp^sing
Differences in Religion and Reformation of corrupted Discipline, Of Synods and
Councils their initiation.
was from the very four Apostles meeting at Jerusalem, concerning the Gentiles
observing Moses Law; and from that example in a Province or City, the Primitive
Bishops assembled at several times for 200 years then following.

The peace and unity of the Church in CONSTANTINE gave ease for many Churches
to communicate over the whole Empire, and was called in his time, The Holy
Synod, and not long after, The General and Ecumenical Council, though the
Empire was divided, Eastern and Western; and afterward amongst the Graecians
from the Assembly of the five Patriarchs. And in those Kingdoms from the Unity
of States obedient to the Pope in Ecclesiastical causes, which till the
fifteenth Century of years so continued quiet, unless in that of John Husse,
and Jerome of Prague, from the Doctrines of John Wickliff in England.

In the time of Richard the second King of England, who married Ann the Daughter
to Wincelaus King of Boheme. And though he had no issue by her, yet the
conversion of Boheme from Popery may not unfitly be styled the issue of her
Marriage; for they that brought her hither, carried over Wickliffs Works, anno.
1382. to John and Jerome; So then England was Grandfather of Reformation,
Boheme the Father, and Germany the Son. Their Doctrines were against the Popes
Supremacy as Antichrist, they condemned Transubstanatition. He translated the
Bible into English, and was burned in Leicestershire, the first man that
suffered the fire of English Martyrdom, at forty five years of age.

About the year 1500. appeared the first occasion* amongst the Waldenses near
the Alps; In some Cantons of Boheme, called Picards; but both of them then
rather despised than feared; their disciples were called Sub utraque, receiving
the Sacraments with the Cup and with the Bread against the Papists. But their
opinion of long time, rather amongst themselves than communicable.

In 1517. began Martyr Luther Luthers story
an Hermit Friar in Saxony; that Covent being usually employed to publish the
Popes indulgencies, he spoke against the excessive abuse of the pardons in
ninety five Conclusions at Wittenburgh, which John Thesel a Dominican opposed
in others at Frankford of Bran^enburgh, by Ecchius also and Prierius.

And so controversy increasing matter of greater importance, they were fallen to
strengthen their weak Arguments with the Popes authority, as being the chiefest
in the Church, and not able to err.

Martin proves him inferior to a General Council, which he craves as most
needful. Whereupon he was cited to Rome the next year, but in favor remitted
to Examination of the Popes Legate Cardinal Cajetan at Ausburgh in Germany; who
could not convince him, and in such policy, backed by some Princes, he appealed
from the Popes Bull to a General Council.

The same occasion of indulgence collected at Zurick provoked Zwinglius
Zwinglius
a Canon to oppose Samson a Franciscan who preached for the pardons.

These Reformers and their writings were examined and condemned by the
Universities (...) Lovain and Cullen; and the more opposing, the more
increasing; The Pope remitted the dispute unto some Cardinals, Prelates,
Divines and Canonists, and their books were condemned and burnt; And the Popes
Bull resolving it, the effect followed first at Lovain and Collen.

Luther and his Scholars did the like by the Popes Bull and Decretalls at
Wittenburgh, Exploded by the diet at Worms.
and justified it by a long Manifest to all the World. And this caused a Diet
at Worms, which examined him, and his answer moved the Elector and Others to
favor his Doctrine; but was condemned as notorious Heretical by Imperial
Edict. And by example so did the University of Paris.

Henry the eight King of England, born a second Brother, and therefore bred a
Scholar, designed for the Archbishops See of Canterbury, writ a Book against
Luther, and had his reward, and Title of Defensor fidei, though upon
consideration of Lust and Policy, turned Reformer also.

The like Dispute and Measure had the Doctrines of Zwinglius, And at the Diet
at Noremburgh.
and the rest, and so these differences increasing, did necessitate another
Diet at Norembergh, where disputes against the Reformers increased complaints
against the Courtiers of Rome, and were reduced into Centum Gravaniana, and at
the Diet at Spire as many more.

The horrid plots between the Princes and the Popes, and general distraction of
Germany, and other parts of Christendom, and by the seeds of the Reformed
Religion, Council at Trent resolvved upon.
at last to amend all, or make it worse, the Pope was forced to consent to call
a General Council at Trent.

The Elector of Saxony, and five Princes more opposing the Emperors Decrees,
and fourteen principal Cities adhearing, they protesting against it by
Manifest, were now first called Protestants, as from the Reformed Doctrine of
Luther, and the rest.

At the Diet of Ausburgh, the Protestant Princes, fifteen, and thirty Cities,
prefer their confession of faith of Luther, called from the place Augustine.
The Cities also of Zwinglius doctrine, presented their Creed, differing only
in the Eucharist, and at home were opposed by their Neighbor Roman Cities, and
quarrelled it by War; wherein Zwinglius in the head of a Company sacrificed his
life; for whom Oecolampadius a Minister of Basil, of the same Opinion dies for
Grief; and from these of the Cantons came the name of Gospellers.

The horrid troubles, discords and disputes amongst Christian Princes from the
seeds of Reformed Churches, Council of Trent began 1545.
controverted by several quarrels and Armies, and referred to several Diets,
Colloquies and Meetings in Germany. It was then at last resolved of the holy
Ecumenical Council of Trent (as the Roman Catholics call it) Opening at Trent
in December. 1545. In the time of Pope Paul the third, Charles the fifth then
Emperor, Henry the eight, King of England, and Francis the first of France,
and ended Anno 1563. Eight Bishops of Rome lived and dyed during that treaty
eighteen years.

Our Countryman Campian that apostate, writes to the Universities in that
Councils commendations.

The Synod of Trent (says he) the older it waxes the more it will flourish,
good God what variety of Nations, what choice of Bishops of the whole world,
what splendor of Kings and Commonwealths, what marrow of Theologues, what
sanctity, what weepings, what Academical ^lowers, what Languages, what
subtilties, what infinite readings, what riches of virtues, and studies, did
fill up that Majestical sacred place?

And so they amuzed the after age with counterfeit value of that Council, until
that an Italian compiled a work of the particular ordinary Acts of that
Council, wherein their practices to maintain the power of the Court of Rome,
and to hinder the Reformation of their Eripus is plainly expressed. An
excellent work written in the time of King James, and translated then into
English 1618. if there were no deceit in the Writer (as I have heard it
pretended) as that under hand he was a Protestant, and so partial.

Having now of late 1652. The effects of War from the Blazing-star.
with admiration beheld the horrid broyls and civil Tumults (these thirteen
years last past) in these Western Nations of Europe; how barbarously
Protestants oppose, and massacre each other; whilst the Jesuit Projects, hiss
at us by the ears. The Empire also, having gotten but a woeful booty by her
more than thirty years wars, heretofore weakened her self with loss of six
millions of Soldiers, besides others, men, women and children numberless. We
in Great Britain having gained no better by our Civil Wars.

The sins of Subjects hastening untimely fate, the Church delacerated, our own
Nations disjointed and dismembered in every part.

These considerations might move us to cry to Heaven for an end of such
Tragedies. The mysteries whereof, by sundry writers take rise from the fearful
blazing Star, which appeared this year 1618.

Longamontanus and Doctor Bambridge say, That this Comet appeared but twenty
eight days, for it was not observed in Denmark, nor in London before the
eighteenth or one and twentieth days of November.

But Puteanus observed it the eleventh day, and so appeared thirty seven days;
foreshewing that first the more Northern parts of Europe, then Great Britain
afterward, should feel the smart for thirty seven years; even from 1618. until
1656. And not only these Nations, but the effects were to end upon all Europe;
and why? mary because they neglect the downfall of Antichrist, ruin of Rome,
destruction of the Order of Jesuits, and State of Papistry; to make way for (I
know not whose) fifth Monarchy, the Lion of the North.

The matter of these Comets is variously described, being (some say) composed
of wind and lightning; hot and dry; exhaled by the Sun, into the highest
Region; and there (bordering the Element of fire) is inflamed partly by it, and
the whirling motion of the Heavens. And this matter, whilst imprisoned in the
Earth, produces Earthquakes.

If it ascend to the Middle Region, and be from thence beaten back, it turns to
wind; if entering that Region, and being environed with thick Clouds, it flashes
into Lightning; and if it passes to the upper Region, it becomes a Comet. And
the common opinion promotes them as Signs and Causes, prognosticating some
dreadful mischiefs to the World, whereof Brightman foreshewed; who from Joseph
Scaliger of Leyden, got some Notes of Grebneer, concerning those prophetical
numbers in the twelve chapters of Ezekiel; the three last of Revelation, and
the last chapter of Daniel, with some passages of Hosea and Zachary.

But that excellent Manuscript of Johannes Bandensis de vita Grebnerii,
declares all.

In which that learned Astrologer brings reasons Divine and humane, why Europe
for the space of thirty seven years following this fearful Comet, should feel
the Mutations of flourishing States as siuce it has lately happened in Portugal,
Swedland, Bohemia, Denmark; Great Britain, and Ireland.

However foretold; I am sure they and we feel the sad effects; and so have we
mixed predictions, both Astrologicall and Divine.

Since the spiritual Sword was sheathed in England, which had lopt off the
Serpentine heads of Heresy and Schism, It is more then wonder, how all these
Sects in the whole world have with their prophecies (like devouring weeds)
overgrown or choked the seed of Gods word.

The Millenaries dream of a Personal Reign of Christ upon Earth; Heresies
increase,
How he shall descend 1666. and destroy all the Works of Dark^ess; that he
shall keep quarter Sessions, and Goal delivery in his own person upon Mount
Olivet; That in anno 1700. shall be the day of Judgment, Opinions prophetical.
and that Judgment last other 1700. years, and a thousand other such like
Fancies, made familiar to us, by sundry mad-headed Millenaries; lately printed
in 1642. 44. and 45.

In anno 1650. comes another Opiniator, and tells us that this year says he
all Europe being in civil Wars which shall not cease till they have mustered an
Army to destroy Rome anno 1666. Then that the Western Jews shall come into the
Faith of Christ; and shall in anno 1683. convert the Eastern Jews (being the
ten Tribes hidden invisibly in Tartaria and India) and these two Brethren shall
ruin the Mohammedan in anno School. and so presently to be restored to Jerusalem,
and then follows the dissolution of all things, and not before.

For my part ( says one in anno 1650) I am a zealous adorer of Parliaments, nor
desire to censure the actions of our Representative yet will not promise the
term of an age to our Novel Government (as hs terms it) but thinks verily a
change toward the old Model is near at hand. A pestilent Prophet if such should
come to pass, and the whole effects of Grebneer follow after.

And further this figure-flinger has collected by way of Chronology upon the
principal passages in ( Ezekiel and Revelations) Grebneers and Bandensis
prophecies; where he observes out of the fourth Viol poured out, to be in anno
1605. when the Protestant Champions, Pareus, Polanus, Whitakers, Perkins,
Andrews, and K. James, did power light upon the Sun of the Gospel against
Bellarmine, Stapleton, Campian, and other Papists, Revelations 16. 8, 9.

The fifth Viol (says he) began pouring out from anno 1630. by the Swedes in
Germany 1632. then the English in England 1640. and combine against Papists
1648. and shall end in Romes ruin, 1666. and has Scripture for that too,
Revel. 16. 10, 21. and so goes on to the year 1830. where he leaves the
faithful to expect Doomsday.

There are other Writers strongly encounter these poisonous prophecies;
Opposers of them.
That there is no certain predictions; that Comets do not alwai^s fore-run such
events; nor do Events follow Comets, and instance wonderful fruitful blessings
after such signs.

Peucer a Germain, prognosticated upon the Comet in anno 1583 and contrariwise
followed a most calm Summer; no Prince dyed; no war, and the Plague in Lombardy
then ceased. Gemma Frisius sp^aks of as many good as bad effects.

And the Comet in Qu. Elizabeth's time in Cassiopea, she being diswaded to look
out of the Window upon it, she went forth to see it, saying, Jacta est alea,
The Die is cast in Gods providence, not in Signs to be blasted with such
beams, which had a ground in Nature, but no warrant in Scripture, to portend
Mishap to States and Princes,

But that which is most observable to me, is this, The Scripture, which relates
remarkable things, mentions not one Comet, Blazing Star, nor Eclipse (but
that miraculous Star at Christ's birth) though no doubt many such happened in
that space of three thousand five hundred years, but takes notice of other
natural events less considerable; and yet from the other we infer, changes of
Empires, nay, Church and Religion.

The Prophets never foretold of any Meteors, as not troubling their writings,
with what could be foreseen by humane or natural means, For though Agabus, Acts
11. 18. foretold the Universal Famine twelve years after, in the time of
Claudius Ceasar, yet he speaks not of the Eclipse that fell then; for that
might be foreseen of a natural cause, and was foretold by Astrologers, but not
the famine which could not be inferred by Eclipse, nor by any Comet, to presage
evil.

We grant natural virtues which reside in the Stars, besides enlightening; for
they were created four days after the light, to warm and give vigor and life,
and such good things. And indeed those natural signs, are rather marks of Gods
favor than anger, Stars do submission to Man; unhappy to none but such as
believe them fatal and unlucky. Natural est magis nova, quam magna, mirari.
And that Comet at Christ's birth, was Nero's death. Cometes sum bonus aparuit,
qui praenuntius fuit, mortis magni illius Tyranni, and pestilentissimi hominis,
says Tacitus.

False Predictions prove true to them that fear them, that is our superstition.
The other extreme is Epicurism, which admireth not Gods works at all. Continual
custom without some change in natural things, becomes less regardful. God
scatters intermixtures to force man to admire.

The sacred Chronology shows Gods admirable measures in the dispensations of
time, more worthy than in the speculation of Astrologers. Nay even in humane
History, more wise, than such Predictions; for certainly a good Historian
deserves better than a bad Prophet.

After the appearance of this Comet, Q. Ann dies,
the same year died Q. Anne. A lingering sickness and fullness of humors brought
her to a dropsy, and for recovery, she for some years before frequented the
Bath, with continual Physic. But the disease come to the height, she took
leave of this life at Hampton Court, Her Corpse brought from thence to Somerset
House, part of her Jointure, and at her proper charge lately rebuilt and
beautifyed to this luster it appears now; and by her desire called Denmark
house, from the name of that Kingdom, whence she had her Birth. And not long
after with sumptuous ob^equies she was intombed at Westminster Abbey in the
chapel of Hen. 7. ordained for Royal Interments.

A good Lady she was, Her character.
and Sister to the King of Denmark, fetched from thence by King James with great
affection to her person, and being a Stranger to these Kingdoms, with
Providence designed for her future fortune, she med^ed the less in Matters of
State. A matchless pair, drawing evenly in all courses of honor, and both
blessed with fair issue, because never loose from eithers Bed, Hist. Gr. Br. p.
54. and 129.
abating that blemish, basely abusing her excellent virtue [ for loving my Lord
of Pembroke] a crime as false as odious in the Author, who yet concludes [ her
character, a monument of virtue.]

I may not leave the Reader at random in the affairs of the Kirk of Scotland.
Kirk of Scotland.
How they boggled with the King when he was lost there, and so left them
incorrigible, never intending to hazard his honor any more by granting General
Assemblies. But he come home, unsatisfyed then, and after with their Synods,
had sharply reproved them by Letters, which they excuse till one Assembly more
might make trial of their allegiance.

The King gracious to be reconciled, adventures to grant them another General
Assembly to be held at Perth, August 25. But enters upon them with this caution.

That the affront offered his Royal self in the late meeting at Saint Andrews,
The K. lette^s to them.
gave him just reason to resolve never to grant any more General Assemblies,
concerning the Churches policy; what he hastily desired, and what they did was
to do him injury; He is yet over entreated by their Bishops to permit a new
Convocation, who are now convened for the self same business, as before.
Advising the Bishops not to admit the wonted, ignorant, and unruly multitude to
overpower the more judicious. He having placed them overseers of the rest in
the chiefest Rooms.

He dislikes not the advice of the whole, and the greater the consent the
better his content. But matters of this nature (the Articles) may yet be
enjoined without them, by his own authority, as an innate power by his calling
from God.

Persuade them they may, to induce them by discretion in their duty to Him,
wherein he will not be delayed, nor satisfied with their shifts, from their
simple acceptance of those Articles sent unto them, the necessity whereof had
better becomed them all to beg of him, than he to propone the practice upon
them.

What and how many abuses were offered to him by the Ministers before he came
to the Crown of England, can hardly be forgot, nor likes he much to remember,
sufficient by their disobedience to have separated his affection from them; His
patience for Gods cause forgiving and forgetting foul faults; endeavoring to
force from them better effects of his best purposes. He wishes that he be no
more provoked, nor the truth of God which they profess any longer shadowed,
under the Cloak of some of their seeming Saintlike holiness, shaking hands and
joining hearts with such persons as by their tenants against Majestracy, uphold
Popery.

In sum, he craves God to witness on his part; and let the World now at last
see, their dutyful obedience to their dread Sovereign; that so his care of
their good may meet with zeal and affections in them, inferior to no subjects
of any Sovereign, and the glory of God and peace to his Church; which is his
earnest prayer for them all, unto whom he now and evermore commends them.

James Rex.
July 1618.

We say not how much these might deserve from men holy minded, nor what tedious
and weak Arguments, were reasoned; which needed such a defense, as was fain to
be published in answer to a Pamphlet set out against them. Five Articles of
Perth.
But truly shame of their trifling, and fear to offend, produced these effects,
from which yet in aftertime they fled.

That seeing the memory of all bypast superstitious and idolatrous worship of
the sacraments by Papists is long since abolished; 1. Kneeling at the Sacrament.
Therefore in reverence of God, and due regard of so Divine a Mystery, and in
remembrance of so mystical an Union, they think good, That the sacrament be
celebrated hereafter meekly and reverently upon their knees.

If any Christian visited with sickness, 2. Private communion.
and thereby unable to receive the Holy communion at the Church; and shall
declare in his conscience his sickness deadly, and desire to receive the same in
his house; the Minister shall not deny him so great comfort, there being three
or four communicants to join with him, according to the Order of the Church.

The Parents nor Pastor shall not defer the Baptism of infants longer than the
next Sunday after the Birth, 3. Private Baptism.
unless upon reasonable cause; nor shall they use private Baptism in their
Houses, but when great need requires; and then the Minister shall not deny it,
in the form as at Church, and the next Sunday declare the same, and that the
infant ought to be received into Christ's fold.

That according to the primitive integrity, 4. Confirmation of children.
care was ever taken, for educating of children and catechizing of them, now
altogether neglected. The Minister shall therefore catechize them, and in the
rehearsal of the Lords Prayer, Belief and ten commandments, as in the
Church-catechism is used and expressed. And afterward the said children shall
be confirmed by Prayer and Blessing of the Bishop, for the continuance of the
grace of God in them.

That the inestimable benefits by our Saviors Birth, 5. Festival days.
Passion, Resurrection, Ascension and sending down the Spirit, has been at
certain times remembered by the whole Church of the World; And therefore the
Minister shall observe those times, and form his Doctrine according to the Text
purposely to be chosen, and proper for the day.

These were thus obtained, proclaimed and obeyed, and to this day called, the
five Articles of Perth, ratified in Parliament there, the next year, and the
last Parliament of this Kings time; when a monstrous storm thickened the face of
Heaven, and the factious sort said, it was a sign of Gods anger against those
Articles; others in derision of that sense, said, it was rather an approbation
from heaven, like thunder and lightning at the giving of the Law to Moses.

The Bishops had much ado to go on to Action, for Papistry being a Disease of
the Mind, and Puritanism of the Brain, the Antidote of both ought to be a
grave and well-ordered Church, to reduce them either simply or wilfully erring.

But those that were refractory and factious, got the more of the mad crew,
swarming to such to seek the Communion, and to receive their Doctrine, and
those that would not, were excommunicate upon every ordinary and frivolous
occasion.

Excommunication, Of Excommunication.
the greatest Judgment upon Earth; that which is ratified in Heaven, a
precursory or prelasory Judgment of CHRIST in the end of the World; and
therefore not to be used irreverently, as an ordinary Process, derogate to Gods
honor, and the power of the Keys contemtible.

It is urged indeed not so much for the thing it self, as for the contumacy:
and as God's judgment seizes on the least sin of the impenitent; so
Excommunication may in case issue out upon the smallest offense, and not upon
the greatest, in another case.

But are these contumacies such, as that the party (as far as the eye of the
Church can discern) stands in statu reprobationis and damnationis, given over
to final impenitence?

It is therefore to be wished, that this Censure were restored to the true
Divinity and use in cases of weight.

To this purpose, a Bill was drawn in Parliament, 23 Eliz. the gravest Assembly
of her time, and recommended by the gravest Counselor, but for some politic
Reasons was retarded.

We read of three degrees of Excommunication in the New Testament, the first
called Nidui, A casting out of the Synod, John 9. 22. A separation from all
commerce, society, eating or drinking with any person, from the Marriage Bed,
from washing; and these according to the pleasure of the Judge, and quality of
the offense, for thirty days or more: he may be present at divine Service, to
teach or to learn others: if impenitent, his punishment was increased, doubling
or trebling the Sentence for time, or to his death. His male-children were not
circumcised. And if he died unrepentant, a stone was cast upon his Coffin, as
deserving to be stoned: and was buried without lamentation or ceremony, and not
in common Burial.

The second was called Cherem, A giving over to Satan, 1 Cor. 5. 5. It differed
from the first degree, because it was not sentenced in a private Court, but in
the whole Church, and Maledictions and Curses added out of the Law of Moses. At
the publishing Candles were lighted, and when the Curses were ended, then the
Lights were extinct, even so the Excommunicate deprived of the Light of Heaven.
And thus against the incestuous person, 1 Cor. 5. 5. and against Himenaeus and
Alexander, 1 Timothy 1. 20.

The third was named Maran-atha, viz. The Lord comes: and was instituted (they
say) by Enoch, Iud. 14. An Excommunication to death, and so the phrase, 1 John
5. 16. There is a sin unto death, viz. to deserve Excommunication to death.

In the Greek Church, four degrees of this Censure.

1. Those, who were only barred the Lord's Table, all other benefits of the
Church they might; nay, to stand by and see the Communicants, and therefore
called stantes.

2. But he is admitted into the Church, his place behind the Pulpit, and must
depart with the Catechumeni, such persons as were not yet baptized, and so
might not pray with other Christians.

3. Degree, admitted but into the Church Porch, to hear, but not to pray with
others, and therefore called Audientes.

4. Degree, such were only permitted to stand quite without the Church,
weeping and requesting those that entered in, to petition the Lord for mercy
toward them, whence called Plorantes.

So then they say, Cain's Censure was the first, and the last Enoch's.

The three sorts were borrowed from the three sorts of uncleaness, which
excluded people out of the three Camps.

1. Nidui, out of the Camp of God alone, those, defiled with the touch of the
Dead. 2. Cherem, out of the Camp of God and Levi, defiled of an issue. 3.
Maran-atha, out of all three Camps, God, Levi, Israel; defiled with Leprosy.
From the Jews, Greeks, and Latins, took the degrees of Excommunication.

The Emperor of the House of Austria, Of Bohemia, and the occasion of the
Palsgrave accepting that Crown.
with interwoven Marriages of Spain, (as aforesaid) had so settled the Empire
from other interests, that no obstacle interposed their excessive ambition, but
their jealousies of the Protestant Princes and States, whom they intend by
degrees to reduce; and in over-doing of this, began the German miserable
Distractions.

And because the Palatines too sudden accepting the Crown of Boheme was the
immediate occasion, I shall let in the Reader into that story.

The Kingdom of Boheme for many hundred years past, enjoyed Sanctuary and
Privileges, to empower the free election of their King, which is manifest in
their Chronicles, in many Bulls of their Emperors, in their Kings Reversal
Letters, and diverse other Examples and Antiquities.

Sundry practices have been against this free Election, but never managed with
more wiles than now.

Matthias the Emperor two years before, had adopted Ferdinand his Uncles Son
his Successor, but not to meddle with Sovereignty of a King, whilst Matthias
lived: however, Ferdinand thus far set forward: Ferdinands undue practices to
be King.
himself makes way to the Dignity of Boheme; and to prevent discovery from the
incorporate Confederate Provinces, who have Voices in the Election; he calls a
Parliament forthwith, only of the States of Boheme, with express denunciation,
that in the Assembly, nothing should be consulted, but the choice of a new
King. The Electoral Provinces, nor their Deputies, nor Ambassadors, not being
present, the Assembly was not legal.

The best of the States of Boheme therefore refuse to appear; against whom was
denounced such threats, as frightened them with hazard of their Heads, and so
was procured a pretended Election, (for the present) and his Coronation
assented, by the main party, Catholics.

The Crowning Kings in the life of another, was of late a sure policy, to unite
those Kingdoms in the Austrian Family, contrary to the ancient custom of free
Elections, which now, neith^r State durst oppose.

To this end therefore, and to suppress all future free Elections, (the
Paladium of the Kingdom) Ferdinand secretly compacts with the King of Spain,
without consent of the States, and before his Election, or pretense to any
interest.

That the King of Spain, his Posterity, and Heirs, for want of Issue male of
his Fathers Austrian Line, should succeed him in that Kingdom, contrary to the
established Rules of Politicians, (that no elected King has power to alienate,
without consent of the States) this succession exposed them to the loss of all,
and Religion also, and enabled him to enfeoff strangers into each Province, and
into the inheritances of those Royally descended, highborn, illustrious
Families; and by which, as was then suspected (and since came to pass) he
should easily seize the Dignity of the Crown Imperial, and so abolish the
foundation of the Golden Bull and Form of Empire.

This while, the aged Emperor keeps Court at Vienna, King Ferdinand at Gref in
Steria: the Government of Boheme continues in such Counselors as Matthias
left there, chosen Ministers Catholic, who with the Archbishop of Prague
endeavor to suppress the Protestants.

The States Protestants assemble themselves to redress these injuries,
Protestant Princes ^ee^ redress.
backed with some Forces which they brought with them, and were opposed by the
Emperor's Faction, whom they overmastered and flung his chief Justice Slabala,
his Secretary Fabritius, and others out of a Window of the Castle, down into
the Court; and being done in choler, excused by Apology to the Emperor.

But on they go, raise force, and banish the Jesuit, and others of that
Faction, whom they load with Complaints.

The Emperor Emperor in arms also.
as forward, commits the command of two Armies unto Count Buquoy and Dampiere.

The Protestants counter-force with two Bodies, severally under the Prince of
Anholt, and under Count Thorn and Mansfeilt, skirmishing with different effects.

Some Princes, King James and others interpose Mediations: and Ferdinand
complains of the Bohemians obstinacy.

They remonstrate former, undue Elections, and allege:

That between a conditional King and his Subjects, Their grievances.
there are reciprocal obligations; the one Obedientia, the other Promissa.

That he received the Scepter of the States, with thankful remuneration, and
royal grace to all; to satisfy the desire of every one, and to deserve their
love, and swears not to meddle with Government whilst Matthias lives.

Notwithstanding he maintains the Wars of others, against the Bohemians,
Moravians, and Silecians, and raised Terra Maria, against the Bahemians, sent
for his own Army out of Steria, and pronounced the Protestant States of Boheme
Traitors and Rebels, and declared himself Enemy to them all.

That he banished the old President Cesal, directs all Councils, corrects the
Decisians and Decrees Imperial, disposes the actions of Buquoy, as King and
Lord of all, and dis-inclines all means of Peace with Ambassadors of all
Provinces, who met at Prague, carefully consulting to recover Peace.

That conditional elective Kings receive their royal Authority upon Oaths,
Kings Election and Succ^ssion distinguished.
their Sovereign power, Ex pacto, non ex jure: from the Subjects by concessions
upon Covenant; not by succession nor descent, as other Kings, who are so before
they swear to their Subjects, and do swear because they are Kings, but are not
Kings because they swear, the one born a Prince without his Subjects, the other
made and given to be a King.

The Oath of Elective Kings is, Et si (quod absit) in aliquibus Iuramentum meum
violavero, Nullam mihi incole Regni, omniumque dominiorum unius cujusque
gentis, obedientiam praestare delebant.

And the Chancellor usually tells them.

Quandoquidem viderunt Ordines, Majestatem regiam, pactis conventis stare
nolle, non debere ait, ipsius Majestatem in malam partem interpetari, si
Ordines obedientiam ipsius Majestate renuncient.

These things thus a doing, Mathias dies, Ferdinand succeeds Emperor.
the old Emperor dies, and Ferdinand now King of Hungary and Boheme, and
adopted Heir of the Empire, meets at Franckford, (by Summons) with the three
Electors, Men^z, Collen, and Trevours; the other three Silecia, Moravia, and
Lusatia, failing in their persons, sent their Representatives only, and so the
Council chose him King of Romans, Anno 1619.
which the State of Bohemia disclaim, and of his being Elector as King of
Bohemia, he never actually possessing the Crown. Their dis^entions could not
lessen his Election to the Empire, yet they swore never to receive him their
King.

King James much troubled at these interruptions of Germany took himself to be
much conce^ned in the hazard of the Protestant party, King Jame^ how concerned.
and the peace and danger of the Reformed Church, and therefore sent Hay,
Viscount Doncaster, Ambassador extraordinary to mediate with the Emperor and
Bohemians; but to little purpose; The Emperor by means avoiding to receive
him, knowing his errand, being to paliate what was grown too high for his
Reconciliation, and removed his Gests, when Doncaster came but near him; so
whilst King James hunted at New Market; his Ambassador coursed the Hare in
Germany, but his business, through the crudity and raw initiation, took not the
effect.

Ferdinand fearing the Success of Engagements, insinuates with the Germain
Princes, and had possessed the Duke of Bavaria, and others.

The poor Bohemians in this strait, and finding K. James an Inte^cessor,
thought it policy to bring him into the List; for having published their
Declarations and Reasons, Palsgrave elected King of Bohemia.
pronounced the Election of Ferdinand to be invalid and null; and the States of
that Kingdom, and other Provinces, Elect by this Title The most Gracious, and
the most Mighty Prince Lord Frederick, Count Palatine of the Rhine, and King of
Bohemia.

In the mean time King James consults with his Council, diversely affected to
this Design of taking or refusing. Amongst them, see what our Archbishop Abbot
^ends to Secretary Nauton, not being able to come to Council.

Good master Secretary,
I have never more desired to be present at any Consultation, Archbishop
Abbats Letter to Nauton.
etc. My humble advice is, That there is no going back, but a countenancing of
it against all the world, with ringing of Bells, and making Bonfires in London,
so soon as it shall be certain of the Coronation. I am satisfied in my
conscience, the cause is just, having rejected that proud and bloody man,
making that Kingdom not elective, and when God has set up the Prince a Mark of
honor to all Christendom, to propagate the Gospel and protect the distressed.
I dare do not other, but to follow where God leads.

It is a great honor to our King to have such a son to be made a K. and me
thinks I do in this, and that of Hungary, foresee the work of God; that by
piece and piece the Kings of the Earth that give their power to the Beast,
shall now leave the whore to Desolation as St. John says.

Our striking in will comfort the Bohemians, honor the Palsgrave, strengthen
the Union, bring on the Dutch, stir up Denmark, and move his two Uncles, Prince
of Orange and Duke of Buillon, together with Tremvile a rich Prince in France,
to cast in their shares, and Hungary I hope will run the same fortune, and for
money and means to support the War, Providebit Deus. This from my Bed; and when
I can stand I hope to do better service.

Geo. Cant.
Sept. 12. 1619.

Some regret there was in the Palsgrave (as well might be) to act without the
consent of the King of Great Britain, and whilst his Ambassadors were treating
a Peace; but by persuasion of the Prince of Anholt, the Earl of Holloch, and
Baron Done, with other their intimates he was at length entreated to accept of
that golden Bait, a Crown, which was given to him freely, not without some
regret, though by Others, such a Bit would be swallowed with damnation it self.

And this was hastened upon him in August 1619. and Crowned
and his entrance into Prague the last of October, and his Coronation four
days after. But instantly posts the Baron to King James in excuse of all,
either of too hasty acceptance, and neglect of his fatherly advice.

King James ever averse from such undue Precipitations, for affections of the
people to be engaged at their pleasures, and to be a President to dispose of
Sovereignty already established; utterly refuses Done's Address, for a time,
but dispatches Ambassadors to the Emperor, and to the States of the League
and Covenant, not meddling with his Son in Law to advise or neglect him.

Of this errand two are sent in joint Commission to Boheme, Ambassadors sent
from England to the Emperor.
Sir Richard Weston (after Lord Treasurer) and Sir Edward Conway, not long
after Secretary of State: Ferdinand, upon the News of his New Rival in the
Kingdom, hastens this Proscription against the Palsgrave.

We Ferdinando, etc.
Palsgrave proscribed.
To all Electors, Princes, etc. But especially to the subjects of Frederick
Count Palatine of the Rhene, Elector, etc.
That Frederick Count Palatine of the Rhene, has made himself head of that
perfidious and rebellious crew of our Kingdom of Boheme, wherefore we proclaim
him guilty of High Treason, and Iterate Proscription, and of all the penalties,
which by Law and Custom are depending thereon. We conclude him out of Our and
the Imperial peace, and are firmly resolved to execute the said penalties upon
him, as against one pub^ickly proscribed an Enemy and Adversary to us, and the
Empire. Commanding you under pain of Life, not to give him aid, succor,
assistance, money, provision, munition, openly or covertly.

And whoever is in pay, his Accomplices or Helpers, to forsake his service, and
that the States dependant, alliances, subject, and his Vassals, shall not yield
to him Obedience, nor partake to him of his crime, but to forsake him and
assist us, to reduce him the Rebellious Frederick to obedience. And we absolve
ye his Vassals from his protection, and from your Oath into our grace and
favor, and whoever disobeys this our command, we declare him and them guilty
of high Treason, and iterate Proscription, so well as himself.

Given at Our City Vienna, etc. 1626.
And now each Party take the field; War on both sides.
The Duke of Saxony for the Imperial Ban, with twenty five thousand Men reduced
Lusatia. The Prince of Anholt General, and Holloch Lieutenant General for
Boheme, and with these (evenly powered) the war went on, in that Kingdom.

And to make it famous through the Western World; Spinola raises Forces in
Flanders,
Spinola forms an Army in Flanders, under Spains interest, but for that
purpose, which King James suspected, and to be assured sent to Sir Thomas
Edmonds his Ambassador at Bruxels, to inquire (for the truce of Spain and the
Netherlands continued) but Spinola's Commission was sealed up by the Spanish
subtilty, not to open till the March of the Army of twenty thousand foot, and
five thousand horse, So does Oxford and ^ss^x in England.
which proved fatal to the Palatinate.

The Spirits of the English began to bustle, Sir Horace Vere being here, and
somewhat rusty since the peace with Spain, associating his Nephew the Earl of
Oxford and Essex (young and daring Spirits, Hist. gr. B^. pa. 135.
says one) indeed so young they apprehend no danger, and so ignorant they knew
not how to avoid it. Oxford the eighteenth Earl, and Lord High Chamberlain
without intermission, from Awbry de Vere high Chamberlain to Henry the first;
Portgrave of London, and Lord Chief Justice of England. Descended from the
Earls of Guisure; the surname from Vere a Town in Zealand, his Son Awbry
created Earl of Oxford by Henry 2. and High Chamberlain.

The eighth Earl after him, was by Richard 2. created Duke of Ireland during
life, and bore for that honor quarterly before his own cote, three Crowns or,
a border Argent; his own being quarterly Gu. and Or, upon the first a Mulletary.

This man now was lately returned home from Travel in hope to recover his
former debaucheries, but how improved implicit credit was to expect the Trial.

As for Essex then, he only boid up by the people, upon his Fathers score,
which we have told before.

But made they were made by Our younger Brothers to fight, and a Regiment only
was raised, not I believe imagined for any goodly effects, but to bandy with
the Kings Wisdom, who though not forward in this unjustifiable quarrel, yet not
without co^nsel to act for the future.

How madly some men urged the Kings interest, seeming so hasty, as to do the
work at their own charge? but being connived at, to try their intent, the good
Earl of Essex had fifty brave fellows pinned upon him to pay them their
pensions, besides his complete number of his own company. These two brave
Captains with the rest, raw-souldiers, adventured without fear under (indeed)
the fame and fortune of that Right valourous, and truly expert man of Arms, Sir
Horace Vere their Colonel, who must needs endure with patience, the toil he
had to make them good Soldiers.

Spinola had got the start, Their march and action in the expedition.
yet the English got over, ere he took leave of the Archduke, but they
followed at a distance, somewhat in danger to go too near; and in August both
forces were marching, the English had passage over the Rhine, by conduct of
Prince Henry of Nassaw, with two thousand horse, and four hundred Musketeers.
Convoid by Hen. of Nassaw.
But ere they came there, our raw English drooped with eating honey, and lost
not the Nickname for some years after. Ninety four with Tents, Truncks and
Luggage were left at Bac-rack, and they and the Town lost to Spinola, by former
example of all other that had stood in his way, and with no more pains than his
sudden summons. And had done so to all the English, if his Design to snap them
had not miscarried by the boisterous stream of the Rhine, which wet his Wagons
of Ammunition, and some of his Fieldpieces disordered, and so escaped they to
Franckford, the 24. of September. Then to Darmstat, a Town of Bohemia, and to
Hessen, where Prince Henry and the Dutch, take leave of the English and return
home to Holland.

And here they join with fifteen hundred horse of the Princes of the Union and
march to Reinshem, Join with the Princes of the Union.
the nether Town of the Palatinate; and the third of October join with the
Army; four thousand Horse, and six thousand Foot. Spinola at hand frightened
them with a charge, but night afforded no light to sight, the next day to
quarters for a Week, where the new Wine in the Must, grapes and fruits brought
crudities upon their weak stomachs, till Spinola led them a Dance for Digestion
as far as Keysers-Luther; and the weather cold, the Nights long, disposed their
necessities to several Garrisons, Anno 1620
and the Forces of the Reformed Princes cooped up to their several places,
whilst the Enemy carved to himself of the whole Country, the good English
went thither to fight, and so came home again.

In this mean time the two Generals encounter, The Emperors General Bucquoy,
Anholt for Bohemia.
Anholt for Bohemia, had the better, and scattered Bucquoys main Body, this was
in the Spring. But in Autumn it fell out otherwise, for whiiest Spinola and the
Princes were hunting each other on the Hills, the Duke of Bavaria joins with
Bucquoy and Tilly. Anholt and Mansfield got between them and Prague, but the
Enemy breaks through, and routs the other into confusion and flight.

Anholt and Holloch, the first that ^led to the King of Bohemia at Prague, and
the next morning the ninth of November, they all fly for succor, the King and
Queen with both our Ambassadors, Weston and Conway, Is defeated and flies with
the K. and Q
as far as Limburgh, in their way to the Netherlands, and the Ambassadors by
safe conduct returned back to Bohemia, where the conquering business took up
more time than to spend with leasurely disputes, and so they came home again.

The next Spring the Princes of the Union submit to the Emperor, The Prin^es
submit to the Emperor.
so does Anholt, who is received into favor, and made one of his Generals.
Mansfield not so capable, and being put to his shifts, doubles his brave Spirit
with the necessity of his Fortune, hurrying several Countries with Forces of
fourteen thousand men, for almost two years after, till he constrained them to
offer him peace, which he accepts.

Whilst King James sends to the Emperor by Ambassy of Sir Henry Wootten a Man
fitted for Negotiation by his often employments to Several States and Princes,
Sir Henry Wootton Ambassador e^traordinary into G^rm^ny.
and thus qualified he has his Commission, passes by the Duke of Lovain in
transitu (for I find not he had any Credentials to him) only confers the Kings
Christian intents, as one cumbred with the sad events of the Germane Troubles
on this side; and the French intents on the other, and so not improper for the
King to study the passages of both.

And out of his particular Commission to others he frames general Agruments to
him, Duke of Lovain.
of the Kings innocence in the beginning of the Bohemian business, and his
impartiality ever since, and so rendered his Master the first Mediator therein,
being tied in the conscience of a Christian King to prosecute the same, and in
it peace to all.

The Duke, a cunning and subtle Prince, told him, that the Princes of the
Union would assure him, how his affections were in the cause, (...)
more he could not get out of him.

His next was to the Archduke Leopold (of the Austrian family) to him he had
Letters, and tells him, That King James was clear of all foreknowledge or
counsels in the business of Bohemia, and also of the Pdlsgraves preceding
practice, till it was laid upon him.

That his Master continued equal to both parties, and was troubled, that there
should be so great preparations for invading the Nether Palatinate, being the
Patrimony of the Kings Descendants, no way commixt with the affairs of Bohemia.

Persuades the Archduke, as a Personage of power to keep those that were in
action, from such precipitation, as might preclude all mediation of accord.

He was answered, with the Archdukes protestation; That he believes the Kings
cleernes, but of the Palsgrave he much doubts, accusing him of practice with
the Bohemians, at the Emperors Election at Franckford, and more foully (said
he) to introduce the Turk into Hungary.

And conceived, the Marquess Spinola might have some aim upon the Lower
Palatinate, assured the Emperors inclination to accord, but never without
restitution of the usurped Kingdom; a loss not of easy concoction, especially
by the Palatine his subject.

And excused the Emperors levies, for that there were likewise some English
forces, designed, toward that place out of England, which was no fair way, if
King James intended a Treaty.

It was replied by Wootton, That true it was, the Kings people, and some of the
Nobility, had taken Alarm, upon a voice of that Invasion, and voluntarily meant
to sacrifice themselves in that action; but without the Kings concurrence of
money or command.

And being ask; he answered, he had no particular form of Accord to propose to
the Emperor, for the King thought it necessary, to dispose the affections on
both sides; and so collect some measure of agreement without spending the
honor of the King in vain Treaties.

Then to the Community of Strasburgh and Ulme, Community of Strasburgh, and
Ulme.
who professed themselves in Newtrality, for it might be uncivil (they said) to
offer their Counsels, where such Kings employ their Wisdoms and Authority;
they would only contribute their prayers.

The Duke of Wittenburgh, Duke of Wittenburgh.
made large professions toward the King of Bohemia (as he called the Palatine)
of whose cleerness from practice, he could vindicate; for visiting him
presently upon his Election, he found him perplexed even to tears for to accept
of the Kingdom, he was liable to suspicion, as to ambition, and if he refused,
he feared the people would call in more then Christian aid, to the effusion of
much blood. And professed that no Prince of the Empire, should exceed his
affection to defend the Palatinate, with all his power by bond of consederacy,
and reason of State, lest any Stranger should neighbor him.

He had likewise Commission to the Duke of Bavaria, And to the Duke of Bavaria.
whom he found in actual arms about Lintz. in the Upper Austria, and the
Emperor at Vienna, with no success in those Messages.

Yet still King James hoping that time it self, Without success from any of
them.
and the experience of vexation, might in some degree mollify their
affections, better to digest difficulties, he never refused by Ambassies to
both sides, and to all other the intervenient Princes and States, to attempt
that high work of Peace first; and then afterward of Restoration of the
Palatinate, by other ways and means.

The times when these Negotiations set forward, were usual in the Kings
progress or retirements from London to his Sports (as was conceived) but they
were then chosen abroad for better leisure of business, even then when Kingdoms
were in dispute. An art he had thus to cover his weightier Meditations, for
most of his Dispatches were concluded in his hunting journies.

Prince Charles now grown man; Resolves upon a Parliament and Match with Spain.
the King had disposed to a Treaty for his Marriage with the Infanta of Spain
(some while since) and Sir Walter Aston, sent thither Lieger to fit
correspondence, and now conceived not improper to induce the restoration of
the Palatinate by that means.

However, it may be observed the evil success of all our former meddling with
that Nation in matters of marriages, so malignant, and disagreeing with ours.

Let us ravel back to the memory of the Black Prince, a person of the greatest
performance that Christendom can parrallel. Yet in his voyage to Spain to
settle Don Piedro; besides their monstrous ingratitude and perfidy to him then,
caused also that miserable revolt in France by his absence, which lost us our
Inheritance there, and his health ever after, his body either corrupted by the
air, or by their Drugs impoisoned.

And indeed their matches with the heirs and Princes of this Crown, for above
six score years, having been no where else (except the second Marriages of
Henry the eight) were always unhappy.

Prince Arthurs sudden death, left his Widow to his wicked Brother, with whom
God was less pleased, as the Match was more unlawful; and therefore not a Male
was left of their race, only one Daughter, in whose short reign of six years,
was more bloodshed for the true Religion, than for the false in sixty years,
she adventuring to marry there also, this discontented Nation; fell into
insurrections, Treasons, Wiats Rebellion, and therefore her Husband Ph^lip,
suspecting the future effects, forsook her; who lost Callis to the French in
six days that the English had enjoyed 200. years; but altogether, broke her
heart, and she dyed.

Now to parallel these foreign Matches with those at home to our own Subjects,
the first being by Edward the fourth, and the last with Henry the eight, from
which two, Gods blessing brought forth two Queens Elizabeth's; such instruments
of his Glory, Peace in the Land, and Religion in the Church, as never could
produce greater examples of Happiness to England, until this of King James, who
brought hither them both with him.

But for settling affairs at Home, A Parliament called.
for his purpose abroad, he resolves of a Parliament [which he had thought
(says one) to lay them by for ever as incroachers upon his prerogative, Hist.
gr. Br. pa. 150.
and diminishers of his Majesty's glory, making Kings less, and subjects more
than they are.]

Certainly he had good intelligence from the Kings thoughts or else the Man had
a Devilish revelation, to prophesy the effects, for such they proved to be
afterward. But in truth, the people were grown high fed, with plenty and
peace, and pretending their zeal for regaining the Palatinate, were wild for a
War, with any body for any thing.

The King willing to let blood in that vein, meant to make it his purpose, and
to get money to boot.

Some sheets of paper together, is wasted by Our adversary to let in his Reader
into that Parliament, [he says, That for the Spanish faction was Arundel,
Worcester, Digby, Calvert, Weston, Hist. Gr. Br. p 144.
and others Popishly affected, with Buckingham, and all his Train.

The Duke of Lenox, Marquess Hamilton; and Earl of Pembroke, their Antagonists.
Such and so few were they, not in anger against the King, but against his
Ministers ( a plea evermore borrowed by practical people against their
Sovereigns Proceedings.)

The Papists flourished by Gondamores power with the Ladies of England, their
Nieces and Daughters, presenting him in their Balconies in Drury Lane, and the
Strand (long before any were quilt in those places) and himself in a Litter;
but was only accosted by the Lady Jacob with a gaping Yawn, telling his servant
that came on the Errand to know the meaning, that she had a Mouth to be stopped
too; which Gondamore closed with a present.

That this Lady was a Bawd to the beauties, and poor fortunes of young
Gentlewomen, whose parents sent them up hither for preferment, and says, that
for respects to their posterities he will spare to name their persons. It
seems, he was Pimp-Major to them all.

How does this di^^ecting become his grave Proeme (if it be his own) where he
says, Histories are like Anatomies; if ignorance or malice attempt to hack,
hew, or bespatter it, it will be most inhumane, etc. And so dissect and open
their own follies, etc. They must not cauterize and flash with malice, etc?
Therefore he that censures others, and vents them for truth, digs in the bowels
of another, and wounds himself. And yet (as he says) though he fly high and
may rove, he is sure not to light far from the mark. So he there in his proeme.

He goes on in his History, Buckingham made M^rqu^sse* and Master of the Horse.
and tells us, That the Earl of Buckingham, now Marquess rules all, That the
King bought of Worster to make the Marquess Master of the Horse.]

But in truth, that ancient Earl being Chamberlain also to the Queens Household,
could not attend that service, and wait abroad upon the King, and it was
therefore his own suit, and Buckingham paid him for parting with it, and so was
made Master of the Horse.

The place of Marquess is the next in honor to a Duke, The Dignity of a
Marquess.
the title came but of late days, the first was by Richard 2. upon Robert de
Vere Marquess of Dublin; and so it became a Title of honor; for before that
time, they were called Lords Marchers and not Marquesses. After the Conquest
(as in policy) they were resident upon the Confines and Borders of the Welsh,
and other places not subdued; Men of valor, of high blood of the Normans, with
the name and privileges of Earls of Chester. And for the Nort Borders of Wales
to be Count Palatines. And the Barons of the Middle part of the South-Marches
were adorned in a manner with a Palatine Jurisdiction, having a Court of
Chancery, and Writs among themselves pleadable, least their attendance abroad
might be prejudicial at home. And as for the other part of the South-Marches,
they seemed sufficiently, defended with the River Severn and the Sea.

By these Ascents our Marquess Buckingham climbs to succeed at this time a good
and gallant old Earl of Nottingham Admiral, who being almost Bedrid, made Suit
to the King that he might dispose of his place, as a Legacy in his life time
upon Buckingham; which was so done, and who to my Knowledge went in person to
him, and acknowledged the kindness, and his young Lady was presented with a
Noble and valuable Reward 30001. besides a pension of one thousand pound per
annum during his life, and this was done with so much love and liking, that I
have often observed Buckinghams great Civility ever after, at meetings to call
him Father, and bend his knee, without the least regret of that Lord, that
gained more by the bargain. And because Sir Robert Mansel, a dependant of
Nottingham, had the place of Vice Admiral, at pleasure only; Buckingham, for
his Lords sake continued him so by Patent during his life; for which courtesy
the good old man came himself to give thanks (as I remember) the last
Complyment his age gave him leave to present. And thus was this office of
honor, and safety to the Kingdom, ordered from the command of a decrepit old
man, to a proper, young, and active Lord, strengthened with the abilities o^ an
experienced Assistant, without deserving qu^r^el of our carping Pamphleter.

After Suffolk, Montague Viscount Mandevile, L. Treasur^r.
the weight and charge of the Treasurers Staff, was conferred upon the Lord
Chief Justice Sir Henry Mountague Viscount Mandevile, Son of Sir Edward
Mountague of Bolton in the County of Northampton (Son of another Sir Edward
likewise Chief Justice) who had three Sons, Edward the eldest, Knight of the
Bath, bred up in the Wars, a faithful Noble stout Commander. James that
reverend, eloquent and learned Bishop of Winchester, a man so highly in favor
and esteem with this King his Master, that he had the honor of the Bedchamber,
which no Prelate ever enjoyed from any King. This Henry was created Baron of
Kimbolton, Viscount Mandevile, and Lord Treasurer in 1620: Afterward Pre^ident
of the Council, and the first year of King Charles Earl of Manchester, and Lord
Privy Seal, and dyed after the entrance of the long Parliament, 1643.

A man of singular learning in the Laws, his Wisdom and experience deserving
those high places of Trust and honor. He married three wives, Katherine the
Daughter of Sir William Spencer in Oxon, by whom he had five sons and four
daughters; Edward the eldest Viscount Mandevile, Knight of the Bath, Walter,
James, Charles, and Henry. His second Wife Ann Wincol of Suffolk, Widow to
Alderman Holyday, Lord Major of London, by whom he had issue. His third Wife
was Daughter of John Crowch of Cornbury, in the County of Hartford, Widow of
John Hare of the Court of Wards, by whom he had issue George and Sydney, men of
eminent virtues now living, 1655.

Our Historian tells us, Hist. Gr. Br. p. 152. his falsities.
of the swarming of Jesuits, That our Counselors of State, and Secretaries,
were Counselors to the Pope and of a Divelish Sermon before the King, which he
(the Liar) saw and heard (if the King did not) for Bishop Neal would always
ingrosse the Kings ears with baudy Tales. This his Discourse, smells too rank
(he says) and craves excuse, having had hammerings and conflicts within
himself to leave it out (and yet goes on with his baseness) and tells us, that
this Bishops hand closed up the Countess of Essex's virginity, and that such
like practices as these gave an after period to that Hierarchy.

Then follows, [a Tale of the female Iesuitrices in England, an Order (he says)
first framed in Flanders, by two women, Mrs. Ward, and Mrs. Twily, clothed in
Ignatian habit, supported by three Fathers, Gerard, Flack and Moor, to preach
their Gospel to their Sect in England, and two hundred English Damsels of
great Birth and quality sent of the Errand, and for the truth of all produces a
Proselyte Turn-coat, of any Religion, and every Trade, that tells this story in
the Spanish Pilgrim, which our Adversary recites to grace his History.

The Jesuits indeed are bad enough, but to cope them with our Counselors of
State, and other Tales with no better Authority, we may herein mind our
Author, Not to belly the Devil.

Sir Francis Cottington, Resident in Spain, had the convenience three years
before, to discover the affairs of those parts, and gave intelligence hither,
of the increase of Pirates in the Mediterranean Sea, Design against Pirates in
the Mediterranean Sea.
their whole Fleet then consisting of forty tall Ships, of two hundred, and
four hundred Tuns, in two Squadrons; the one remaining before Malago, the other
about the Cape St: Maria, between Lisbone and Sevile. That within the Streights
they entered the Road of Mostil, a Town by Malago; beat down the Castle, and
had taken the Town, but for succor of Soldiers that came from Granado; yet
they took diverse Ships, and four of the West of England, two other of ours that
ran on shore they burnt also; and absol^tely perverting our Trade into Spain.
These at Cape St. Maria, met with seven Sail of London, five they took, and two
e^caped. They are usually manned with Turks and Spanish Moriscoes, and attend
the coming of the West India Fleet, then commanded by Don John Faxardo.

Upon this occasion the State of Spain moved King James to join some Sea-forces
for their suppression, as the common Enemy of Christendom. And indeed those
courses of the Pirates do but exercise the Forces of Spain by Sea, without any
great hurt, the most damage falls upon the Trade of Merchants thither, of
which the English will be the greatest number, and so of Sufferers. The last
year the Hollander having leave of Spain, for certain of their Ships armed
against the Pirates, to have safe recourse thither, but instead of offending
them, sold to Algier as much Powder and Ammunition as ever since has furnished
the Pirates Fleets. By which means now grown formidable, few Merchantmen
escaping them; the strong Town of Algier upon the Coast of Barbary
countenancing their Thievery, and depending on the Turks Protection; yet so
cunningly contrived; as not to be seen to protect them, that all Christian
Ambassadors concerned herein, and complaining at Constantinople, could have no
redress.

And therefore, it was now concluded to conjoyn Forces of Christendom to free
that Sea. In so much that they in some fear eighteen of the chie^est Pirates in
the Levant authorized the Viscount L' Orme, Some of them offer submission.
and one De la Pomeray, Frenchmen, to search for their pardon, and to come in
with all their Shipping, offering to the English (mostly concerned therein) for
retribution of this grace, forty and five thousand pound sterling; but this
was negotiated only by their Emissary La Forest at Bruxels unto our Agent
there, Sir William Trom^all, on purpose to tempt us and the French, unto whom
the like was offered, from joining with others to ruin them, but was therefore
attempted by all.

And for the English was sent Sir Robert Mans^^ Vice Admiral of the Narrow
Seas, Sir Robert Mans^l sent to surprise them.
with a Fleet this year.

And arriving in May with expectation of other Assistants, they all failing to
any purpose, his noble heart disdaining to return without Attempts. He first
furnished two Prizes (which he took by the way) three Brigandines, and a Boat
with Firelocks, and combustible materials for bu^ning the Pirates Ships in the
Harb^r, (who were all come home from Sea, and got in for safety within the
Mole) Mansel having trained his men in the execution of their several Du^^es,
and likewise appointed a Squadron of Boats with small Shot to rescue the
Vessels of Execution both in the Advancement and Retreat.

The 21. of May, the Vessels of Execution were all advanced, but by reason of
contrary winds were presently commanded to retire.

The next two nights, being likewise in readiness they were becalmed, and could
execute nothing.

The fourth night, with a fair Gale being advanced again, and the Fireships,
almost recovered the Mouth of the Mole, the wind turned to the opposite point
of the Compass.

The Boats performed their Direction in towing the Ships, but considering, that
by continuance of this course, they should expose our principal men to hazard,
by the Ordnance and small Shot that played upon them, they debate therefore
amongst themselves what to do. Captain Hughes that commanded one of the
Brigandines, replied, Go on, and give attempt by the Boats, which they did,
crying out King James, and fearless of danger, even in the mouth of the Cannon
and small Shot, which showred like Hail upon them; the English fired the
Enemies Ships in sundry places, and maintained the fight to the delight of
their fellow-shipping that were lookers on, so long as powder remained;
striving in the end, who should have the honor to come off last, which was
left to the Captain Hugh^s, and so retired only with the loss only of 20 men,
and leaving the fire flaming up in 7 several places.

The cowardly Turks, who before dur^^ not show themselves to these weak forces,
but from the Walls and tops of houses, so soon as the English were retired,
opened their ports, and sallied out a thousand, and so by help of Multitudes
and a sudden shore of rain, and a calm, the fire was extinguished, making some
of their Ships unserviceable.

In which time of Service only one Frygat came out of the Moal, which was
forced back upon the Shore; sunck one of their best men of War, being manned
with one hundred thirty Turks, and twelve Christians, whereof twelve only
escaped.

And took also a Fly-boat (which the Pirates had formerly taken from the
Christians) which was sold to Leghorn, her merchandise to be exchanged for
Pirates goods, and some money, above two thousand pound Sterling. The Turks
manned out 3. Galleys to rescue her, but were beaten by the help of the 3.
Brigandines, sent out to her succor.

Ten days together the English attended opportunity to send in the Ships with
the Fireworks, to finish the former service, done by the Boats, but not a
breath of Wind happened fitting for the Work, So that in this time the Pirates
had boomed up the Moles with Masts and Raffs, and set a double Guard upon all
their Ships^ planted more Ordnance, manned out twenty Boats to guar^^ ^he
Booms, and sent out Galleys and Boats for Intelligence hereof, East and
Westward to all Ships abroad, not to come in during the English abode; which
made Mansel retire, with all his Ships and Merchants assisting him, into the
Road of Alegant, where he received Order from hence, over land to return home
and to entrust four of the Kings ships into the hands of Captain Rogers; and
not long after the Plague and infection possessing his Fleet, he was forced to
return home, without any other assistance.

The time come and Parliament sit in January; The King enters them thus;

My Lords, and you the Commons,

CUi multiloquio non de est peccatum. K. Speech to the Par^ia^.
In my last Parliament I made long Speeches to the lower House; I have piped to
you, and you have not danced; I have mourned, and ye have not lamented. And
wills them to apply it to themselves, not to spend long Speches. That a
Parliament is composed of a Head and a Body; the Monarch and Estates; first a
Monarch, then after a Parliament (No Parliaments but in Monarchies; for in
Venice, and Netherlands there is none) and Parliaments duties is to treat of
Difficulties, It seems so by ours lately not long lasting.
and to Counsel their King; To make Laws for the Commonwealth, and the Lower
House to petition the King, with knowledge of their grievances, but not to
meddle with the Kings Prerogative. They are to supply his necessities, and he
in recompense, distributes his Justice and mercy.

It is the Kings Office to make good Laws (whose fundamental is the peoples ill
manners, and so at this time, new abuses and incroaching Crafts.

The Religious Laws are enough, consisting only of Persuasion and Compulsion;
and Gods blessing: Priests, Puritans and Sectaries, errors of the right and
left hand, are forward enough their way. Let Bishops be as bold by good
examples and preaching, but compulsion binds the conscience.

There is talk of the Match with Spain: However he will never proceed but to
Gods glory and Subjects content.

And for their supply of his Necessities; tells them of their eighteen years
peace and plenty, and yet he has received far less assistance than any King
since the Conquest. Queen Elizabeth had communibus annis, above one hundred
thousand pounds a year in subsidies: and he had in all his time but four
subsidies and six fifteens, and it is ten years since he had any; that he has
been sparing to trouble them, or to spend himself, abated in his Household, in
his Navies, and Munition, changed an old Admiral for a young Man, whose honesty
and care has lessned that charge.

Tells them, he is not the Cause of Dissentions in Christendom but rather sent
Doncaster to appease them, Hist. Gr. Br. will have it 60000. l.
at the charge of three thousand five hundred pounds. His Son-in-Law sent
indeed for his advice, and accepts the Crown three days after, which the King
never approved of for three reasons. 1. Religion, not as the Jesuits to dispose
and overthrow Kingdoms, but with our Savior to uphold. 2. He was no judge, and
ignorant of those laws, Quis te judicem fecit? 3. That he treated a Peace, and
will not be party, yet he left not to preserve his Childrens patrimony, and
accounts to them his Receipts for that purpose, and how disposed.


He borrowed of his Brother of Denmark 7500.l. And of his own added 2500 And
sent this to his Son And to the Princes to hearten them 30000 Total 40000l.

That had the Princes done their parts his handful of men had not failed, Anno
1621.
and now he must be fain to persuade, unless a strong hand assist, and purposes
to provide a strong Army next Summer, and desires them to consider his
necessities; qui cito, bis dat.

And shows his equity to them, in course of Law never obstructing Ju^gement, by
message or Sentence.

W^shes them to consider advance of Trade, and why his Mint has stood still
the^e nine years; confesses his Royal heart liberal in Gran^s; but being
informed he will amend any grievance; but yet he tells them, that who ever
hastens after grievances, and neglects all other business of greater moment,
has the Spirit of Sa^an; for himself will reform any error; and desires that
the world may speak well of their mutual agreeing.

Thus much in effect the King told them, and which prepared their wild
resolutions, to strike at Prerogative now, to undermine it, Digby Extraordinary
Ambassador to the Emperor.
only by qu^rrelling with the Kings best Ministers and whilst these bandy in
the Lower House; the King proceeds in his Public course, concerning Germany,
and forthwith sends the Lord Dig^y, extraordinary to the Emperor for a
posi^ive answer for rendition of the Palatinate by force or friendship.

These businesses abroad and expense at home brings him to account with his
Exchequer, Sir Lionel Cranfield I* Treasurer.
where he finds his Exits increased the Incomes, and intending the best
Husbandry to piece out the expense, He changes his Treasurer Mountague, for
other preferments of honor and profit, and puts in Sir Lionel Cranfield [upon
no other merit (says one) but for marrying the Marquesses Kin] such Another
says more. Co. and ch p. 87.


But I find him of an ancient family in Gloucester-shire, and being bred a
Merchant Adventurer of London, and other his extraordinary qualities, in that
and other Commendable ways, became useful to the State also.

And first had the honor of Knighthood, then the custody of the Kings
Wardrobes, afterward Master of the Court of Wards and Liveries, and now Lord
Treasurer, and created Earl of Middlesex.

Some busy Barons had gotten together a gang of Discontents, of several
Titles, and framed a petition, and their hands to it; with this General Title.

The humble Petition of the Nobility of ENGLAND. Anno 1620.

SHOWS,
THat whereas your Majesty by importunity of some natural subjects of England,
Petition against the multitude of titles of Honor.
has conferred upon them Honors, Titles, and Dignities, peculiar to other
your Majesty's Dominions, by which the Nobility of this Realm find themselves
prejudiced. Our humble desire is, that with your allowance we may challenge and
preserve our Birthrights, withont any notice of those Titulars to our
Prejudice; and to be excused to deny them the respect or place as to Noble men
Strangers. Seeing that these being our Countrymen, born and abide here, have
yet procured their Translation into foreign names only to our injury.

But in this address, we meddle not to limit or interpret the power of your
Sovereignty (being the root whence all Honor receives Sap, under what title
soever) to collate what you please upon whom, and how you please.

The Subsigners were,
Oxford, Essex, Warwick, Abergaveny, Dacres, Darcy, Sheffield, Cr^mwel, Scroop,
Sturton, St. John, Paget, Dudley, Spencer, Say.
The Barons indeed came behind, but few Earls had cause so to complain. And it
was Say (I remember well) the Ringleader of all, though the last in Rank, and
least in prejudice.

But his prejudice and subtilty, steered the way to the rest, who having a
loose Brother amongst them (perhaps many more) stole the Copy to the King, and
betrayed their intentions, before it was well-moulded.

The King wisely sent for them a sunder, and roughly told them, their Petition
was saucy, but ended humbly; concluding themselves, not to expostulate his
power or pleasure, which if any of them sought to question, they should soon
find the effects; but the first Man declined it, as brought in by the buy, and
so did the second and third; the rest took pattern from their submission, Hist.
Gr. Br. p 189.
and here was an end of that ranting Petition; for our Author would enforce
belief, That the King pulled up his Spirits, when he told Essex, He feared him
not with his forty* thousand men; But the Proverb alludes in scorn to the
folly of the French, Oh the King of France and forty thousand men, and then
with more disdam on Essex.

Hereupon the Commons take example, and Petitions are framed, Petitions against
Gri^vances.
as from the people, but indicted by the Parliament: A custom which the Commons
house in those times took up to make business, rather than be idle.

And first they fall upon Patents for Inns, Alehouses, Gold and Silver Thread
counterfeit, (precious matter to spend time, being now to quarrel with the
Empire.)

The last of them, Hist. gr. Br. pa. 135.
Our Historian says [was of sophisticate materials, engrossing all the Trade
of that Ages vanity (only in Gold and Silver Lace) and so poisonous were the
Druggs of the Composition, that rotted hands and arms, with lameness upon the
very work-folks, loss of their Eyes and Lives, by venom of the vapors that
came from it] ah abominable un truth!

The Patron of this Patent was an honorable Lord, though led aside by
Instruments whom he trusted. Indeed a Pragmatick Lawyer, whose weakness in that
Profession came behind the ordinary Practisers, and therefore he got a
Privilege and Prerogative to be first heard at the Bar, and was nicknamed
Prerogative Pleader, until a witty Judge told him, he should have the first
Motion, but not to be granted at all.

Sir Giles Mompeson, the Patentee for Inns.

Sir Francis Michel for Alehouses, two corrupt Justices of the Peace. It were
wished that they might have been the last of that race. But these Patents
taking up more time in the Disquisition, than their serious business should
permit, the King rouses the Lords to their Sentence of them with this Speech.

MY LORDS,
THE last time I informed you, The Kings Speech to the Lords.
the Verity of my Proceedings, and caution, in passing these Patents in
question, by way of Declaration, and now to express my desire, to have your
sentence and execution, against Mompesson, who though he be fled, my
Proclamation pursued him, and shall be as earnest to see your sentence against
him executed.

And tells them his Reasons: 1. That there being a Politic Marriage betwixt
Him and his people, he is in duty to God, tied to the care of good government.
And had these things been complained of before, he would have redressed them
sooner: Remembering them what he has often said, That no private person should
be respected before the public good, not only of the whole Commonweal, but
even of a particular Corporation, that is but a member of it.

2. That he intends not to infringe but to satisfy the House Liberties, for
never any King did so much for them, and will do more; and assures them that
the Presidents of former good government shall warrant them to him.
Acknowledging them the Supreme Court of Justice, Himself as present by
Representation. And to add to their Honor; he has made the Prince a member
amongst them: Professes the love and respect he has received from the Lower
House, in their proceedings. And always the like from the Lords, especially by
relation of his son, of them all in general and particular; and the like (he
said) by One that sits there, Buckingham, a proof whereof the Earl of Arundel
witnessed in his report to them, of the privileges of Nobility, how earnest he
was therein.

Acknowledges the free gift of this Parliament of two Subsidies, and so
accepted by him, which he will re^ribute by a General Pardon, at the end of the
Parliament, and will do somewhat in ease of the people till then.

As for the Alehouses, he refers to the Justices of Peace. For the Gold and
Silver Thread, he damm's the Patent, which may serve for a Pardon to the Actors
therein.

Another Bill against Informers, he desires may be put to an end, for (he
says) that heretofore he has showed in Star Chamber his dislike of such
people. And that Buckingham told him, that since this Parliament, he was not
haunted with such spirits, as usually he had been vexed.

Tells them plainly, he is assured, That this external Government for learned
Judges, and hopes honest administration of Justice, and with Peace and Plenty,
yields to every one safety under his Vine and Fig Tree; yet he understands his
Subjects vexations by vile execution of Projects, Patents, Bills of Conformity,
and such like, which more exhaust the peoples purses than Subsidies.

Then he comes close to the Lords, the effect of his errand, He advises them of
their Judgment; Agere bonum, and been bonum is good proof before Judgment.
Been is the formality and legality to advise with the Judges, so the ground
good, the form orderly, it will befit the Court of Parliament.

The Sentence he observes in two parts; that which is worthy the Judging and
censuring; And secondly, to proceed as against these Delinquents, so against
such like crimes. Complaints are of passion, justly distinguish, innocent from
guilt, and do it legally; for Moral Reason supposes, breach of Laws, standing
in force, otherwise they punish by predestination.

And concludes, against his late Attorney General, Sir Henry Yelverton Prisoner
in the Tower, upon Sentence in Star Chamber. That he being accused besides
concerning a Warrant- dormant; he freely delivers him over unto their Judgment.

Thus we see what the King says; But as in this Speech, Anno 1621.
so in all others of his, our Historian fails not to let in his conceited
descant, not worth the Dispute, and excuses Yelverton, as he does all Offenders
against the King.

Sir Henry Yelverton was Attorney General, and by his place of Employment, it
was his duty to mann^ge the charge of Impeachments against Somerset, or any
Subject whatsoever without dispute, which yet he refused, as receiving that
place by his favor; for which contempt to the Kings service, not without more
than suspicion of concealment of some passages concerning Overburies death; he
was for those reasons (and deservedly) by the whole Court of Star Chamber,
unanimously sentenced, and so of course committed to the Tower, close Prisoner;
where we are to be persuaded also by the Pamphleter,

That the Lieutenant of the Tower Balfore, Co. and Chapter p. 156.
admits Buckingham to treat with him in prison, and then to piece out a peace
between them both.

Certainly, Yelverton had law to teach him (or any other Prisoner of Reason)
that this was Treason in Balfore, and in Buckingham also to attempt. And
therefore to clear it, Balfore himself has since avowed to a Prisoner,
sometime under his Guard, that there was never any such act done by Buckingham,
or any other by his permission. But afterward upon Yelvertons humble
submission for his former fault, and his innocence (in some doubts) cleared
from other suspicions, he was set at Liberty. And in truth according to the
merit of the Man, he was afterward entrusted with the judgment Seat.

But what was this secret information, which we are told he should tell
Buckingham? That which the King spoke in Parliament, viz. Not to spare any that
was dearest, or lay in his bosom, by which he pointed to you, says Yelverton
(meaning Buckingham.)

And must Buckingham adventure his and the Lieutenants head to learn this news;
which no doubt the Favorite heard before, being at the Kings elboe.

And this discourse pretended by our Pamphleter betwixt Buckingham, and
Yelverton in the Tower, Hist. gr. Br. pa. 158.
our Historian himself, that passes by nothing to pick his cavils, suspects the
truth thereof. But will nothing satisfy but Yelvertons own hand, see what he
says in his Letter to Buckingham upon his return out of Spain? dated the
fifteenth of March, 1623. Which we enter here.

May it please your Grace,
MY humble heart, etc. will be glad to expiate my errors at any rate,
Yelvertons L^tte^ to Buckingham.
etc. Your noble Heart, (I hope) harbors no memory of what I gave distaste,
your own merits, which have so much enobled you, will be the more complete. If
I seek your Grace before I deserve it, enable me I beseech you to deserve that
I may seek.

If any, on whom you have cast your eye most, endear himself more to your
service then I shall; let me not follow the vintage at all. Till this day I
feared the relish of sour grapes, though I have sought you with many broken
sleeps, but this Noble Earl (whose honor* for this work shall ever with me be
second to yours) has revived me with assurance of your Graces pardon and
liberty, to hope I may be deemed your Servant. I protest to God, it is not the
affluence of your honor makes me joy in it, not the power of your Grace, that
trains me on to seek it, but let the trial of your fortunes speak thus much for
me, that I will follow you, not as Cyrus his Captains and Soldiers followed
him for Spoil or place, but if with safety to your Grace, though with peril to
my self I may serve you, let me die if I do it not, rather than want longer,
what my humble love ever led me to, and still to affect the honor to be,

Yours, etc. Henry Yelverton.


This if he were guilty, was very ingenuous, if innocent, most base.

Sir Francis Michel, for his crimes concerning his undue Execution of his
Justiceship of the Peace, Michel censured.
is degraded the honor of Knighthood, and rode with his face to the Horse-tail
through the strand. and Mompesson,
The same sentence had Mompeson of his Inns, but he runs away out of their
reach as far as France.

In this Parliament of searching the sores of Complaints appears the Chancelour
Sir Francis Bacon to his censure for Bribery and Extortion, but to mollify the
Sentence, he submits and supplicates the Lords in Parliament, and because you
shall see what he could say, I shall set it down at length very witty and worth
the reading.

To the Right Honorable the Lords of the Parliament, the Upper House assembled.
The humble submission and supplication of the Lord Chancellor.
May it please your Lordships,
I Shall humbly crave at your hands benign interpretation of that which I shall
now write, for words that come from wasted Spirits, and oppressed minds are
more safe for being deposited to a noble Construction, than being circled with
any reserved caution.

This being moved (and^ I hope obtained of) your Lordships as a protection to
all that I say I shall go on but with a very strange entrance, as may seem to
your Lordships at first; for in the midst of a State of as great affection as I
think a mortal man can endure honor being above life I shall begin with the
professing of gladness in some things.

The first is that hereafter the greatnesss of a Judge or Magistrate shall be
no sanctuary or protection to him against guiltiness, which is the beginning of
a golden work.

The next that after this example, it is like that Judges will fly from any
thing in the likeness of corruption, without it were a great distance, as from
a Serpent which tends to the purging of the Courts of Justice and reducing them
to their true honor and splendor.

And in these two points God is my witness I thought it be my fortune to be the
anvil upon which these two are broken and wrought, I take no small comfort but
to pass from the motions of my heart whereof God is my Judge to the merits of my
cause, whereof your Lordships are Judges under God, and his Lieutenant; I do
understand there has been expected from me some Justification, and therefore I
have chosen one only Justification, instead of all others out of the
Iustifications of Job, for after the dear submission and confession, which I
shall now make unto your Lordships, I hope I may say, and justify with Job, in
these words, I have not hid my sin as did Adam, nor consealed my faults, in my
bosom; this is the only Justification, which I will use.

It rests therefore that without Fig Leaves, I do ingenuously confess, and
acknowledge that having understood the particulars of the charge not formerly
from the house, but enough to inform my conscience and memory, I find matter
sufficient and full both to move me to desert my defense, and to move your
Lordships to condemn and censure me, neither will I trouble your Lordships by
singling these particulars to which I think I might fall off. Quid te exempla
juvant spinis de pluribus una? Neither will I promise your Lordships to observe
upon the proofs where they come not home, or the scruple touching the credits
of the Witness; neither will I represent to your Lordships, how for a defense I
might in diverse things extenuate the offense, in respect of the time and manner
of the guilt, and the like circumstances, but only leave these things to spring
out of your more noble thoughts and observations of the evidence and
examinations themselves, and charitably to wind about the particulars of the
charge, as God shall put into your minds, and so submit my self wholly to your
piety and grace.

And now I have spoken unto your Lordships as Judges, I shall say a few words
unto you as Peers and Prelates, humbly commending my cause to your noble minds
and magnanimous affections.

Your Lordships are not simply Judges, but Parliamentary Judges, you have a
further extent of arbitrary power than other Courts, and you are not tied by
ordinary course of Courts or Presidents, in points of Strickness, and severity,
much less in points of mercy, and yet if any thing which I shall move might be
contrary to your honorable and worthy end, the entroducing a reformation, I
should not seek it, but herein I beseech your Lordships to give me leave to
tell you a story.

Titus Manlius took his Sons life for giving battle against the prohibition of
his General; not many years the like severity was persued by Papinius Cursor
the Dictator, against Quintus Maximus, who being upon the point to be
sentenced, was, by the intercession of some particular person of the Senate,
spared; whereupon Livie makes this grave and gracious observation, Neque minus
formata est disciplina militaris periculo Quinti Maximi quam miserabili,
supplicio Titi Manlii; The Discipline of War was no less established by the
questioning of Quintus Maximus, than by the punishment of Titus Manlius, and
the same reason is in the reformation of Justice: for the questioning of men in
eminent places has the same terror, though not the same rigor with the
punishment. But my cause stays not there, for my humble desire is, that his
Majesty would take the seal into his own hands, which is a great downfall, and
may serve, I hope, in it self for an expiation of my faults.

Therefore if mercy and mitigation be in your Lordships power and no way cross
your ends, why should not I hope of favor and commiseration. Your Lordships
will be pleased to behold your chief pattern, the King our Sovereign, a King of
incomparable clemency, and whose heart is inscruteable for wisdom and
goodness. And your Lordships will remember there sat not these hundred years
before a Prince in your House, and nevee such a Prince, whose presence deserves
to be made memoriable by Records and Acts, mixed with mercy and Justice. Your
selves are either Nobles (and compassion ever beats in the veins of noble
blood) or reverend Prelates, who are the servants of him that would not break
the bruised Reed nor quench the smoking flax. You all sit upon an high Stage,
and therefore cannot but be senseable of the changes of humane condition, and
of the fall of any from high place.

Neither will your Lordships forget, that there are Vitia Temporis, as well as
Vitia Hominis; and the beginning of Reformation has the contrary power to the
Pool of Bethesda; for that had strength to cure him only that was first cast
in, and this has strength to hurt him only that is first cast in, and for my
part I wish it might stay there and go no further.

Lastly, I assure my self your Lordships have a noble feeling of me as a member
of your own body, and one that in this very Session had some taste of your
loving affection, which I hope was not a lightning before the death of them,
but rather a spark of that grace, which now in the conclusion will more appear.
And therefore my humble suit to your Lordships is, That my penitent submission
may be my Sentence, the loss of my Seal, my punishment, and that your Lordships
will recommend me to his Majesty's pardon for all that is past. Gods holy
Spirit be amongst you.

Your Lordships humble Servant and Suppliant, Fran. St. Albons Canc.
April 22.

This Petition found the full effects, pity and compassion from all, procured
pardon also from the King, with the loss only of his Peerage and Seal; for so
weak a husband he had been to lay up any store for the future, that the King
allowed him a pension to his death.

He was a person complete, His character.
of excellent parts and general learning, with that of the Law, as proper for
that place as any man of the Gown.

His merits made him so then, which his vices in continued time, and now,
basely blemished, and he justly removed, to his private studies, which render
him to the world full of worth. And with small charity of the Scorner, might
merit the Bays before many men of that age.

Indeed his Doom was designed by his Enemies as far as Scotland, Co. and Chapter p.
126.
at the Kings last being there, and such a distance, might deal some
disadvantage to a Wiser Man. Yet the King at first intending but to let him
loose, only to exercise him with the change of his chance, like as a rub to an
overthrown Bowl, which proves oftentimes an help to the Caster, by hindering
its course; but it fell out more fatal to him which lasted to the end, and
thereby wrought its best use; In the midst of sufferings the bread of sorrow
tastes better than the Banquet of fools; for afflictions brings such men's souls
to be Saints at the Mark, which otherwise would be overgrown with too much
Greatness.

His memorable abilities remain but in few, and his compassionate infirmities
common to all. To expiate which he did as became him to do to the House of
Peers [prostrate himself] and sins, Hist. G^. B^. p. 159.
which ingenuously he acknowledged, promising amendment of his life, and made
it good to the Worlds eye. Those excellent works contrived in his retirement,
do evidently manifest his wit and worth, with much regret to many good men,
that such an one, should be fallen off from the face of State.

In Bacons place comes Doctor Williams Dean of Westminster, Dr. Williams
succeeds to be Lord keeper.
by the Title of Keeper of the Great Seal of England, the same power and
Jurisdiction as the Chancelour, see Statute quinto Elizab. which was not so
besore. At first, but as Vice-Chancelour. Matthew Paris says, Custodiam
^igilli Regii accepit Cancelarii Vices Acturus and Officium, etc.

He was also then made Bishop of Lincoln together to make him more capable of
the Office; [brought in, Co. and chapter pa. 139.
says one, to serve turns, which no Layman was bad enough to undertake.]

Former ages held it more consonant to reason to trust the Conscience of the
Clergy with the case of the Layman, they best knowing a Case of Conscience,
and anciently the Civil Laws were adjudged by the Ministers of the Church, and
the Chancery, and other Courts of Equity, then in the charge of a Divine
Minister.

And therefore a mistake in the Record that sets it down as a Wonder, for an
Archbishop of Saint Andrews to be made Chancelour of Scotland by King Charles
[a thing (he says) not known in that Kingdom for three hundred years before,
Reign of K. Charl^s, page 128.
for a Clergy man to bear that office] But we find James Seaton, and David
Seaton, both Archbishops of Saint Andrews, and Chancelours of Scotland, within
one hundred years space. And many other Archbishops and Bishops within three
hundred years, not only Chancelours, but Judges of the Law, Master of the
Robes, and other Offices of Judicature; By which means, (their only
Bishoprics too poor) they advanced to degrees of wealth, enabling them to
erect most of those sumptuous Fabrics of piety and Honor in that Nation, and
so in England by our Clergy, by this man also in some measure.

So ran the Channel, till Bacons father had it from a Bishop, and now a Bishop
has it again, and had King James lived to have effected his Desires, the Clergy
had fixed firm footing in Courts of Judicature (out of the rode of the
Common Law) and this was the true cause of Williams initiation thither, his
quality thus fitted for the Kings intention.

He was in truth Chaplain to Buckinghams Mother, and let into Court, parallel
in some degree with Cardinal Richlieus entrance by Queen Mother of France, a
Man may take view of these conformities, not few, if you consider proportions,
what is allowed to the Jesuit must rebate of the Reformed, and what this man
could not do in competition as the other, his aim showed his will, but not the
effect.

But at his entrance into this Trust, comes two Bills signed from the King to
be made Patents by the Seal; the one for a Pension of two thousand pound per
annum, and the other for the Office of Earl Marshal of England, both of them to
be conferred upon the Earl of Arundel.

The first (though with some regret in those unseasonable times to receive such
large pensions), which yet he sealed, but took upon him to trench upon the Lord
Treasurer Middlesex, (who willingly gave way to it) for which they both had
enmity ever after. Dignity of the Earl Marshal* of England.


The later he refused upon these Queries.

1. Whether in the Delivery of the Staff to the Earl, his Majesty did not
declare it to him for ease of the other Commissioners that executed it before
with him, and so to imply no enlargement of power, which this Patent does?

2. Whether his Majesty means, that this Patent, leaping over the powers of the
three last Earls, Essex, Shrewsbury, and Somerset, should refer only to
Arundels own Ancesters, Howards and Mowbrays, Dukes of Norfolk, who claimed
that place by Inheritance? the usual way and reference of Patents, being unto
the last, and immediate Predecessor, and not to the remote; whose powers
heretofore in these troublesome times, were vage, uncertain and impossible to
be limited.

3. Whether that this Lord, should bestow those Offices settled in the Crown,
as Sir Edward Zouches in Court, Sir George Reynolds in the Kings Bench, and
diverse others, all which this Great Patent sweeps away, being Places of Worth
and Dignity?

4. Whether my Lord Stewards place shall be (for all his power of Judicature is
in the Verge) either altogether extinguished, or at least subordinate to the
Office? A point considerable because of the Duke of Lenox, who was Steward, his
greatness of Person, and neerness of blood to the King. And here he claws him.

5. Lastly, whether that the Offices of the Earl Marshall of England, and the
Marshall of the Kings house (in former times distinct) shall be now united to
this great Lord?

A power limited by no Law or Record, but to be searched out from Heralds,
Chronicles, Antiquaries, and such absolute Monuments; and thereupon this sixty
years (for Essex his power was clearly limited, only as Marshall) unfit to be
revived by the Policy of this State.

And by these queries the Patent was pared, which increased malice to the end
of their Days.

Certainly there is a difference between the Earl Marshal of England, and the
Marshal of the Kings House: See Lambert Archiron, or of the High Courts of
Justice in England.

The Marshall of England, and the Constable are united in a Court, which
handles only Duells out of the Realm, and matters within, as Combats Blazon,
Armory, but may not meddle with any difference tryable by the Laws of the Land.

The Marshal of the Kings Household is united in a Court with the Steward, which
holds Plea of Trespass, Contracts and Covenants made within the Verge; and that
by the Laws, Articl. super Cart. cap. 3, 4, 5.

The honor of Lord Marshal is so ancient, as Thomas Lord Mowbray by Richard 2.
was created Duke of Norfolk, and the first Earl Marshal of England, anno 1397.

And so successively unto John Lord Mowbray, who dyed the 15. of Edward 4. anno
1475. and had issue one only Daughter, married unto Richard Duke of York,
second son of Edward the fourth, and was by his Father created Duke of Norfolk
and Earl Marshall of England, murdered in the Tower, anno 1483 without issue.

Then comes John Howard (Son of the Daughter, and coheir of Thomas Mowbray Duke
of Norfolk) and was by Richard the third created Duke of Norfolk, but not Earl
Marshall. Nor was his Son Thomas, but Thomas his son was by H. 8. created Earl
Marshal of England.

Afterward was Seymer by Edward the sixth created Duke of Somerset, and Earl
Marshal of England. And after him came the Grandchild of Thomas Mowbray, and
was by Q. Mary created Earl Marshal of England.

Then Robert Devereux Earl of Essex made Marshal of England by Q. Elizabeth.

And now this Thomas Howard Earl of Arundel, and the last Earl Marshall of
England.

But in time this Patent was divided, which his greatness intended to swallow
up whole.

And because we have done with the Keeper and his Office, we will take our
leave of him with this Character which here follows.

His Acts of Piety to the ragged and ruinous Church of Westminster, new
clothing, warm and dry, L. Keeper his Character.
adorned with the Statues and Structures of the ancient English Saints, and in
truth and merit, set up his Master King James amongst them. And though he
sucked not the Milk of Oxford University, yet he founded a decent complete
Chapel to Lincoln College there, and erected the Library at Westminster, as
also that Eminent Structure the Library of St. John's at Cambridge, where he had
been Master for many years. He had a large heart to men of learning and Arts,
and though his Stately gait, at a blush might present him to appear proud to
the common Man, yet abating the nature of his Birthplace a Welsh man, he was
not so to conversation; for he made himself more familiar at the College School
at Westminster, than at Court, not leaving that society and Mr. Osbastons
Company, for the consort of Courtiers at Whitehall.

His bounty like that of Caesar, who gave gifts like a King, even to mean
Beggars; witness a hundred pound gratuity to Monsieur du Molin a Minister of
France, to welcome him hither, when, in the Judgment of his Chaplain 20 l. had
been sufficient.

His blaze at Court lasted out this King, which by quarreling with Lawd the
Archbishop afterward, retired him to Bugden, where he lived the most
Episcopal of any Priests his Predecessors; how he fell from that, and other
ways after, from worse to worst of all, evil example being no rule to a
Prelates conscience, we leave him dead to his last account, the time of Gods
grace and mercy, 1652.

Amongst the factious party of this Parliament, were a knot of discontents,
well mingled for Mutiny, high^born; Ambitious-bold, to bear out any
complottings, which Subtilty suggested, and Hypocrisy dissembled, and got in
also the plain meaning man, and altogether to supplant Order of Church and
State; Other Characters would be counterfeit; a Halter take him that would
mistake them, a fitter line for his long story. Indeed to busy these had been
(junto of them) of whose disposition the King was justly sensible, and
therefore thought fit to separate their contrivings, and by proroguing the
Parliament the 4. of June, till Novem. 20. sent them home during his Summers
Progress, and this he did, sudainly to see what they would do, which, as he
suspected came forth in Declaration, thus.

The Commons fair Declaration to assist the King to recover the Palatinate.
THE Commons assembled in Parliament taking into most serious consideration;
the present State of the Kings children abroad, and generally afflicted estate
of the true Professors of the same Christian Religion (professed by the Church
of England) in foreign parts, and being truly touched with a true sense and
fellow-feeling of their distresses, as members of the same body do with an
unanimous consent in the name of themselves, and the whole Body of the Kingdom
(whom they represent) declare unto his most excellent Majesty, and to the whole
world their hearty grief and sorrow for the same; and do not only join with
them in their humble, and d^vout prayers unto Almighty God, to protect his true
Church, and to avert the dangers now threatened, but also with one heart and
voice, do solemnly protest; That if his Majestyes pious endeavors by Treaty to
procure their peace and safety, shall not take that good effect which is
desired in Treaty (wherein they humbly beseech his Majesty not to suffer any
longer delay) that then upon signification of his Majesty's pleasure in
Parliament, they shall be ready to the utmost of their powers, both with their
Lives and Fortunes to assist him so, as that by the Divine help of Almighty God
(which is never wanting unto those who in his fear shall undertake the Defense
of his Cause) he may be able to do that with his Sword, which by a peaceable
course shall not be effected.

This is well said, and the King put them to Trial sor assistance in money, the
sinews to help on the Treaty first, and for settlement of the future effects by
the Sword in case the other failed.

And sundry overtures and propositions amongst themselves somewhat resolving,
then again declined, and as with the houses, the like between the King and
them, that nothing was concluded in pursuit of their fair promises and
specious pretenses, and so they part home to their Houses, and the King to his
hunting.

And in Autumn returns to Hampton Court, where meets him Digby; come home from
his Ambassy, with Answers dilatory, and doubtful, and therefore commands him to
declare the particulars to the Parliament, which was now set from his last
Recess.

He tells them,

That his Majesty commanded him to account to them his Negotiations with the
Emperor, who upon advantage of fortune in the success of Bohemia, has invaded
the i^heritance of his Son the Palatine; That he was directed to treat of
Peace, which he seemed to incline to, but the Diet in Germany being deferred,
they both suffered the delay by depending on it, and the Princes; in the end
Restitution was promised of the Palatinate, which was only granted by
Commission to the Duke of Bavaria, until it should be otherwise settled by
Peace or War.

That the Emperors Letters addressed him to the Duke, wishing his tractable
condescent to terms of peace; upon which occasion he urged that he had
authority from the Palatine, to cause Count Mansfield to desist from War, and
the like from the King to Sir Horace Vere.

That the Duke answered, He had becalmed Mansfield with money, who being at
quiet, his peace was made. To which scornful reply something (he says) was
answered; and so departed to the Infanta at Bruxels, who seemed to understand
by the Emperors Letters, his preparations rather for War than Peace, and would
give no direct answer till she heard from the King of Spain; who (he confesses)
stood at this t^me clearly a Newter; yet is he now prepared with five great
Armies in motion, which will not misbecome the Wisdom of State to fear the
worst, and therefore for the Kingshonour, and his Sons right, he presumes they
will contribute not only aid to the present support, but supply to invest his
Son into his Inheritance.

But this, nor what else could be said by others, the true Ministers, and
Patriots of State, could work ought out of the Parliament; for now, being put
to it, they are hide bound; and yet have an excuse, That the King meant not to
fight, for they were afraid he was forward in the Match with Spain, and trusted
rather to treat that way; and therefore intend not to assist him with Money for
a War abroad, nor support of his Wants at home.

But to shadow over their resolve, they prepare to expostulate these
distempers, and lay down a pretended way to the Remedies, which the King
understood by some of their own, ashamed to assist in such thwarting courses,
when necessity at home, and honor abroad called for speedy redress. The King
retires to New Ma^ket in discont^nt.
And therefore the King in disdain to attend their slow Motions, leaves them to
their lazy Committee, and whilst they are hammering out a Remonstrance, he
took no leave but went to New Market.

And there with regret of the unking Parliament, together with the Miseries of
the Reformed Churches in Germany; the persecution of the Protestants in France,
besieged in Rochel and Montauban, the one by Count Soissons and the Duke of
Guise; the other by that King; and Doncaster sent thither Extraordinary to
mediate the Peace; which King James could not fight for with like Success, as
usually words have prevailed with Swords; The King (I say) fell into deep
discontent. Notwithstanding our Calumniator here, as in all other the like
places [Loads the King with the loss of all] for not fighting without men or
money. Hist. gr. B^. pa. 172.


[If the Kings spirit (says he) had been raised up to a War when the voice of
God, being the voice of the People called him to it, it might have hindered the
great effusion of blood amongst our selves that happened after in his sons
time.]

The consequence of all our sequel Miseries he derives from this King, which
truly then and after came from the Houses of Parliament.

The King not so far off, but had his spies and Intelligence, with a Copy of
the Remonstance, and thought to save them the labor, in a Letter to the
Speaker, Sir Thomas Richardson.

Mr. Speaker, K. letter to the Speaker.

WE have heard, to Our grief, tha^ Our distance from the Parliament caused by
Our indisposition of health; has imboldned some ^iery and popular Spirits of
the Lower House, to debate Matters above their Capacity, to Our dishonor and
breach of Prerogative Royal.

These are therefore to command you to make known to them, that none shall
hereafter presume to meddle with any thing concerning our Government, or
Matters of State, with Our Sons Match with the Daughter of Spain, nor to touch
the Honor of that King, or any other Our Friends or Confederates. Nor with any
Man's particulars which have their due Motion in Our Ordinary Courts of Justice.

And whereas they have sent a Message to Sir Edwin Sandis to know the Reasons
of his late Restraint, you shall resolve them, It was not for any Misdemeanour
of his in Parliament; but to put them out of doubt of any question hereafter of
that nature, we think our self very free and able to punish any Man's
misdemeanors in Parliament, as well sitting there as after, which we mean not
to spare hereafter upon any occasion of any man's; and if they have touched any
points (which we have here forbidden) in any petition of theirs, which is to be
sent to us, tell them (except they reform it) we will not daign the hearing, or
answering.

New Market; December. 3. 1621. James Rex.


But on the Parliament will; yet to sweeten the bitter Pill, they accompany
another Remonstrance with a Petition, to this effect they are put together.

Most dread and gracious Sovereign,
WE your most humble and loyal Subjects, The Parliaments petition to the King.
etc. in the Commons House of Parliament, full of grief, etc. through the sense
of your Majesty's displeasure, expressed by Letter unto our Speaker, and read
unto us; yet comforted with assurance of your Grace and Goodness to us, and of
the sincerity of our proceedings.

In all humbleness, etc. beseech the King.

That their Loyalties may not suffer by misinformation of partial Reports, but
rather to understand from themselves what their humble Declaration and Petition
does contain; the occasion of their consideration of what is therein contained,
and their intention.

They beseech his Majesty not to give credit to private Reports against all or
any Member, until they inform him, and that they may stand in his Majesty's
good opinion.

The Remonstrance runs thus in effect.

That upon their last re-assembling, His Majesty did by three Lords impart to
them these particulars following.

That notwithstanding the Kings piety to procure Peace, the time is now come
that Janus Temple must be opened.

No hope of Peace nor Truce.

Either the King must abandon his children, or engage in a War, and so to be
considered what foot, horse and money sufficient?

That the Lower Palatinate was seized by the Army of the King of Spain, as the
Executor of the Ban, then in quality of the Duke of Burgundy, as the Upper part
was by the Duke of Bavaria.

That the King of Spain had five several Armies.

The Princes of the union disbanded, the Catholic League remains firm, to the
ruin of the others, whose estate was miserable. And

That out of these considerations the Parliament were called to a War, and for
supply for keeping forces together, to foresee the means for raising an Army
against the Spring.

And accordingly they did address to that service. And being now invited
thereto, and not only to look after a War abroad, but also for peace at home,
with the increase and insolency of Popish Recusants, urge us unto.

The consideration hereof led them on, as incident and unavoidable to touch
upon the King of Spain, as relation to Popish Recusants at home, and to the
Wars by him maintained against your Children, but without dishonor to Him, or
any of the Kings Confederates.

In which discourse they did not assume to determine, or to incroach upon the
Sacred bounds of your Royal Authority, to whom, and in whom only it belongs to
resolve of peace or War. But as humble subjects to demonstrate these things to
his Majesty, and humbly to lay it down at his feet.

This being the effect of their resolves in their Declaration and Petition.

They humbly desire his Majesty to receive them by those their Messengers with
favorable interpretation, and to so much as concerns Papists, the passing of
Bills, and granting his Pardon royal, that he will be pleased to answer.

And concerning those General Words in the Kings Letter, Not to intermeddle
with Matters of Government, or particulars which have motion in the Courts of
Justice; may involve those things which are proper subjects of Parliamentary
Discourse.

And that his Majesty seems to abridge them, freedom of Speech, and Liberty of
Parliament, etc. they desire his Majesty, to allow them the same.

And pray for his Majesty, etc.


Twelve select Members are sent herewith, whereof Sir R. Weston was the leading
Man entrusted to read them. And until their return with some satisfactory
answer, they resolve not to proceed to any business in the house, but muttering
there was, though they durst not speak out.

The King understanding the silent humor of their Action, and being yet
desirous to have the time better husbanded, Christmasse being at hand commands
his Secretary Calvert to deliver this message to them in Speech, and afterward
in Writing.

His Majesty remembering that this House was desirous to have a Session between
this and Christmas, The Kings Mess^ge by Secretary Calvert.
it pleased him thereupon to signify unto us, that we should have contentment
herein, and that there should be a Session, if we our Selves were not in fault,
taking now notice that we forbear to proceed with any Bills until the return of
the Messengers lately sent to his Majesty, has warned me to command the House
in his name not to lose time in their proceedings, for preparing good Laws in
the mean while, and in consideration of the near approach of Christmasse. And
that his Majesty hopes, We will not take upon us to make a Recess in effect,
though not in show, without his warrant.

But some captious pates take exceptions, as tending to breach of privilege, by
commanding them to proceed with Bills, and so spun out the time and did nothing
till the return of their Messengers, whom the King receives not with overmuch
kindness, knowing the effect of their former petitions, and observing the
Contents of the later; and both reflecting on his Person and Government, which
causeless aspersions, and therefore returns them with this answer to all.

The Kings Answer to their Petition.
WE must here begin in the same fashion that We would have done if your first
Petition had come to our hands before we had made a stay thereof; which is to
repeat the first words of the late Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, used by
her in answer to an insolent Proposition which a Polonian Ambassador made,
that is, Legatum expitamus, Heraldum accipimus. For we had great reason to
expect that the first message from your house should have been a message of
thanksgiving for our continued gracious behavior toward our people since your
last Recess. Not only by Our Proclamation of Grace, wherein were contained six
or seven and thirty Articles, all of several points of Grace to the People; but
also by the labor we took for the satisfaction of both Houses in those three
Articles recommended unto us in both their Names by the right Reverend Father
in God. the Archbishop of Canterbury, and likewise for the good Government of
Ireland we are now in hand with at your Request. But not only have we heard no
news of all this; but contrary great complaints of the danger of Religion
within this Kingdom, tacitly implying Our ill Government in this point. And we
leave you to judge whether it be your duties, that are the Representative Body
of our People, so to distaste them with our Government, whereas by the ^pntrary
it is your duty with all your endeavor, to kindle more and more in duty for
our gracious Government.

Now whereas in the very beginning of this your Apology, you tax us in fair
terms, of trusting uncertain Reports, and partial informations against your
proceedings. We wish you to remember that We are an old and experienced King,
needing no such Lessons, being in Our Conscience, freest of any King a live
from hearing or trusting idle Repotts; Which so many of your House that are
nearest Us can bear witness unto you, if you would give as good ear unto them
as unto some Tribunitial Orators amongst you; And for proof in this particular
We have made your own messengers confer your other Petitions sent by you with
the copy thereof, which was sent us before, between which there is no
difference at all, but that since the receiving the first Copy, you added a
Conclusion unto it; which could not come to our hands till it was done by you,
and your messengers sent, which was all at one time. And if we had had no Copy
of it beforehand, we must have received your first Petition to our great
Dishonor, before we had known what it contained, which would have enforced us
to return unto you a far worse Answer then now we do. For then your Messingers
had returned with nothing, but that we have judged your Petition unlawful and
unworthy of an Answer; for as to your Conclusion thereof it is nothing but
Protestatio contraria facto; for in the body of your Petition, you usurp upon
our Prerogative Royal, and meddle with things far above your reach; and then in
the Conclusion you protest the contrary; as if a Robber would take a man's
purse, and then protest he meant not to rob him. For first you presume to give
us your advice concerning the Match of Our dearest Son with some Protestant, we
cannot say Princess, for we know none of these fit for him, and dissuade Us
from his Match with Spain, urging Us to a present War with that King, and yet
in the Conclusion, forsooth, you profess you intend not to press upon our most
undoubted and Regal Prerogative, as if the petitioning of Us in matters that
your selves confess you ought not to meddle with, were not a meddling with them.

And whereas you pretend that you were invited to this course by the Speeches of
three honorable Lords, yet by so much as your selves repeat of the Speeches,
nothing can be concluded but that we were resolved by War to regain the
Palatinate, if otherwise we could not attain unto it. And ye were invited to
advise forthwith upon a Supply for keeping the forces in the Palatinate from
disbanding, and to foresee the means for the raising and maintaining of the
Body of any Army for that War against the Spring.

Now what inference can be made upon this? that presently we must denounce War
against the King of Spain, break our dearest Sons Match, and match him to one
of our Religion, let the World judge! The Difference is no greater than if we
would tell a Merchant that we had great need to borrow money from him for
raising an Army, that thereupon it should follow, that we are bound to follow
his advice in the Directions of the War, and all things depending thereupon.

But yet not contenting your selves with this excuse of yours, which indeed
cannot hold water, ye come after to a direct contradiction to the Conclusion of
your former Petition, saying, that the Honor and safety of Us and our
Posterity, and the Patrimony of our children, invaded and possessed by their
Enemies, the welfare of Religion and State of our Kingdom, are matters at any
time not unfit your deepest consideration in Parliament.

To this generality we answer with the Logicians, That where all things are
contained nothing is omitted. So as this Plenipotencie of yours invests you
upon all power upon Earth; lacking nothing but the l'opes to have the Keys also
both of Heaven and Purgatory. And to this vast generality of yours, we can give
no other answer, for it would trouble all the Lawyers in the House, to make a
good Commentary upon it. For so did the Puritan Ministers in Scotland, bring
all kind of Causes within compass of their juris^iction, saying, that it was
the Churches Office, to judge of slander, and there could no crime or fault be
committed, but there was a slander in it, either against God, their King, or
their Neighbor, and by that means they looked into themselves the cognizance
of all Causes; or like Bellarmines Distinction of the Popes power over Kings in
ordine ad spiritualia, whereby he gives him all Temporal Jurisdiction over
them.

But to give you a direct answer to the matters of War, for which you are so
earnest; We confess we rather expected you should have given us thanks for the
so long maintaining a settled Peace in all our Dominions, when as all our
Neighbors about are in miserable combustion of War, but dulce bellum
inexpertis, and we indeed find by experience, that a number of our Subjects are
so pampered with Peace, as they are desirous of change, though they know not
what.

It is true that we have professed (and in that mind with Gods grace, we will
both live and die) that we will labor by all means possible; either by Treaty
or force to restore our Children to their ancient dignity and Inheritance, and
whatsoever Christian Princes and Potentates, will set themselves against it, we
will not spare any lawful means to bring ou^ so just and honorable purpose to
a good end. Neither shall the Match of our Son, or any other worldly respects
be preferred to this our Resolution.

For by our credit and intervention with the King of Spain, and the
Arch-Dutchess and her Husband, now with God, we preserved the Lower Palatinate
one whole year, from any further conquering in it, which in any eight days
space in that time might have easily been swallowed up by Spinola's Army,
without any resistance; and in no better case was it now at our Ambassador the
Lord Digby's coming through Heidleburgh, if we had not extraordinarily
succored it.

But because we conceive that ye couple this War of the Palatinate with the
cause of Religion, we must a little unfold your eyes herein.

The beginning of this miserable War which has set all Christendom on fire,
was not for Religion but only caused by Our Son in law his hasty and rash
Resolution, following evil Counsel to take to himself the Crown of Bohemia; and
that this is true, himself wrote Letters to Us at that time, desiring Us to
give assurance both to the French King, and to the State of Venice, that his
accepting of the Crown of Bohemia had no reference to the cause of Religion,
but only by reason of his right of Election (as he called it.) And we would be
sorry that that aspersion should come upon our Religion, as to make it a good
pretext for disthroning of Kings, and usurping their Crowns. And we would be
loath that our people here should be taught that doctrine.

No, let Us not so far wrong the Jesuits, as to rob them of their sweet
Positions and practice in this point. And upon the other part, we assure our
selves so far of your charitable thoughts of us, that we would never have
constantly denied our Son in Law both the title and assistance in that point,
if we had been well-perswaded of the justice of his quarrel. But to conclude
this unjust usurpation of the Crown of Bohemia and Hungaria from the Emperor,
has given the Pope, and all that party, too fair a ground, and opened them too
wide a Gate for curbing and oppressing of many thousands of our Religion in
diverse parts of Christendom.

And whereas you excuse your touching upon the King of Spain, upon occasion of
the incidents by you repeated in that place, and yet affirm, it is without any
touch to his Honor. We cannot wonder enough that ye are so forgetful, both of
your words and writs; for in your former Petition you plainly affirm, that he
affects the Temporal Monarchy of the whole Earth, then which there can be no
more malice uttered against any great King, to make all other Princes and
Potentates both envy and hate him.

But if you list it may be easily tried, whether that speech touched him in
honor or not, if we shall ask him the question, Whether he means to assume to
himself that Title or no? For every King can best judge of his own Honor; we
omit the particular Ejaculations of some foul-mouthed Orators in the House
against the honor of his Crown and State.

And touching your excuse of not determining any thing concerning the Match of
our dearest Son, but only to tell your opinion, and lay it down at our feet.

First, we desire to know, how you could have presumed to determine in that
point without committing of High Treason.

And next, you cannot deny but your talking of his Match after that manner, was
a direct breach of our Commandment and Declaration out of our own Mouth, at the
first sitting down of this Parliament; where we plainly professed, that we were
in Treaty of his Match with Spain, and wished you to have that confidence in
our Religion and Wisdom, that we would so manage it as our Religion should
receivt no prejudice by it. And the same we now repeat unto you, professing
that we are so far engaged in that Match, as we cannot in honor go back,
except the King of Spain perform not such things as we expect at his hands: and
therefore we are sorry that ye should show to have so great distrust in us, or
to conceive that we should be cold in our Religion, otherwise we cannot imagine
how our former Public Declaration should not have stopped your Mouths in this
point.

And as to your Request, that we would now receive your former Petition. We
wonder what could make you presume that we would not receive it; whereas in our
former letter, we plainly declared the contrary unto you, and therefore we have
justly rejected that suit of yours. For what have you left un-attempted in the
highest points of Sovereignty in that petition of yours, except the striking of
Coin? for it contains the violation of Leagues, the particular way how to
govern a War, and the Marriage of our dearest Son; both Negative with Spain, nay
with any Popish Princess, and also Affirmatively, as to the matching with one
of our Religion; which we confess is a strain beyond any Providence or Wisdom
God has given to us, as things now stand.

These are unfit things to be handled in Parliament, except your King should
require it of you; For who can have wisdom to judge of things of that nature,
but such as are daily acquainted with the particulars of Treaties, and of the
variable or fixed connection of Affairs of State, together with the knowledge of
the secret ways, ends and intentions of Princes in their several Negotiations?
otherwise a small mistaking in matters of this Nature, may produce more
effects, than can be imagined. And therefore Ne suitor ultra crepidam.

And besides the intermeddling in Parliament with matter of Peace or War, and
marriage of our dearest Son, would be such a Diminution t^ us, and to our Crown
in Foreign Co^ntreys, as would make any Prince neglect to treat with us, either
in matters of Peace or Marriage, except they might be assured by the assent of
Parliament. And so it proved long ago with a King of France, who upon a trick
procuring his States to dissen^ from some Treaty which before he had made, was
afterward refused Treating with any other Princes to his great reproach,
unless he would first procure Assent of his States to their Proposition. And
will you cast your eyes upon the late times, you shall find that the late Queen
of famous memory, was humbly petitioned by a Parliament to be pleased to marry;
but her answer was, that she liked their Petition well, because it was simple,
not limitting her to any place or person, as not befitting her liking to their
fancies; and if they had done otherwise, she should have thought it a high
presumption in them. Judge then, what we may do in such a case: having made our
public Declaration already (as we said before) directly contrary to that which
you have now petitioned?

Now to the point in your Petition, whereof you desire an answer as properly
belonging to the Parliament.

The first and greatest point is that Religion, concerning which at this time,
we can give you no other answer then in the General, which is, that you may
rest secure, that we will never be weary to do all we can for propagation of
our Religion, and repressing Popery. But the manner and form ye must remit to
our care and providence, who can best consider of times and Seasons; not by
undertaking a publicb War of Religion through all the World at once; which how
hard and dangerous a Task, it may prove, ye may judge. But this puts Us in
mind, how all the World complained the last year of plenty of Corn, and God
has sent us a cooling card this year for that heat. And so we pray God, that
this desire amongst you of kindling war (showing your weariness of peace and
plenty) may not mak^ God permit us to fall into the Miseries of both.

But as we already said, our care of Religion must be such as on the one part,
we must not by the hot persecution of Our Recusants at home, irritate Foreign
Princes of contrary Religion, and teach them the way to plague Protestants in
their Dominions, with whom we daily intercede, and at this time principally to
ease them of our profession that live under them. Yet upon the other part; we
never mean to spare from due and severe punishing of any Papist that will grow
insolent for living under our so mild Government.

And ye may also be assured we will leave no care untaken, as well for the good
Education of the youth at home, especially the children of Papists, as also for
preserving at all times hereafter, the youth that are, or shall be abroad, from
being bred in dangerous places, and so poisoned in Popish Seminaries.

And as in this point, concerning the good education of Popish youth at home,
we have already given some good proofs, both in this Kingdom and Ireland, so
will we be well pleased to pass any good laws that shall be made either now or
any time hereafter to that purpose.

And as to your request of making this a Session, and granting a general
Pardon, it shall be in your defaults, if we make not this a Session before
Christmas. But for the Pardon, you crave such particulars in it, as we must be
well advised upon, least otherwise we give you back the double, or treble, we
are to receive by your entire Subsidy without Fifteens. But the ordinary
course we hold fittest to be used still in this case is, that we should of our
Free Grace send you down a Pardon from the Higher House, containing such points
as we shall think fittest, wherein we hope you shall receive good satisfaction.

But we cannot omit to show you how strange we think it, that you should make
so bad and unjust a Commentary upon some words of our former Letter, as if we
meant to restrain you thereby of your ancient Liberties and Privileges in
Parliament. Truly a Scholar would be ashamed so to mistake, and misjudge any
Sentences in another man's book.

For whereas in the end of our former Letter, we discharge you to meddle in
matters of Government, and Myste^ies of State, namely, matters of War or Peace,
or our dearest Sons match with Spain; by which particular denominations, we
interpret and restrain our former Words; And then after we forbid you to
meddle with such things that have their ordinary course in Courts of Justice;
yet couple together these two sentences, and plainly leave out these words, of
Mysteries of State, so as ye err, a been divisis ad male conjuncta, for of the
former part, concerning Mysteries of State, we plainly restrain our meaning to
the particulars that were after mentioned; and in the later we confess we meant
it by Sir Edward Cooks foolish business.

And therefore it had well becomed him, especially being our Servant, and one
of Our Council, to have complained unto us, which he never did, though he was
ordinarily at Court since, and never had access refused unto him.

And although we cannot allow of the style, calling it your ancient and
undoubted Right and Inheritance, but could rather have wished that ye had said,
That your privileges were derived from the Grace and permission of Our
Ancesters and Us (for most of them grow from Presidents, which shows rather a
Toleration than Inheritance) yet we are pleased to give you Our Royal
assurance, that as long as you shall contain your selves within the Limits of
your duty, we will be as careful to maintain and preserve your lawful Liberties
and Privileges, as ever any of our Predecessors were, nay, as to preserve our
own Royal Prerogative.

So your House had only need to beware to trench upon the Prerogative of the
Crown; which enforce Us, or any just King to retrench them of their Privileges,
that would pare his Prerogative and flowers of the Crown. But of this we hope
there shall be never cause given.

New Market, 11. December 1621. James Rex.

This Answer on Tuesday returned to the House on Friday following, raises a
storm amongst them all, to talk freely, their privileges now violated, denied,
infringed, and therefore committed the particulars to examinatiod. So that the
more moderate amongst them in some doubt and discontent, how to manage it for
reconcilement, which caused an Explanation from the King directed to his
Secretary Calvert from Royston, in his return homewards.

To Our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Counselor, Sir George Calvert, one of
our principal Secretaries.
Right Trusty, etc.
WE are sorry, The K. Letter to Secretary Calvert.
that our reiterated Messages to our House of Commons to go on, they continue
yet to loose time. And now of late upon our gracious Answer, make more delay in
appointing a Committee to consider of the points of our Answer concerning their
privileges. You shall tell them, that to lessen misspent time, we shall descend
to explain our meaning.

Concerning what we said, Not to allow of the style, Their ancient and
undoubted right of Inheritance, which we wished that they had said, Were
derived from grace and permission of our Ancestors, and Us, for most of them
grow from Presidents, a Toleration rather than Inheritance. And the plain truth
is, we cannot endure Subjects to use such Anti-Monarchical words to us; except
subjoined with acknowledgement of grace and favor from us. Yet we never meant
to deny them lawful privileges, as in former times, nor what they have right
unto, or hy Grace now; and so we made that distinction, either by Law, or
Statute, or long Custom, or lawful Presidents; and so we shall maintain them in
their Rights. Therefore advises them to set afide wrangling, and proceed to
that which is fit for the weal of his Crown and Kingdom, otherwise their
curious shifts, maliciously from time to time found out, to frustrate the Kings
good purposes to his Subjects, will come to light, and the Authors not
thankfully rewarded.

Royston, December. 16. 1621.

All these three several Admonitions of the Kings take no effect, for any
obedience to follow, and therefore the King, desirous not to dissolve them,
without some fruit, addresses another Letter to the Speaker Richardson.

Mr. Speaker,
Whereas at the humble suite of Our House of Commons, The Kings Letter to the
Speaker.
we made this Meeting a Session, before Christmasse, and so till Saturday next,
and by our Letters to take away mistakings, we explained Our selves in points
af their privileges; and all to little purpose for preparing things necessary
for a Session, We think good once more to impart our mind, that (for the
Reasons reiterated) we have an earnest desire to make it a Session, free pardon
to the Subjects, and good Laws to be passed, as they have had both by the
unusual examples of Justice, and ^ase and comforts by Proclamation. The passing
of the Subsidy, the continuance of Statutes, and the pardon being the most
pressing to be effected, and the pardon on his part now drawing up. So it
concerns them the Act for the Statutes, And as for the Subsidy, though time
presses, let that be no prejudice if left undon. For on Saturday next he
expects their performance, that so they may go home to their habitations.

Theobalds December 17. 1921.

Nor does this any more prevail, but comes to be excused by way of Petition.

The Parliament return Thanks and Petition.
May it please your Most Excellent Majesty,
We the Knights, The Parliam. return thanks and petition.
Citizens, and Burgesses, etc. after your Majesty's Letter, read this morning
full of grace and goodness, do return our most humble and hearty thanks, etc.
And though we have been desirous to have some good Laws passed, and a Session
before Christmas, yet entering into serious Consideration of those things to
be prepared, and the straitness of time. They humbly submit to the Kings Wisdom
for their departure, and for their re-access to perfect what is begun.


The Kings Reply.
The King returns them Answer, How sorry he was this could not be made a
Session. Excuses himself by his former Advisoes, and lays this blame before
them to their face. He had given Order to adjourn to the eight of February
next. And omits not to tell them that he expects other thanks, then as they
sent to him, for his promises to maintain their privileges so often contained
in his answers, and letters explained and enlarged.

But for all that, the King heard nothing; though this message was delivered to
them the next Morning; The Parliaments Protestation,
and having plotted a Thin House, and a late hour, six a clock at night in
December, not a third part of their number, They enter a Protestation for their
Liberties, in such dubious manner, as may and did for the future, serve to
invade most of the Rights and Prerogatives annexed to the Crown; for grounding
the claim of their Privileges upon the Words in the Writ of Assembling, the
Contrivers of that Protestation craftily mentioned, Super arduis Regni
Negotiis, but of purpose left out Quibusdam, which restrains that generality to
such particular cases as the King consults with them upon, and the uncontroled
customs of all times manifest: For the King or Chancelour usually declares
what things those Quibusdam are, wherein he craves their advice and assistance.

And upon all which undutiful Protestation, the King is justly occasioned to
publish his pleasure for dissolution of this Parliament, by Proclamation to
this effect.

A PROCLAMATION for the dissolving the Parliament.
ALBEIT the assembling, continuing, and dissolving of Parliaments, Dissolved by
Proclamation
be a Prerogative peculiar to our Imperial Crown, yet We are pleased to
acquaint our good Subjects with the reasons of all Our public Resolutions and
actions; intending to have made this the happiest Parliament in our time,
without imputing (however) to the Major part of the Members any want of their
duty, as has been mutually expressed from either party.

Beginning in January with good harmony betwixt us, so as many ages past could
not parallel the like. Their love to us, our Justice to them, extended not
only to private persons, but even upon the prime Officer of Our Kingdom, we
found notwithstanding they misspent time in cavils; yet we gave longer time,
continuing the Session till the eight and twentieth day of May, then the Recess
till the fourth of June; Expressing that our Progress approaching, the
necessity of our Council to attend us; the disfurnishing our Courts of Justice
so many Terms, and the long absence of Justices of Peace and deputy
Lieatenants, from their necessary duties in the Country.

Then we sent them word, we would hear and answer all businesses at an
appointed time. They are notwithstanding in jealousy and expressed discontent;
yet made not their address to us; and thereof we signified our pleasure to both
Houses. The Lords submitted to our Resolutions, passed the Act for some
especial Bills with commendation to the Commons, which they neglect. We
therefore continued the Session for a Fortnight longer. Our self in person
offered to the Lords the passing Bills, had thanks from them, which the Commons
the same day refuse. The Grievances of England and Ireland, (though not
presented to us) were rectified by Proclamations in both Realms.

But during this time of Recess we mediated with the Emperor by Our
Ambassador Digby; upon promise of assistance of Parliament in case that
failed; then we reassemble the twentieth of November, and made known in
particular all the transactions abroad, yet some Members took inordinate
liberty to treat of Our prerogative not fit to be meddled withal, of which we
gave them warning.

[And so reciting all the particular passages beforementioned.]

And therefore concludes, whereas the Assembly of Parliament was adjourned
until the eight of February now next ensuing, we minding not to continue it
any longer, have thought fit to signify our Resolutions with these reasons,
willing and requiring the Prelates, Noble men and States, as also the Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses, and others, etc. to forbear to attend on the said day
prefixed, and that the said Convention of Parliament, shall not be esteemed any
Session of Parliament. And that we shall be glad to take hold of any good
occasion, which we hope shall not be long, to call and assemble a Parliament
again.

Westminster, the 6. of January 1621. 19. Iac.

Hereupon the Members become Subjects again, and being vexed at their dissolve,
Oxford and Southampton committed.
sought their own excuses with scandal of the King. And with that which was
prated then, and what our Historian devises now, base and treasonable abuses;
The State wisely proclaims warning to any such insolent persons, intending to
set a watch upon those of quality; and amongst them who should fall into the
offense, but the Earl of Oxford, and therefore was committed to the Tower,
Hist. Gr. Br. p. 190, 191, 192.
and Southampton to the Dean of Westminster, and Sir Edward Hawly, a Confident
of Oxfords to the Gate House, and all of them close Prisoners, their several
crimes were bold and dangerous Speeches against the King and Council, indeed
Treasonable enough, if true.

Their Accusers were the Domestiques of the Widow, Lady Grisby, a Dame of
Pleasure heretofore, but now declined that and turned Housekeeper to such like
as her self had been. Her Gay-lant was one Sir John Wentworth, a man of a bold
Spirit, and well born, but by ill-Husbandry much decayed in his Estate, the
fitter to be wrought upon to betray Oxford and Hawly; for the most dangerous
words, were table talk between them; They were all close imprisoned, and often
examined; truly their friends were much afraid, that either their own guilt or
the policy of skilful Examiners, of each Prisoner a part, might involve them
all, into destruction. Southampton was best trusted in that, for he had been
versed in questions and answers, under the nocency of Essex Treason; but
therefore more to blame to whisper against his Sovereign now, that restored him
in blood and raised him to preferment and honor.

Oxfords faults were accounted frailties, rather distempers of his natural
condition, derivative from his Father, both of them debauched, and now this Man
(not in malice to the King, but) in a wanton way of ranting, and only envy to
Buckingham.

Hawly, heretofore a Student Templer, discontented with the Court, upon a mean
account; a rough West-Countrey-Blade he was, and being too bold at a Mask in
Court, had his Ear-ring torn out in the bussle, by a dogged ill-natured Scot,
Maxwell, an Usher in Office there; who being challenged for the injury, Hawly
was in hazard to suffer more by seeking his satisfaction this way, and for the
present was committed to the Marshalses, until it increased muttering amongst
the Inns of Court Men; who upon the like occasion) sided in this quarrel. The
King, that knew how to caresse such Students, sent for Hawly, and told him,
that he had considered of the Challenge occasioned from Maxwells duty to his
Service, and therefore now, unwilling to take advantage of his restraint, sets
him at liberty, only upon condition, to make good his Challenge, and himself
would be second to his Man Maxwell; and bids defiance to Hawly to go on; if he
durst; or else (quoth he) in true affection shake hands with him, and be all
friends, and so that quarrel ended, but not Hawlyes malice to Maxwell.

But in this now, the King full of mercy, made not much of this Treasonable
matter, but lodged them all, too long a time for such Spirits; It might be
thereby to draw voluntary Confessions, or Petitions for pardon, but then, they
all, being so near a kin in the Crime must not dissent in the design, which was
to be set free. In fine it was amongst their best Friends thus ordered.

A Noble Lady dressed directly La Mode d' France, passed as a Stranger
unsuspected, A design for their Release.
to see the Lions and Wardrobe, and such Shows as the Tower affords,
accompanied with a Gentleman acquaintance of the Gentleman Jaylors daughter, To
whom he (for this occasion) made Court, and so had freedom of her Fathers
lodgings. Where, after a Collation, they might be trusted into the neither end
of his long Garden, but by no means to advance toward the Chamber window where
Oxford lodged; who in this time and noise in the Garden, looked out upon them,
and had Items by signs from the Gentleman (whom Oxford knew) to observe the
disguised French Wench, and she the liberty to pick Dazies any where; and so in
a careless guise (unsuspected) and French Tone, she sung, as to her self, which
Oxford observed, all the Design, what was done against them all Prisoners, and
what he should do in reference to their liberties.

Such another trick to Hawly, taught them two to be even-tongued, and so upon
petition were released, on hard conditions until Oxford besought Buckingham.

That since his Lordship was pleased to mediate with his Majesty for his
freedom, Oxford supplicates Bu^kingham.
he would procure it free from rubs, and so his obligation the greater, which
he promises to pay to his Lordship whilst he lives.

Hen. Oxford.

And to piece with Buckingham; Busy bodies severally humoured.
Oxford descended to be under his Vice Admiral at Sea, and Hawly beneath him, a
warm Summers business sufficient to warn them for hereafter. Southampton
likewise upon submission, withdrew from Court into the Country, the wiser way.

These were thus punished, others were more crafty to cover their malice, but
least they should do mischief by undermining, were sent of Errands out of the
way into Ireland, and other where; to regulate disorders there, in which they
had been so busily affected at home, some also ambitious, and too much popular,
were lured in, and rewarded with Office or honor. Such was Sir John Savile, the
Knight for Yorkshire, made Controwler of the Kings Household and Privy
Councelour, and yet paid for all [ Active Spirits] says one, indeed corrupted
humors, which by several ways were thus rewarded.

These were men of note; Hist. ^r. Br. p 190, 191, 192.
But we are told [ that peoples tongues were set a work] and takes upon him to
chronicle the words, so base, sordid, and traiterous, that no Civil Subject
would dare to repeat of his Sovereign. Nay more, he imprints to memory, the
abusive Pastimes, Pasquils, and Plays set out (as he says) in Foreign parts
by Papists (and at home by Puritans) if not of his own making.

I remember well those times, Of Libels.
wise men's thoughts were somewhat, and if amiss, fools talked, and amended
nothing. Certainly a Princes fame and repute is to countenance them. Alexander
could say, Regium est been facere and Male a^dire.

And Nero despised that Pasquil, Quis neget Aeneae Magna de stirpe Neronem?
Sustulit hic Matrem sustulit ille Patrem,


Et quosdam ad Iudicem dilatos ad Senatum affici graviore poena prohibuit.

Yet Queen Elizabeth's cruelty cut off the hands of Stubs and Page upon a bloody
Scaffold, for writing against her marriage with the Duke of Anjou; she lost
much of the peoples love by that spectacle, which scared the Commons into fear,
whether she were the right and not uncertain daughter of H. 8. but wise men
could easily resolve it.

The often repeated Story of the Merchant Bindet, for saying, He would make his
Son heir to the Crown, meaning his House of that Sign; for which he was
quartered within four hours after by Edward the fourth; and the Duke of
Buckingham afterward made use of that Record to the Commons, against the
succession of his Race for that Tyranny.

The like of Collingburn by Rich. 3.

The Rat, the Cat, and Lovel the Dog,
Rule all England under the Hog.
How should posterity know their demerits, if rigorous justice had been spared;
for to suppress Pasquils were to make men seek them, and being found to prize
them. Those of Fabritius Venito were condemned to be burnt, and so long were
they sought for, but when permitted, they were instantly despised.

Who can silence them? Power cannot suppress Memorials. And it is to be
pitied, that Princes are more affected with future fame than their present
honestly.

It may not be amiss, to make strickt laws against Libellers, but not for a
good Prince to prosecute the rigor. But with wisdom to consider the convoy of
such papers, whether Truths or Falsehoods; if mixed apparances, then to be
neglected; if base and flat railing, to be despiced.

Indeed novel causes of Sedition upon apparent grounds, are to be answered and
confuted by reason; so did that wise Statesman Caecil in his answer to
calumnies that stroke at the State through his Sides; see before anno 1606. p.
364.

Such as are presented by Supplication for redress of errors, com^ to be
Libells when they are urged with popular subscriptions, or made public ere
they come to the State.

That of Humphery Earl of Gloucester, against the Cardinal of Winchester, was a
Libel. Taxing the King of Dotage about the King of Scots Liberty, the Sale of
Crown Jewels, his Charter pardon to the Cardinal for receiving his rents.
Setting the Duke of Orleans at Liberty against Englands Friend, the Duke of
Burgundy.

This fault was only questioned, nothing done. Miseria summa ubi de injuria
conqueri, pro delicto habetur.

Augustus writ to Tiberius, Noli in hac re indagare, and nimium indignari
quenquam esse, qui de me loquatur Male; Satis est enim, si hoc habemus, ne quis
Malefacere possit. And though Tiberius beheaded Cremutius for wor^s only, yet
he could say. In Civitate libera cuiquam quoque liberum esse debere. Wise
Princes may, weak Princes cannot suffer liberty of Judgments, nor indiscretion
of Tongues.

But to counsel ^uch Justice, were to assist Domitian to kill Gnats with his
Dagger.

In a word, we have found the unhappy event of the late public punishment
upon Burton, Bostwick, and Prinn, Divine, Physician, and Lawyer. Their crimes
then were thought fit in policy to be punished, but were taken up, in after
time justified, when the time served the turn, to revenge that punishment.

It was wisely retorted by King James upon himself. A Country Clown told his
Companion the London News, The King to marry his Son, to the King of Spains
Daughter.

Why, says his Friend, what of that?

He answered, For so our King will turn Papist.

Nay rather, replied he, I Will cut his throat?

For which he was condemned at the County Assize. But the King heard of his
Sentence; and said, By my sale, sal he not need to do that, ere I Will turn
Papist, I Will cut my own throat, and gave him pardon.

But debosh spirits, distasting their own Miseries, are always earnest in
Novations, and desire a change of fortunes; and if they had power would sooner
turn Traitors; such were some of them in this Kings time; by the effects since
you may guess at them then.

We spoke of Student Templers, The Kinghts Templers.
These Houses heretofore had been a Covent of Red-fryars (for so I find them
styled) and afterward men of the Sword got the possession, and were called
Knights Templers, from that of Jerusalem, where they heretofore dwelt, and were
instituted there by Baldwine King of Jerusalem, anno 1100. and created by Pope
Gelasius, anno 1117. continuing two hundred years, until they were suppressed
about Edward the first his time, anno 1300. and their Substance of great wealth
given to the Knights of the Rhodes by Pope Clement the fifth.

The Romans say, They fell away from Christianity to the Sarazens, and lode
them with inormous Crimes. But, and in truth others say, their destruction grew
from siding with the Germain Emperor against the Pope, and these Authors are
Bo^atius, Villanus, Antonius, and others. Indeed they were Enemies to the sins
and corruptions of the Court of Rome and Clergy. And all Authors conclude, That
however sundry of them had been accused of Crimes, yet they endured cruel
torments without confession of guilt.

Paulus Aemilius stories one of them, James Burgond, the principal of that
Order, and two others of great Birth, who suffered exquisite tortures and dyed
in the ^lame, innocent Martyrs. And Plessis says, that other Authors report,
That two Cardinals being present, Burgond summoned Pope Clement the fifth,
before the Tribunal of God, to answer that injustice, and that the Pope dyed
the same day. Besides the Clause inserted into the Condemnatory Bull, Quanquam
de jure non possumus tamen pro plenitudine potestatis dictum Ordinem reprobamus.

But in a word their great wealth, was one Notable bait to the Popes, and the
Gulf of other Orders, Hospitalers, Knights of the Rhodes, and St. John's. All
these together smack this Order, and swallowed their Riches at one time; by
consent of all the Princes in Christendom, where they had their habitations.

Length of Peace necessarily increasing swarms of people, Massacre of the
English in Virginia.
it was politickly permitted to disburthen this land by Foreign Plantations
into the vast Continent of America, unhabited (as is before touched in Anno
1614.) and since that time, pursued with above forty sail severally trading to
Virginia, New England, and other parts of that Coast, with transportation to
this year of above three thousand five hundred seventy persons (according to a
list) in several Colonies and Towns built, for mutual trade with the Natives,
being brought with much kindness, so communicable, as to be hired servants into
private families. But at last maliciously envying at the English, consult with
themselves to massacre all at an instant; their intent failing in the whole,
they found means to murder three hundred forty seven persons, being but the
eleventh part of the twelve parts of the rest.

The customary practice of the Indians, is to disperse themselves into several
Colonies, as naturally affecting division, under sundry Governors Supreme;
yet now in policy confederate amity, to work their Design for destruction of
all the English, through out all Colonies at once, separate and very remote.
But their plot necessarily to be divulged in common, not mistrusting discovery
from any of their own. Yet it pleased God in mercy to put it into the Mind of
an Indian servant to one Pace, to discover it to him overnight; who first
securing his own Habitation, with all possible speed gave waruing to each
Plantation, by several intelligence, and saved the rest, but in the fury three
hundred forty seven were slain. And since that time the English are more wary
to guard their houses. And as the best Maxim in policy to separate the conjunct
affections of their Indian Kings to make themselves the more secure.

It was the Spanish policy that got them the two rich Kingdoms of Peru, and
Mexico in America, for the two heirs Brothers Attapalippa and Gasco,
quarrelling for the Kingdom, each striving to gain the Spaniard to friend,
Francis Pizacro managing their differences for his own ends, stripped them both
of Peru.

So did F^rdinando Cortes vanquish Matezumo, and got Mexico by the Neighbor
Friendship of the Province of Tascala, deadly Enemies; for which service that
Province is freed from Tax for ever.

So did the Romans advantage overcome Great Britain, as Tacitus says, Ita dum
singuli pugnant universi vincuntur.

And Justin has the same with the Grecian Cities.

And hereupon King James furnished these Plantations with ammunition and arms
out of his own storehouse at the Tower at his charge.

There were likewise shipped unto Summer Islands (so named from the first
sinder and Planter Sir George Summers) alias Burmudoes, above a thousand
persons, and nine Ships to transport them and to trade, who have since so
increased that they are forced to fly to the Main for elbow-room, see before
anno 1614. Page 400.

The King and Parliament asunder, Digby sent to Spain to treat in the Match.
it was resolved with his Councillors to speed Digby into Spain Extraordinary,
to proceed in the Treaty of the Match; Sir Francis Cottington Lieger there;
form whom Digby had knowledge of that Kings Progress, toward the North of
Spain, to Lerma, a Town in Biscay, whether the Duke thereof, a sublime
Favorite, had invited the King to his Princely New Palace; which might save
Digby the trouble and discommodity of riding many leagues to Madrid, to meet
there, though it is to be understood by those that know, that the Court and
Council, and State of Spain, are said to be always residing in Madrid in New
Castile, for receiving Ambassadors, and making dispatches; yet the amity of
Digby with that Council, hoped now to alter that Custom, in favor of this
urgent affair and him. And therefore lands, as the time and weather would
afford, the nearest Port Saint Andrews in Biscay; there he stays; sends his
Secretary to Madrid, to signify to Cottington his arrival, and reason for
resting there, as yet, intimating that if he could surprise the King at Burgos
or Lerma, so far nearer his return home, might there also hasten his dispatch
upon that so reasonable consideration.

The King in complement told Cottington, That he hoped the Ambassadors
business was of more weight than to be taken up in the road, where it became
not his Majesty to return him back to his Master without entertainment of the
Court of Spain.

But Digby understood this as State formality, and pressing his own
convenience, was at last ordered to have audience at Lerma; whereupon Digby
might say, without merit of a scoff. [That it was the first President of honor
to an English Ambassador, Hist. Gr. Br. p. 193.
and to his person a particular favor.]

And so he sest forward to Burgos, where Cottington meets him, whom he returns
back twenty miles to Lerma, upon serious affair, to prepare some of the Council
with such interests, as were entrusted, besides his sealed Commission,
resolving himself to follow at the heels, with surprise rather than Ceremony.
Yet the Kings Coaches came to wait on him near Lerma unto Villa Mansa, where he
reposed till the Conde de Salazera Maior-Domo, one of the Kings Stewards, the
Conde de Villa Madena, Correjo Major, or Chief Postmaster, and the Viscount
Toriza, accompanied with several attendants, conducted the Ambassador to Court.

Thus far, and in truth was the passages of Digbyes Reception, which our Author
abuses with base absurdities.

Abbot Archbishop of Canterbury, Archbishop Abbot kills his Keeper.
aiming with a Cross-bow at a Deer in Bramzel park, killed his Gamekeeper with
the Arrow, for which act having his hand in blood, he is by CommonLaw to
forfeit all his estate, and by the Cannon-Law, irregular, ipso facto, and to be
suspended from all Ecclesiastical function, until he be restored.

This troubled the King what to do; Not to add to his affliction, and to leave
virum Sanguinum Primate and Patriarch of all his Churches, ^ounds harsh to the
old Counsels and Cannons; upon either the Papists would descant; and therefore
it was referred to the Lord Keeper Williams, five Bishops, the two Chief
Justices, and two Civil Lawyers, who certify so much; and so he not being
received into the full use of the Ministry, himself forebore the Council
Table, as he told me in these words, Since they will have it so, that I am
incapable of the one, I shall spare my self the trouble of the other. But he
enjoyed the benefit of that See whilst he lived.

Much displeased he was (I well remember) with the Court and Clergy; for Doctor
Lawd refused consecration of St. David by his hand, being tainted with blood;
but the Other was quit with him, for underhand he caused it to be burited
abroad, That Lawd was by Puritans reputed a Papist in Oxford. And to justify
that his function was not weakened by that Mischance, he procured Commission to
inquire, Whether casual homicide was not excepted in the Cannon? In which he
was satisfied that it was not; and so retired from his Magnificent Structure,
his Almeshouse at Guilford, to his Palace at Lambeth, where the air of the
Court, breathing so near, and yet at this little distance he not admitted
there; he fell upon down right Puritan Tenants, which gave occasion to many
discontents of our Church and State to visit him, then so frequent, that they
called themselves Nicodemites, and his Disciples. And I observed very often
(perhaps therefore) that the Archbishop constantly, with candlelight in his
Chamber, and Study, made it midnight at Noonday.

And here he began to be the first Man of Eminency in Our Church, a Ringleader
of that Faction, for I can name those then, his private Disciples, which lately
appear desperate Proselytes.

The Tenants of Arminianism, Ministers ordered in preaching.
which the King feared had infected the Pulpit, with so much heat, that it
inflamed each opponent, so that to Suppress the danger of the one, and to
regulate the disorder of the other, both offensive to the State, the
Archbishop of Canterbury had letters to settle their sick brains to this
effect.

The Kings Letter to the Archbishop.
Most Reverend Father in God, right trusty and entirely beloved Counselor, we
greet you well.
That the extravagancies of Preachers in the Pulpit, have been reformed in the
Realm by some Act or Council of State, with the advice of learned Prelates.
Insomuch that the very licensing of Preachers, had beginning by Order of
Star Chamber the eighth of July 19. H. 8. And that at this present diverse young
Studients, by reading of late writers, and ungrounded Divines, do broach
unsound and seditious Doctrines, to the Scandal of the Church, and disquiet of
the State, and that humble representations have been to the King of these
inconveniences by the Archbishop, Anno 1622.
and other Reverend Prelates of the Church, besides his Princely zeal for
extirpation of Schism and Dissension, proceeding from those seeds; And for the
settling of a Religious and Peaceable Government in Church and Commonwealth,
does by these charge and command you, to use all possible care and diligence,
that these limitations and cautiono herewith sent you, concerning Preachers, be
duly observed by Each Bishop in their Jurisdictions to be communicated to each
Minister in Cathedral and Parish Churches, of which we expect strickt account.
Windsor August 4. 1621.

The Directions sent with the Letter in six Articles.

1. That no Preacher under the degree of Bishops or Deans, fall into any set
discourse or Common place, which shall not be warranted in Essence, Substance
and Effect, or Natural Inference with some one Article of Religion set forth
anno one thousand five hundred sixty two, By 6 Artic^es
or in some of the Homilies by authority of the Church of England.

2. That none shall preach after noon, on Sundays, or holy days, but on some
part of the Catechism, or of the Creed, Decalogue, or the Lords prayer; and to
encourage such Preachers as exercise children in their Catechism, which is the
most landable custom of teaching in the Church of England.

3. That no Preacher under the Degree of a Bishop or Dean, do preach the deep
points of Predestination, Election, Reprobation, or of the universality,
efficacy, resistibility of GODS GRACE, but leave these Theams for godly and
learned men, and that moderately and modestly, by way of use and application
rather then of positive Doctrines, being fitter for the School, then simple
Auditories.

4. That no Preacher soever shall presume in any Auditory, to declare, limit or
bound out, by way of positive doctrine, the Power, Prerogative, Jurisdiction,
authority, or duty of Sovereign Princes, or meddle with matters of State, and
the differences between Princes, and the people, but rather confine themselves
to faith and good life, which are all, the subject of the ancient Sermons and
Homilies.

5. That no Preacher shall causlesly (without invitation from the Text) fall
into bitter invectives, undecent railing Speeches, against the persons of
Papists or Puritans, but rather free both the doctrine and discipline of the
Church of England, from the aspersing of either Adversary.

6. That the Bishops be more wary in the choice and licencing of Preachers. And
that all the Lecturers throughout the Kingdom (a new body severed from the
ancient Clergy, as being neither Parson, Vicar, nor Curate) be licensed
henceforth in the Court of faculties, but only from a Recommendation of the
party, from the Bishop of the Diocese under his hand and Seal, with a Fiat from
the Archbishop of Canterbury, a Confirmation under the Great Seal of England.

I well remember these times, the invectives of the Pulpits, The misbehaviours
of the Pulpit.
which truly the wisdom of State thought fit to suppress. The Nonconformist
nestled himself into a Lecture, by that means depending only upon the devotion
of the Parish, was that way preferred without the favor of the Bishops. And
first insinuating into the women, Wife, Daughter and Maid, infusing at their
homes such doctrines as might easily catch their weak pallates, and thereupon
begat the frequent writing of Notes from their preaching in public, as it
would astonish the indifferent Reader, to meet with their Blasphemies and
miserable Nonsense Notes. And truly, those Lectures, wounderfully haunted by
such people, in after Noon Sermons on working days, with such Stuff as savoured
naught but railing against the Papist, or our Church discipline.

The looseness of Servants took liberty almost every day in the week to be
easied in their Labor and Callings to pretend devotion in this Ordinance of
hearing Lectures in some or other Church, until their Masters complained of
that Custom.

These Articles therefore were seasonably published to regulate the Ministry,
Catechizing again commanded.
and to order the catechizing of children and Servants, which Godly and
effectual Way of teaching, the King had often hinted heretofore, but could
never sufficiently reduce the Lecturers to obedience thereto, See Anno 1603.
Page 300.

What could the care of the King do more, to destroy the seeds of Dissentions?
Yet herein how captious Our Author observes.

[That these directions were to be observed with Caution, Hist. Gr. Br. p. 201.
peaceable compor^ment, that is says he) Papist and Puritan's quiet, being
Equilibero, the Papist in the prime scale.]

[That the Lecturer is not to be endured, unless he pass the Briars through all
Courts to the Broad Seal (a pingeant Ordial Trial) with his Test me ipso, and
so becomes Orthodox, So that (says he) the Lecturers are implicitly
forbidden, by the inaccessible charge and trouble to come to it.

That the Preachers by an Order of Star Chamber in Heaven were licensed, Ite
predicate before any Henry 's time, and so bids them learn, least that Spirit
(from whom they receive the Spirit) bind not them up.]

And endeavors to persuade [That the Papist did forment the Animosity of the
King against Puaitans; Papist and Puritan coupled.
That Bishop Lawd his Agent, though in Religion he had a Mothly form ( and
quotes a Priest in Flanders that told him so) was now become Buckinghams
Confessor, under the Court Livery, and (assures the Reader) that the King once
thought him so; though now he became the bellows to blow the fire for the
Papist, to put the King upon all Projects and Monopolies, to sow the seeds of
division between Puritan and Protestant (for all were Puritans with the
high-grown-Arminianpopish party, that held the Doctrine of the Reformed
Churches.

And it is somewhat true as he remembers Us [That the Courtier (Minister, or
Lay) they called Regians. Regians and Republicans, page 202.
who (says he) swell up Prerogative even to all, that the people had but a
bare being, which in mercy was left to them poor Republicans. That more
reverence was done by the Clergy to the King than to God. And that the Judges
to inslave the people gave sacred and Oraculous Titles of the K. as of God.]

But ( says he) the well-affected by writing and discourse sought to warm the
Kings cold temper with fresh spirits into his chilled vains in this divided
Kingdom. So he

This stuff smells rank of the Doctor, that refined our dead Historians work,
and put it out in print as we have it. Certainly he had heretofore passed the
Pikes to be a Preacher, and run through this Ordial-Tryal of his Text-ship; who
in those days might well deserve a Duns-ship, but of late went out Doctor, to
arm his Republicans (if any such men are) to be as arrant Rebels as himself, in
what estate soever they shall chance to be lodged.

But because the Reader may have better satisfaction of those times, A modest
defense.
and Ecclesiastical policy then toward the Lay-Recusants (for such only was it
needful to favor) the King was so Popishly addicted (as our Calumniator would
enforce) that to the incredible exhaustment of his Treasure, he most zealously
entreated for refreshment and favor unto all the Protestants in Europe (His
Crown and Dominions and Denmark excepted.) The Swedes having lately provoked
the Pole, had no other hope of Peace, those of France for the exercise of their
Religion, those of the Palatinate, and all the neighboring Protestants, the
least convenience to say their prayers, but by the Kings Mediation, And being
advised by the late Assembly of Parliament, into this Milky way of Intercession
and treaty abroad, what a preposterous Argument would it have been to desire
those Mighty Princes, crowned and victorious, to grant clemency to them, and
for himself to execute poenal Laws against the Papists.

The English Jesuit in France did design to frustrate this pious endeavor of
the King, by writing a most malicious Book to the French King, inciting him and
his three Estates to execute their Statutes upon the Hugonotes, as the like
(they said) were here enacted against Catholics. I would therefore advise
with the most subtle States-monger, to chalk out a way for his Majesty to have
mediated for grace to the Protestants, by executing at this time the severity
of laws upon the Papist. But hat this favor should amount to a Tolleration,
is a most dull, and yet a most divilest construction.

A Toleration looks forward to the future, this favor backward, Calumnies
against the K.
only to offenses past; and the Lord Keepers letter to the Judges is so to be
understood; whereby if any Papist by them should be set at liberty, and should
offend and laws again, the Justices may, nay must recommit him, and leave
favor only to the King, to whom only belongs Mercy.

Nay, more, let these two writs directed to the Judges be perused, by any rash
censurors (as they were resolved by grave and learned men; to whom the King
committed the penning) and it will appear the Papists were no more out of
Prison, then with shackles about their heels, sufficient Sureties, and
Recognizances, to present themselves at the next Assizes. So they being grasped
in the custody of law, or rather imprisoned still, than with any liberty.

And in truth they were by this tender favor, to be reduced into a better
behavior, or otherwise upon trial, the King was to recall his writ, and leave
them to extremity. But if a Critique will conclude an Argument from the Devils
Topicques, a converto ad abstractum, from a favor to some well-minded English
Catholic, reasonably to be distinguished from others, what therefore, is the
King turned Roman Papist, whose wise discourses, learned Writings, pious
Exercises, Acts of Parliament, late Directions for catechizing, Preaching, and
all other professions, has manifestly declared himself to all the World, an
Orthodox resolved Protestant.

But the Spirits of wisemen are now satisfied that (those airy Representations
of ungrounded fancies set aside) this Island of all the Countries of Europe,
was then the sole Nest of Peace, and true Religion, and the inhabitants most
unhappy now, that they looked not up to Heaven, to give thanks for those
mercies then.

Thus much the King had to do to keep these Men in obedience at home, Spanish
match goes on.
being intent also upon his honor abroad; And having yet in this time of
Treaty, assisted Holland in an open way of Men and Money to balance them with
Spain, and Recruits daily sent over; so plentiful, that sale was made of our
men, more than they used. The Spanish Lieger took exceptions (and that justly)
that in time of Confederacy, Treaty, and Union of a Match, such partiality was
afforded to the Enemies of Spain, and no more interest of Confederacy with our
King, than we with his Master. To balance both the King grants freedom alike
to his Subjects to be called by Drum to either service, when it was evident
that only one Regiment went away with the Lord Vaux to reinforce the Army in
Flanders, and seven thousand were carried to Holland. Besides, it was intended
more policy to the one, then equality to both, to be rid of the Papists, (which
he says) infected the Kingdom. And whilst the Commissioners on both sides
argue the Articles, Hist. Gr. Br. p. 203.
the Pope no doubt meddled with Spain, in the Matters of Religion proposeable
on that part.

It was prudence in the King to permit an active Man Mr. Gage his own subject,
though Romish Catholic (for in businesses they are not such Bug-bears) to be
at Rome to pry into the Popes actions; and did recommend the affair unto the
Cardinals Ba^dino and Lodeviso, as the passages might correspend with disputes
and differences in points of opinion, Moral and Divine. But in his letter to
the King of Spain, disclaims any Treaty with the Pope, or to observe his rules
in reference to his Son. Was it not an oversight (tro you) that some better
affected Puritan was not put in for an Intelligencer: What mad Work such an one
made once at the Popes Altar?

But not to spend Paper to answer such a Cutter of Cumminseed, Digby had
express commands,

Not to wast time with the Spanish Delays, Digby ordered by Letters how to
proce^d.
either for dispensation of the Match from Rome, or cessation of Arms in the
Palatinate; H^idleburgh being then besieged, and the English Garrisons blocked
up; Of all which the English Ambassador, Sir Richard Weston at Bruxels,
disputing with the In^anta, had no redress as the Copyes of the Dispatches
intend; for he was commanded to represent the merits of his Master for sincere
proceedings with the Emperor and Spain, upon protestation of their
Extraordinary respect. However the Palatine had deserved, That the way is now
pr^pared, that the English may have the honor to hold those places which are
not in dispute, until the general accommodation, without more amuze, or further
treaty of Cessation, and before the whole Country be seized, or our Treaty
ended. Refers him to the Dispatches, to be furnished with Arguments of
unkindnesses, there notwithdrawing the Spanish forces, but leaving the business
to discuss with the Emperor and Bavaria.

That the Infanta's Answers, with Recrimination altogether Minister jealousy
of the Emperor and Spaniard, if he consent not; for if those things be not
forthwith remedied, the King of England will recall his Ambassador from
Bruxells, as an unkindness, deserving from the Emperor. Not to be interpreted,
as to reflect upon the entire affection, between those two Crowns of Us and
Austria, being mntually promised, That as the King expects his Son in Laws
dependence on his advise, or to be forsaken, so in the same measure it is just
for Spain to decline the Emperor.

And concludes with this honorable Item; To carry things fair, without cause
of distrust, if reality be perceived on their part in the Match, wherein the
King excepts against their dull diligence depending only upon the Dispensation,
and in returns of Queries and Objections.

But as the King will not be wearied with patience, so Digby is warned to be
wary and watchful in the Overtures of the Pope, as a Postil unto the Articles
of Spain (which Gage got, and gave warning of here.) And to admit of no more
respite then two Months, and no more at all.

That so their resolution will be before Christmas.

Wansted 9. of September 1622.

Thus much to Digby.

But whether Digby pressed these particulars, the Palatinate, Digby is faulty
was at the brinck or last cast, in Frankendale, now blocked up: The Popes
captious capitulations in reference to the Dispensation, obtruding and
intruding Novelties, never as yet disputed.

Yet he plainly tells the Spanish Council (the old King lately dead) If these
offers of his Master be not balanced with the like from theirs, without loss
of more time, he is commanded to take leave and return home.

But ill news has wings; the loss of the English Men, and the Palatines
Country, came faster to the King, then could be supposed by Digby, who it seems
was loath to leave the employment in suspense, for any other to negotiate; or,
by discovering the Spanish deceit, to give end to any absolute breach; for
here at home he was somewhat suspected not to deal fairly abroad, which as yet
the King was loath to see; And therefore quickens him again, with the
particular relations of the losses of the Towns in the Palatinate, Heidleburgh
forced, Second Letters peremptory.
the Garrison put to the Sword, Manheime besieged, and the Infanta not
commanding Cessation, wherein she had absolute authority, and that these
effects give the King reasons to recall all his Ambassadors.

Weston (now Chancelour of the Exchequer) and the Lord Chichester from Bruxels,
having trusted to Treaties, which probably might have secured the remainder of
the Palatinate, the English Garrisons being rather maintained in honor to keep
footing until the General Accommodation, more in assurance of Friendship by
Treaty, then of force by fighting.

And therefore to put the Spaniard to it, he was to demand, under hand and
seal, either the Rendition of the Town and Castle of Heidleburgh, (seventy
days after audience) in condition as when the Palatine had it; and the like
for Manheim and Franckendale, if either be taken whilst this Treaty, as also
cessation there for the future upon the Articles of Sir Richard Weston. The
Treaty which the Emperor propounded by Articles in November last, to which the
King of Spain then condescended. if not in all these. Then, that the King of
Spain join with the English for recovery thereof, thus lost upon this Trust;
and to permit English forces to pass the spanish Territories into Germany; and
in every particular herein, Digby is peremptorily enjoined to be assured under
hand and Seal within ten days after Audience, or else immediately after to
take leave and return. October 3. 1622.

Thus the King fights and treats, not as in love with a match absolute, upon
any uneven Terms then, as our mad World would make us believe them now, from
whose pens and Pasquils, the Kings mind is pretended to be unmaskt, [ as mean
and fearful] for he being heightened with hopes of powerful assistance from his
Parliament and people, the King to satisfy in some measure, the suspicion of
the world, and well-mindedmen, that he withdrew not his affection from his
children for fear of any Enemy, to cousin himself with a Spanish Cheat, never
meant him in a Match, these proceedings will unmask.

And why to be charactered [ Studious of Peace somewhat overmuch] truly not so
for a Christian King, Reign of K. Charles p 3, 4.
and therefore not to be [ imputed to Pusillanimity] admitting [ His
Son-in-laws extirpation from his Patrimony] which himself was justly the cause,
not the King. Nor is it handsome to say to his dishonor confessed [ That the
Austrian Family cojol'd him in delusory chat, with specious falasies] whilst
the Author is pleased to abreviate that tedious Treaty, and loss of three
Towns, and afterward the whole Palatinate into three lines, with this
Observation [ That the moity of the Money spent in Ambassyes would have
modelled an to have mastered the Imperious Eagle.]

And so the short Relation, with unskilful Surgery to cauterize, not truly to
characterize the Wisdom of this King, in such difficult designs as were
intent, more against him, than against many other Princes his Predecessors.

But these proceedings (I say) will unmask all; for from outward force, he was
left in the lurch even by his own people that put him forward, and yet having
more desperate conditions to work out at home, then was urged abroad; He in
this Dilemma, bringing all his possibilities to this exigent and ending, sends
suddenly after his Packet, this Item to Digby. In Case of Rupture (which the
King was to manage with most advantage) not instantly to return, but privately
to advertize hither to the King himself, and publicly to give o^t the
contrary, that accordingly he might deal with his Parliament, who stood at gaze
to entertain the bad effects, not to welcome good fruits of this tedious Treaty.

What ere the King commanded, then days expired, Digby made Earl of Bristol.
and no satisfaction, yet Digby, created Baron 1618. and now by Patent Earl of
Bristol, spins on the Treaty, willing to accept of any trifles to animate the
King, whom he fed with certain hopes of real intention in Spain, till all was
lost indeed; And yet the Articles of marriage handed to and fro, with such
copies as each fancy led him to falsi^ie; of which one inserts them in print
(besides sundry others his excellent Authors) The fabulous French Mercury, and
Mr. Prinns Hearsay (though his ears were cropped) and says,

[That this only came from the Neast, Hist. Gr. Br. p. 212.
kept at this time with scarce a Feather amiss, and so humbles them to the
Readers acceptance, only to tell us, what pains was taken to little purpose,
where no Intention meant performance.]

And this he intends to prove out of the young King of Spains Letter to the
Count Olivares.

The King of Spains advice to Olivares.
That the King his F^ther at his death declared his intent, never to marry the
Infanta with the Prince of Wales, which Don Balthazar, Uncle to Olivares
understood, and so treated with intention to delay it. Yet being now so far
adv^nced, he wishes him to direct the Treaty, but in all things to procure the
satisfaction of the King of Great Britain.

Novem. 5. 1622.

It is true that the King writ this Letter to Olivares, and likely enough, that
in the first Motions, the State of Spain might heretofore unsettle. But now,
that the Treaty had brought their Negotiations to some concernments; therefore
Olivares, within three days after (so suddenly) returns Answer to that King;
wherein posterity might apprehend the several true Interests of all, and more
cannot be surmized, than that which Olivares himself does herein confess, which
it seems escaped out of Mr. Prinns hidden works of Darkness, and thus it
follows.

Olivares Answer to the King of Spains Letter.
SIR,
Concerning the Estate, which we find in the Treaty of Marriage between Spain
and England, and being well assured how the ministers understand it, who
treated in the time of Philip the third (that is) that their meaning then was,
never to effect it, but only by enlarging the Treaties and points of Marriage,
thereby to make use of the Friendship of the King of Great Britain, as well in
matters of Germany, as those in Flanders. And suspecting that your Majesty is
of the same opinion (although the Demonstrations do not confirm it) and that
the Infanta Donna Maria, is resolved to put her self into the Descalcas, An
Order of Religion, bare ^ooted.
when she shall be pressed thereto.

I have therefore thought fit to present to your Majesty what my zeal has
afforded me; the time most necessary, for your Majesty with your Ministers to
resolve what is fit.

The King of Great Britain, finds himself equally engaged in two businesses to
this Marriage; moved thereto by conveniences of your Majesty's Friendship; in
making an Agreement with such Catholics, that he thinks are secretly in his
Kingdom, and so to be assured of them, as likewise the honor in Marriage, with
one of the House of Austria, and the best born Lady in the World.

The other is the Restitution of the Palatinate, in which he is yet more
engaged; for besides that his Reputation is at stake, there is added the love
and interests of his Grandchildren, Sons of his only Daughter: which in nature
and reason of State are to be preferred, what soever conveniences might follow
by dissembling what they suffer.

I dispute not, That that Kings concernments herein are to be Governed with Art
and Friendship. He has used both; but as precisely, not necessary) I omit it.
But, as a Maxim, I hold these two Engagements (to him) are inseparable. And for
us, though we make the Marriage, we must fail in the other (most necessary) the
restitution of the Palatinate.

Thus much supposed. Having made the Marriage in the form as it is treated,
your Majesty and England, will be engaged in a War against the Emperor and the
Catholic League, and so to declare with your Arms. Or declaring for the
Emperor and the League, (as certainly you will) you will be forced to a War
against England, and yet your Sister married to his Son, with the which all
conveniences whatsoever that were formerly thought upon, will cease.

If your Majesty shall show your self Newtral, the first will appear very
scandalous. and with just Reason, since in matters of less opposition than of
Catholics against Heretics, the Arms of this Crown has taken part with the
Godly against the convenient party. And though at this time the French have
taken the part of the Hollanders against us, your pity is such to send your
Arms against the Rebels of that Crown of France, leaving all the great
considerations of State, only because these men are enemies to the faith of the
Church. It will oblige your Majesty to give good occasion to those of the
League to make use of France, and other Catholic Princes illaffected to this
Crown, as necessary for them so to do; and these men against their own Religion
will sement, and assist the Heretics for hatred to us; and follow the
contrary party only, to leave your Majesty with that blemish that never has
befaln any of your Predecessors.

Besides, the King of England will remain offended and disobliged, seeing
neither interests nor helpers do follow; the alliance of this Crown, is
likewise the pretext of particular resentment, for having suffered his Daughter
and Grandchildren to be ruined in respect hereof.

For the Emperor, though he be well affected and obliged to us, in making the
Translation at this time, as business now stands (the Duke of Bavaria being
possesed of all the Dominions) and though he would dispose all to our
conveniencyes, it will not be in his power to do it; as your Majesty may see by
the Memorial, the Emperors Ambassador gave you yesterday who make it certain.
Since in that List of the Soldiers, that every one of the League is to pay,
Bavaria alone will pay more, all than the rest joined together, Which shows his
power and intention not to accommodate matters, but to keep to himself the
superiority of all in this broken time; the Emperor is now in the Diet, and
the Translation is to be made in it

I propose then for this Estate, to conserve the means for a Conference with
your Majesty's Ministers; for the Difficulty will be to find a Way to make the
present Distracted Affairs straight again; which with Lingering, both the Power
and the Time will be lost.

The Emperor (as your Majesty knows by his Ambassadors) desires to marry his
Daughter with the King of Englands Son, and I doubt not, but he will be
likewise glad to marry his second daughter with the Palatines Son.

Then I propound that these two Matches be made, and set on foot presently,
giving the King of England full satisfaction in all his propositions, for the
more strict Union and Correspondence, that he may agree to it.

And so all the conveniences of alliance with us, will be as full in this; for
it accommodates the matter of the Palatinate, and the Succession of his
Grandchildren, with his honor, without blood or treasure, together with the
interest of the Emperor, the conveniences of England and the Palatinate, and
to reduce the Prince Elector, that was an enemy to the obedience of the Church,
by breeding his Sons in the Emperors Court in the Catholic doctrine.

To conclude, the business is great the difficulties greater, than perchance
have been in any other Case.

I am obliged thus to represent it to your Majesty, and shall further show what
I think fit foe disposing of the things, to the great Ministers of State if
your Majesty please; being helped with the good zeal of Count Gondamore, and
God his blessing therein: so much for his Honor, and your Majesty's service.

Madrid Novem. 8. 1622. Olivares.


A wonder to some, why this Bird was not hatched in our Historians nest, Princes
jo^^ney to Spain.
for it was fledged with the rest, and writ (you see) but three days after for
Answer, and might have been nestled in Mr. Prinns ^abal, if either of them had
been so honest, as to preserve a truth.

Some reasons besides, which animated King James to proceed, having wasted much
time of Trial by his Ambassadors in Spain, and with theirs here Gondamore, a
Man of subtle wit, yet prevailed more with us by the advantage of time and our
own distempers, than by the virtue of any worth in him; who having done here,
as you have heard, was called home the last year, and Don Iuan de Mendoza
Marquess Inojosa, with Don Carlos de Colonna, sent hither Extraordinary, with
whom here passed more narrow overtures in the Match, besides what was acted
beyond Seas, with such effects as are before remembered.

And being a mixed business of Love and State, and yet in them the common good
and quiet of Christendom involved; standing upon desperane terms, had the more
need of desperate Cures: It was therefore resolved here, to entrust it wholly
and secretly to the Suitor himself; the Prince with his Confident the then
Marquess of Buckingham for a journey to Spain.

And the seventeenth of Febr. 1622. disguised with their single Attendants,
Endimion Portor of his Highness Bedchamber, and Richard Graham, Master of the
Marquess Horse; meeting Sir Francis Cottington the Princes Secretary at Dover;
These only hazard a journey by the way of France, land at ^oloign, post to
Paris, and had ^ight of a Mask there, and the first view of the Princess
Henrietta Maria, his after Queen and Consort, in anno 1625. From thence in
haste, and some difficulty to Bourdeaux, and after to Bayon; the Confines of
France: and from thence, no sooner gone, but that the Governor Count Graimont,
had notice by the Currier (who carried the advice from hence to the King of
Spain) that the Prince of Wales, was gone thither.

Where he arrived at Madrid, friday the 7. of March at eight a clock at Night,
in thirteen days from Paris, seven hundred fifty miles, and alighted at
Bristols house, the Extraordinary Ambassador, and Sir Walter Aston Lieger,
entrusted underhand to overlook the others actions, in this particular, being
hitherto, suspected of the Prince, to be too much Catholic there. So that
this sudden arrival, startled Bristol, that was a stranger to the Journey;
which met with such success afterward, as the measure of his Malice did meet
out; Together with Gondamores regret (on the Spanish party) who with all his
wisdom, more by estimation then merit, was abused also at home to credit what
was commanded to him, who thought nothing more sure then now to be effected.

The next morning the Arrival of Buckingham was willingly discovered to
Gondamore, and so to the Conde Olivares, the Spanish Favorite, and by him to
the young King Philip, who gave him leave to visit the Marquess, and Order to
be brought to the King in private to whom he delivered King James his Letters;
and discovered that the Prince was come; and therefore with the Ambassadors
was returned, Olivares with the Kings salutations of honor and welcome. Where it
was observed that Olivares would not be covered, though the first Grandee of
Spain, who are not bare to their own King.

The next Sunday afternoon, though in Lent, upon Design (...) (...) desire to
take view of his Mistress, The King, Queen, (...) Infanta, and the Infantes
(Don Carlos and Don Ferdinan^o, his two Brothers) with a great Train of
Coaches, took air upon the Prado, a public place of Recreation, where the
Prince likewise (disguised) in the Duke of Ceas Coach with his English Train,
made diverse turns, and so had sight of the Infanta, not refraining though, to
salute each other with seemly congies.

The King desired to visit and embrace the Prince at the Earl of Bristols
House. But to avoid that disadvantage, the Prince would not be denied to pass
to the King, who therefore appointed half way, where he stayed, and there they
met.

The King got out of his Coach first, and embracing the Prince with wonderful
Kindness, made incomparable professions of love and honor.

In the strict Obligations which the King his Father, and His Highness Himself
had cast upon him, by that singular act of Confidence and Favor.

To which the Prince replied,

That he was Royally recompensed by the honor he receives, to be his own
Advocate in this His High Design to visit His Majesty and His Princely Sister.

And taking Coach together, He forced the Prince therein first on the right
hand. Bristol interpreting between them (for the Kings of Spain do not descend
to give honor to the French tongue) and return home by Torch-light.

On Monday the Prince was visited by Olivares, to let him know, the Kings
Public Devotion unto the Monastery La Merced, attended on Horseback with a
glorious Train of which the Prince had sight, and so passed that day in
Recreation abroad.

The next day the King sent two Dukes to visit the Prince, with this Complement,

That seeing the good service of the Conde Gondamore had imprinted such a
singular Character in the K. of Great Britains affection, to trust so
excellent a terasure into Spain as his Highness, therefore he could not suffer
any Subject of His unadvance^, who had been so graciously accepted in Eng^^^^;
For which cause he was resolved to make him a Counselor of State, though he
accounted him indeed as an Englishman, Nay, rather for that respect, that they
might be the more confident of his proceedings, and Privy to the Inmost
actions; and the Prince was empowered to establish him therein.

For which Gondamore falls down at His Feet, and being by His Highness
addressed to the Court was instantly sworn.

Not long after was proclaimed a General Pardon, General Pardon proclaimed.
Of all Offenses, and all Prisoners within the Continent of Spain released; and
all English Slaves for Pyracy or Mortal Crimes, were set at liberty, and
manifested to be done in contemplation of the Prince.

The 16. of March appointed for the Princes Triumphal Entry through Madrid. The
day before, were presented two Barb-Gennets of excellent value, His entry in
Triumph.
for the Prince to choose, and the other for the King.

The Morning come, four Counselors of State were sent to attend, and to
conduct him to the Monastery, St. Ieronimo, near Madrid; from whence the Kings
of Spain, make their solemn Entries of Coronation; where he was feasted
privately at Dinner by the Kings appointment.

After Noon, was ^ent by the Prince in giving Audience to the Inquisitor
General, and to all the several bodies of Counsels (which continually reside in
the Court at Madrid) except only the Council of State, which never makes visit
in Corpse; the rest did; being of Castile, Arragon, Portugal, Italy, Militia,
Indies, Treasury, and Exchequer, etc.

The Corrigidor and Regidores of Madrid (the Governors) had audience likewise.

About four a Clock in the even, comes the King, whom the Prince receives at
the ^ate, and all things in Order they dispose to be going; They came in
Coaches, but now all Mount on Horseback in Magnificent manner, and riding to
the entry of the Liberties of Madrid, there attended twenty four of the
Regidores with a large Canopy of Tyssue* rich imbossed (being their office to
bear it) were apparelled in rich Cloth of Tyssue, lined with Crimson Cloth of
Gold; They both came under the Canopy, the Prince always on the right hand;
Before them the Courts and Ministers of Justice. Then the Grandies, and all the
principal Noblemen in excellent Bravery, attended by their Followers in rich
Equipage and Liveries (a custom in that Kingdom wherein they have excess.)

Next after the Canopy, followed the Marquess Buckingham, and the Conde
Olivares, as Masters of the Horse to them both, with eithers cloth of State;
which Canopy was presented to Buckingham, as a Fee to Him in that Office, and
serving for the Prince, in whose honor, that days action was performed. Then
the Earl of Bristol, between two of the eldest Counselors of State, and a
Gentleman of the Bedchamber; Sir Walter Aston following them, in like manner
accompanied. The rest of the Council of State and Bedchamber, next after. Then
that goodly Guard de los Archeros, bravely clad in gallant manner; then numbers
of gallant youth followed, being of the glory of that Court and Kingdom.

The windows decked (you may believe) with the painted beauties of the most
famous Donna's, the Houses outwardly furnished with hangings of Arras and
Pictures; the Streets scaffolded, and here and there in more eminency were
raised Temporary buildings, whereon the several bodies of the Councills sat,
to see and do reverence, and by the way several Pageants, Representations of
the rare Comedians and Dancers* and all to give content to that Royal Pair, as
they passed by until they came to the Court-Gate.

The Queen, The Queen is visited.
and Infanta were Spectators, but soon retired to the Palace to receive the
visit; the King and Prince embracing, passed up to the Queens Quarter, whom She
received at her Chamber Door; and conducted him to and under the Cloth of
State; they sat on three equal Chairs, the Queen in the midst, the Prince on
the Right hand, the King on the Left.

The Room richly furnished, but more, by those excellent beauties, the living
Tapistry of Ladies, Noble Men's Children, called Menines.

Madam (said the Prince) the Honor of this Days Solemnity is due to your
Majesty, The Complement.
which conveys Me hither to kiss your Princely hand.

And so stooped to her Knee.

Sir (said she) It is to your Highness, and in such manner as to the Royalty of
Spain, due and done to your excellent merit.

And so passing half an hours complement in French, which is natural to her,
she brought them back to Her Chamber Door.

The King conducting the Prince to his Lodgings, a quarter of the Court,
prepared for him with all magnificence. At the entrance, stood the Infantes his
two Brothers, and so all three conducted the Prince into His Bed chamber. And
then the K. t^ok the right hand, Because (said he) your Highness is now at
home; and so left him to his pecul^ar attendants, and other Officers of honor,
especially Grandees mixed amongst them to wait the Princes pleasure.

And within an hour comes the Conde de Benavente, Rich Presents to the Prince.
as Mayor Dorro to the Queen, with a present.

A Fair Basin of Massy Gold, born by two Men, A Cu^^ous imbroidered Night Gown
laid double in it. Two great Tr^nks bound with bands of pure Gold, studded very
thick with nails of Gold and Locks and Keys of the same. The Coverings and
Linings were of Amber Leather, filled with several Delicacies, curious Linen,
rich Perfumes. A rich fair Desk, full of rarities in each Drawer.

And Buckingham was remembered by a Present from the Countess Olivares.

Fire works were made, and Torch Triumphs in all Houses, Triumphant Fireworks.
and Windows for three Nights together by Proclamation, with wonderful
acclamations night, and day crying Vive el Principe de Galls, Vive el
Principe, etc.

And thus settled at his home, attended with all the like Officers as the King,
and of the same rank and quality, with the one half of his Guard with golden
Keys of the Court to dispose to such English as the Prince was pleased to
entrust. Great Triumphs in preparation, and the principal Nobility in Aragon
sent for to honor the Court, and for the glory and luster of the same. the
Edict for restraint of all excess in point of apparel was suspended.

Some days after invited to run at the Ring, in presence of his Mistress,
Takes the Ring in presence of his Mistress.
he took it at the first course, with acclamations of joy and honor; The glory
of which challenged fate to finish his desires with good success in the
Infanta's favor. And although some days had passed with utmost extremities of
ga^lantry, yet saw he not his Mistress, but at those distance^^; which was
excused by Olivares, That the custom of the Nati^^ in Princely Overtures with
Infanta's, was not to take view of nearer affections, till the Dispensation
from Rome should come to admit them Lovers. Yet (as a Prince) he had access
often in presence of the King (for privacy is not admitted between Brother and
Sister of Royal descent) yet the Prince at these interviews, spoke to her by
Bristol his Interpreter.

By this time the Court of Spain, was changed into English Lords, and
Buckingham created Duke by Patent, Buckingham created Duke.
carried over by Viscount Doncaster, lately made Earl of Carlisle, and every day
brought thither the affluence of fresh Gallants of English Nobility, the Earl
of Denbigh, Viscount Rochford, the Lord Kensington, Caecils, Herberts, Howards,
not a Noble Family that failed to tell posterity what he had seen in Spain.

There is one who will have the Prince soundly beset for fair hopes to turn
Papist] a scandal not worthy the confutation, Hist. Gr. Br. p. 230.
for I have heard it discoursed oftimes afterward, when the Duke, Kensington,
(after Earl of Holland) and Denbigh with others avow, to the world thar there
were never any proposals or designs to alter the Princes Religion; for indeed
it was so unlikely that in it self, it might be sufficient reason to hazard his
succession. Though I may be easily drawn to believe (and do know some
particulars) that the Arts and Engines at Rome, were set on work and vainly
whetted for that advantage; and that the outward acts of State in that
Negotiation, might mix secret workings, with circumstance and respects to the
Romish Religion; and might thereafter through that Expedition amongst free
Wits, and French Gazets, under diverse censures since, not proper for me, in
these our last days, so to dive into as to convince the malice of Libellers,
These our Authors, Mr. Prinn, and the French Mercury, and other such stuff.

It Is true too that the Dispensation molded at Rome, The Pope writes to the
Prince.
induced the Pope Gregory, to write to the Prince, not improper so to do; and
as handsome for his Highness to afford an Answer; both are in Print and common
(such as they are) and of custom may be somewhat corrupted in the truth of what
was writ, and by the answer we may understand the other.

The Princes Answer to the Popes Letter.
Most Holy Father,
I Received the Dispatch with content, His Answer
and as the respect and care, wherewith Your Holiness writes, does require;
Being unspeakable the Delight I had to read the generous Exploits of my Noble
Predicessors, to whose memory Posterity have not sufficiently given due Elogies
of Honor. I believe your Holiness sets their Examples before me for my
imitation, and the courage which they had to exalt the Cross, has not been
more than the care which I have, that the peace of the Church might be bounded
in true Concord, and as the glory of God requires our endeavors to unite.

I do not esteem it greater honor to be descended from such Princes, than to
imitate them in true zeal of Piety: in which it assures me much to have known
the Mind and Will of Our Thrice Honored Lord and Father, to give concurrence
to so laudable a design; for it does not a little grieve him to see, that great
Evil grows from Division of Princes Christian, which if this Marriage between
the Infanta of Spain, and my Self, may procure, I shall the rather conclude my
happiness therein.

For as I have been far from encouraging Novelties, or to be a Partisan in any
Factions against the Catholic Religion; so shall I seek occasion to take away
suspicions, that I desire but One Religion, and One Faith, seeing We all
believe in One Jesus Christ: Having resolved in my self to spare nothing, that
I have in the World, my Estate and Life, for a thing so pleasing unto God, whom
I implore to give your Holiness health and happiness.

Charles Stuart.


[A fatal Letter (says one) whether this profession of the Prince did not rest
upon him at his death?] was it such a sin in the Prince to wish and endeavor
unity of faith and profession in Christ Jesus. Hist. Gr. Br. p. 234*
But thus he carps at every clause, and descants on each syllable, adding the
words Apostolic Roman, for Catholic Religion, as shows he took time and
leisure to leave his Book large, and which inforces my Replies to this bigness
of a Bulk.

And now arrives the Dispensation from Rome, Dispensation* is come, and
Articles ^igned there.
and thereupon the Articles signed by that King, and Our Prince, were sent over
to England, for our King and Council to consider. When Abbot Archbishop of
Canterbury (in suspension of his function as you have heard, and not coming to
the Council Table) somewhat factious to foment errors of State. Hist. Gr. Br.
p. 236.
Our Author says [ had the badge of a puritan clapped upon him] and undertakes
to join with the jealousy of fools [ That hereupon a Toleration must needs
follow] and so as a chief Stickler, having no Office, nor much esteem to hazard
undertakes a long Letter to the King, which perhaps was penned to please his
Disciples, with copies to publish in print after his decease, we never heard
tidings of it till now our last days, and here.
for Abbot Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England, was the first Man
that signed to the Postscript, which attested those Articles of the marriage,
and so did all the Privy Council. If not he? than none at all.

O! Hist. Gr. Br. p. 238,
[but the good old man is excused, Being much against his mind, and swore with
as little zeal to observe it: such power (says he) have Kings over Men's
consciences] And I can tell him that there were two other Bishops, 239.
John Bishop of Lincoln, and Lancelot Bishop of Winchester, Men of far greater
merit, and high esteem, and evener Conscience, that subsigned with him.

These Articles were concluded with a sumptuous Feast at White Hall, and the
Spanish Ambassadors invited that day to Dinner; but what to do?

[ That after Dinner they might take a private Oath of the King. 240.
]

For what? [ Marry, in favor of Papists for free exercise of their Religion in
all his Dominions, and that the Parliament should confirm that Oath.]

It Is strange; That the Oath never came to light; but is it lost? Nay, for the
Author had the Articles in keeping, but not the Oath.

[ Hereupon (he says) followed disputes of Religion frequent; Doctor White,
and Featly, against Fisher and Sweet, and sets down thirteen points of Popery,
which they are not able to prove. And that presently thereupon a Chamber-floor
at Blackfriars fell down flat with the weight of the Auditory three hundred at
a Popish Sermon, Anno 1623.
and a hundred killed outright; besides many maimed; as the immediate hand of
God a great Judgment, or an unfortunate Mishap, through their wilful
stupidity.]

Abating his numerous Hearers also, there was indeed fifty found dead, and
dying. It was in truth a miserable Spectacle for doctrine and use to all. Not
as the fall of the Tower of Shilo was apprehended, of such as mistook the
Justice of God, as peculiar only to those that suffered, but ought to be
example to all, to amend their lives also; yet see our Hypocrites charity to
himself, and censure of othe^s.

In this while the Articles signed are sent to Spain, Those Articles returned
and signe^^
and some outward preparations here anent the Infanta's entertainment, if she
should come. A Chapel new built, adjoining to Saint James, the place for her
Court.

In Spain she was wantonly styled Princess of England, and more frequent
Meetings, afforded Her Suitor. In an in^tant Pope Gregory dies, so that the
dispensation not made use of as yet, was invalid, and a new License must now
refer to Urban, that succeeds to the Chair.

Winter quarter was come, the weather foul, unfit to travail and might endanger
the Princes Return, by rough Seas, and therefore was invited to stay till after
Christmas, and so to take his Consort with him.

The Prince, The Prince resolves his return.
and his Council doubting more delays; sent word to England, for the Kings
consent to return speedily, and had accordingly warrant, by the next Express,
to take leave of Spain.

This news so sudden startled that State; to have the Sister of so great a
Monarch, The two Favorites quarrel.
and the best born in Europe, to be left by her Lover; with much regret that
they had gone thus far forward, which Olivares took upon him to quarrel, and in
heat of discourse hereabout, with the Duke urged their sudden resolve of
parting to be hastened by him, without the Princes intention.

And Sennor Duca (says he) you have not done well with us, to represent our
affairs to your Master in evil sense.

Buckingham told him, His information came far, but wished the Intelligencer
there present.

It cannot be denied ( says Olivares.)

It is false, ( said the Duke.)

The other starts back, in mighty passion, seeks for the Prince and tells him
all.

And had this Answer, He might not believe it, without just cause given or
(otherwise) much mistaken.

The Condies choler not abated, he finds out an English Gallant, Sir George
Goring, and in Language of a Challenge complains,

That did not his own sense of suffering come in competition with his Masters
honor, the Duke should know the danger of the Ly.

But he was told the others temper;

Whom no threats could ever make afraid: and since your Grace seeks me out for
the honor, I shall do your ^rrand and bring the Dukes Answer.

Which was, That he had the like regret by being a Guest, but had rather to
suffer under the power of the others Sword, than to injure truth withconsent to
a contrary sense.

But the King made them Friends.

This great Favorite was named Gasper de Gusman, Olivares character.
a third Brother, born in Rome, and upon the fall of his
Predecessour-Favourite, and his Family, the Duke of Lerma, under Philip the
third. This Man crept into esteem with the Prince at that Kings death; he
managed all, and was in hasty time created, Conde-Duke de Olivares, an
excellent Minister of State, with much zeal and passion to agrandize his Master
and His Dominions. So that the excess became his vice, to his loss of the
affections of the Princes, Nobility and People; and in time might have turned
to the hazard of the whole Monarchy; The revolt of the Catalonians first, and
the whole Kingdom of Portugal following, in anno 1640. The Islands and Indies
after* having been sixty years under the Spanish Yoke, with several other
considerable plumes, plucked from the Eagles wings; caused this same King Philip
the fourth, afterward to turn him off to his solitary home, where of grief he
soon dyed.

The Prince hastens his return, Buckingham comes away.
the Duke stayed not that time but instantly took leave to attend the English
Navy at St. Anderas, and ere the Prince departed from the King, promises were
made each to other, to make Espo^sals ten days after the Arrival of the next
Dispensation. And accordingly a Procuration was left by the Prince in Bristols
hands to empower him therein.

And to bear the Marks of Magnificence, The Princes parting Presents.
the King presented his Princely Guest with high and eminent gifts of value,
and also to his Train: So did the Prince, if not more to the Court of Spain,
especially to the Infanta, A Pearl Neck-Lace of incomparable value, which was
returned after the Breach of the Business (Mr. Prinn takes the Pains to
catalogue these presents not intending it I dare say for the Princes honor in
the bounty.) And after this he takes leave.

The Queen and Prince in French, wherein she was natural; but Bristol took the
Infanta's in Spanish, and turned it into English, which if not changed in the
Dialect by his Art, she seemed to deliver up her own heart, in as high
expressions, as that language and her learning could (with her honor) set out.

But to put the Prince to his complement, a Notary was present, who in honor
of his Highness took it upon Record, the ancient custom from the Mighty.
Empires of the East, the Scribe to lift up his right leg, and rest the heel
upon the left Knee, and so writes.

The King accompanied the Prince to the Escurial Escurial.
in his way to the Sea, a most Magnificent Structure, the eighth Wonder of the
World, and Descriptions come short.

I shall satisfy Curiosity with the Princes account thereof, at his return
home, when he advised such as would thoroughly be acquainted to take the pains
as he did, To go and see it. Leaving the Relation to Coriats Description, whose
pilgrimage thither, some years ago, was perfected farther upon his Ten-To; Hunt
a Stag by the way.
for he died about Ganges in the East Indies.

After a Feast here; in his way to the water side, a Stag was roused, and (as
if trained up to the chase) he leads the hunt directly for the Journey, and
also (as if by consent falls down in a Copice, where at hand, in a full grown
wood, they were refreshed with cool air, and a curious Banquet, seeming rather
by Destiny than Design, seeing all accidents agreed in the impossibility of any
prefixed plot.

This Holocaust Sacrifice concludes their parting, which the very beast
expressed in tears.

And truly a Sudden sadness and murmur amongst them all.

In which general silence, the Kings complement came breathing out.

Sir (said he) Men most eminent are famed by Their parting Complements
their Adventures, and that your Person might give President to after times,
Your Highness has taken hazard by the hand in coming hither. Such Attempts in
high Born Princes are without example; which has tied up Two in mutual
conjunction of Love and Honor, and on my part with exceeding Obligation.

The Prince replied,

Under protection of Your Sacred Majesty all Difficulties turn to Delight, so
great influence flows from You as to bind up My observance to honor Your
Person; Esp^cially in preserving My Memory with Grace and favor to me, the
most devoted to My Dearest Mistress.

The Rubric of the day shows it the twelfth of September, Anno 1623. The
pillar of Parting.
when with imbracings they parted, and a Pillow of Marble forthwith erected
there, with inscriptions for perpetual memory; the Princes departure.

And therefore a false scandal on the King to have any Design to stay the
Prince [had he not outstript the rest.]

The Prince hastens to the Seaside, waited on by numbers of the Spanish,
Cardinal Zapata, the Marquess Aytone, the Condies of Barajos, Montare, and
Gondamore, newly created, the height of all his preferments for all his
Dissemblings. And Don Mendoza de Alcarnes, had commission to the King of Great
Britain, and command to wait on the Prince, and so to congratulate his
adventurous Journey into Spain, and his safe return into England.

And from hence into Flanders, Germany, and Italy to make known to all those
Princes and Potentates, Allies and Confederates, the near approaching and
consummation of the marriage, and unity of both Nations.

The beauty of Our gallant Navy (for in bigness of bulk theirs exceed)
occasioned an invitation of them by the Prince, aboard his Ship, then called
the Prince Royal.

The pleasant evening invites the Prince to accompany his Guests in his Barge,
Danger to be drowned.
back to the Shore; they had day enough, and coolest when latest, the best
recreation. Besides, they gave it as a complement to take a Round of the whole
Fleet, which took up more time, that had like to have been their last, for they
were all almost lost.

It becomes a Story of Princely hazard to tell out the Tale; when the Recovery
takes delight from the danger.

The Barge-men have a custom at the Oar to be cheered up by the Boat-swains
whistle, The Strorm.
to which One and All, with courage and force strain their brawny Limbs, until
they crack again, with such a gird, as might seem hazardous to divide the
Barge, and pull themselves asunder. This over-wantonly done, with too much
daring, put them to want it, when they came to danger. For now the damp fog
fixes, and descends to the deeps, the Sun in shame sincks down to she Sea; the
winds begin to whistle, and ere they apprehend danger, death seems to seize
them with several distractions. A monstrous shower of Rain thickened the face of
Heaven, so dark as Hell; and yet the Stars were seen, affording but light to
discern more dread. The Sea with flames do burn, and yet sad clouds do sink
down shores (of tears) as if to quench them: Yo^ would have thought the waves
to heaven had wrought, and heaven to seas had sank, No place for Art or force.
The Seamen inured to Trials, yet now grow fearful, horror possesses all. No
Card or compass aboard; They steered to and fro, doubtful what to do but to
drown, and first to pray, which they did; and thereby were directed with
wondrous chance to the glimpse of a candle, being the Lanthorn of an outlying
ship. Hope helped the worn-out Rowers to recover their faint hearts, and yet
with difficulty, doubling the former danger, it was impossible to clap aboard,
so mighty were the billows to bulge the Barge. But up they get, and all safe,
for his sake, the Prince of men, and of such a mind above the Power of all (but
fortune) Seas or Wind.

And in their company departs Mr. Clark, Mr. Clark returns to Madrid.
the Dukes Attendant, sent by the Prince to see the Spanish Train safe at home,
and to bring back that good News to England.

This complement had more of business, for he carried commands under the
Princes hand to Bristol, not to deliver the Procuration left in his charge till
further* Order from England, upon the extremest peril to his person; It seems
the Prince was not then over-earnest in the Match.

Bristol bounded with this Restriction, Bristol is to forbear the Espousals.
by which he foresaw the fraction, having (by agreement) ten days limited
after the Dispensation, should come, and so time to consider what to do; for
Clark, having no order to return, with any answer; Bristols actions were by him
narrowly observed, and advice thereof sent home to the Prince, by whose
intelligence, the jealousy upon Bristol was heightened to crimes, almost to his
after destruction.

The fifth of October lands the Prince at Portsmouth, Prince lands, October 5.
and the next day posts to London, with unspeakable Love in the Peoples
welcome; and therefore expressed in feasting and Bonefires; with little
refreshment, he hastes to Royston, the Kings usual abode* for the air in
Autumn; who receiving the particular and just account of the Devices of Spain,
and communicated to the Council, it was concluded to acquaint a Parliament with
all the proceedings, which was resolved with speed, February following. A
Parliament designed in February following.


Then Letters were sent to the Earl of Bristol, intimating the true sense in
the King and his Council, of the Spanish Forms and delays, which the Wisdom of
the Prince, by his own presence and conversation discovered most abusive. But
to meet in the jusling, and yet to bring theirs to maturity. He was to suspend
the Proxy till Christmas, though the Dispensation should come, the power
mentioned in the Procuration being no longer of force, the Execution after that
time would prove invalid; and because the honor of England shall be preserved
throughout, he was to review his former Instructions concerning the Restitution
of the Palatinate, and his Son-in-Laws Electoral Dignity, and to press them as
inherent with the Marriage.

But all these Items, he was to reserve to himself without discovery, until
the Dispensation should set those Demands on foot.

Bristol bound up by this Express durst not break out the least limits to
discover his own dislike to his Overlookers Aston and Clark, but in public set
out the Preparations of England, in more expensive proportion than those
Provisions of Spain, for accomplishing so glorious a Marriage; which put the
Spaniard into a firm opinion how powerfully he had captivated the English
credulity. That the Ambassador for Poland, then at Madrid, Seeing the Corrival
of his Masters Son had got assurance of his Mistress, took leave of his woing,
and went home with the Willow Garland.

For now the Dispensation come, Bone-fires, and Bells-jangling, were signals
through Spain of the mutual joy of Prince, and people.

And few days after the Marriage was prefixed, with all possible preparations
of State and Solemnity; both for the present dependence, and future reference,
even to the Ordering of her voyage to England in March after.

When in the interim fresh commands confirming the former by several Expresses
for failing; Bristol opens to King Philip his Masters resolutions,

That having with vast expense, Bristol has Audience.
and in^inite patience, expected the effects of his just desires, with hazard
of the Prince his Person, to consummate his part in the Treaty, that nothing
might lodge upon the King of Englands honor, so highly preserved with all
Pot^ntates of Europe, and therefore unless the Restitution of the Pala^inate,
and the Electoral Dignity were included, the Treaty of Marriage was (...) to
take end.

The King troubled to be overreached, and to see it without remedy fairly
answered,

That those Demands were not in his power to effect, the one un^^^ the command
of the Emperor, the other in possession of the Duke of Bavaria, and if those
could not be reduced with reason, he would with Arms asist the Kings part
against them, or others in that behalf.

And not long after, the Spaniard taking it in earnest, and Bristol having no
motion to any further address, had order (in honor to the King of Spain) to
expect no more audience, nor to send conveyance of any more Letters to the
Infanta; and by public command, none should call her hereafter, Princess of
England, as in honor to the Match, they had usually styled her; and Bristol
prepared to return home. Duke of Richmond dies suddenly.


The twelfth of February the Duke of Richmond dyed, that morning being found
dead by his Duchess, whom she left slumbering, as she thought somewhat early,
when she arose; and therefore forbore his disquiet, until the late hour seemed
necessary to call him up to the Parliament; but gently withdrawing the
Curtains, he was found dead, without the least Symptoms of any warning to show
distemper in his body. This sudden amazement to all, caused the King instantly
to adjourn the meeting till the 19. day after.

Various conceits were rumoured of his hasty end, which according to the
peoples fancies, suffered several conjectures some attributing his death to an
Apoplexy, to a Surfeit, to Poison, [which served (says one) as a forerunner
to the King] for he will have him impoisoned also. Hist. Gr. Br. p. 258.


The Parliament meet at the day assigned, and the King greets them.

In effect thus.

That to justify himself and willingness with frequency to advise with his
people. The K. speech in Parliament.
He urges it by way of Parable in Christ and his Church, so he says, as
Husband to them, his Spouse, the effects of communion with Man and Wife is
often visiting each other.

There being two ways of Love in a King and his people, ordinary and
particular administration of Justice; and by communicating with his Parliament.
For the first, that his Government has been without error, he cannot say, but
does truly avouch it before God, and his Angels, that never King governed with
more pure, sincere and incorrupt heart, from intention and meaning of Error, or
imperfection in his Reign.

The other part he imparts as a secret importance to his estate and children;
These ways, as they procure love of his People, and of them, he acknowledges
the effect, whom the Parliament represents; so he desires, That they would
effectually present the Peoples Loves to him, as a true Mirror, not as a false
Glass, otherwise than it should be.

In a word, he falls upon the Matter; The match of his Son, wherein they
cannot but know, his time spent his cost.

His Reasons; Advancement of his Estate and Children, and peace of
Christendom, depending too much upon fair hopes and promises; with the
necessary hazard of his Son to prosecute his desires in Spain; and with him
Buckingham to wait his Commands, who are returned, not with such effect as was
desired; nor altogether without profit. For it took forth a point of Wisdom;
Qui versatur in universalibus, etc. is easily deceived, the Generals affording
others, ways to evade, and means to avoid effects.

The particulars too many for him to relate, he refers them to the Prince, to
Buckingham, and the Secretaries; that so Super totam Materiam, he may receive
their Assistance and advice for the good of the Commonwealth, Religion, His
Son, and His children of the Palatine.

And for his Estate, it is considerable, as consisting with theirs; And as Res
Integra is presented to them, so he professes himself free to follow their best
advice.

By Metaphor of good Gardiners, that plant good and pluck up bad, weeds choke
their Labors, but jealousies are to be rooted out; for they are of a strange
depth.

And cleers himself in the presence of God, of either Remissness in Religion,
or maintenance of Toleration; what suspicion might be, was when he connived at
some things, which hindered weighty affairs, but never to overthrow or disagree
with Our Laws; For a good Horseman spares the spur, and sometimes suffers the
Reigns; so a Wise King (as his age and experience informs) to quicken, and
execute Laws, and upon just occasion to be remiss.

And closes with that, which he would have take best impression, as most averse
from their faith; their Privileges. He never restrained Lawful Liberties,
anciently warrantable, therefore he forewarns them (as Saint Paul did Timothy)
to avoid Genealogies and curious Questions, quirks of Law, idle Innovations.
And his prayers to God for them, and a happy Conclusion of this Parliament.

Concluding with serious and Christian Protestations before God, That never
wayfaring Man in the burning Deserts, more desired water to quench his
drought, than he thirsted and longed for happy success of this Parliament. that
the good issue of this, may expiate and acquit the fruitless of the former,

AMEN.
This the effect; His occasions were always to speak much; and his excellent
abilities to speak well; worthy of print as they are other where virbatim;
which the bulk of this History craves leave to breviate. The L. Keepers short
complement.


The Lord Keeper, as Speaker to the Peers, whose place there usually adds to
the Kings mind and meaning, and excuses himself,

After his Eloquence to be silent; not to enamel a Gold Ring with studs of
Iron. And as One says of Nerva, that having adopted Trajan, he was immediately
taken away, Ne post divinum and immortale factum, aliquid Mortale faceret; So
he durst not after his Majesty, Divinum and Immortale dictum, Mortale aliquid
addere.

Of this one complains, as the temper of those times only, [Men make
themselves Beasts, Hist. Gr. Br. p. 262.
by making Kings Gods] and advances highly the Spanish and French [not
idolizing their Kings with Sacred, Sovereign, Immortal, Oraculous Expressions,
but in their Title Sir, tells the business and demands Justice.]

When both houses had well digested the Kings excuses, and given some hopes of
their good satisfaction, and so clearly to go on to business of the time; It
was thought fit for the King to per^orm his promise in reference to further
Relation of the Mysteries in the Match.

And therefore after five days breathing, the Duke of Buckingham, with the
Prince, gave particular remonstrance to both Houses of such Transactions (or so
many as is necessary) as before Buckinghams D^claration to both Houses.
remembered, especially those which were managed by Sir Richard Weston, with
the Arch-dutchess at Bruxels, in reference to the K. of Spain, and both their
jugglings, viz.

That thereupon the King sent Porter to Spain, and was abused with hopes to
credit Bristol; till Olivares told him plainly, That they meant neither the
Match, nor the Restitution of the Palatinate.

Bristol in private, discovers this freedom to Olivares, who incensed with
Porter, refuses to speak with him any more. And so Bristol orders his return,
with a dispatch and assurance of both Demands; but being of slow performance,
the Prince undertakes it himself in Person, where the Spanish deceipts, and
Bristols connivance, being with some intricacy discovered, by the Prince; He is
now returned through all these hazards, to deserve thanks from us all.

The Duke having satisfied the curiosity of a searching Parliament, was highly
esteemed as the Preserver of the Nation, contrary to that natural custom of
incompatibillity of affections, between the vulgar and the Sovereigns favor,
and so he kept it to the Kings last breath (eighteen Months after) a long
course, calm and smooth prosperity, without any visible eclipse or variation.

Though an Author seeks to scandal his Memory [ And brings Hist. Gr. Br. p. 264.
Bristol his Accuser hereafter (I know not when) That the Duke carried the
Prince Purposely into Spain to be better instructed in Popery, and gave hopes
of the Princes conversion; and professed himself a Papist, heard Mass, adored
their Sacraments, and received a Bull from the Pope to encourage him to pervert
both the King and the Prince.]

These imputations so feigned and false, need no confutation but neglect and
scorn, though some Articles since seem to say so much.

The Parliament had other opinions then, Parliaments advice.
and thereupon advised the King to break the Treaty, and proclaim open War
against Spain, but in such General terms as gave his Wisdom cause to suspect;
and therefore thinks fit to propound such cautions to them, as should advisedly
draw to Resolutions, and not leave him in the lurch,

My Lords and Gentlemen,
Have cause to thank God, The Kings Speech.
that my last Speech takes this effect, that with unanime consent you have so
speedily given advice in this Business; to break off the Treaties of the
Match, and Palatinate.

And now give me leave, as an old King, to propaund my doubts and hereafter
give me your answer.

It is true, I have been all my life a Peaceable King, my Titles, and Impress
Rex Pacificus give me that Honor; and should I now imbroyl my self in War
against my Nature, and mine honor, to spill more blood, of which too much had
been shed? unless it be by Necessity, Malum Necessarium; Besides He tells them,
Some hopes of better conditions has been offered since this sitting. But to
take off their Iealousies, that while they advise he rejects. It is therefore
left to their consideration, as a matter of weight, that the course may agree
with his conscience.

In the case of his Children, he being old, would be glad (as Moses saw the
promised Land afar off) if not to see the Restitution, yet to be but assured it
shall be, and so to sing, Nunc Dimittis Domine.

He has heretofore said, as now, not to desire a furrow of Land in all his
Dominions without Restitution of the Palatinate; but then take the Difficulties
of the Case. It is unchristian to advise a King to War by blood which may be
had by Peace. And to consider the Requisites anent his Nccessityes, for he
tells them plain, Parliaments have afforded him least helps of any King. His
Necessities.
His disabilities increased by his Sons journey to Spain, Ambassadors,
maintenance of His Children, assisting the Palatinate, his debt to Denmark for
the Low Countries, who, if not assisted by him cannot subsist of themselves.

The Princes of Germany that should help, are poor, weok, disheartened, and
expect from hence. Ireland as a backdoor, Anno 1624.
must be secured; The Navy though well, must be repaired for securing it self,
and the Coasts.

That his children abroad eat no bread but by him. His customs the best part of
his Revenue in effect the substance of all are farmed with conditions if war
follow, their bargains sease, and Subsidies ask time to bring in, unless he
take them up upon credit, and so lose of their value.

In these cases he would be loath to show his Teeth, and cannot bite. And
refers the condition of his own Estate to his Treasurer.

And thus freely he opens his heart; for their Hearts and Help, let them show
the means, and he will do what they direct, referring the dispose of moneys to
their own Deputies and Treasurers; and upon the offer of their Means, he makes
War; he will wave the Prerogative of Kings, of War and Peace, and be advised by
them in either for weapons breed peace.

He desires to be in Love with Parlaments to make good Laws, reform abuses and
maintain good Government, and so blesses their labors to the end.

Thus far the King.

Here was plainess. He had cause to fear, for he foresaw his own hazard to be
left in the lurch. So that to set him forward, without despair, they soeak as
they should mean, and not long after give him this Declaration.

They first render thanks to his sacred Majesty for accepting their humble
advice, to assist him in a Parliamentary way with their persons and abilities.

And whereas his Majesty was pleased to descend to particular propositions for
advance of so great a Bu^iness, upon his Majesty's Declaration for dissolution
and discharge of both Treaties, and for defense of the Realm, the securing
Ireland, the assisting the Netherlands, and other his Majestyes Friends and
Allies, and for the Navy. For these they will grant him three entire Subsidies,
and three fifteens, to be paid within a year. The money to be in hands of
Committes and Commissioners by them to be expended, as shall be agreed upon
this present Session.

The King was well pleased, and tells them,

He is willing to dissolve the Treaties, their Gift being sufficient to begin a
War, but when it will end God knows. That he will engage his Successor, his
Son, for the recovery of the Palatinate, and in his old age will assist in
Person, if need be. That as he is pleased the Committes should direct the
disposing of the moneys, so the Design must not be acted by public counsels,
that is, whether two thousan^ or ten thousand, by Sea or Land, East or West by
Diversion or Invasion, upon the Emperor or Bavaria; these be hopes must be
left to the King.

Hereupon a Council of War is chosen of some ancient Actors in the Militia of
Ireland, Council of War.
and other Nobility, the Meeting at the Savor, at the Lord Caries, President of
that Council, who resolve of six thousand to be sent for the present into the
Low Countries, to join with their forces, against the Spanish under command of
Spinola, and so have a freer passage into Germany, if need were hereafter.

The Spanish Ambassador Marquess of Inojos^, much perplexed at the even
proceedings between the King and Parliament, Spanish Ambassador accuses the
Duke of Treason.
resolved to put in practice a Jesuit trick upon Buckingham, by that means to
distemper the Calm proceedings of this State.

We are told the Manner [That Inojosa sent one Padre Majestre a Spanish Jesuit,
Co. and C^. K. James p 150.
a great Statesman, to King James, that he under confession had found the King
was by Buckingham, or by his procurement to be killed, but whether by Poison,
Pistol, Dagger, etc. he could not tell. Then that the King should say to
Buckingham, ah Stenny, Stenny, (a term of favor) will thou kill me* the Duke
in high passion, being told that Padre Majestre had been with the King, who
being questioned by the Duke; Inojosa undertook the quarrel, and told the Duke,
he would maintain him the Traitor, etc.]

Another says [That the Ambassador sent one to the King to let him know,
Hist. Gr. Br. p. 278.
That the Duke of Buckingham had some dangerous Machination on foot, that
tended to his Destruction, and the best He could expect would be a Con^inement
to a Country House in some Park during his life, the Prince being now ripe for
Government, etc. and the Author concludes, That such an attempt could not be
done without the Princes privity, and yet the King was willing to have the Brat
strangled in the Womb; though there was cause to suspect, that the great
intimacy and deerness between the Prince, and Duke (like the conjunction of two
dreadful Planets) could not but portend the production of some dangerous
effect to the Old King.]

What horrid infamy is here cast on them both?

But this was the story and the truth, The Truth of the Story.
for not a day passed then, but that I was present, and acquainted with all
that transaction to the end. It was well known how much it concerned the
Ambassador for his Masters honor to disimprove the value of Buckingham, with
the King and Parliament, and cunningly meant to do it home, and to involve the
Prince too in one and the same act.

And therefore aspersed abroad a suspicion (which really also Inojosa devised
to the Kings ear) That Buckingham should have plotted this Parliament to over
power the King, which if resisted, then by that authority to con^ine the King,
and to transfer sovereignty upon the Prince.

And thus ( Machevils rule) lay the scandal high enough, no matter to prove it.

Himself the Brocher, to be free from Examination, being qualified an
Ambassador.

A great noise there was (I remember well) more in the peoples resentment than
any way considerable at Court. And yet the Duke was not so dull to neglect the
means of satisfying Others. Himself and Prince needed not, nor truly did it any
way interfear (as it was devised) to startle the King.

And being generally cried down as a false scandal, the power of all three
could not question an Ambassador, though it was scanned at the Council Table,
and put to vote in the house too, how to proceed with him: That the Shield of
his Ambassy was too weak to defend him from the Sword of Justice, for then he
resolves into a private man.

The Duke not satisfied, See before pa. 74.
had the opinion of a learned Antiquary who with much circumstance advised and
directed a tedious Ceremony of State to be used therein.

Both Speakers to remonstrate to the Ambassador the crime, and if he reveal
not the Informers, then is he Author Scandali, and so the Houses to petition
the King to confine him, and restrain his person till his Master know his
offense, and satisfy Justice. If he does not; then is it Transactio Criminis,
upon himself, and draws a denounce of War.

But the wisdom of the King would have none of this Geer. Yet the Prince and
Duke complained hereof to Spain, and a command returned to Inojosa to crave
forgiveness, which he did,; and the Duke in confidence of his own Innocence,
suffered it to pass without much more trouble to seek satisfaction in
public: for he would always say, Lies are not long lived.

And indeed more he could not have; Examples vary, some Ambassadors in like
cases have been secured and punished, others freed by privilege; for in the
times of the Scots Affairs, with Us and France; frequent Presidents have been
used, by Throgmorton, Randolph, Tanworth, and Bishop Ross, according to the
power of the Princes where they have been committed, Sea before anno 1571.
as has been before mentioned.

The Earl of Bristol, this while in Spain, received command to take leave of
that King, and to return; and had intelligence from hence in what hazard he
should appear after such Complaints in Parliament against him. Bristol^return
And indeed he delayed it so long that it was suspected he would stay there,
being so advised by the King of Spain, who gave him assurance of all Civility
and kindness in his Court for security, rather than adventure his head at home.

But these branglings here, feigned there to be high Distraction, Hist. Gr. Br.
p. 272.
gave him courage to return [ where no sooner appeared but was clapped up in the
Tower (sa^es one) and the next day set at Liberty, nor durst any bring him to
farther Tryal] He was committed by the Lords in Parliament, Co. and Chapter p. 163.
and might have lain there longer a Prisoner; but the Duke made means for his
release, least it should move jealousies, that it was his design thereby to
delay his Trial; and this to my knowledge, for I acted in his release. He being
earnestly pursued by the Duke, and had the Parliament lasted, it might have
proved his destruction, who afterward humbled himself, and gained favor to
retire into the Country to Shirbone, that fatal seat for suceeding Offenders.

But the Spanish Ambassadors practice failing, some Lords, set on work a
Petition to the King against Papists, as intending it necessary to go on with
the compliance of the Public Affair, now happ^ly proceeding, or to hazard all,
and nothing would serve to satisfy these Men, but several Conferences of both
Houses, until they had with consent framed their Propositions, and presented
them to the King in two Petitions alike.

We your Majesty's most Humble and Loyal Subjects the Lords and Commons do in
all humility offer unto your Majesty These two Petitions.
THat for the more safety of your Realms, Petition of both Houses against
Papists.
and better keeping your subjects in obedience, and other important reasons of
State, your Majesty would be pleased by some such course as you shall think fit
to give present Order that all the Laws be put in due execution against
Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and others, having taken Orders of the Sea of Rome,
and generally against all Popish Recusants; and as for disarming, that it may
be done according to the Laws, Acts and Directions of State in that Case.

And least the Jesuits and Priests here, may pretend to be surprissed that a
day certain may prefix their departure, and neither they nor other to return or
come hither, upon peril of severest Penalties of the Laws now in force. And
that no Subjects receive, entertain or conceal them upon penalties, etc.

Seeing we are thus happily delivered from those Treaties, and the use which
your ill affected subjects made thereof, and yet we fore see the like
hereafter. We therefore are humble Suitors to your Majesty, To secure the
hearts of your good Subjects, by your Royal word, That upon no occasion of
Marriage or Treaty (or such other Request, from foreign Prince, or State what
soever) you will slacken the execution of the said Laws against Jesuits,
Priests, and Popish Recusants.

And humbly pray a gracious Answer.
The King doubting this double Petition, intended as a check to the main
business, resolved yet to satisfy them.

That he commends both Houses for their Petition, The Kings Answer.
but wonders at their suspicion, to spur him on to his conscience and duty.
That his Religion, Profession and behavior, his own Books declare; nor will
swarve from them, for he that dissembles with God, will be distrasted by Men.

That his heart bleeds at the increase of Popery, as thorns in his eyes and
pricks in his sides. He has always desired to hinder the growth as a Martyr;
As in the sense of Isaac, persecuted by Ismael by mocking words, as no King
ever suffered more of ill tongues. Yet he has been far from per seeuting,
believing that rule, Sanguis Martyrum est semen Ecclesiae.

As for the Petition, he grants in substance what they ask, and adds of his
own. Their Treaties being annulled their desire is granted, and will declare by
Proclamation to banish Jesuits and Priests by a day, but a Proclamation here
extends only to this Kingdom.

He will do more, command his Judges in circuit to put the Laws in Execution
against Recusants, as before the Treaties, the Laws being in force, and never
dispensed with by him; but as he told them heretofore, as a good Horseman to
use sometimes the Reigns, not always the spur. He promis^th by Declaration to
disarm them; which indeed is done by the Laws. Nay, will disorder the Papists
frequenting to Ambassadors Masses; for though he cannot break their privilege,
yet the Lord Mayor, and Officers may seize them as they come out. And resolves
to order the Education of Recusants children, as he has advised therein with
his Bishops and Council.

The second part of the Petition is the best advice in the World, being against
the Rule of Wisdom, that Subjects should transgress a Law by Intercession of
a Foreign Prince, and forced in such conditions in such a Treaty; which he will
avoid in any whatever.

This his answer so satisfactory as pleased the Parliament. (Sa^es Calumny) [
He promised much, Hist. Gr. Br. P. 275.
and performed little.]

See what he did by the sequel. Order was forthwith to inroll the chiefest
Recusants, you see he spares none, nor were the Parliament so nice as to leave
the best of them out.

The Earl of Rutland, Sir Thomas Compton (the Dukes two Fathers in Law) the
Countess his Mother, Earl Castlehaven, the Lords Herbert, Rivers, Peter, Morly,
Windsor, Eure, Wootton, Teinham, Scroop; and of Knights, Courtney, Brewdnel,
Somerset, Ireland, Stonners, Brown, Howard, Powel, Lacon, Lewkner, Awbery Gage,
Shelly, Carvel, Wiseman, Gerrard, Filpot, Russel, Bedingfield, Wrey, Conwey,
Jones, Conyers, Lamplow, Savage, Mosly, Beston, Riddal, Wyral, Townsend,
Norris, Knevet, Tasborough, Selby, Tichburn, Hall, Perkins, Penruddock, Sands,
and diverse Esquires and Gentlemen, either by themselves or their Wives.

These men were all at Mercy, and who ever else the Parliament would pick out,
with lime and baited Hooks to catch them; for the King not minded to interrupt
them (having done his part) withdrew to New Market cold air, for his Northern
conditions the most healthy.

The Prince increasing in years, The Princes Marriage with France, treated by
the L. Kensington.
and in affection of the People, it was most convenient also to speed him a
marriage. The Treaties with Spain being thus far annulled. Some Overtures were
hinted from France, of their willingness for a Match with Madam, the Princess
Henri^tta Maria, the French Kings youngest Sister, the two others being
preferred to Spain and Savoy.

And because it was necessary to feel the pulse of that State, Sir Henry Rich
Lord Kensington, was sent over singly, and at his own time and discretion to
manage the discovery of the French affections. and then to present himself,
with his credence.

He arrived (in no public splendor) at Paris, on Sunday after Noon, and was
informed that the King intended the next morning a journey for five or six
days to Shantelie a House of Momorancies, and therefore in private Kensington
gave visit to the Duke of Chevereux, who with his Lady, were appareling for
instant Actors in the Queens Mask, and within an hour came the Queen Regent
and Madame and in an hours view might have this chata^ter.

The Sweetest Creature in France, Madames Character.
her growth as her age little, her Discourse discreet and quick, and had the
report of Wisdom beyond her years, and for additions of grace, she was said to
dance and sing most sweetly, I am fure she looked so.

My Lord had reason to suspect the Queens reserve toward him* she being
Spanish, and so not well pleased with the breach of her Sisters match. But she
was changed so much French, as to grace him with her hand. The King was told of
Kensington, and because of his journey next Morning, purposed to receive him an
Ambassador, as some had suggested to him, until Chevereux assured him the
contrary, his coming merely to kiss his Majestyes hand, and see the glory of
his Court this Christmas; and so was taken to the Masque, danced by sixteen
the greatest Princesses of France, with whom the King and his Masquers (the
last Tuesday) were now by lot to dance with these Ladies, and all these, and
the Court besides, so infinitely rich in Jewels (golden and silver dressing
being there forbidden) as their apparel, almost all, ^mbroidered and thick with
Diamonds and Pearl, as usually with purl.

I doubt not, but some counter^eit, or else you might have suspected the wealth
of that nation on their backs.

The presence of a Stranger, somewhat public, presented to each persons
caress made most men (acquainted with State) to judge the plot of his Journey,
was rather to set an edge upon Spain; to cut off delays, than to cut the
throat of that business.

The Kings weakness or indisposition to affairs, gave leave and time to Queen
Mother to manage all; who receiving an humble visit by Kensington to kiss her
hands, she entered discourse of the Spanish Alliance.

The Treaty (said he) had suffered many Delays, and was annulled. Though the
Spanish Ambassador there, had given it out to be concluded, on purpose to
prevent conjunction with France which he suspected, and his design got credit
with some persons of power, seeing Kensington had no Credentials positive to
speak to the purpose. Yet from others, France how affected.
and not the meanest, he apprehended the affections of that State, generally
prepared to receive offers of Amity and Alliance* when the dissolution of the
other shall be declared.

Indeed the Savoy Ambassador there said, That the intention of the King of
Spain, was for a Cross Match with France for himself.

But the late abuse upon the English in that way, made the French wary, and
hastily to bite at that bate. Yet the reasons of State were not unequal. Our
Design was double, both Marriage and League against Spain. And if the French
should match with Spain, and so hold us to hard conditions, they have the safer
ground; for they may expect restitution of the Valtoline, as we do demand the
Palatinate, these two being the open quarrels on both parts to ground.

And these doubts were suspected to draw on a tedious Treaty and therefore it
was thought fit by the English to insist upon the Match, and bring on the
League, necessarily to follow, and to have reasonable conditions concerning
Catholics in England.

Indeed the necessity of the French Affairs, least Spain, that has begirt
them, should in time swallow them up, was like to make this Match easy enough
for the English; the alarm being fresh in Court, from the Spaniards raising a
fort upon the ruin, to command the Town of Liege.

Queen Mother, suspecting that Kensingtons errand was in earnest, by degrees,
gave him encouragement to speak plain though it was his part to plead and woe
too, without any signal.

The Duke of Chevereux and Le Grand, of credit and power both, were the men
this Design most affected. Kensington bore the Princes Picture tackt to his
Breast, limm'd in little in a Case of set Diamonds, which the Queen would offer
to open, as to show the Ladies, which they would as often desire, to please her
Majesty, who (me thought) did love to look on it, She wishing that some good
occasion might make them meet, and she might see him like himself. But because
Madam. could not in modesty or honor get a glance of his shadow, she in private
dealt with a Madamoselle, that had some interest in one of the Lords Family, to
borrow the Picture, and so in secret to gaze her fill, where in much have she
opened the Picture, and discovered her passions, her blushes not concealing her
inward affections to his person, which she prized by praising his Picture in
presence of him that saw her.

Two mouths calmed the way unto the Mother, she and Le Grand advised to move
the King, if this business were fitted to the full.

But Kensington declined, as not to deliver the King his Masters inclination,
unless he might receive the return, answerable to a due respect and value of
the Proposition. Of which being assured, he took his opportunity to withdraw
the K. toward the window, and told him,

That his journey to France was singly his own inclination to honor and serve
him, and therein to discover how the Prince of Wales would be free and
disingaged from the Spanish Treaty, not finding them to his expectation in such
particulars as principally should invite a Conjunction. And therefore the Duke
of Buckingham had exercised his interest with the King and Prince to convert
those thoughts toward his Majesty, from whom it was persuaded, nothing but
truth and honor would be returned, as an advantage to both Nations; And
believed that if the King would show a disposition inclineable, the effects
would soon confirm the end of his coming, free from other Designs, than what
he now expressed.

The King (often uncovered) said,

He had not heard, that the Match with Spain, was as yet broke, the just cause
for him to be reserved. But assured him in general, That any propositions from
the King of Great Britain should be heartily received.

This was short, His Resentment.
for his Imperfection of extreme stammering by nature, made him usually speak
very little, whose affection (if one might Guess by his courtesy) would have
said more, as most of the Ministers of that State did, And that nothing to them
was more equal than Amity and Alliance with England.

This entrance encouraged Kensington to discover himself and letters of
Credence to the King, and so was quallified to treat fu^ther.

And to increase more than Jealousies in the young Count Soissons, Count
Soissons a Pretender to Madame,
who had some hopes of pretensions toward Madame, but now discouraged, and the
more upon discourse of the Cardinal Rochfalcaut with his Mother, to take off
all expectation? That in this Conjunction of Affairs, the King would no doubt
prefer his Sister into England, with advantage of his Dignity, and her Honor,
and (though he loved the Count) he would counsel his Master to the contrary
with him.

Soissons encountering Kensington, Encounte^s a quarrel with Kensington.
had his salute due to his rank, a great Peer of the Blood, who disdainfully
turned aside, and so a second time; in presence of Grandmont, he told it to the
Marquess de la valesse, a Confident of the Counts, who conveys it to Soissons,
and was answered, That he affords no better Countenance to Kensington whom he
hates not, but his errand, which he resented so ill, as were it not the behalf
of so great a Prince, he had a heart to cut Kensingtons throat; And so retires
out of Town.

This boldness of him, to aver Corrival with our Prince, and abuse of his
Minister, made Kensington begin the quarrel with a Challenge, which the Count
accepts, but the former passages were so narrowly observed, with the public
interest and honor of that State, so nearly concerned, that the Count was
secured, and Kensington seized into several Courtships, as made it not possible
to try the Combat, but were both made Friends by the King.

The Treaty on foot, and the Match managed most by the Constable, Monsieur de
Vieuxville, who after some disgusts upon the peoples interest, was for that
secured from their rage by a seeming imprisonment, and after rewarded by
public preferment, being the Queen Mothers Instrument also, to enter her
nearer Favorite Cardinal Richlieu her Confessor, and great Confident, Cabinet
^unto.
and now introduced him also into the Cabinet Council, composed of the Queen
Mother, the Cardinals Rochfalcour and Richliew, the Constable, and the Guard de
Seaux.

To assist Kensington, comes over Carlisle, with joint Commission to balance
the French Council.

The first difficulty likely to be insisted upon was Religion, wherein they
were told the course that King James might be driven unto, The Earl of Carsile
comes over Commissioner, and treat.
to banish Jesuits and Priests, and quicken the Laws against other Catholics,
in necessity of reducing them within the bounds of obedience, correspondent to
the expectation of Parliament now sitting; for without them this work of weight
could not proceed, which with much altercation was at last resented as reason,
upon hope of Moderation herafter, which was all they pretended unto.

And that the Grace theeof might the rather flow from the mediation of that
State (so much stood upon by Spain) to save their honors therein, who
otherwise would be held H^reticks.

And their good inclination forthwith appeared in the public Treatment of the
Ambassadors, for some time, at the Kings charge; which so heightened them
thereafter, that their Expense so Magnificently profuse, was never matched by
any.

Many subtilties lengthened the Treaty, the French following the former way of
the Spanish delay, from their several Overtures to cross ours; and ministered an
excuse, Of unseasonable concluding in this conjuncture of time, when such great
changes are apt to beget jealousies from neighbor States.

And this was cunningly fomented by the Spanish Ambassador, who vaunted, That
there is not a greater change in La Vieuxville his preferment (who governed
all) as there is in the General affections, which follow the stream of his
greatness and credit.

Casting in the Kings mind the Seeds of doubt; whereto Olivares in Spain did
contribute his Rodimentado to Bristol, not yet come home,

That if the Pope should grant a Dispensation for France, his Master would
march to Rome, and sack it.

However, Kensington (who was more interessed to press the Princes affection,
than his Colleague Carlisle) had leave to make Address unto Madame, at some
distance, yet nearer than before, with such commands as the Prince had
entrusted to him, which Queen Mother would know.

No ( says the Baron) that were in example to the like prejudice, which the
Spaniard put upon the Prince.

She replied, The Case is different, there he was in person, here but by Deputy.

But yet such a Deputy ( says Kensington) that represents his Person.

Mais pour tout celas, (dit elle) qu' est ce, que vous diret? Rien (dit ille)
qui ne soit digne, des orcilles d' une si virtueuse Princess. Mais qu' est ce?
said she.

Why, if your Majesty will needs know, it will be much to this effect, and so
in a way of freedom, expressed it thus,

That your Majesty has afforded me liberty of free Discourse, presenting his
Highness service, not by complement, but by passions of affections; which both
her outward and inward Beauties, the virtues of her Mind has so enlightened
his resolve, as to contribute his utmost to her alliance, as the greatest
happiness here upon Earth, if the Success might minister occasion to manifest
his Devotion in adoring her.

And going on.

Aller aller (said she) il ny a point de danger en tout cela, je me fie en
vous, se me fie.

But I dare say, he said more to Madame, who drank down the joy, and with a low
courtesy acknowledged it to the Prince addi^g her extreme obligement to his
Highness in the happiness of meriting such eminent place in his good graces.

Then turns he to the old Ones that guard her, Ladies, says he, Since the
Queen grants me these freedoms, It would not ill become your Ladyships to
speak and do suitable; Letting them know that the Prince had Madames Picture in
the Cubinet of his heart as well as in his hand, and so fed his Eyes and Soul
with sight, and contemplation until he should be blessed with her person.

This serving as a second Courtship to Her self, who no doubt took up each
syllable as it fell from him; and such success followed, that Carlisle had the
Garter of Saint George sent him, snd the Baron converted to an Earl and called
Holland.

The Princess appearing more in public, Hist. Gr. Br. p. 178.
Her Court and Train enlarged, and though our Ambassadors had to do with harsh
and subtle Clergy, and the rest, resolute Statists, yet so reasonable were the
conditions on both sides, as that the Articles were received by King James, not
long before his death, but not sworn unto (as some do say that he did) and
worse would make us believe. [That Carliles coming was to delay the Treaty in
hope of renewing that with Spain.]

A scandal ^evised to make the King odious, and the Prince inconstant; for the
copied Articles of several Transactions, and the original Dispatches are to be
produced in answer to all.

And thus was the business managed abroad until she came over to be Queen of
England.

These were times of Trial at home, Inquisition upon all Men's actions, the King
being willing to expose his greatest Ministers, who escaped not the censure.

The Lord Treasurer Cranfield is questioned for mismannaging the Exchequer. I
find him of no mean Family in Gloucestershire, as by their Cote Arms in the
Heralds Office, Or, on a pale azure three flower de luces of the first. L.
Treasurer Cranfield questioned in Parliament.
He was brother to Sir Randolph Cranfield, who inherited their Fathers
possession there and in other Counties of good value. This Man was bred a
Merchant in London, and by his extraordinary qualities and blessings of God
upon his endeavors, in that laudable way of Adventure, besides his
understanding in the affairs of the customs, became useful to the State.

And first had the honor of Knighthood, Master of the Requests, then made
Master of the Kings Wardrobe, afterward Master of the Court of Wards and
Liveries, and Privy Counselor, Baron Cranfield, and lastly succeeded Suffolk
in the place of Treasurer, and in that time created Earl of Middlesex, 1622.

And in all these Offices of trust I never knew him then, nor can find sithence
any suspicion, unless in that of the Treasury [the Ground where of is hinted to
us by our Pamphlet, Co. and ^ch. p. 166.
but in truth in this he has but scummed the pot to clear the broth. For who
more fit for the reasons of a necessitated Excheq^er than this man of
experience, in stating the Accounts for the Revenues of the State, which I know
he improved, and not unlikely thereby purchased envy for his eminency therein.

And to say truth, according to the duty of his place; he did endeavor to
husband the same to piece out the expense, which the necessities of the Kings
affairs had heightened (As himself told the Parliament) and the Princes journey
into Spain, Hist. Gr. Br. p. 278.
had wonderfully and unnecessarily exhausted, Mr. Prin, etc.
as by the printed account thereof lately devulged by Parliament does appear.

Then which no better evidence can be produced to acquit the Treasurer
together, with what the Pamphlet publishes as a supposed crime in him [his
refusal to supply the Princes expense and Buckinghams folly and prodigality.]

And this he did deny, as the duty of his Office required, and which he well
understood, as being of Council, and acted as a Counselor to my knowledge in
that undertaking, and indeed being then the Statesman at the Council Table.

But his refusal of supplying Buckingham upon that score only, wrought him no
doubt, at his return home the Treasurers deadly Enemy. And whom he opposed [ A
small accusation might serve the turn to turn out of all] as he did him; and
yet to the honor of his Memory, though they raked into all his actions, and
racked all Men's discoveries to the height of information, the eminency of his
place, exposing him unto much observing and opening the way to all kind of
complaints (as they did) examining nothing upon oath (as they never do) yet
that there should be no more matter gleaned. And where there are such bolt^ngs,
there was expected a great deal more Bran. Yet the power of Buckingham could
never produce any crime against his exact Accounts in that boundless trust of
the tempting Treasury. And in spite of Malice (he was envyed also) though they
divested him of that office, yet he lived long after in peace and honor, and
dyed since these last times of enquiry, 1650. leaving to his heir, his honor
untaint, enabling them to bear up the character of their Fathers merit.

We are told [That the Duke got Chelsey house out of him for his part of his
fine.] what shift the Author makes to patch up his Stories with falsities, when
to my Knowledge that Seat was in treaty to be sold to another, Hist. Gr. Br. p.
279.
and the Duke wanting a House near hand to retire for a Nursery to his
children, (his Duchess teeming) that other party, concluded for the bargain,
and to him the Dnke paid the money, valuable to the utmost penny.

And the like Tale he tells [That the Lady Finch corrupted him with Copthall, a
Noble Seat in Essex, to procure her to be Viscountess of Maidstone.] when the
talk of the Town was, he had so dear a bargain as occasioned the saying, That
it was cheap enough to him, being bought with the Kings Money, there needs much
dung to stop a wide mouthed Oven.

Cranfield indeed was in this Kings life, the last of that Office, and the
meanest of birth, lately altered from the Trust of Nobly-born persons. The late
Treasurers more useful than others better born.
The Treasury of antieut Spring-tides was of late sunck into neap-ebbs of
Revenue, and enforced a necessity of providence in collecting, and judgment
and practice in disposing: Neither of these could be found by experience
suitable to our latern Lord like-breeding; ignorant and careless.

Yet in honor to the Office, the King raised other Men to Titles for
countenance against the outward beseechings of the Mad-headed multitude of
Suitors, as it happened to his Successor Lee, by the rudeness of the Sea men,
and all to little to support a Treasurer without prejudice of public esteem,
even with the best Suitors by unhandsom treaties, between their necessities,
and an empty Exchequer.

Besides, succession inherited the obloquies of former Predicessours, which
happened frequent in this, and other places of Trust; not out of inconstancy in
the Kings affections to his Ministers (the misreport of his wisdom) but to make
Trial of the chiefest Mistress of Instruction, to meet with the best.

And in such a change or remove he left them not unrewarded being never well
himself, till his Servants were wealthy, least being cripled in hi^ life, they
might want an Hospital after his death. A mischief not seldom; much like a
Lords well-mannaged Horse for his own saddle, comes often; afterward to the
Hackney-Coach, nay, and sometimes dies in drawing a Dung-Cart.

He knew Men, and had them to his Mind or made them so; able capacity not bare
measure; rather with surplusage equal to the business he employed them.

Yet he had easy natures near his person too, because more manageable, than
abler men, in such matters where their hands were more useful than their brains.

But say some, the King raised men to preferment of honor and dignity, whose
birth and Gentry were extinguished by being Apprentices.

Hence they start their Opinion, Digression. Apprentiship is no bondage
That it is a kind of Bondage;

I deny to be either vera Servitus, or omnino Servitus, the Contract is but
Civil Permutatio or Exchange. The obligation is mutual, Master and Man; only
Freemen can make contracts, and Challenge the benefit.

The Oath of a Freemans admission is, To take no Prentice but freeborn, no
Bondmans son.

It were madness to imagine that Jacob served his Uncle Laban seven years in
the honorable contract for a Worthy Wife, and for an Estate to maintain her,
to be therefore a Bondsman.

By which example in Scripture, it is undeniable, That Servire to serve, is
laudable for good and honest purposes; but our Apprentice does but deservire,
obey, and his Master does docere, teach him his Trade; and of late the
Apprentice comes commonly more like a Wife with a large portion to his Master.

Indeed Erasmus Roterodamus his Etymology makes of our Apprentices to be pares
emptitiis, as with the Romans, but they differ. Servus with them, was of
Servando, saving, not of Serviendo, of serving.

Our Apprentice comes of Apprenti, the French Word; a Raw Soldier, or to
learn, or of the Latin apprehendo.

So then sir Tho. Smiths Repub. Angl. does them injury, terming them Bondslaves.

Bondmens bodies, were vested in the Lord interminable, but only by
Manumission, and that by the Will of the Lord, without any condition in behalf
of the slave.

Servus with the Romans, Nullum caput habuit, and were reputed, civiliter
mortui: servi pro nullis habiti.

There was a voluntary bondage, de jure gentium as by the Romans, a Man might
sell himself, ad participandum pretium. And also de jure divino positivo, So
the Hebrews Bondmen. Yet they had not jus in corpus, they could not violate her
chastity.

By our Law only two sorts of Bondmen, villains in gross, and vilains
reguardant to Manor.

A Master in London has not despoticum imperium over his Apprentice, but only
quasi curaturam, a Teacher, ut Pater, non Tyrannus, immoderate Correction
looses his Apprentice, who is by Statute to be free from him, 5. Eliz.

But of late our City discipline, had more need to be reduced to ancient
severity, than to be abduced from it.

The final Cause of every Ordination quallifies the course; and determines the
Means and action, tending to it, though abstracting from that consideration,
the work wrought in the proper nature be servile; as for a Soldier to dig, or
carry earth to a Rampire, a Student to be bare, or a Novice to do servile
Offices, and so an Apprentice to do, does not extinguish Gentry, and what ever
he does, as not sui juris, yet he does nothing Servile, but propter finem
nobilem, to God, Country and Calling.

But Apprentices are so far from being bondmen, that then they begin habere
caput, to be aliqui, and by degrees to be free, then of the Livery, and by
after degrees become Wardens, Masters, Common Council, Aldermens Deputies,
Aldermen, Sheriffs, Lord Majors.

And by further merit, Counselors to the King, and Lord Treasurers of
England, and so if it be rashness to cast a scorn upon a renowned Corporation
unjustly, let it be iniquity to lay it upon London, which in the Empire of
Great Britain, amongst their other Cities, Velut inter ignes
Luna Minores.


And though the Schools and Camp are most proper for Honor and Arms, yet the
ancient wisdom and bounty of Sovereigns, left the Gates of honor open to City
Arts, and honest gain, as fundamentals to commonwealths, by example of rising
Rome under her first Dictators and Consuls. By which they avoided Tyrannical
appropriation of Gentry, to some certain old families, as in Germany, and the
Confusion of allowing hereditary Nobleness or Gentry to none at all, as in
Turkey, etc.

And with us Cotes of Arms, and Title of Gentlemen being the most familiar part
of Honor, Our Adversaries would overturn, and tax our policies in that point,
which being once gotten and given by Merit or Favor, cannot be lost or
extinguished.

No man in England loses his right to bearing Arms, or Title of Gentleman,
unless attainted in Law.

Jura Sanguinum nullo jure civili devinci possunt. Not to be aliened to
another, no more than to pass away any habit or quality of the Mind, Virtue or
Learning.

Queen Elizabeth was descended lineally from Sir Godfrey Bullen, Lord Mayor of
London, by Queen Anne Bullen her Mother.

Sir Martin Calthrope, her Kinsman also, and Lord Mayor of London.

Citizens of London have been called Barons, Hen. 3. Londinenses, Quos propter
Civitatis Dignitatem and civium antiquitatem Barons consueuimus appelare.

London sends Kinghts and Citizens to the Parliament, not Burgesses.

And sundry of our Sovereigns have daigned to be of their Freedom.

But the opinion of bondage, and extinguishing birthright of Gentry, has
filled England with more Vices, and sacrificed more bodies to odious ends, and
more souls to sinful life, than perhaps any other uncivil opinion whatsoever.
Holding it better to rob than to labor, though they daily see, that out of Our
Apprenticeships rise such Ministers of Justice, as sit upon Malefactors, when
they (a shame and sorrow to their Kindred) undergo a fortune too unworthy the
basest of Bondmen. May not his Sons fall into the same fate, by the Fathers
prejudicate opinion? So much in honor of truth, not interest.

The Hollanders in these times rich and proud at home, Cruelty of the Dutch in
Amboyna.
increased so mighty in power also in the East Indies, that by insenseable
Encroachments at first, they went on to quarrel particular rights and interests
in several places there, for sole trading from the English.

And complaint being sent hither by the Governors of our Factories there. A
Treaty was demanded by the King, and accordingly Commissioners appointed to
dispute their differences in London 1613. The next Treaty was at the Hague,
1615. The last was at London 1619. And by Amnesty then, a Solemn Composition of
all differences, and Orders were concluded for the future between us and them.
And in regard of their bloodshed and vast expense, in reducing the Trade of the
Islands, Molucca, Banda and Amboyna from the Spaniards and Portugals, and their
buildings and Forts; therefore the Hollanders should enjoy two thirds, and the
English the other third; and the charge of the Forts to be levied by Taxes and
Impositions upon the Merchandise, and so were settled in those places.

The Island of Amboyna lies near Seran, about forty Leagues in compass, and
has relation to other Factories, the chief Town called also as the Island
Amboyna, the Rendevouz for the gatheing and buying of Cloves, the chief
Commodity; the smaller Factories are H^^^o, Larica, Loho, and Cambello. The
Hollanders Forts there are four, strong and well manned, with two hundred Dutch
Soldiers, and a Company of free Burgers, four hundred Mardikers, or free
Natives, so called. And here the English lived in the Town* and under
protection of the Castle in an House of their own.

During two years the Dutch very cunningly wasted too much upon their
Fortifications and Garrisons, and yet drew their Account so chargeable to the
English, that instead of the third part, they contributed two thirds, and their
complaints were examined by the Counsel of Defense of both Nations, residing in
Jaccatra in the Island Java Major, and they disagreeing, the differences, were
to be sent home to be decided herein by both Companies, or by the King and
their States, according to an Article, 1619.

But disputes breed delay here, and increased jealousies there, and in February
One thousand six hundred and twenty two, A Japoner Soldier discoursing with a
Dutch Sentinel of the Strength of the Castle, was suspected and tortured, and
confessed sundry of his Contrymen contrivers with him of surprising the
Castle, who were also tortured, and one Price, an Englishman and Prisoner with
them, who also accused others of the Factories, Captain Towerson, Tomson,
Beomont, Collins, Webber, Ramsey, Johnson, Farde, and Brown; and these being
sent for, from the other factories with horrid Tortures either in truth, or for
pain of Torment, some of them confessed,

That two Japoners should have gone to each point of the Castle, and two to the
Governors chamber door, and when the Mutiny or Alarm should cause the
Governor to come out, the two Japoners to kill him for the reward of 1000
Royals a piece.

Towerson was tortured and confessed, That he swore all the English at Amboyna,
to be secret to his plot, with the Japoners, to surprise the Castle, and to
kill the Dutch; to this effect diverse were accused, condemned and suffered
Death, viz. 10. English, 9. Japoners, and 1 Portugal.

The manner of the tortue was thus:

First, they hoised the Examinant up by the hands with a Cord on a large door,
fastening him upon two Staples of Iron on the Top, as wide as the arms could
stretch; his feet hung to the ground stretched out at length and wideness,
fastened beneath the Door. Then they wrapped a cloth about his Neck and face so
close that no water could go by.

That done, pouring the water leasurely upon his head, and filling the Cloth up
to his Mouth and Nostrils that he could not draw breath, but must withal suck
in the Water, and so continued till it forced his inward parts to come out of
his Nose, Eyes and Ears, stifling and choking him into a Swound or fainting,
but being taken down, they make him vomit out the Water, and so somewhat
recovered, they torture him again four or five times; his body Swollen three
times bigger, his cheeks like Bladders, his eyes staring out beyond his brows;
yet still Colson denied their accusation; then they burn him under his Paps,
arm-holes, elbowes, hands and feet, till the fat dropped out their Torches,
lodged him in a Dungeon, his flesh putrified, Maggots engendered to an horrid
and loathsome condition, till at the eight days end they were executed, in
March 1623.

At which instant a sudden Darkness and tempest, two of their Dutch Ships were
forced from Anchor in their safe harbor, and almost perished.

One Dunckin their Accuser, stumbled at their Grave (all buried in a Pit) fell
stark Mad, and dyed so within three Days after.

A sickness followed at Amboyna of 1000 Dutch, where 30 dyed, not usual in that
space.

And in time the Relation is sent into England, by the next return of the
Ships, which appeared so horrid, that a Defense thereof was imprinted and sent
hither out of Holland. And Sir Dudly Digs undertakes for our East Indie Company
to publish the truth and answer that Pamphlet; and the Governor of Amboyna,
leaving his Command, was forced by fowl weather upon our Coast his Ships seized
on, and his person brought to give an account hereof before our Admiralty; Some
Assistants Delegates appointed Judges; but then the Examinations and
Confessions under their hands, coming hither, before any returned on the part
of the English viva voce, to confute them.

And (though suspected yet) for the present set aside, till further
confirmation. In the mean time the Description of the English in their several
tortures, was lively put in draft and painting; so horrid as that the King and
Council, thought fit to burn it, least the monstrous appearance should incense
the English to a National Quarrel.

So great force and resemblance has that Art with Nature that the effects
thereof fell upon Towersons Widow, who at sight of the Picture fell down in a
Swound, with hazard then in that Trance, to follow her Husband, which the often
Relation before, did not so much astonish.

The disparity of a Po^tical pen, with the powerful art of painting, may
thereby be distinguished.

But to return to the Design of the Parliament, which went on (in their manner)
for the Recovery of the Palatinate, by War, and as the King feared to imbroyl
him in the busines^e with pitiful effects, which themselves meant to manage.
And now they provide four brave Regiments under commands of the Earls of
Oxford, Southamption, Parliament design for war and raise four Regiments.
Essex, and the Lord Willougby, elected by the Parliament, who afforded
(forsooth) favor to the King to present them their Officers most Scots. But
indeed for number of Men, fifteen hundred in a Regiment, and well armed they
were complete, the King hastening these away, and with them, wished (no doubt)
more of their mind, that sent them, for these were discontents, and transported
into Hollvnd, to join with the States Army intentionally to divert Spinola, who
was in arms for the King of Spain. Land in Holland. and join with the P. of
Orange against Spinola.
The English no sooner landed, and quartered into Garrisons, hardly drilled to
obedience, were suddenly called out to Service, for Spinola was in the Field,
fitted for Enterprise, lay hovering in Brabant, sends Count John Nassaw, of the
House of Orange, (but always faithful to his Sovereign) with a flying Army
toward Cleve, and after him Marches the Prince of Orange up the Moze, first to
Ginnegen to the Rendevouse, where his Army mustered twenty five thousand;
thence to Mastrick in deadly fear of a Siege, and so to the Town of Cleve,
lately taken in by the Count which was now soon rendered to Maurice, and he was
watch all this way by the other. In this time Spinola with freedom to choose
his Design, began with Spade and Pick ax, and fell to digging about Breda, the
twenty sixth of August 1624. and had earthed suddenly so large and deep as
Maurice, Who besieges Breda.
the craftier Fox that way, yet knew not how to unlodge him, but returns down
the River to Guitrudenburgh, and encamped at Mede, some hours journey from
Breda; and there besieges the Besiegers. Maurice encamps at Mede
The wonder of which was so famous then as deserves particular Remembrance now.

This Barony and Town of Breda with eighteen Villages belonged to the Dukes of
Brabant, and sell to the Family of Nassaw, Breda sometime the D. of Brabant.
by a Wives Dowry 1404. and so remained for one hundred sixty three years, till
by revolt of William of Nassaw, the Duke d' Alva possessed it for the King of
Spain, 1567. from whom Count Holloch took it for Nassaw 1577. and from them
surprised 1581. and then again regained by Stratagem in a Turfbote, where lay
hid seventy Soldiers (like the Graecians in the Trojan horse) and wan it for
Nassaw, 1590. who held it to this Siege.

It is situated in the uttermost part of Brabant, adjoining Holland, Pleasant
situation.
pleasant, strong and wealthy, most convenient for either Nation.

The territory about by Sea-tides or inundation of waters, may be made
unaccessable. And therefore the Prince about two years before, had with some
additions and fortifications made it invinceable, against all but hunger, and
with much delight called it his Tempe.

The Arch Duchess Isabella, Infanta of Spain, and dowager of Prince Albert,
Arch-duchess Governess of Flanders.
now Governesse in Flanders under the King of Spain, gives Commission to
Spinola, Lieutenant General of the Spanish Forces, who in July 1624. departs
from Bruxels, with an Army of eighteen thousand, divided into three parts, the
more to distract the Dutch, The condition and strength of Breda.
who in some doubt, re-inforces Breda, with twenty foot Companies, and dismst
three Troops for better freedom of Forage. Two Rivers run through the Town, a
Tower three hundred sixty two foot high, fit to discover a far off; the houses
twelve hundred.

The form of Breda seems three square, but that the Castle bears out with
several Fortifications of Bulwarks and Bridges, and an Armory of double ditches
a mile in compass, makes another side; and so beautiful with Galleries,
Pillars, Walks, and Gardens, that it seems to excel the strength. The Town
Walls are all of Turf, with a continued row of Oaks, and at three Corners, are
three several Ports, and the Castle Port, fourteen Bulwarks. with Artillery
upon the Walls, and several Windmills. Two Platforms raised, whose Artillery
played afar off; beneath these, two lesser Bulwarks, to which there is a
passage under ground, the Ditch one hundred and fifty foot broad in some
places, and in other seventy foot. In the Ditch fourteen Ravelins triangle, and
the River encompasseth all; five great Outworks, secure the Counterscarfs,
being cast up before the four Ports of the Town and Castle, the the longest
curtain of the Town, cut round with Ditches thirty foot broad; the level sides
of these works, are 210 foot long, one hundred and fifty foot broad; and the
largest of them before the Castle, is two hundred forty paces long. Other
fortifications, strengthen this outwork, and with such excellent order, are all
disposed most admirable.

Justin Nassaw base brother to Prince Maurice was now Governor, Justin Nassaw
Governor.
Artsen Lord Wermont made Drossart, to dispose the victual and restrain
mutinies; Town Colonel and of the Council: it was reinforced with eight
companies, eighteen hundred Townsmen of Arms, excellent sufficient provision of
all sorts, and each Townsman furnished himself with Corn for a twelve Month.

In one night the two sides of this Town was beseiged, Don de Medina, The siege
begins 26. Aug.
a Spaniard took up the village of Gineken, and Paul Ballion an Italian, with
some Strangers, and Arguile with Scots, settled at Terheyde a village opposite;
and at Noon, came Spinola with his whole Army. This first day intercepting 12.
Boats carrying provision to Breda; an Omen of success to regain many Botes,
what was lost by One. Then was fortified Titeringen, and Hage, two other
Villages, opposites on the other side.

Each quarter entrenched with Earth, eight foot high, and a eleven foot thick,
and a Ditch about all seven foot deep, and bottomed, but four foot broad; above
water 10. foot broad. Then from those quarters began their first enclosure, to
beguirt the Town. with a continued Trench, containing three thousand six
hundred paces; the inward Trench against the Town was distant from the outward
two hundred paces. In which space, they passed from quarter to quarter, being
in compass 5 hours going. The Trenches five foot high and seven foot thick, at
the bottom, on the outside a ditch, sunck six foot deep, and seven foot broad,
on the top of the water, Forts and Redoubts belonging to these Works, seventy.

And thus with four quarters, like four Armies, this excellent service was
designed and perfected by Don Io. de Medices, Marquess of St. Angelo, in
eighteen days.

Spinola's provision came far, from Antwerp to Mechlin, Provisions from several
places.
four hours and a halfs journey (as they reckon their distances) thence to Lime
three hours to Herentals four hours; to Turnhout four more, to Hogstrought
three and a half, in all, above twenty hours journey to his Quarters, much
about, when in truth Antwerp lies but ten hours direct from Breda, but P.
Maurice at home had his with ease and plenty.

The first Sally out of the Town, Sally out of the Town, and ill success.
with much loss was repulsed by Count Isenbergh; this ill beginning made them
less hearty to hazard often sallyes; which would have been troublesome to the
Besiegers to fortify and fight; yet so busy they were, with their own works
as kept them in health, all old Soldiers, inured to hardship. But Manrice had
many new men without, with more idleness, which brought sickness and infection
to all.

The Town of Breda, industrious with singular defense, the Burgers and
Soldiers firmly united. Every man by Oath lends his store of money to the
States; all the Officers did so too; whose good example brought one hundred and
fifty thousand Crowns, which paid the Soldier, and for their Works, and their
coin was cried up.

About the end of September, Prince of Poland comes to Spinola.
the Prince of Poland came from home, through the same of this siege to see it;
conducted from Bruxels into Spinola's Camp, and entertained with three Vollies
of Artillery, and small Shot, Drums and Trumpets; which which at first put us
in doubt in Prince Maurice quarters, that the Enemy was in storm, but the Town
felt some of those Bullets with little hurt; and the next Morning the besieged
bestowed as many on Spinola's Troops, conducting the Poland to see the works,
whose opinion was, That the Dice were cast between two Matchless Generals, and
their Reputations were at take.

Eight French No^les, unwilling to be cooped up, adventured to quit the Town,
and to get through the Enemies Camp, but were taken, and either to go to
France, or be returned in to Breda, they in honor accepted the later.

The Prince of Orange, with his Army in this time, being come down by water and
land to Gytrudenbergh, and so incamps at Mede, a village three hours journey
from Breda, and there besieges the Besiegers, without any attempt upon Spinola
(though at this time weak, and his horse absent to convey back the Poland) who
therefore with seven thousand foot, and thirty Troops of horse, marches out of
his Trenches to meet Maurice near Ousterholt within three miles of his Camp,
Spinola takes in Ousterholt.
and got possession of that place before him, the very mischief to Breda, for
betwixt Titrengen and Terheyde, lay vast, void places, dry land and standing
waters, by which Wagons and flat Boats, might relieve Breda with victual; so
much advantage is expedition, though but some hours; and here he raises a great
Fort, levels the ground and dares the Prince to Battle.

Who not accustomed to Ostentation, but military circumspection, made more use
of forecast than force, and gave his Enemy time, to raise five Forts more,
separate, to keep all passage.

It has been usual, with Armies in Camp, Combating between each Camp.
to allow of Combats single, or equal numbers, with their Enemy. And now one
Briante, a French Galiant, weary of looking on, that came to fight, besought
the Princes leave to send a challenge to young Grobendouck, the Son of his
Fathers murderer (as he styled him) who slew him, long since, at such a
meeting; Grobendouck accepts; but Spinola, giving much value to the Man,
secured his person, and denied the challenge. Bryante the more fiery, Bryante
against Count John of Nassaw.
by being refused; tacks about to be revenged on any; and by his Trumpet,
summons Count John Nassaw, single, or with numbers. He indeed without dread of
any Man's daring, and above the quality of asking leave, accepts the challenge,
and three more, the next Morning, at a fair distance, between the Camps. His
seconds were Captain Steenhius, and two horse Lieutenants. Bryante and his
Comrades, furious Frenchmen (we need not name them, they would be disguised)
advance forward and at a convenient distance, Anno 1625.
a half Troop of Horse, behind the Combatants to see fair play; and a hundred
further off, lookers on.

In like manner came on Count John, who upon the carrier, passes Bryante, and
discharges so close upon a Frenchman, that the Pistol flame fired his Shoulder,
but had received before the others Bullet in the brow of his Saddle,
indangering the Counts Codpiece, for it pierced through, and grazed his flanck;
angry Bryante, having lost his aim, wheels short on any, and cries out, Charge
Moy! charge Moy! be what thou dare, I am Bryante, revenger of my Fathers
blood; and as fate would fixes upon him who indeed was Lieutenant to
Grobendouck, that for his Captains cause chose the quarrel, and both spurred,
Bryante fires, too far off, Bryante killed
and mist his deadly aim; the other came closer, and clapped his bullet through
Bryantes belly, who dying, caught hold of the others Saddle pommel, but sanck
down to the ground. Thus was it the fortune of father and Son, to be the cause
of eithers ruin.

Steenhius was hurt, Steenhius hurt.
and another killed. But Bryante his deadly case, the cause of all, gave
occasion to withdraw the Combat, whether by consent I cannot say, but as my
eyes conceived at a distance, though the Spanish say, the Dutch came in to part
them. All retire.
Indeed Count John retired, unwilling to engage Forces, which drew up on both
sides, and therefore the Count made have away, and was out-rid by one of his
own, at getting the start, the hilt of whose Sword, (pressing close) caught
hold of the Counts bridle, and snapt it out of his hand, and therein the others
Sword so fast entangled, that it drew out of the Scabbard, pricked the horse and
scared the Rider; but astonishment to the Beast to be ill used, and yet his
reins so loose, made him suddenly to leave pransing, pause and stop, for the
Count to recover all.

At this encounter Count Maurice was Spectator, and I believe Spinola; but not
so public, either of them as to be well guarded, for I am sure the Prince put
his dapple Nag to a dangerous leap, and ever after was displeased with this
Duelling, that might have endangered eithers Army.

Yet one Bouteville, Bouteville against Beauvoix.
such another Beautefeau as Bryante, with five more, set upon the Baron of
Beauvoix, of like Number, and forced them into a Grove, within their Guard.

Bouteville boasting what he was, advanced alone, and challenged any one,
confiding more in his own valor, than his secret Goslet (for indeed he was
daring enough, though by chance he had it under his Coat) but he was bidden
begone, with a Musket ball in his Breech, which made him let fall his Pistol and
retire with raging pain. This was he that had fought as the French say, Anno
1624.
twenty Duels, and therein killed a dozen, and was now hunting counter for an
Enemy in Holland, who was fled from France, and to beard Boutevile, had worn a
slip of his Mistresses Riband. He killed him here, and afterward returns home
again, fought so frequent in France, that at last for a desperate Duel, in the
midst of the Palace Royal, and the death of his adversary, with much ado had
his head taken off by the Hangman.

These were all the Recreations the resty Gallants used to employ their
Spirits, whilst the Camps faced each other, at gaze only, and in truth it
became the Pastime of the Centuries, Perdues, and Out-guards, oftimes a dozen,
or more, horse or foot, went a birding (as the English termed it) to meet with
booties, or broken Pates; not a day past, but some hot spirit advanced from the
Guards, and dared the Enemy at these duellings, and one or other kissed the
ground.

Prince Maurice, Design to surprise the Castle of Antwerp.
not idle of designing, set on foot an Enterprise, better than Breda, which had
been in his deliberation from the first time of the Siege, to surprise the
Castle of Antwerp, and to that end all our Out-guards at Bergen-op-zome,
Rosendale, and Mede, kept strict watch for this Secret, that so Spinola's Camp
little dreamt of it. The Stratagem committed to a Dutchmans Command, one
Brouchen, Drossart of Bergen, and Captain of a Horse Troop^ that for the
assurance and ease of it, the honor mightnot fall upon any other Nation. Out of
all quarters, he picked out a thousand foot, and two hundred Horse, Dutch, with
Wagons and Engines suitable. The Soldiers out of either Guards, amuzed to
march to several places, until at distance gotten out together, they had order
to alter the Orange Colors into the Red Scarf, and Colors of Spain, and their
Wagon Canvas marked with the Burgundian Cross, to pass unsuspected of the
Pesant; and (if demanded) to answer, they marched to Antwerp for Provisions,
whether indeed the Enemy had designed such an errand, and at dead and a dark
night, they arrived near the Castle, forthwith seizing Out-guards, pulling down
three or four stakes of the Pallasado for a passage, and already gotten upon
the Bridge; the Wind so assisting as carried away all noise of the Wagons,
neys of the Horses, or clattering of Arms; and so having let down their Boats
into the Ditch, fastening their scaling Ladders, making ready their ^insers,
Hammers, Leavers, and Engines, to break Baracadoes and to lift Ports off their
Hinges. And thus as silent as mlght, yet coming too near, an Old Soldier
Sentinel, one Andrea Cea a Spaniard, he listened to an unusual murmuring noise,
and like a tried Blade discharged his Musket, which alarmed Iuan Bravo, the
Spanish Governor and Guard, who got to the walls, and the Dutch to their
Heels, lest all their Instruments and Engines, evidences what they meant to do.

In our Camp at Mede, we had a flying report of the good success of some
excellent Enterprise; Mis^eport of it at the Camp.
which no doubt our General himself, too much assured of good effects, had
revealed. But when it was blasted and better known, the Prince to excuse his
Contrymen, complained only of their quick Spirits, confidence, and too much
have in the execution. It was my chance to be there when Brouchen came in to
yield up the account of his miscarriage; and with him an English excellent
Engeneer, one David Collet, who over a sip or two of Brandwine, protested to me
that he by Boat and wading was got upon the Bridge-end, and fixed his Pittard
upon the Castle-Gate, that the Century called (indeed) qui-va-la, as but
suspecting, for after a good while silence, he seemed satisfied, when (said he)
the cowardly Dutch scared at his voice only, left the Enterprise, and ran away,
leaving him to wade and swim back again in cold weather, with a hundred shot,
by guess, about his ears, for then the Century discharged his Piece, and not
before. A second Design.


Another such design afterward committed to the charge of Statenbrunk
Governor of Grave, which intruth, failed by the hand of neaven; the monstrous
showers of Rain, moistened their powder pans, made their Muskets unserviceable,
and some fires upon the Walls of the Castle, gave suspicion of Discovery, and
so they retired in Confusion.

Then we endeavored to relieve Breda by Boats, Enterprise by Boats to relieve
Breda.
flat bottomed, strong and able to brook the tide ebbs, and Danger of Sands or
Shelves, armed with six Cannon of Brass, with Iron and Fire Balls, laden with
Corn shut up in Pots, with Cheese, Bacon, Lard, etc. and filled with choice
Musketeers. They of the Town, forewarned of the time, furnished fourteen Boats
also, six of them armed with six pieces of Artillery and Fireballs; the other
six with three hundred Musketeers. These should drive with the Ebb upon the
Boats of Provision; and six hundred men by land should sally out near the River
side; Spinola's prevention.
Spinola by quick intelligence fortifies the Black causey, cross the drowned
Meadows, over flowing twice in twelve hours, and so by passage to the Town; and
after the ebb to wade through on foot. The wind was at first very favorable
for the Boats, to bring them out, but suddenly quite contrary, and so
languishing ^or a change, our provisions taking wet and purloyned by the
Soldier, the whole Enterprise was frustrated.

Anoaher Design of Maurice was, Design to draw near Spinola.
to draw near unto Spinola's quarters, by dispossessing the Enemy of Ousterholt
Steeple, kept by twenty two of their men for discovery, Anno 1625.
back by an Horse Troop. The Dutch with a Pittard blew up the Steeple, and
retired; the fire ascends to the place of their Powder, which with great
difficulty they removed, and flung away; and with stones from above (their best
weapons) killed some below, but the poor Spaniards above burnt to death, except
three or four escaping with wonderful hazard, scrambling down without the
Steeple, and horridly scorched, with honorable scars, under their black
patches all their lives after.

And (another Design, not the least) so they set fire on Ginnegen Church, where
Spinola had six thousand Sacks of Meal, with a Granary of Oats, and much other
Magazine provision, which put the Enemy to the inconvenience of Recruit.

These and such like were endeavors to have done more.

After thirty days encamp at Mede, the Prince very pensive and sad, fires his
quarters, leaving the place to the Enemy, and warily retreats in two divisions,
Himself and Count Ernest to Rosendale, from whence he retires home to the
Hague, never appearing in public to his death, not long after. His Brother
Henry with the other division fortifies Sprang; some hopes were surviving if
cold weather, and want of provision to enforce Spinola.

And besides the good hap of Count Mansfield was come out of Germany into the
Skirts of Brabant, with his roving Regiments, and scattered troops of the Duke
of Brunswick, both beaten out of Germany by Tilly and Cordoua. And these men
(God knows) more like Travelers than Fighters, were rather rumored than
numbered to be ten thousand, in truth not six thousand, without Arms, Money or
Provision, and as outrageous, where relieved which unwillingly was every where,
to be rid of such Guests; necessity enforced them into those ways, which has
taught that practice of late days to the Duke of Lorain. But in fine they
having no means nor maintenance their Men forsook their Masters, and Mansfield
and Brunswick became Courtiers at Hague.

And thus at leisure the Count was invited by Projectors in England, and
promises out of France, slender enough on all sides to seek an Army to seize
the Palatinate; and imbarquing at Zealand in the depth of Winter and foul
weather, split upon the Sands at his setting out, but himself and some
Followers escaped in the long boat; got aboard of a Pinck, and came safe to
England, the Ship, Captain and Seamen swallowed in the Sea.

He was caressed here by hearsay of his Honorable fame, and shortly a Press
for twelve thousand foot; His Horse were conditioned from France and Germany
(as he said) whither his Design was to journey. And six fresh Regiments soon
raised by young Colonels, Anno 1624.
the Earl of Lincoln, the Lord Doncaster, (son to Carlisle) the Lord Cromwell,
Sir Charles Rich, Sir John Burrows, With six Regiments and two Troops.
(late Governor of Frankendale) and Colonel Gray, an old Scotch Commander, a
tuff tried old Buff-blade.

The Earl of Lincoln for more honor, had a Troop of horse, and to accompany
him, Mr. Gunter, an active Horseman, and professed Rider raised the other
Troop, and of him a Writer is much offended [as if none could command Horse
(quoth he) but Hist. Gr. Br. p. 283.
such as can make them curve^ in a Riding house.] belike he meant to prefer
Lincolns Lordship of greater ability, who truly till that time, had never
bestrid a managed horse, nor durst for fear of falling.

And in February they mustered in Kent, attending for shipping and readiness of
his French Horse, to receive him at Calais, but lying here over long, the raw
Soldiers not well disciplined, that Marshal law could not keep them in aw, and
at last shipped for Calais, one hundred and twenty Sail, lay there hovering to
have leave to land, the French Horse not being ready, nor that State willing to
hazard such raw and unruly men through their Country, that were so ill tutured
at home, and so upon likelyer hopes, were forced to ^ail for Zealand, and for
the former reasons, anchored at Ramekins, till the States could better consider
what to do with them, rather wanting provisions than men; and weighing anchor,
up they sail to Guitrudenbergh, but not permitted to set them ashore, pestered
on Shipboard with si^all provision, and such as putrified, stench begat
pestilence, and to be rid of general infection, the sick were flung overboard,
ere half dead; nay some of them floted to shore, and lived long time after. And
at last of their whole number, there landed not six thousand, and those well
aired, were mingled with the other English, serving to recruit their weakened
Regiments. Yet the very noise of this new Army put Spinola to procure great
succors from the Arch-Duchess, Spinola procures fresh Forces,
till he was 38000 horse and foot, and wrought another outward Trench about his
former works of fifty two thousand paces, much larger than the other, which
before was but three thousand six hundred paces. and makes double larger
Trenches.


Indeed after ages may make it too monstrous to be true; for Caesar's at Durace,
was but fifteen thousand, and Pompeys but nine thousand paces. This Trench was
ten foot high, and fifteen foot thick at the bottom, and six at the top, rising
five foot high; the ditch seven foot deep about it, and fifteen foot broad, and
again each several quarter, with new Trenches. In all a very labyrinth of
Trench and fortification, expecting to be forced. Thus far was subtle Spinola
deceived with fears of foreign forces to join with the Prince. Anno 1625.
And Mansfeild, (to amuze the more) took upon him to write to the Arch-duchess)
To permit him leave to pass (toward the Palatinate as he pretended) and to
victual his supposed Army) through the Spanish Provinces as (to comply with the
King of England his Masters commands) he must of necessity pass unto. Mans^^'d
desires passage to the Palatinate.


But he had no answer.

On the sudden at Sprang (the Dutch Quarters) we heard three several volleys of
shot, Breda's holy day.
great and small, from Breda; but the English, strangers to the design, were
told that it was the Holyday Triumph, the Anniversary fourth day of March of
the surprise of Breda from the Spaniard by the Turfeboat 1590. which was now
done says Herman Hugo this year very solemn, more like the funeral than the
birth, as being their last day.

When yet (though lost a little while after) it was regained by the Dutch in
anno and remains to the States this day, 1654.

The next Month gives up the Audit of Prince Maurice, who died at the Hague,
P. Maurice dies, Apr. 1625
full of years and honorable fame, in April 1625. and his Brother Prince Henry
gone thither to solemnize his Obsequies, P. Henry Generalissimo.
returns back with ample powers as the other enjoyed over the whole Army
Generalissimo.

King James lately dead, ^. of Oxfords Enterprise upon Terhelda.
the Earl of Oxford being sent for, into England, moved Prince Henry, the new
General, to have the honor of an Attempt, to break into Spinola's quarters.
The design was by the Causey, that leads from Guitrudenbergh to Treheida, which
was fortified with two dry ditches, a Redoubt, a breast work, and a large Fort.
His forces were six hundred foot choice English, assisted with the person of
his Uncle, that tried excellent Soldier Sir Horatio Vere, with fifteen hundred
more English the Vantguard, and some Germane and French following, in all four
thousand. In the Rear the Artillery and some Troops of Horse. The Enemy got
warning, and prepared to receive us that way, but where to fall he knew not.
But whilst we gave them of Spinola's Camp, false alarms, we immediately fell
upon the Italian quarter Carlo Roma, and surprised a foot Sentinel per du, and
so got to the Redoubt, which we forced with fire Balls, and drove them to
retire, and placing our men about the Redout in dry Ditches, with undaunted
courage we won the half Moon before the Fort; laboring with hands and feet to
scale the Rampire, upon which Oxfords Ensign fixed his colors, and with therest
leaped into the Fort, where the Italians fought well ere they were beaten out.
Those also of the other causey, which leads to Sevenbergh adjoining, quit their
Trenches and fled.

The English (says our Enemy) maintained their Fight with that fury and
resolution, as if no other occasion could make proof of their worth and valor.

The Enemy thus engaged, began to disorder and fly into the face of a fresh
company of Foot sent to their Relief, and so mixing routed the rest to a plain
retiring, proving a means to make their danger greater than before; until
Carlo himself with his Sword and Target forced them back, and getting before,
led them on again, with such Fury on either part, as till then had not been
seen since the first of this siege; and so overpowred by fresh men, wrought the
English out again, who indeed could not mount the second Fort so soon, but with
wondrous difficulty, the Wagons not able to march with our scaling Ladders,
the Canon playing continually upon us in the windings and turnings of the
causey, with great disadvantage to the English, and so narrow, that the Rere
could not advance timely to our Succor.

Oxford in the head of all gave excellent testimony of his valor, and in
mishaps, impossible to be releived he retteated as punctual and orderly as his
onset, each Soldier observing his rank, not stepping one foot a side, as if
duty and obedience, could oppose the Canon, which had advantage on us all with
certain execution, to the loss of some hundreds on all sides. And this, though
daringly done, as was possible for men, proved not successful, and the last
Attempt on this wondrous Siege.

The Earl and his Uncle untouched, returned with much honor, and Oxford two
days after, in the heat of the day, took leave of the Army, riding hard upon a
great Horse, to several Quarters, himself very corpulent, came home to the
Hague, but with heat and cold got an Ague, and died there in a Fortnight after.

And the Winter before, dyed the Lord Wriothsey, Son to the Earl of
Southampton, at Rosendale, and the Father at Bergen-opzome.

This was the ill success of the Last Attempt, whereof the Prince acquaints the
Governor of Breda by a Spy, who proved false.

And that the Town should not delay too long to hazard all, by too much
obstinacy; That if he received these letters, then to give a sign by shooting
off three pieces of Canon; which he did at Midnight after, and by showing as
many lights upon their Tower as they had yet days to feed upon provision,
which was eleven. And this letter was brought by the Spy to Spinola, as many
others had been before by this fellow; which were all copyed, and sent in for
Answers, and evermore returned to Spinola, being deciphered by one Michael
Rowter, Secretary to Spinola. Upon which a Trumpet is sent by the Enemy to the
Governor, and the doubt of all deciphered, by which he was assured his secrets
were made public, and having honorable conditions, the Town was surrendered
the second of June 1625.

The Infanta made her entrance into Breda at Haughe Port, upon which was fixed
this Programma.

Philippus HIspanIae ReX.
gVbernante IsabeLLa CLara eVgenIa
obsIDente SpInoLa.
HostIbVs frVstra In sVppetIas ConIVrantIbVs
BreDa
VICtor potItVr.
This which follows, alluding to the year, was placed in the Church.

AMbrosI SpInoLa
VIgILantIa
BreDa
eXpVgnata.
And Concluded with this Chronographicum.

ReX
BreDaM CepIt
qVInta
IVnII.
And seeing we are in discourse of War and Death; Marquess Hameltons sudden
death.
it will not be much different or disagreeing, to remember the decease, or
violent death of the Marquess Hamilton, a gallant Noble Person, but a man
intemperate, which hastened his sudden death, by his high feeding very late at
Nights, and at all times most diseasonable. Which Physicians did forewarn, as
impossible for his constitution, enclining to humors, long to continue;
insomuch, as feasted late at the Lady Udalls, a place of too much good
fellowship, he was coached home sleepy, and so put to bed.

And though he awaked yet slumbering without any account of himself after, and
dyed before Noon the next day, not without Symptoms very unusual, unless of
distempered Bodies.

But why impoisoned? Hist. Gr. Br. p. 285.
because [Doctor Eglesham a Scotch- man was something bitter against the Duke,
whose Niece had lately married the Marquesses Son, for the Marquess was averse
to the Marriage.]

A very stout reason. Certainly had the Duke been but at Breda, all our English
Lords had been impoisoned there too, and so might have saved that Authors
labor to story their several diseases.

But I can tell him (as the Town talk then) that a new Frenchmode Cook with his
Quelque choze and Mushrom Salads at that Supper, surfeited the Marquess to the
death, and for the Ladies sake, the tumourous discourses were then cast upon
any body else, which thus long after we see falls upon the Duke.

And although King James died some time after, yet Death follows him close at
the heels in this man's account [and impoisoned also] Marry, his disease that
brought his sickness, is far fetched [Care for his Grandchildren, danger of his
own person, at home, or Engagement of war abroad, or full feeding, or sweet
Wines, or what other accident he knows not. K. James dies March 27. 1655.


But a Tertian Ague he had, which by several violent fits brought him into a
Fever, and so expired on Sunday Morning the twenty seventh day of March, the
year of our Redemption 1625. at Theobalds.

Our Pamphlet having tumbled the King hitherto, blows his death at par^ing,
which he says [began with a F^aver, but ended with a poisoned Plaster applied
by Buckingham, for which being questioned the next Parliament, it was hastily
dissolved for his sake, only to save his life.]

In the entrance of the Spring, His sickness and disease.
the King was seized with a Tertian Ague; which to another constitution was not
pestilential, but rather might prove Physical. But all men then knew his
impatience in any pain, and always utter enmity to any Physic; so that
nothing was ministered to give him ease in his fits, which at length grew
violent; and in those Maladies, every one is apt to offer advice, with such
prescriptions as have been helpful unto others, and in truth, those as various
as the disease is common.

In this time of the Kings rerire, the Duke got leave to visit his Estate at
New-Hall in Essex, where the Earl of Warwick told him, that a near Neighbor,
Dr. Remington at Dunmow had cured many and him also, of a Quartane Ague, which
had lasted a long time. The King being told this, commanded the Duke to send
for the Medicine; which was a Plaster of Mithridate, made and spread upon
Leather, and delivered from his hand to One Mr. Baker, a Servant of the Dukes
then, and now living near to the Earl; and so by that Messenger brought to the
King and showed to the Doctors, and lay ready prepared upon the Table until
proper time to be applied to his stomach; Together with a Possit-drink of milk
and Ale, Harrs horn, and Mary-gold Flowers, ingredients harmless and ordinary,
which the Duke gave him to drink, and so took leave and went to London.

The King fallen into slumber about Noon, the Physicians took opportunity to
retire, having watched all night till that time. When in the interim of their
absence, the King awakes, and falls from a change of his fit, unto timelyer
effect, then usually it had happened before; which to allay, this Plaster was
offered and put to his Stomach. But it wrought no Mittigation, and therefore
was removed by the Doctors, who were much offended, that any one durst assume
this boldness without their consent. But by after examination, all men then
were assured of the composition, and a piece thereof eaten down by such as made
it; and the Plaster many months afterward in being, for further trial of any
suspicion of Poison; which if not satisfactory now, it must and ought to lodge
upon their scores, Sir Matthew Lister, Doctor Chambers, and other Physicians
worthy men, who were herein examined, with very great satisfaction to clear
that calumny, and are yet living to evince each ones suspicion.

Otherwise to blame was Montgomery, that precious Earl, of successive merit
toward the Kings Posterity [ whom (it is said) Co. and Chapter p. 174.
the King trusted above all men, and imprecates him, for Gods sake look I have
fair play, which he mistrusted] that this careless Earl should neglect his
duty, falsify his trust, or connive with the composition of any poison, if it
were so.

It was indeed remembered the following Parliament, and whereof the Duke was
questioned, as a boldness unpardonable, but in the charge (which I remember
Littleton managed at a Conference in the painted Chamber) it was not urged as
poisonous, but only in him criminable. The Duke asked of me the effect of his
Speech, and answered me, Well, In that as other things, my innocence is so
clear, that their malice does the more rivet me into good men's affections; and
tru^y the Lords thought the Commons, more busy then needful, to spend time in
the examining.

Oh! [ But the Physicians muttered, and others made a great noise, Hist. Gr.
Br. p. 287.
and were forced to fly for it.] It is thus far true. There is a Doctor yet
living, from that time discontent with the Court; and perhaps to color his own
demerit; would now insinuate to easy men, his too much resentment of the Kings
death, which he is willing any one should suspect.

And to boot Egglesham ran away, Egglesham his scurrilous ^^^^phlet.
writ a scurrilous Book at Bruxells, vain and false; as full of lies as lines,
which was reprinted in the times of freedom for such like Pasquils, purposely
set out to renew the memory of the Dukes crimes, Anno 1624.
and to taint others with infection; but as the surface thereof, at the first
sight is frivolous, so be it examined to the full, it will be found malicious,
and lastly laid aside as impossible.

I was told by Sir Balthaser Gerbier (though his testimony be odious to any
man) that Egglesham dealt with him in Flanders, for a piece of money (not more
then four hundred Guilders to defray the charges) to imprint his recantation;
of which the Duke bid Gerbier join Knavery together, and spit their Venom till
they split, and he would pay for printing that also.

But of these enough; Hist. ^r. Br. p. 287.
and yet what will our Monster of man pursue [ It will be a hard task for any
Man (says he) to excuse the King his successor, See before of the Kings
sickness and death.
for dissolving that Parliament to preserve One that was accused for poisoning
his Father] he means Buckingham, who was never accused of any such crime.

Trace this Authors Steps in your reading as we have done his writing, from his
first taint toward King James [ of suspicion to imprison Prince Henry] and now
concludes that his Son, his only Heir and Inheritou^ of his Crown and Kingdoms,
should connive (an equal guilt with the Principal) at the impoisoning of the
Father; what can be more horrid infamy, for a Traitor to surmize to publish,
nay to imprint in Odium of his two Sovereigns, for he lived their sworn Subject.

And now to conclude in Answer of their Characters, who cauterize K. James. As
also of such another, Nuper Natus and Notus; Cumini cultor, who hews the King
into chips, and then shreds them. We refer them to the Encomiums, Divine and
Humane. The one by Mr. Bolton, a Reverend and Judicious Writer, which he had
preached to his People. The other by Sir Francis Bacon, that learned and most
accomplished Judge of all Knowledges, Divine, Natural and Humane, which he
offered up a Pauegyrick to the King himself.

Boltons Religious Contemplation of King James. Anno 1625.

ANd here (says he) I cannot hold, Boltons Lectures, pa. 15, 16, etc.
but must needs most justly complain, of the hateful intolerable
unthankfulness of Us in this Kingdom, the happyest people, under the Cope of
Heaven, had we hearts aright to conceive of Gods extraordinary love, and such
miraculous Mercies, as never Nation enjoyed! walk over the World, peruse the
whole face of the Earth, from East to West, from North to South, from one side
of Heaven to another, you shall not find such another nlightened Goshen, as
this Island, where besides does the Gospel shine with such Glory, Truth and
Peace* etc.

We have lived in a time of Miracles; Our posterity will hardly believe the
wonders done in Our days, etc. Was it not a miraculous mercy to have such a
King? etc. who has already, next under that Almighty God, by whom Kings reign,
continued the Gospel unto us, and preserved us from the destroying Sword, all
his blessed Reign over us? and what do you think were so many years Peace
worth, were it to be bought? with the Enjoyment of the Gospel to boot; He has
enobled this Kingdom for ever, by his excellent Writings in the cause of
Religion against Antichrist; which would have created a great deal of Honor to
a private Man, minding nothing else. How illustrious then do they make Our
King? The child unborn will bless King James, For his Premonition to all
Princes and free States of Christendom, and that Royal Remonstrance against
the rotten and pestilent Otation of the French Cardinal, to the utter and
Triumphant overthrow of it, penned in that Style that none can possibly reach,
but a learned King? his Golden Pen has given such a blow to that Beast of
Rome, that he will never be able to stand upon his four Legs again. He has
shot out of his Royal Bow, such keen Arrows taken out of the Qu^ver of Gods
Book, which will hang in the sides of that Scarlet Whore, and make her lame as
long as she lives. Has he not most happily and seasonably stopped the hasty
torrent of the Arminian Sect, and the domineering Rage of bloody Duels? etc.
And was not the discovery and delivery from the Powder plot, that great
Astonihment of Men and Angels, one of the most unparalleled and merciful
Miracles, that ever the Church of God tasted, etc. And to crown all with wonder
of greatest Astonishment, do not we all (that are of the Kings faithfullest
Subjects) almost fear still left we be in a dream, That King Charles the flower
of Christendom, etc. And concludes, Away then with all sour, melancholic,
causeless, sinful discontent. And praise ye the Lord, sing unto the Lord a New
song, and his praise in the Congregation of the Saints: Let Israel rejoice in
him that made him. Let the children of Zion be joyful in their King, for the
Lord takes pleasure in his People: he will beautify the meek with salvation.
Let the Saints be joyful in Glory. Let them sing aloud upon their Beds, etc.

Sir Francis Bacon in honor of K. James.
WHerefore representing your Majesty many times unto my mind, Advancement of
Learning, page 2.
and beholding you not with the eye of presumption to discover that which the
Scripture tells me is inscrutable; but with the observant eye of duty and
admiration, leaving aside the other parts of your virtue and fortune; I have
been touched, yea and possessed with an extreme wonder at these your virtues
and faculties which the Philosophers call Intellectuals. The largeness of your
Capacity, the faithfulness of your Memory, the swiftness of your apprehension,
the penetration of your Judgment, and the facility and order of your
Elocution. And I have then thought that of all the persons living, that I have
known, your Majesty were the best instance to make a man of Plato's Opinion,
That all knowledge is but Remembrance, and that the Mind of man by Nature
knows all things, and has but her own Native and Original Notions (which by
the strangeness and darkness of the Tabernacle of the Body, are sequestered)
again revived and restored; such a Light of Nature I have observed in your
Majesty, and such a readiness to take flame, and blaze from the least occasion
presented; or the least Spark of another knowledge delivered. And as the
Scripture says of the Wisest King, That his heart was as the Sand of the Sea,
which though it be one of thr largest Bodies, yet it consists of the smallest
and finest portions. So has God given your Majesty a composition of
understanding admirable, being able to compass and comprehend the greatest
Matters, and nevertheless to touch and apprehend the least; wherein it should
seem an impossibility in Nature, for the same Instrument to make it self fit,
for great and small Works. And for your gift of Speech, I call to mind what
Cornelius Tacitus says of Augustus Caelar, Augusto profluens u^ quae principem
deceret eloquentia fuit. For if we mark it well, Speech that is uttered with
labor and difficulty; or Speech that ^avoureth of the affectation of Art and
Precepts: Or Speech that is framed after the imitation of some pattern of
Eloquence, though never so excellent. All this has somewhat Servile and
holding of the Subject. But your Majesty's manner of Speech is indeed
Princelike, flowing as from a Fountain, and yet streaming and branching it self
into Natures Order, full of facility and felicity, Imitating none, and imitable
by any. And as in your Civil Estate, there appears to be an emulation and
contention of your Majesty's Virtues with your Fortunes; a virtuous Disposition
with a Fortunate Regiment: a virtuous expectation (when time was) of your
greater fortune* with a prosperous possession thereof in the due time* a
virtuous observation of the Laws of Marriage, with most blessed and happy fruit
of Marriage, a virtuous and most Christian desire of Peace, with a fortunate
inclination in your Neighbor Princes thereunto. So likewise in those
Intellectual Matters, there seems to be no less contention, between the
excellency of your Majesty's gifts of nature, and the Universality and
perfection of your Learning. For I am well assured of this that what I shall
say, is no Amplification at all, but a positive and measured Truth, which is,
That there has not been since Christ's time, any King or Temporal Monarch,
which has been so learned in all Literature and Erudition, Divine and Humane.
For let a Man seriously and diligently revolve and peruse the succession of the
Emperors of Rome, of which Caesar the Dictato^, who lived some years before
Christ, and Marcus An^onius, were the best learned. And so descend to the
Emperors of Graecia, or of the West, and then to the lines of France, Spain,
England, Scotland, and the Rest, and he shall find this Judgment truly made.
For it seems much in a King, if by the compendious extractions of other Men's
Wits and Learning, he can take hold of any superficial Ornaments and shows of
Learning: Or if he countenance and prefer Learning, and Learned Men. But to
drink indeed of the true Fountain of Learning, nay to have such a Fountain of
Learning in himself, in a King, and in a King born, is almost a Miracle. And
the more, because there is met in your Majesty a rare conjunction, as well of
Divine and Sacred Literature, as of Profane and Humane. So as your Majesty
stands invested of that Triplicity, which in great Veneration was ascribed to
the ancient Hermes, The power and fortune of a King, the knowledge and
illumi^ation of a Priest, and the Learning and Universality of a Philosopher.
This propriety inherent and individual Attribute in your Majesty, deserves to
be expressed not only in the fame and admiration of the present time, nor in
the History or Tradition of the Ages succeeding, but also in some solid work,
fixed memorial and immortal Monument, bearing a Character or Signature, both of
the power of a King and the difference and persection of such a King. So he.

Memoria Iusti cum laudibus,
Et Impiorum Nomen putrescit.
An EPITAPH ON King James the sixth.
THose that have Eyes awake and weep,
For He, whose waking wrought Our sleep
Is fallen asleep; and never
Shall awake, till waked for Ever.
Death's Iron hand has closed those Eyes
Which were at once Three Kingdoms Spies,
Both to foresee, and to prevent
Dangers so soon as they were meant.
That Head, (whose working Brain, alone
Wrought all men's quiet, But His own)
Now lies at Rest. Oh let Him have
The Peace (He purchasd) in His Grave.
If that no Naboth, all His Reign,
Was for his fruitful Vineyard, slain?
If no Uriah lost his Life,
For having had so fair a Wife?
Then let no Shemei's curses wound
His Honor, or profane His Ground;
Let no Black-Mouth, no Rank-breath Cur,
Peaceful James His Ashes stir.
Kings are as Gods; O! do not then
Rake in Their Graves, to prove Them Men.
For His days toil, and Night watches;
For His crazed sleep, stolen by Snatches;
For Two fair Kingdoms, joined in One;
For all He did, or meant to have done;
Do this for Him; write on His Dust;
King JAMES the Peaceful and the Just.
Sit Gloria DEO.
FINIS.
The Conclusion.
HItherto, having pursued the Descent, following the Union of the two Roses by
Marriage of Henry 7. of England; and the reunion of both Kingdoms Sovereignty,
by succesfull inheritance of King James, and then left to a son and Heir, and
also to the numerous issue of a Daughter and her Descendents; and suddenly into
the present possession of King Charles of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
the first; who though affianced forthwith in Marriage with the Princess Maria
Sister to the French King Louis the 13. Blessed also afterward with a numerous
Issue, Sons and Daughters, as a full Period (in show) of all former Mutation
and change, through them and their posterity, perpetual.

So indeed it appeared to a State-observer, but not seemed good to the Eye of
Providence, whose powerful Hand has ordered it otherwise; for He is taken
away in the strength of his years and perfections, and none of his (in
possibility of Reason) to succeed to any part or portion of his Inheritance.

But, to proceed in the continuation of this History to these Times, and to
branch into such particulars, as to draw down to discover Truth to after-Ages,
may seem to some very difficult; the common Excuse of such as cannot or will
not undertake it; and therefore pre^end, that by following the heels of Truth
too near, a man may endanger his Teeth. A defect of Reason so to conceive; when
an even and unbiassed Narrative of Men and Matters may well become the
judicious Historian.

For first, that King Charles was lawfully possessed and crowned Monarch of his
Fathers Inheritance; his Peers and People obediently submitting to his Scepter.

That He being necessarily imbroiled into some foreign Engagements against
Spain and France, was enforced to summon the assistance of several succeeding
Parliaments unsuccesfull; and by too hasty Regulation of Ecclesiastic
Discipline upon the Scots Kirk, moved them to an unnatural Insurrection, which
caused Expeditions against their Armies already descended into the heart of
England; which enforced him to assemble another long-lasting Parliament,
wherein he lost himself and his Life also.

What were the true and different Reasons, Grounds and Man^agements of the late
Differences between Him and Them, the Pro^ocations on either side to the first
entrance into the miserable War?

Their several Battles, Sieges, Policies and different Successes of that so
long uncivil-civil Dissension.

His n^^^ssities enforcing Him to leave his own Party and to resign up himself
unto his natural Countrymen unfaithful Scots.

Their Sale of his Person back again to his English subjects.

Their several Passages, Declarations, Narratives, Treaties, Overtures and
Disputes between Them, both before and during his Restraint in order to a firm
and lasting Agreement with his Parliament and People for Reconciling Important
Affairs of Church and State, with the Presby^erian future destruction of the
Hierar^hy of Ecclesia^tick Discipline.

Their Policies thereupon to be rid of the Bishops, Deans and Chapters.

The Dismission of the Lords House in Parliament and Impeachment and Execution
of Ecclesiastic and Lay persons, Bishops and Beers.

And after all, they brought his Head to the Block a sacrifice for the sins of
the whole Nations.

The different Dis^ositions in their eleven years long domination of a
pretended Triennial Parliament necessitates another Power to purge them with
several Doses, and afterward to put them down.

Sundry Expedients to prove them by a fresh Assembly, Representatiues of the
People.

Their time and debates wasted to no good purpose, they are broken up, and in
fine dissipated.

And then the last little Assembly rise of themselves, leaving all in Anarchy
and desperate confusion.

Until it pleased the Almighty to raise a Power which resumed the Peoples
protection in monstrous danger of utter destruction.

The necessity of the national Affairs introducing, were put under the power of
single Sovereignty.

How that power has managed the Government against diverse desperate Designs
Foreign and Domestic.

The prosperous effects and issue now settled into an assurance of the Nations
future subsistence. And all these in reference to our neighbor States; War
with some, Amity with others.

All these particulars, faithfully put together, without captious and
pres^mptuous opinions of partial observers, not to descant private conceits
upon the necessity of State. But barely to represent the Narrative, and to
leave the (...) the Readers sentence.

And this way (God willing) is thus intended, and in part pursued, the matter
and manner of this monarchical succession and final conclusion to be faithfully
performed unto these Times our last Days.

By W. SANDERSON.
Nec magna desiderantur.

