PAIDON NOSATA OR CHILDRENS DISEASES, BOTH Outward and Inward. From the time of
their Birth to Fourteen Years of Age.

WITH Their Natures, Causes, Signs, Presages and Cures.

IN THREE BOOKS:

1. Of External Diseases. 2. universal 3. Inward

A'LSO, The Resolutions of many Profitable Questions concerning Children, and
of Nurses, and of Nursing Children.

By J. S. Physician.

London, Printed by W. G. and to be Sold by J. Playsord and Zach. Watkins at
their Shop in the Temple near the Church. 1664.



To the illustrious person ROBERT BOIL Esquire Brother to the most Honorable the
Earl of Cork.
FAME reports your Generosity and Humanity to equal your Learning; the latter
is so great that it makes you a Transcendent, especially in the mysterious
Secrets of Nature and practical Philosophy, and so, most fit for the Protection
of the meanest of this Work, as you are by the former, most ready to pardon my
unworthyness; therefore I have put forth this Manual under the Patronage of
your Illustrious Name, and hope for Pardon, if not Acceptance, because it is a
part of practical Philosophy (Medicine being only the Application of the
precepts of Philosophy) in which, as you are the greatest Luminary, so the
noblest Encourager of others in it. If you vouchsafe this favor, I doubt not
but it will be accepted of as well by the Learned as the Vulgar, it being an
Extract or Issue not meanly Descended, and habited in English by

Your Devoted Servant in all humility I. S.

Courteous Reader,
THE true use of Physic is as difficult, as the abuse is dangerous, for the
goodness of remedies consists in the convenience and and fitness of them (good
and convenient being the same) to the Patient, causes and circumstances of
Diseases, the mistake whereof by the Vulgar, is often mortal, especially to
Children, who are very obnoxious to alteration by the tenderness and softness
of their bodies: To prevent which, I present this Manual to you, pointing and
holding forth what ought to be done, and what not, for the procuring and
preserving the health of Children, in which are slipped in some few words, either
not altogether fit for the matter, or the unlearned Reader (by my being under
pressure of business when this Work was in the Press) where by Pugil is to be
understood, as much as the Thumb and four Fingers can take up; by Liniament, a
Medicine thinner then an Ointment; and by boiling according to Art, boiling
from a pint and an half to a pint, and putting Flowers and Seeds in toward the
end of the Decoction; the other Obscurities will be no Impediment to him, which
makes me hope for acceptance from him, as I do from the learned by the quality
of the matter, proved by most eminent Authority in Physic, as appears by a
List of the Authors hereunto annexed.

Oundle in Northampton. June 9. 1662. Vale.

A Catalogue of the AUTHORS used in this Work.
A. AEtius, Avicen, Aristotle, Averrhoes. C. Cardanus, Crato, Celsus. D.
Dioscorides, Dordonaeus. F. Fallepus, Fabritius de Aquapendente, Fabricius
Hildanus, Fernelius, Fonseca, Fontanus, Fucksius. G. Galen. H. Hartmanus,
Hippocrates, Horstius, Hurnius. L. Amatus Lusitanus, Zacutus Lusitanus. M.
Mercurialis, Mesnes. P. Paraeus, Platerus, Plato, Prymrose. R. Rhazes,
Rolfincius, Riverius. S. Sennertus, Salaemander. T. Theophrastus, Trallianus.
The CONTENTS of the CHAPTERS.
The first Book of EXTERNAL DISEASES.
THE Preface. Chapter 1. Page 1. Of the Greatness, Dropsy, and water of the
Head. Chap. 2. p. 5. Of the Kings Evil. Chap. 3. p. 15. Of Pustules and little
Risings in the head. Chap. 4. p. 23. Of Chapt Lips in Children. Chap. 5. p. 26.
Of the Inflammation of the Navil. Chap. 6. p. 29. Of a Rupture and Broken Belly.
Chap. 7. p. 30. Of the falling of the Fundament. Chap. 8. p. 32. Of the Galling
of Children. Chap. 9. p. 34. Of Chilblanes and Kybes. Chap. 10. p. 36. Of the
Scab. Chap. 11. p. 39. Of the Itch. Chap. 12. p. 51.
The second Book of Universal Diseases.
Of Fevers in Children in general. Chap. 1. p. 43. Of a Synoche Fever. Chap.
2. p. 49. Of the Small Pox and Meazles. Chap. 3. p. 52. Of the Consumption.
Chap. 4. p. 70.
The third Book of Particular Diseases of Inward Parts of the Body.
Of the Epilepsy or Falling Sickness. Chap. 1. p. 86. Of Convulsion. Chap. 2.
p. 27. Of the Palsy. Chap. 3. p. 101. Of Childrens dreaming and tronbled sleep.
Chap. 4. p. 104. Of moderate watching of Children. Chap. 5. p. 108. Of the
Inflammation of the Head. Chap. 6. p. 110. Of the running at the Nose, Cough,
and difficult Breathing. Chap. 7. p. 114. Of the pain and humidity of the ears.
Chap. 8. p. 117. Of the Inflammation of the Glandules called the Almonds of the
Ears. Chap. 9. p. 120. Of the Soreness of the Mouth. Chap. 10. p. 123. Of the
Ranula of the Tongue. Chap. 11. p. 127. Of Dentition and breeding of Teeth.
Chap. 12. p. 129. Of the Hiccough. Chap. 13. p. 135. Of Vomiting, and a vain
desire of Vomiting Chap. 14. p. 138. Of the involuntary pissing of Children.
Chap. 15. p. 140. Of the Strangury and Suppression of Urine. Chap. 16. p. 143.
Of the Stone in the Bladder. Chap. 17. p. 146. Of Costivenesse and being bound
in the Belly. Chap. 18. p. 150. Of the Flux and Loosnesse. Chap. 19. p. 155. Of
Tenesme. Chap. 20. p. 161. Of the pain in the Guts. Chap. 21. p. 163. Of the
Worms. Chap. 22. p. 167.
Contents of several Questions.
WHat is Age, the Definition and Division of it? Page 2, 3. Why before 14.
years of Age ought one not to be esteemed a perfect man? Why before 7. years of
Age Children have not the use of reason? p. 87.

When and how the Lessening of blood is to be done in Children? p. 46, 50, 51,
65, 66.

Why Children are disposed to many Diseases? p. 3, 4. Why they never sleep
moderately? p. 105. and why their want of sleep is very hurtful? p. 108. Why
they hold not their water so well as men? p. 140.

Why Chilblanes and Kybes happen chiefly to Children, and to the hands and
feet, and not to other parts? p. 36, 37.

Why a Consumption is said a Disease, and an Effect of a Disease, or a
Symptom? p. 70, 71. What is the Subject of it, and in what order the parts
consume? page 71, 72.

Why a Fever is called a Child's Disease p. 44.

Diseases in Children why so called? p. 5. Why Phrensy and Madness are not
reckoned amongst Childrens Diseases? p. 87. Nor the Apoplexy, though it has
the same matter as the Epilepsy has? p. 101, 102. Nor the moisture of the Nose
and Ears, and yet the humidity of the Ears is called a Child's Disease, p. 117,
118. Whether the Inflammation of the Almonds of the Ears may be in Infants? p.
120, 121. Why Diseases of the head are difficult to cure? p. 8. As also of the
Fundament, p. 33. Why a Child is most apt to a Synoche Fever, and whether he
may have a Quartan Fever, it being contrary to its nature? p. 44. Why Fevers
are not dangerous, and why sometimes they turn into Hectic Fevers? p. 46.

Why the Kings Evil exactly cured, returns again? p. 18, 19.

Why waterish humors are more often collected in the head of Children then
other parts, and in the Womb then out of it? p. 7.

What is the use of Lips, and why are more often chopped in Children then in
others and most frequently from cold? p. 27.

How good Milk from bad may be known? p. 76. and how the bad Milk of a Nurse
may be made good? p. 78, 79.

How a good Nurse may be known from a bad one? p. 78.

Whither the Small Pox had a beginning or not, and where: and whither beasts
have it or not, and how it differs from the Measles which has the same matter,
cause and cure? p. 53. Why the cause is not the impurity of the Mothers blood,
as by most supposed p. 54, 55. Nor is the cause the fault of the Air? p. 56.
Why scarce any one but has it, and that it is mortal to some and not to
others, happening most to Children? p. 57. Why some have more breakings out and
marks then others and the face most troubled, and next to it the Feet and
Hands? p. 58. Why the Small Pox troubles the eyes more then the Measles? p. 58.
Why the Small Pox is infectious and more easily to kindred then others? p. 58,
59. Why some have twice, rarely thrice, almost all once? p. 59. Why Scars and
Blemishes are left chiefly in the Face, Lips, and foreskin? p. 59.

Why the Stone of the Bladder is seldom in Female Children, and not so often
in men as Children, yet the Stone made in the Reins, is oftener in men then
Children? page 147.

How Teeth and Bones differ, p. 130.

The use of Teeth p. 131. and the order and time of their Growth. p. 132, 133.

Worms, why very Familiar to Children and in what parts they are, made and
found? page 167. 168. The difference of Worms. p. 168.

Imprimatur,

October. 28 1663. Roger L'Estrange.

The First Book Of External Diseases in CHILDREN.
CHAP. I. The PREFACE.
IT will not be unprofitable to prepare a way for the ensuing Discourse of
Childrens Diseases, by premising these Particulars. 1. What is Age, and the
Definition of it? 2. The Division of Age? 3. The Subject of the Discourse? 4.
Why Children are apt to Sickness? 5. Why Childrens Diseases are so called? 6.
The Order and Method of the Discourse of Childrens Diseases.

It is answered, 1. Every Age is obnoxious to all kinds of Diseases, but one
Age is more disposed to some Diseases, then another is; for every Age has a
peculiar temper, and so a similitude with some Diseases, whereby it is more
easily affected and changed by them then by other Diseases; nevertheless, Age
it self does not produce Diseases, but only disposes and makes one apt to
receive certain sorts of Diseases; for Age is a thing that is natural, and a
Determination of a time; and it is defined by some to be a Space and Duration
of Life, in which the Constitution of the Body is manifestly changed, by the
Action of the natural heat upon the radical Moisture. The Life of Man consists
in Heat and Moisture, the Heat consumes by degrees the Moisture, whereby
necessarily follows several Changes of the Temperament, which are called Ages.

2. The Division of Age is various by the Ancients; some divide it into 7.
parts, other into 6. or 5. parts: But the Modern (considering that in all
things there is a Beginning, Increase, State, and Declination) have divided Age
into 4. parts (alluding to the 4. Elements, 4. Humors of Man's body, and 4.
seasons of the year.) 1. Adolescency, or growing Age, in which are contained
Infancy, Childhood, and Puberty, and it extends to 25. or 30. years. 2.
Youthfulness or flourishing Age, extending to 36, or 40. years. 3. Consistent
Age, extending to 45. or 50. years. 4. Old Age, which contains decrepit Age,
and extends to the end of Life.

3. The Subject treated on will be the first Age and Adolescency, as it extends
only to 14. years, for then and not before, ought a man to be said perfect,
(though some say at 7. years) because as Plants are said then to be perfect,
when they first begin to bear fruit, so Man ought to be called perfect in that
time, when he begins to be prolifick and procreable.

4. Children are disposed to very many Diseases for diverse reasons, because of
the 1. Impurity of the nourishment in the Womb by an erroneous Diet or Sickness
of the Mother. 2. Great labor and pains in the Birth and Getting out of the
womb, being a narrow passage, whereby is weakness, and very often are bruises.
3. Cutting of the Navel String, that the Infant may get forth, whereby pains
and Inflammations often follow. 4. Diversity of Nourishment, Children in the
Womb are nourished with the purest blood of the Mother, and they only perfect
the third Concoction, but after Birth they use Milk and other food, and need
the help of the Stomach and Liver for the first and second Concoction. 5.
Change of place, being not used to the Air, for Infants live in the womb in the
greatest Lukewarmness and Tranquillity, but as soon they feel the cold Air
outwardly and breath it in; they are hurt, which appears by their crying. 6.
The unsoftness and uneasiness of the things they lie upon, for Infants lie very
soft in the Womb. 7. Hot and moist temper, which is very obnoxious to
Corruption. 8. The fault and badness of the Milk.

5. Diseases of Children are so called, not only such which trouble and affect
only Children, as Diseases arising from breeding of Teeth, but also such
Diseases, which most frequently happen to Children, and are cured in a
different manner in them then they are in other Ages.

6. The Order and Method in the Discourse of Childrens Diseases will be, 1. Of
External Diseases, and such as belong to the outward parts of the body. 2.
Universal Diseases, which affect all parts of the body. Thirdly and lastly,
Particular and inward Diseases of particular and inward parts of the Body,
proceeding from the Diseases of the upper parts to the lower parts.

CHAP. II. Of the Greatness, Dropsy, or Water of the Head.
THere is sometimes an immense largeness of the head, vitiating the natural
Actions of it; yet the Head is not to be called diseased, as if it needed the
help of a Physician, because it is natural and incurable, that is not here
intended; but that which is called the Dropsy of the head, and though
sometimes it is in a peculiar part of the Head, yet for the most part it is in
the whole capacity of the head, and it is more frequently in Children and
Infants newly born, then others of elder years, in regard of the softness of
their head and bones.

It is defined to be a Tumor of the Head, contrary to nature, happening for the
most part to Children; or a Tumor of the Head, caused by the Collection of
Waterish humors in some part of the Members constituting the head.

The immediate cause is either, 1. A Wind, which is seldom, in regard of the
rarity and purosity of the head (which appears by the hairiness of it) and the
Thumes and Tenuity of the Wind (made of a very thin humor (and so easily
dissolved and dissipated. 2. Thin and Waterish humor, which is sometimes thick
and colored, by the mixture of the Ichor of other humors with it. This humor
is collected more often in the Womb then out of it, and in the head then other
parts; because 1. Of the great moisture of the Brain. 2. The plenty of Vapors
which ascend to the head, and by its coldness turn into Water. 3. It being the
seat of Waterish humors, for the Head is placed over the Belly, as the Head of
a Still over the body of it. 4. The Density of the Skull which retains the
Vapors.

The Signs by which this Disease is known, relate to the Cause or Place; If
Wind be the Cause, the head lightly struck will sound like a Drum, and the
Tumor pressed by a Finger yields to it, and leaves a Dent, which presently fills
up again; If an humor be the cause, and not within the Skull, the Tumor is
soft, clear; if pressed, it slowly returns to its former fullness, the Color of
the Skin is unchanged, and there is crying and want of sleep; If the humor be
within the Skull, the Infant has an heaviness of the head, cries and cannot
sleep; and in those of elder years, the eyes are prominent, and stand out,
weeping, and can hardly be shut, and sometimes the fancy is hurt.

The Presage; If the Tumor is within the Skull, some think it incureable,
others think it cureable by Cauteries, and by Diaphoreticks. If it is on the
outside of the Skull, it is dangerous, because of the Dignity of the Head, and
the tenderness of it in an Infant; for every Disease of the head is dangerous,
especially in an Infant, whose tenderness cannot endure a Disease or Remedy,
and if the humor should move inwardly, there is great danger of a Lethargy or
Apoplexy.

The Cure is, by discussing and extenuating the wind, and evacuating the humor
insensibly, or sensibly by purging or manual Operation, for the doing whereof a
convenient Diet is necessary, which ought to be directed to the Nurse if the
Child suck, otherwise to the Child. Wherefore let the Air be hot and dry where
the Nurse and Child is kept; and if it be not so naturally, and by the season
of the year, prepare it so by good fires and fumes of sweet and hot woods; If
the Child suck, let the Nurse watch much, and if it is weaned, let it sleep
less then if it was sound, because watching does much dry the body, as sleep
softens it; Moderate Exercise and a soluble belly is very convenient, which if
need, let it be helped by a Suppository made of Honey; The Nurse and Child both
are to abstain from Wine, and in the place of it a Drink is to be made of Water
with Coriander seed prepared, and Anniseed; let the Meat be such as discusses
and breaks wind, and dissipates humors; wherefore let the Bread have a little
Coriander seed in it, and the Flesh be rather of Wild Fowl, and roasted rather
then boiled; a Moderate use of spice is profitable; and Coriander canded with
Sugar. All Herbs and Waterish Fruits are to be avoided. If the Nurse be sound,
avoid purging her, lest you hurt the Milk; if she be unsound, purge her as the
quality and nature of the humor require.

External Remedies only belong to an Infant (for Purges and other Remedies are
to be used to the Nurse) and very carefully, least they hurt, wherefore this
Fomentation will be convenient. Take of Pennyroyal, Maryroom, Savory, of each
an handful; Cumminseed and Aniseed of each an Ounce, boil them together in a
pint and an half of Water, to a Pint, in which wet a Sponge and apply it to the
head, afterward anoint the head with the Oil of Cammomile salted; if this
prevails not, the Oil of Anniseed may be added, and to the two Oils without
the Salt you may add a little of the Powder of Anniseed and Fennel-seed. It
will be convenient for the Nurse to use the following Electuary, which will
make the Milk discuss wind. Take the Conserve of Bettony, and of Rosemary of
each an Ounce, the Powder of Coriander and Anniseed of each an Ounce, mix
them, and take Morning and Evening half an Ounce. In a Child of some years,
that can endure Medicaments, Purge the Child first gently with two Ounces of
the Honey of roses solutive, mix it with a little Broth. Afterward prepare
the humor thus, Take of Mugwort, Savory, Staccados, Celandine, of each half an
handful, boil them in a pint and half of water to a Pint. Take two or three
Ounces of the said Decoction, of the simple Honey of Roses, of the Syrrup of
Staccados, of each half an Ounce, mingle them; and give it the Child 3. or 4.
days together, then purge the humors so prepared. Take of the Pills called
Pillula Aurea one Dram and a half, of Castor two Grains, of the Root of Ireos
finely powdered half a Dram, mingle them with the Honey of the Syrrup of Roses
solutive, and make thereof for one Doss (or quantity to be taken at once) five
little Pills. If the Child refuse Pills; Take an Ounce of the root of Ireos, of
Raisins of the Sun half an Ounce, the Seeds of Fennel and Coriander, of each
half a Dram, boil them according to Art. Take of the Decoction an Ounce and a
half, of the Trochische of Agarick two Drams, infuse them all Night, then
strain them strongly and add an Ounce and an half of the Honey of Roses
solutive. After sufficient Purging, the use of the Electuary directed before
for the Nurse, and the External Remedies will be convenient, to which may be
added this following Lixivium. Take of Figtree-wood two pound, of Salt or
common water twenty pints, make of it a Lie according to Art, when it is
strained add to it Coriander-seeds, and Anniseeds of each a Pugill, of Bran one
Pugill, the Leaves of Pennyroyal, Maryroom, and Mugworth, one handful and an
half, boil them away to a fourth part, then strain and use them. In the same
manner you may prepare a Lie of Brimstone beaten and applied to the head with a
dry woollen Cloth, it dries the head very much; stronger driers are dangerous.
There may be made Plasters of the aforesaid Herbs, being boiled and bruised to
the form of a Plaster, and laid upon the head; a Plaster made of Snails,
bruised and applied to the head, until they fall of themselves, is an approved
of remedy.

The following Ointment does very much discuss the water or wind in the head:
Take of the Oil of Ireos and Cammomile of each two Ounces, of the Powder of
Sulphur and Ireos of each two Ounces, of Wax a little, and make an Ointment of
them. Remedies also are convenient which are put in at the Nose or Ears, As the
Oil of Cammomile with a little Ireos or Brimstone, or the Oil of the Gum
called Sagapenum with a little Castor. Some commend the Brain of a Wolf dried
and sprinkled with Musk, put into the Nose. In the use of these Remedies you
are to take notice, that if the water moves from the internal to the external
parts, it is incurable: Likewise, if the Water is plentiful which is collected
out of the Skull, the use of inward or outward remedies are in vain: because as
strong internal remedies in this tender Subject are not convenient, so moderate
and weak remedies do not prevail; the like is also in external Medicaments,
wherefore there is only hope in a sensible evacuation by Chyrurgery and
Incision, which is to be used if the water be not discussed within three weeks;
by the preceding means Incision is dangerous, in regard of the tenderness of
the Age, and greatness of the distemper, and ought to be the last remedy, and
not to be used upon Children newly born, but in others of elder years.

In the making Incision, if the Tumor has a great point, the head of the point
is to be opened, with two or three Cuttings, and in the lowest part for the
easier evacuating the humor, which Evacuation ought not to be at once, but by
degrees, lest the Spirits are dissipated, and care is to be taken that the
coldness of the Air does not hurt the Brain. After Incision is made, and the
water evacuated by little and little, Proper Medicaments to wounds are to be
used, as Linen wet in Oil or Wine; which Medicaments are to be straightly
bound if the Child is very strong, but if very tender and weak, the place that
is cut is to be only covered with some soft Wool (or the like) dipped in
Medicaments proper for wounds. If after Incision the Flesh will not grow, by
the fault of the bone, (as if often happens) scrape the bone gently that the
fault may be removed, and the flesh grow. If the Water is between the skin and
the Temp'ral Muscles, or between the Muscles and the Skin it is mortal to make
Incision, but you must expect the settling of the Water in the sides of the
Muscles not belonging to them. Some there are that use Caustic Medicaments,
and burn many Ulcers in the Child's head, and if it is not effectual, then they
come to Incision, but it is very dangerous; for exulcerations in the Child's
head which is full of water, are never or hardly cureable.

CHAP. III. Of the Kings Evil.
THe Kings Evil is a hard or Schirrous Tumor contrary to nature, growing for
the most about the Neck, and chiefly of Children. The immediate cause is
sometimes Flesh, but very seldom: Sometimes the Glandules turn into this
Tumor, but most frequently Phlegm, or Melancholy hardened. Some think the Cause
is an Alamentary Juice hardened; because they are not changed into a disgested
matter, nor do putrefie, and continue a long time. The Antecedent causes are
youngness of Age, cold and moist temper, softners of Flesh and Muscles, and
shortness of the Neck, thereby the humors fall easily from the head in the
neck, and cleave tenaciously. The external causes are the coldness and moisture
of the Climate, Idleness, drinking crude and thick waters, the use of Cheese,
Fruits, and gross food; but chiefly voracity, and imoderate eating, wherefore
Children and Infants are principally troubled with this Disease. If the matter
is not viscous and glutinous, although it condenses, yet it is not coated or
contained in a Membrane; but if part of the matter is glutinous when it is
congealed by the cold of the Part or Glandule, a skin is made round about, and
consequently a Bladder or Membrane, in which afterward the matter by degrees
thickens, the thinner part being in time consumed. The difference of this
Disease, is taken from 1. Magnitude, some being as great as a Melon, others
moderate, and little as a Pea. 2. Nature, Some gentle without pain or
inflammation, and with a moderate hardness. Some moderate, between a Schirrus
and an Aposteme, or Malignant, with pain and inflammation, and very great
hardness. 3. Constitution, some being elevated, and move hither and thither;
others, as if they were impacted and unmovable. 4. Place, Some are about the
hinder part of the head, others about the auteriour part, some in the Skin,
others profound, and about the noble great vessels. 5. Plenty, Some are
accumulated into an heap, others not.

The signs are, Tumor sometimes round, sometimes somewhat long, sometimes of
the same color with the Skin, sometimes more red, hard, and without pain, and
move not to and fro being handled. The Kings Evil is known from hardened
Glandules, because 1. The matter of Glandules is more subtle and thin, then
the matter of this Disease, which is more thick, viscid, and contumacious;
hence it is, that as often as the thin and subtle matter is incraffated, the
Kings Evil is made of the Glandules. 2. Hardened Glandules are more separated
from the next Flesh, that it it is easy to discern them from the flesh, by
Feeling, the contrary is in the Kings Evil. 3. The Kings Evil has for the
most part a Membrane or Coat, the Glandules not. Some distinguish them thus;
Take the Leaves of Ivy and Citron, and bruise them together, lay them upon the
Tumor, and if in three days the Tumor lie hid, it is a sign of the
Glandules; but if they are exasperated by the Medicament, then it is a sign
that it is the Kings Evil.

The Presage is, This Disease is troublesome and wearisome to the Patient and
Physician; for whatsoever way you deal with them, they are exasperated, and if
they seem to be cured return again. It is very difficult to cure, but with
less difficulty and danger in Infants and Children, then in youth, because
they often degenerate into Cancers and dangerous Ulcers. The Kings Evil that
is little, superficial and gentle, are not very dangerous, and are more easily
cured: but such as are great, deep, and malignant, are pernicious, and for the
most part incureable.

The Kings Evil though it is most exactly cured, yet it returns again, which
is not from the motion of the Moon, as some have thought, because they have
returned after a Month, a year, or two years: but the cause is, 1. The
Viscosity thickens, and contumaciousnesse of the matter, which is not perfectly
eradicated and extirpated in the Cure, but some part is left, which vitiates
and corrupts the temper and nourishment of the part.

2. The Coat or Membrane which is tenaciously infix'd, that it can scarce be
extirpated, and so is filled with new matter; if it be extirpated, yet there
remains some roots or ligaments, out of which the Membrane or Coat grows
again, and so the Tumor or Kings Evil remains.

The Cure is, taking away the antecedent cause, and correcting the Debility of
the Parts, which make Phlegm; all which is done by, 1. A Convenient Diet, let
the Air be hot and dry, the sleep little, exercise moderate, avoid much rubing
or kembing of the head, and bearing weight on the Head; avoid all perturbations
of the mind (except moderate anger) and Wine that is strong and thick; if you
use Wine, do it moderately and mix it with water. Let your meat be attenuating
and drying, as Bread well baked, and with Anniseeds or Coriander-seeds. Let
your flesh be of Wild-fowl, and rather roasted then boiled; avoid Spices, as
filling the head with vapors, and all thick, gross, viscid, and cold meats,
as Beef, Cheese, Milk, Eggs fried or hard and the like. Hence it is that the
Children of poor persons are more troubled with this Disease then the Children
of rich men, because they eat gross and ill Diet, which makes and ^oments the
humor. 2. Purging, Take of the Leaves of Senna half an Ounce, of Polypode two
Drams, Ginger 15. grains, half an Ounce of Raisins stoned, Sebestens Pruins of
each three in number, of the Flowers of Borrage, Violets, Red Roses, and
Rosemary, of each half a dram, boil them in a pint of fountain water until half
be consumed. Take of the Decoction two Ounces, of the honey of Roses two or
three Ounces. Let the humors be prepaired thus; Take of the Leaves of
Brownwort, Plantain, Dry Bettony, and Mint, of each half an handful, boil it
according to Art; of the Syrrup of Roses and Oxymel of each half an Ounce,
mingle them. After the humors are prepared, purge thus; Take 30 or 40. grains
of the Pills of Agarick, or infuse two Drams of the Trochische of Agarick, in
three Ounces of the Water of Bettony all night, strain it, and add 2. or 3.
Ounces of the Honey of Roses solutive. Observe, that most gentle Remedies often
used, is better then violent, and has often cured. 3. By the restraining of
the moving of the humor into the Part, by rubbing Cuppingglasses and Blisters;
and there is no remedy so effectual and fit for derivation, diversion and
evacuation of the humor (and in all Swellings and Tumors in Children about
the Neck) as is the exulceration of the Skin of the Head, which is best done
with Mustard Seed, and a Nettle, but with prudence and moderation; but have a
care you use not Cautharides, which cause great pain and pissing of blood. 4.
By discussing the humor in the part, if it be moderately thick, and viscid,
which is done by inward Medicaments, as by the use of the Trochische of Vipers;
and Treacle, but principally by outward Medicaments, first by softning it, and
then by dissolving it. Emollient or softning Medicaments, are, the Plaster of
Diachilon with the Gums; or this Ointment: Take four Ounces of Diachilon, one
Ounce of Hyssop, four Ounces of the Root of Ireos finely powdered; mingle them,
and with the Oil of Almon^s make an Ointment, which use several days until the
matter is softened, then use Discutients, as dry Figs, or a Plaster made of
Honey, or the root of a wild Cucumber bo, led in old Oil to the form of a
Plaster, is very effectual; so is this following, which is stronger: Take of
Stavesacre, Nitre, of each two Ounces, Rocket four Ounces, with as much
Turpentine as is convenient make a Plaster. The Ashes of Colworts mixed with
Honey, is also very good. Observe that strong Discutients may not be used, lest
Fevers are caused, and the tender Flesh of the Child hurt.

If the matter be very viscid and contumacious, it is not cured but by cutting
or burning it, which is very dangerous, and turns them into Cancers that are
mortal, as is experienced in the using such remedies for the Kings Evil, in
the Neck, Breasts, or Grayn.

CHAP. IV. Of Pustules and little Risings in the Head.
PUstules, or Risings, or Swellings for the most part they are in the Head, but
sometimes in the whole body.

In the beginning they are small and little, afterward they are sore, and make
hard white Scabs and Crusts, by the dryness of the humor; In sucking Children
they are called Crusta, in those of elder years they are called Achores; they
are ulcerous Tubercles, or Ulcers with small risings, perforating the skin with
small holes, through which passes a sanious or filthy matter.

The cause is, as some think, a nitrous and salt Phlegm mixed with Choler;
Others a putrid, corrupted and Ichorous blood: but I consent to them who think
the humor is mixed, partly thick and partly thin, waterish, salt, and nitrous,
and according to the various mixture of the humors with the salt waterish
humors, the various colors of the Sores arise, being thereby, black, red,
white, or yellow, and those humors are either generated in the womb of the
Mother, out of the Menstruous blood; or after the Child is born, by the fault
of Milk or Diet, nature purifying and purging her self, sends them forth into
the outward parts of the body.

The signs are manifest to Sight, the Child cries, cannot sleep, and are
watchful; the Child Itches, and after Itching they are sore, a bloody humor
passes forth, and oftentimes the Child is lowsy. If they proceed from blood,
there is a redness, pain, and more easy Itch: but if from a more sharp humor,
there is a great Itch.

The Presage, Pustules sometimes degenerate into great Ulcers, and sometimes
corrode the Skull by the Malignity and badness of the humor, that the
Membranes may be seen. They many times preserve Children from great and many
Diseases, as Fevers, Falling-sicknesses, and others, by natures purging her
self by the skin.

They heal frequently of their own accord by Time and Age.

The Cure is in, 1. A Convenient Diet, by avoiding salt, sharp, hot and sweet
things, fish and fruit. If the Pustules are moist, a dry Diet is convenient,
as the eating of Wild-fowl roasted, bread twice baked, etc. which ought to be
used only by the Nurse if the Child suck.

2. Evacuation of the humors by Blood-letting, Leeches, or Cuppingglasses, and
purging the Nurse; if the Child suck not, prepare the humors with Cichory,
Eudave, Fumitory, and Agrimony, of each an handful, boil them in a pint and an
half of Water until half a pint be consumed; Take thereof three Ounces, and add
the Syrrup called Syrrup Byzantius, and the Syrrup of Fumitory, of each half an
Ounce, or temper the humor that is faulty with the Syrrups of Borrage and
Fumitory. The humors being prepared, Take of Rhabarb one Dram, infuse it all
night in three Ounces of Endive-water, in the Morning strain it well, and add
an Ounce and an half of the Syrrup of Roses solutive. The Body being purged,
the part excoriated is to be cured by outward Remedies. A Bath of common Water
in which the Leaves of Scabius, Agrimony and Plantane are boiled, is very good.
The Ointments of Litheridge, Cerusse, or Diapompholiges cures it.

CHAP. V. Of Chapt Lips in Children.
THe Lips are made not only for Beauty, but also for use, for the defense of
the Mouth and Teeth, and also for Speech and Sucking, so that they being chopped,
they cause pain, and hinder Sucking. This Disease is a certain Division of the
Lips with Pustules and breakings out, and sometimes without them.

The immediate cause is a salt, sharp, and choleric humor, or sharp, biting,
and exulcerating vapors, proceeding chiefly from the whole body, as in
Fevers; many times from the Head, Stomach, Lungs, or other principal part of
the Body. These humors and vapors produce the Cleavings and Ulcers of the
Lips, chiefly in Children, because of the frequent motions of the skin, which
draws them to the mouth, and in regard of the tenderness of them, which makes
them apt to receive.

The External Causes are, the use of hot things, hardness of Dugs, kisses of
many people, but chiefly an intemperate Air in heat and cold, but most
frequently the coldness and dryness of the Air; for though Lips may be so dried
by the Air, that they may exulcerate, yet not so frequent as from the coldness
and dryness of it, because heat cleaves and divides that which is moist, by
consuming the moisture; Cold, by compressing and repelling, and it is easier to
repel and press moisture out of a thing, then to consume it, especially in
soft parts, to which humors continually flow, as it is in the Lips.

The Signs are manifest, as little Ulcers and pains in the Lips; there is also
pain, Itching and crying of Children. If a Vapor is the Cause, then the Child
has an Inflammation or a great Fever. If humors, then there is Catarrhs and
Distillations, and the Ulcers are moist, and an humor passes out of them.

The Presage is, this Disease is not mortal, unless malignant Ulcers are made
by Unskilfulnesse. Ulcers made in a Fever or afterward, are a sign of Health,
for they show the humors generating a Fever, are dissipated and dissolved.

The Cure is, if the Choppings of the Lips proceed from an internal cause, a
gentle purge is convenient, and Diet that corrects the humors. If from the
Sharpness of the Milk, let the Nurse use cooling Diet, and things correcting
the Milk. If from the hardness of the Nibble, soften it. Medicaments for the
Child's Lips, are Oil of Roses with the white of an Egg, Oil of Eggs, Oil of
Wax, which is most excellent; Ointment of Roses, of Cerusse, Camphorer,
Pomatum. Take an equal quantity of Turpentine, Honey, and Goosegrease, mix them,
to which you may add half an Ounce of Cerusse, or Litheridge, more or less, as
you would have it dry. If there be extraordinary pain, you may mix a grain or
two of Opium, with a little of the Nurses milk. You need not fear here the use
of Opium because it is only used outwardly.

CHAP. VI. Of the Inflammation of the Navill.
THe Inflammation of the Navil is an hard and hot Tumor with pain and Pulsation.

It is caused in Children presently after the cutting of the Navil-string,
which paining the Navil, the blood is drawn thither, and there heats, and so
makes this Inflammation.

The Signs are hardness, swelling, redness, heat, pulsation, and a Fever.

The Cure is, 1. Let the Nurse use a Diet that is cold and moist.

2. Then use such things as may assuage the pain, and repel the humors, as
the Oil of Roses, the white Ointment, or the Ointment of Poppies, these are to
be used until the beginning of the Inflammation is past; then use the Oil of
Cammomile, and the Oil of Roses, and the more distance there is from the
beginning, the more use Discutients, but have a care of strong Discutients, as
the Oil of Anniseeds or Cammomile, Lumbricated.

3. Suppuration and ripening it, which is to be avoided, if you can help it;
Bread or Mallows boiled in Milk ripen gently, such as ripen more vehemently
are painful, and torment the Child.

CHAP. VII. Of a Rupture, and Broken Belly.
A Rupture is a falling down of the Guts from their place.

The Cause is the breaking, or relaxing the Inner rine of the Belly that joins
to the Caul, the latter cause is most frequent in Children in regard of their
Moisture.

The External Causes are vehement motion, extraordinary Crying, holding of the
Breath, abundance of Wind, and a strong Endeavor of disburthening the Belly.

The Signs of the Causes are thus; If the Peritonation be broken, the Tumor was
caused and increased suddenly, and the Gut descends to the bottom, but if it
be relaxed, the Tumor grew by degrees, neither does the Gut descend to the
bottom.

The Cure is by, 1. Putting the Gut up into the belly; if it has wind in it,
which is known by the noise, and sending wind out of it, then use Discutients,
anoint it with the Isle of Cammomile or Anniseeds; if it has its ordure
hardened in it, soften it by Poultesses, Clysters, and Bathings; if it has
Phlegm in it, evacuate it by degrees with Clysters, and Suppositories, and use
things that are hot and dry, and attenuating.

2. The keeping it in its place after it is put into it, that it fall down no
more, which is done by a Trusse, and inward and outward Medicaments. The
Internal are, the Powder of Mouse-eare used at Meals taken in Water, Rupterwort
taken from the New of the Moon to the full, Decoctions of great Comfrey, St.
Johnswort, and Sanicle. The internal Medicaments profit little, but the
External are more certain, and the only hope is in them. The Seed of Ameos,
with the white of an Egg is highly praised. The Emplasters, called Emplastrum
ad Herviam, and Emplastrum Caesaris, will serve in the place of all other
Medicaments.

3. In cutting it, if it be not cured by the Medicaments above, which is easy
and without danger.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Falling of the Fundament.
THe falling of the Fundament is a going forth of the right and straight Gut
(called the Pudding Gut) with the Sphyncter Muscle.

The Cause is, 1. A weakness of the Muscle by coldness of the humors, or
outwardly, as when Children sit on Stoves, or by a looseness of the Belly.

2. A great Endeavor and striving in disburthening the Belly.

3. A great irritation and frequent desire of emptying the belly, which comes
from a Dysentery or Tenesme.

The Signs are manifest to sight.

The Presage, This Disease is hard to cure, because all Diseases of the
Fundament are very difficult to cure; because,

1. The part is very sensible, and cannot endure sharp Medicaments.

2. The passing of the Filth, which if it be hard it exasperates the part.

3. Medicaments are not easily applied to this part, nor are kept long enough,
by the passing of the Filth.

4. The Place is hot and moist, which requires remedies that are cooling and
drying, which irritate and exasperate, and therefore scarcely endured.

That which is without an Inflammation, not inveterate, but new, is more easily
cured.

The Cure is, 1. By putting it into its place, which is done by a gentle hand;
if it be swelled, bath it with a Decoction of Mallows before you put it up,
which will likewise cleanse the Filth and slimy humor from it, which is
requisite also to be done.

2. Retaining it in its place, after it is put into it, which is done by
astringent remedies, which ought not to be very strong (because they
exasperate, cause pain, and want of sleep) to which use serves Terra Lemnia,
Sanguis Draconis, Frankincense, and Cerusse, which are to be sprinkled upon the
part; apply to the Fundament a Sponge, dipped in an Astringent Decoction of
Sanicle, Herbrobert, Acornes, or Leaves of Oak, or the greater Comfrey.

CHAP. IX. Of the Galling of Children.
THe Galling of Children are certain Ulcers in the Skin, or Excoriations which
happen to Children between the Thighs; sometimes they are in the Feet, Lips,
and between the Thighs in those of elder years.

The Cause is, 1. External, sharp Urine (especially in fat Children) sharp and
choleric Filth of the Belly, and Foulness of Clothes, walking, rough
Clothing, and violent motion drawing the sharp humors to the Skin, or
exasperating the humors in the Skin.

2. Internal and immediate, a sharp and corroding humor, which is either
generated in the part exulcerated, or it flows from the body into those parts.

3. Antecedent, the fault of the Milk, if the Child suck. In elder ones, an ill
Diet, especially meats that are hot, sweet, salt, or corroding.

The Signs are obvious, because the part is red and pained, especially if it be
touched and rubbed.

Presage, If they are neglected they turn into ill Ulcers, and are dangerous,
otherwise they are easy to cure.

The Cure is, if the Child suck, let the Nurse use a good Diet and abstain from
Motion, Watching, Anger, Wine, and all meats that are sharp, salt, and
corroding. If she be of an unhealthy blood, let her purge; The Child is also to
be often washed and clens'd from his filth and excrements, and his Clothes are
to be clean and not hard. If the Child does not suck, the like Diet is to be
used, as is advised for the Nurse, and the same remedies for preparing and
purging of the humors, and outwardly to be applied are convenient, which are
advised in the Fourth Chapter; to which I refer you. To them may be added
Dear-Suet, or the Suet of a Goat. Take a Turnip, make a Hole in it, then fill
it with the Oil of Roses, and Roast it, of which make a Liniament.

CHAP. X. Of Chilblanes and Kybes.
CHilblanes usually follow Tumors and Swellings, and the matter of it is dry,
sharp and corroding, and makes an Ulcer, which for the most part is dry, and no
matter or humor issues of it. It happens to Children chiefly because they
less feel the cold, and defend themselves against it, and so are most
frequently hurt with the cold. It happens to he hands and Feet, and not other
parts of the body; because,

1. The hands and feet are farthest from the fountain of heat, the heart.

2. They are without Flesh, and have no defense from outward injuries, and do
abound with Nerves and Bones, whereby we have great pain, and are more cold in
these parts then in other parts, insomuch that these parts many times corrupt
and putrefie with cold; by what is said. Chilblanes may be defined

A dry Ulcer in the hands and feet, chiefly in Infants.

The Cause is cold, or shoes that hurt being too straight, rough, or hard.

The Signs are, An Inflammation more or less, sometimes Pustules, afterward
exulcerations, a little pain, but the Itching greater, a purulent Ichor comes
from it, that seems to be like ripened or thin matter.

The Presage, It is not dangerous if it be not neglected; if it be, a
Mortification of the Feet may happen, and so Death.

The Cure is in, 1. Preservation from it, wherefore avoid straight and hard
shoes, defend your feet from the cold Air, and rub your feet with salt and honey
mingled, which is good in the beginning when the swelling only appears, so is
the washing your feet with salt water, or with a Decoction of Betes. And when
there is only a Swelling these are good, as Turnips boiled and applied in the
manner of a Plaster, Bran boiled in Wine. Take of the Gum Ammoniacum one
Dram, of Resin two Drams, dissolve them over the fire, add thereto six Drams of
Common Oil, of Wax half a Dram, let the Wax be dissolved, then add Flower of
Fengreek, Frankincense and Mastick, of each two Drams, mingle them. 2. In
curing the Ulcer, Aloes alone, or mixed with sweet wine, cures it being laid to
it; if the Ulcer be sordid, cleanse it with the Ointment called the Ointment of
the Apostles; when it is cleansed that no filth is left, then skin it with the
Plaster called Diapalma.

CHAP. XI. Of the Scab.
THE Scab is a Swelling, with a distemper and exulceration of the Skin.

The Cause is, a corrupted blood mixed with salt Phlegm, and burnt Choler,
either generated in the womb of the Mother by the menstruous blood, or after
the Child is born, by the corruption of milk, or fault of Diet, by which the
Liver chiefly is intemperately hot, or the blood is corrupted by contagion,
which being expelled to the Skin, there sticks, exulcerates it, and makes it
sore.

The Signs are manifest, and are in the Definition.

The Cure is in, 1. A convenient Diet, the meat ought to be boiled not roasted,
of an easy Disgestion, not salt, hot, or having ill qualities; unclenliness,
and unseasonable exercise are to be avoided.

2. Tempering and purging the humors as in the fourth Chapter.

3. By provocation of Sweat, with a Decoction of Scabius, Hartshorn, Fumitory,
and Cardus benedictus.

4. External Remedies, which gently cleanse and dry; Quicksilver is much
commended, but it is only convenient, if the Scab be contumacious, and in the
oldest Children, Unguentum Enulatum is profitable, but be careful it be without
Mercury. Take of the Oil of Roses four Ounces, live Brimstone one Ounce, the
Juice of Limons two Ounces, the Resine of Pine Tree one Ounce, mix them, and
make an Ointment of them. Take of Turpentine four Ounces, washed in-Rose-water,
the Juice of four Oranges, the Yelks of four Eggs, and an Ounce of the Oil of
Roses, mingle them all, and make an Ointment of them, which is excellently good
if the Scab be old and dry. Elecampane powdered, and with Hogs grease made into
an Ointment, is highly praised; so is Brimstone finely powdered and anointed
with Milk. Also Garlic beaten very small and mixed with Hogs grease is very
good.

CHAP. XII. Of the Itch.
THe Itch is a pain exciting a desire of Scratching, without the unevenness or
exulceration of the Skin.

The Itch is sometimes in the whole body, but most frequently in the Soles of
the Feet, by reason of the hardness and thickness of the Skin, hindering the
humors to evaporate.

The Cause is Choler, or salt or thin Phlegm, thereby insinuating it self
into the smallest pars, but it is viscid and clammy, that it may adhere and
cleave tenaciously to the parts. It is caused in the Womb of the Mother by the
Menstruous blood, or by the corruption or fault of the Milk, or by meats and
drinks that are hot, salt, or other things that heat the Liver.

The Signs are manifest.

The Cures are, 1. By attemperating the humors with the Whey of the Milk of
Goats, and the Syrrup of Fumitory.

2. In evacuating the humors, Take a Dram of Rhabarb, infuse it all night in a
little Water, strain it, and add three Ounces of Whey, and two Ounces of the
Syrrup of Roses solutive.

3. Mitigation of the pain, and discussing of it by Baths of Water in which are
Mallows, Cammomile, or Pellitory.

So much of External Diseases.

The Second Book Of Universal Diseases in CHILDREN.
CHAP. I. Of Fevers in Children in General.
HItherto have been considered External Diseases, Internal are either Universal
which affect the whole body, or particular, which affect some parts. A Fever
is an Universal Disease, so is the Small Pox, and a Consumption, which three
Diseases will be considered in this Book.

Although Fevers and their Causes are common to all Ages, yet in regard
Infancy is most obnoxious to them, and has peculiar considerations in the Cure
of them; Limiting the strength, quality and quantity of the remedy, it will not
be altogether improper to call Fevers Childrens Fevers; Children are subject
to Diseases that are accidental, and Symptomatical, proceeding from other
Diseases, as in breeding of the Teeth, Inflammation of the Gums, and c. and also
to Fevers essential, and of their own accord, and to all sorts of them; but
especially a Synoche Fever, in regard their bodies are hot and moist, their
temperament sanguine, and their bodies dense, by which, transpiration of the
heat is hindered, which increases and produces a Fever.

Children may have a Quartan Fever though their natural temper be contrary to
it; because,

1. Humors partake as well of the matter as of the Agent and Temperament of the
body, wherefore as Humors and Excrements of the body do not show the
Temperament (for old men are cold and dry of temper, yet they abound with
Phlegm (so do they not only depend on it, but on Diet likewise, which in
Children is very often gross and unorderly eaten, and so Crudities and very
thick humors are made.

2. If the Mother was elderly and of a Melancholy temper, the menstruous blood,
with which the Child was nourished, may much alter the temper of the Child.

3. A Quartan Fever is not always made from Melancholy, but may be made from
any humor that is thick.

The Internal Causes are the humors of the body.

The External Causes are chiefly, 1. The Air, If the Winter be cold and dry,
and the Spring hot and moist, bodies cannot be cooled in the Summer, but burn
and cause Fevers; besides, in the Summer, Childrens bodies are more thin and
spare.

2. Unseasonable and immoderate exercise, being full or empty.

3. Immoderate and ill Diet, whence are Crudities, Obstructions, and
Putrefying, and so Fevers.

Presage, All Fevers in Children for the most part are not dangerous, because
the natural Faculty is strong and active in them, and can resist powerfully the
Causes of Fevers.

Children sometimes by Fevers have an Hectic Fever, not by the difficulty of
the Curing it, or the greatness of the Fever, but by the morosity of the
Child that will not be governed.

The Cure is, If the Child suck, the Nurse is to be cured, with such things
that alter and purge, as the kind of Fever seems to require. It is much
doubted how blood is to be lessened in Children that have Fevers. Some think
that after the Fifth Month, Cuppingglasses may be applied, and blood drawn out
by them. Others think not before a year, which opinion is most safe, because
this Age is wont greatly to be overcome by pain and trouble, and Cupping
glasses are painful, but after a year Cupping glasses may be applied, but only
to sanguine and strong Children. And then not to the part above, but on the
Thighs, because the Spirits and strength are not so wasted from those parts, as
from above. And only to the taking away an Ounce of blood and no more.

Besides these remedies, others may be added. Inwardly may be taken the Juice
of Granates (which is highly praised) with Oxymel and Citron. It may be made
thus, Take of the Juice of Granates one Ounce, of Simple Oxymell half an Ounce,
you may give the Child a Dram at a time unto half an Ounce, but it is better to
mix the less quantity of Oxymel, because the Child's Nerves are very infirm,
and Oxymel and all sower things hurt the Nerves, wherefore the Syrrup of
Maidenhair, Syrrup of Red Poppies are good. If the Child is bound in his belly,
you may not use purging Medicaments because the Child's body is hot naturally,
and is more heated by the Fever, so it is dangerous to add the heat of a
purging Medicament, wherefore it is better to use a more gentle Clyster or
Suppository. Take of Whey half a pint, of Honey half an Ounce, of Salt half a
Dram, mingle them; make a Suppository of Flesh and Hogs grease, or the common
Suppository, for strong Suppositories are dangerous.

Outward remedies may be used, 1. Things very gentle may be applied to the head
or Feet to provoke sweat, as the Root of a Reed; if the Child's body which is
Dense be opened by Sweat, the heat and putrid vapors will go forth.

2. Cloths dipped in Cichory, Endive, Plantane, or Rosewater applied to the
Breast, Side, or Back for cooling.

The Liver and Stomach ought to be helped in Concoction in all Fevers, much
more here, which is done by cooling and binding remedies applied to them. Take
of the Oil of Mastick half an Ounce, powder of Red Coral, Sanders, and Red
Roses, of each two Scruples, of Wax a little, make an Ointment of it, but if
the Child be between seven and fourteen years, he must be handled in another
manner, which shall be set forth in the following Chapter.

CHAP. II. Of a Synoche Fever.
EVery Synoche putrid Fever in Children is from obstruction made by gross
humors in hot, moist, and sanguine bodies, and the putrid matter is in all or
the greater veins.

The Cure of it in a Child between 7. and 14. years, will be in removing the
obstructions, and tempering the Febrish heat, which will be done by, 1. A
convenient Diet, let the Air be cold, motions of the body and mind avoided; if
the belly move not, use a Clyster or Suppository; let the Drink be water, or
Barley water; the Diet sparing, only Barley broth, or Broth of Meat: But because
this will be accounted too strict and hard, to indulge, you may add to the
Broth bread, and sometimes the Yelk of an Egg, but be careful you do not
nourish too much, because the strength and the Disease are nourished together.
The time of eating, let it be as it was when the Child was well.

2. Blood-letting; Some think that Blood-letting ought not to be before the
Child is 14. years old, because that which the opening of a Vein ought to do,
nature does it of its own accord, which consumes daily much of the Child's
substance by insensible transpiration, therefore it needs not evacuation, lest
the strength be dejected. Others are for Blood-letting, because if a Child can
endure a disease from fullness, why not the remedy? which is, Blood-letting;
otherwise as often as a Disease begins with the imbecility of strength,
especially which happens out of a natural dissipation and resolution, so often
will that Disease be certain, and necessarily mortal: Besides, they which are
against Blood-letting allow purges, which are contrary to nature, and is worse
then Blood-letting: moreover, they bring notable examples for it, as Avenzoar's
letting of his son blood at three Months old. In this Fever, because
evacuating blood is an excellent remedy, you may in the place of Blood-letting
use Leeches which with ease open a vein, and do not wast the Spirits, they will
be most safely safe applied to the Thighs, and also to the Arms: Or you may use
Cuppingglasses, which are not to be used in the upper parts, because they draw
humors from the whole body to the heart, wherefore it is safer to apply them
to the Loins or Hips, and then they must be oblonge and a narrow mouth, because
to draw from profound parts; If you apply them to the Thighs, they are to have
a broad mouth, which draws from the parts which are next and remote according
to Latitude.

If the Belly be not loose use a Clyster or Suppository, before you use
Cuppingglasses or Leeches, afterward endeavor to remove obstructions by
internal and external remedies, that attenuate and deterge without any notable
heat. Take Barley half a Pugil, the Leaves of Hyssop half an handful, boil it
according to Art; Take of that Decoction two Ounces and an half, of Simple
Oxymel five Drams, mingle it, and drink it; when you have thus prepared the
humors; Purge gently, Take of Sebestens, two Drams of Raisins, the Leaves of
Hyssop, the Flowers of Borrage of each one Pugill, make a Decoction according
to Art, take thereof three Ounces; of the Honey of Roses solutive, and of Manna,
of each an Ounce and a half, mingle them; the Purgative Medicaments may be
lessened or increased as the body requires.

Outwardly things that open obstructions are convenient; Such as are gentle, as
meal of Barley rubbed upon the Skin, Barly-water, and a little Oil of Almonds,
cool and moisten the Breast, and prevent the increase of the heat of the
Breast. A Bath of fresh Water is very convenient.

This way may be observed also in a Tertian or Quartan Fever, respect being
had to the humor that is faulty.

CHAP. III. Of the Small Pox and Meazles.
THE Small Pox is a Disease formerly unknown to the Ancients, having neither
writ any Book of it, nor described it; and it is not improbable it had a
Beginning in our Northern Countries, as it had in the West Indies; in which
parts (it is said by Historians) that in that time in which we were infected by
them with the French Pox they took from us the Small Pox and Meazles.

It is a Disease belonging only to Mankind and not to Beasts, not is the
Murrain or Leprosy in Hogs the same Disease with it, as is supposed by some.
The Small Pox and Meazles have the same matter, cause, and Cure, but the
Meazles are made of the thinner matter, and they differ from the Small Pox, in
that,

1. The Meazles have little swellings, or that the rising of them can hardly be
seen.

2. The matter of them is more dry and subtle.

3. They trouble and affect the eyes less then the Pox.

4. The Small Pox for the most part terminates into an Abscessus and Collection
of ripened matter, which lasts many days and blemishes the body, but the
Meazles scarce passes the seventh day, either then they vanish or are almost
wasted, and leave no deformity.

The Cause as I conceive is not the Impurity of the maternal blood, as by most
is supposed, because,

1. The Small Pox proceeds for the most part from the fault of the Air and
Stars.

2. The fault of the menstruous blood was ever since the Sin of Eve, and
therefore this Disease should have been always, but before the time of the
Arabic Physicians, no Author was found that writ of the generation of this
Disease, or clearly explain it, which if they had done, they would not have
concealed it from us (it being a great and dangerous Disease) in regard they
communicated in their Books small Diseases.

3. There is scarce any man but some time or other has a grievous Disease
which makes an Ebullition or boiling of blood, and putrefaction, until the body
is cleansed and purified diverse ways, and so the fault from the menstruous blood
would be expelled: but it is otherwise, for it follows immediately other
Diseases, and the sanguine man who is most healthy is most troubled. It is
granted that the seed of a Disease may lie in part of the body for many years,
but the whole blood infected cannot stay long, and resist so many injuries, and
if as some think the menstruous blood infected should ferment and turn into
other ill Diseases, as pestilential Fevers, then the rest of the time they
would be free from this Evil.

4. Sanguineous Beasts that have menstruous purgation, would have this Disease,
as Bitches, Asses, and Mares, having the matter of the Disease (as menstruous
Purgation) and the Agent, (Heat.)

5. Natures care and wisdom for Preservation, in seperating the Excrements
from Nourishment in the Womb, the excrements are past into the Tunicles in
which the Child is wrapped, and immediately after it is born, it purges by stool
plentifully, and more then is fit for its bigness, which is sometimes bloody,
black and white, and afterward it has Sores in the head, which purges the
ill humors contracted in the Womb; and though natures care may fail in some,
it cannot fail in all. Nor is the cause of this Disease the fault of the Air,
as some conceive it to be, because 1. This Disease arises from the Pravity of
matter. 2. The quallity of the Air that produces the great effects that follow
the Small Pox, would be very strong and powerful, and so young men would not be
free from it.

The true cause is a paternal propriety in the blood and Ichors of it, boiling
by heat, which Ichors may be excited in the body diverse ways. That the Ichors
is the matter, is seen by the 1. Breaking of it out into the Skin. 2. All
Synoche Fevers arise out of the boiling of the Ichors of blood, which Fever
is always in the Small Pox. 3. They are the Ichors (or thin and serosous part
of the blood) because they are not sharp, if they were, there would be a
concussion of the body and shaking when they are expelled. That the Disease is
made by the Ichors or thin and serosous and waterish humidity, is manifest,
because the humor that goes forth is not a Pus and thick matter; but an Ichor
and thin waterish humor, and that it is by Ebullition, appears in the heat,
color, and Accidents that happen. By this we may resolve our selves, 1. That
in our days scarce any man but has this Disease, because it is hereditary,
which came first by the fault of the Stars, which affected all, or almost all,
and now is propagated. As Indians now generate children with long heads, which
in former Ages they endeavored to make by Art, and now is become a natural
disposition. 2. This Disease is mortal to some and not to others, by the
abundance and badness of humors, and ill constitution of body, that the blood
and Ichors boiling, causes an unquenchable Fire and remediless putrefaction;
besides the badnesse of the Air, and errors in the ordering of the person. 3.
They happen most to Children, because they are full of blood and thin waterish
humidity, and abound with heat, being nearest to the principle of Generation,
besides they are given much Motion. 4. They that have most thin and waterish
humors, have most breakings out, and the thicker and more tenacious the
humors are, the worse the marks and deformities are. 5. The face is most
troubled, because of the Ebullition of the blood, the vapors ascend to the
head, and so impetuously, that neither the Spirits of the head or face, or the
Air to which the face is exposed, can resist; besides, the face is moist and
rare, and apt thereby to receive them. 6. The Feet and hands next to the face
are chiefly troubled, notwithstanding the Skin is hard, because of the Sympathy
between these parts and the Liver, which is seen in a hot Liver by the burning
of the hands and feet. 7. The Small Pox troubles the eyes more then the
Meazles, because the matter is thicker, and can be less resisted and repelled.
8. The Small Pox is contagious and infectious by the boiling of the blood,
which sends vapors at a great distance, which enter into other persons and
infect them, as it is in those that have sore eyes, and by the Hereditary
Propriety, so that consanguineous persons are more easily affected in regard of
the Similitude of their temper, and for that reason whole Families in a Plague
are destroyed. 8. Some have this Disease twice, very rarely thrice, almost all
once, because this Hereditary Disposition only disposes, and continues as long
as the Seminary parts in which it is implanted does remain, which most commonly
is consumed the first time the Blood is inflamed, and set on fire, especially
the second time when the Blood Ferments. 9. Scars and blemishes are left
chiefly in the Face, Lips, and Foreskin, because the Skin of them is without
Flesh, or has but very little, and therefore difficult to heal.

The mediate causes of the Small Pox are, 1. Internal, hot and moist temper,
soft and fat habit of body, and tenderness of Age. Boys are more disposed to
it then Girls, by the disparity of heat in them, boys being hotter. 2.
External, hot and moist Air, Southern constitution, Spring time and an hot and
moist region, or Contagion, or other things that move, or corrupt the thin and
waterish part of the Blood.

By what has been said, the Small Pox may be defined to be a disease having
Pustules in an outward part of the Skin, with a continual Fever, by the
peculiar Effervessency and Ebullition of the Ichorous Blood excited by the
expulsive faculty.

The Signs that this Disease is Imminent and coming, which either immediately
accompany the Disease, or proceed it, are Pain in the Neck and Breast, with a
heaviness of the Eyes, Itching of the Nose, Shortness of Breath, Sudden
trembling and starting, Often Sneesing, Urine sometimes muddy, sometimes sound
weepings of the Eyes and tears falling of their own accord from them, a
continual Fever.

The Signs of the Disease present are manifest, being little swellings and
spots; in the Meazles they are Red and not high; in the Small Pox, they first
appear as the head of an Needle or Pin, immediately after they are greater, and
red, and daily increase until they are ripened, grow white, are made an Ulcers
and Soars, and are dried up.

Presage, If the Small Pox and Meazles are White and a few, appear without any
other accident; or if many appear and the Fever is diminished and other
accidents, and the breathing easy, there is no danger. If the Small Pox are
black or green, or if few or many appear, and the other accidents are worse,
and exasperated and the breathing difficult, then it is pernicious and Mortal.
They who dye of the Small Pox, dye either with a Sounding, an Inflammation (with
which they are strangled) or a looseness of the Belly, which destroys the
strength of the Child.

The Cure is in, 1. Preserving the inward and outward parts, the outward are
called so because they are seen, and they are the Eyes, Ears, Nose, and Mouth.
The internal are Liver, Lungs, and chiefly the Guts; the eyes are frequently
troubled with heat, and a tenacious Ichor that Exulcerates them, whereby the
Children cannot sleep, which is helped by cooling and moderately binding
Medicaments, as the water of Roses or Plantain mixed with Sumach: Take of the
water of Roses and Plantain of each five Ounces, Sumach half an Ounce, infuse
them all night, and with a little white of an Egg mix them, wet a little
Cotton in it, and wet the eye often with it; if there be pain and Itching, take
the water of roses and milk, and add a little Myrrh to them; the scratching of
the Eyes are to be avoided: If the Ears be pained, itch, and run, let them be
kept open, if the pain be great, dip a Sponge in hot water with the Oil of
roses, and lay it to the Ear, the scratching whereof is very hurtful. The Nose
is defended from Ulcers if Roses or Plantain be boiled in water, and the steam
taken in at the Nosthrills. The Mouth is helped by this Gargarisme; Take of the
water of Barley one Pint and an half, the leaves of Plantain and Flowers of
Roses, of each one Dram, to which you may add the Juice of Barbaries or
Orange, and wash the mouth with it.

2. In helping of nature, in expelling the humor, which is performed by, 1.
Diet that is convenient. The Air is to be temperate, or rather somewhat hot,
that the Pores may be opened, and the coming forth of the Small Pox promoted,
therefore let the child be kept in a close room, that the cold Air by no means
may come in (by the opposition of the Air, many Children have dyed with a
Benign and gentle Small Pox, the matter of the Disease being repercuss'd to
the interior Parts; let a red cloth be laid next the Skin, which is conceived
by diverse to be helpful by a similitude it has with the boiling Blood.

Be careful your clothing be not too much, lest the Child be Smothered and
Swound; and so provide that the outward Parts are rather hot then cold, but
that neither the heat of the Air, or weight of Clothing, increase the
Feverish heat of the Child; and if the tongue waxes black with heat, the
breathing is short, and Swounding is feared, let some cold water be near the
Child's mouth, that he may suck the cold Air in, Sleep is helpful, but the
troubles of the mind (especially Fear) is to be avoided, only a little Anger
may be admitted, which help the expelling the humor. If the Belly be bound, a
very easy Clyster or Suppository may be used, which does not hinder the motion
of nature, because they only work in the Guts, and the motion of nature is to
the Skin and in the Veins: besides Clysters do not deject us that they may be
feared, contrary to what some think. Avoid fullness and emptiness, let the
body be kept in quiet and rubbed a little, for it expells the humor: let the
drink be Barley Water, with the Juice of Limmons or Barberies, or a Decoction of
the roots of Sorrel, or a Decoction of Ivory or Hartshorn, especially in the
beginning, and whilst the Fever is vehement. If the Fever is not very
vehement, a Decoction of Barley and Figs will be most convenient, and commonly
with success has been used by most eminent Physicians, for that effectually
expells the humors to the Skin. If Wine be permitted it must be but a little,
and in it steep Lettice, Endive, or Sorrel. Avoid gross meats, Spice, Salt,
and Sweet meats, for sweet things destroy, and so does bitter things, being
dry, and contrary to the Child's nature, which is moist, wherefore the meat must
be easy to concoct, cooling, as Barley Broth, or Broth in which cooling Herbs
are boiled; and when the danger is over, you may feed them with Broth and Yelks
of Eggs put into it, with some Juice of Limon or Vinegar. A dried Fig is good
meat, for it expells the humor to the skin. 2. Emptying of the blood before
the Eruption and breaking forth of the Small Pox or Meazles: If the Fever is
great, and there be a fullness of blood, then it may be admitted, unless the
Age is very tender, or something else hinders it. It may not be used upon
Children, that are weak, and forbear the emptying of blood in Children before
they are 10. Months old, though the Arabians appoint at five months. The
lessenning of blood ought to be upon the first visit of the Physician, because
of the beginning of the Ebullition of the blood, which is commonly then, the
Fervor whereof ought to be abated, and nature eased; so that one ought not to
stay until the fourth day, but it may be done when one will, before that time
and not after. The lessening of blood is done several ways, as by letting blood
(which ought to be very seldom) Cuppingglasses or Leeches, the latter is most
easy, and one or two may suffice in the place of Cupping-glasses, or opening a
Vein. 3. Medicaments, All Physicians agree vehement remedies are not to be
used, but some think gentle means may be used in the beginning of this Disease;
but I conceive that Medicaments may not be used in the beginning, because the
operation of it will trouble nature in her work, which is critical (the
Physician being called when the blood is boiling) and it is a rule, there is
nothing to be done unless nature act imperfectly, which cannot be known in the
beginning, but a Clyster may be then and at any time used, for that works only
on the Guts, as is said a little before. Take a pint of Barly-water, 4 Ounces
of the Syrrup of Violets, three Ounces of Butter, and an Ounce of red and
course Sugar, mingle them for a Clyster, the quantity is to be altered, as the
capacity of the Child is. A dried Fig is a convenient Suppository, and one made
of honey. Where the humor moves forth, and the whole matter comes forth, there
no evacuation must be used, for there the Child and all things are quiet: But
if the Child is troubled, the trouble may be taken away with a Lenitive. Take
of Tamarinds half an Ounce, Sebestens 15. of Barley two drams; of the Flowers of
Borrage, Violets, and Roses, of each a Dram, boil them in a pint of water to
half a pint. Take 4. Ounces of this Decoction, and an Ounce of Manna or more,
as the Child is. Some think a gentle purge before the eruption, breaking out,
and appearance of the Pox and Meazles, if the Child abound with ill humors,
and the Fever rage, may be used, for it lessens the ill humors, that thereby
nature does expel more cheerfully; but if the Small Pox begins to break forth,
then a Purge is pernicious and mortal. The rest of the Cure is in helping
nature in expulsion; wherefore if Nature does not expel readily, and strongly,
but slowly, use such a remedy as cools, binds, and opens. Take of Lents one
Ounce, of Figs 10. Maidenhair two Drams, Smalledge roots half an Ounce, Sorrel
half a handful, boil them in a pint and an half of water to a pint, use it
morning and Evening, from four Ounces to six, as the Child is; If nature expels
strongly, omit the opening things, in regard of the Fever which is great, and
the openings are not then to be used; but when nature expels slowly, which is
known by the fewness and slownesse of their coming forth, This expels. Take of
Lents two drams, of Figs fifteen, of Barley one dram, of Lettice and Sorrel of
each an handful, boil them in a pint and an half of water to a pint, use 6, 7,
or 8. Ounces of it Morning and Evening, as the Child is: Note, that Lents
boiled alone loosens the Belly, from whence are mortal Fluxes, nor it is not to
be used alone for a remedy, because of its thickness and binding qualities.
Take of French Barley one Pugil, sliced Liquorish half a dram, red Cicers one
dram, of the greater Cold seeds of each half a dram, Cordial Flowers of each
one Pugill, three Figs, boil them well in water to 6 Ounces, after it is
strained dissolve in it half an Ounce of the Syrrup of Granat which is to be
taken at twice, it is very good; it mitigates and tempers the Fever. These
that follow are also good to expel, as Confection of Hyacynth, Alkermes,
Contraherva, Hartshorn, or Scabius boiled; so is Antimonium Diaphoreticum,
Bezar-stone, and the Bezardical Mineral; some use to bath with Lukewarm water
to promote expulsion by relaxing the Skin. Observe that Medicaments that are
Cordials and expelling, are to be used from the appearing and first coming
forth of the Small Pox, to the Eleventh day, which some call the increase and
state of Eruption of the Ebullition. If the Scabs dry not of themselves, and
have matter in them, and are ripe, they are not to be opened, unless they be
malignant, for if they be ripe and white, their heat and fervor, and eating of
the flesh is gone, and they will dry and fall of themselves, and so there is no
danger of its putrefying and leaving holes and marks. If the Scabs dry not of
themselves fast enough, use Aloes, Litharidge, Cerusse, and Sanders, and wash
them in salt water, in which Plantain, Roses, or some other drying thing is,
that may take away the acrimony of the Salt. If they do not ripen fast enough,
boil Figs and Mallows together, and dip a Cloth in it, and touch them often
with it being warm, it mitigates pain and ripens them. In the end of the
Disease the Scabs sometimes turn into Ulcers, which are cured with the Ointment
of Litharidge and Cerusse, and an ill color is left, which is taken away thus.
Take of Lupine Barley and Beans of each two Drams, bruise them and boil them in
a convenient quantity of water until it is thick, and with it wash morning and
evening the Child's hands and face, until the Scales fall off. The Scars and
holes left by the Pox is hardly cureable, the fat of a man, and the Oil of Eggs
is very much commended.

Chap. IV. Of the Consumption.
A Consumption is called Leanness, Gracility, and Tenuity. If it be considered
as an habit and a certain durable and permanent state of the body, and as
hurting the Actions of the body, it is a Disease; if as it depends on a
vitiated Nutrition, and as a simple Disposition, then it is rather to be called
a Symptom and an effect of a Disease.

A Consumption is an Extabescency and Exiccation of the whole body, arising
from a want of nourishing of the body.

The Subject is the whole body, the harder part whereof may be dried and
diminished, the Veins and Nerves may be so extenuated, that they may seem to be
much less, that a great vein may seem to be a little vein, etc. but these
parts cannot be so lessened as that the whole body should decrease, wherefore
the whole body is said to be extenuated in respect of the more soft parts, as
the fat and flesh; the fat is first consumed because it is caused by cold, and
whatsoever is concreted by cold (unless it be vehement) is easily dissolved by
heat. Moreover, fat has scarce any other use but to preserve the natural heat.
After the fat, the flesh is consumed, which is as a bond of the Constitution of
man's Body, but not necessary to Life; but the seminary parts, as Veins, Nerves,
Arteries, etc. are the foundation of Life, and cannot be consumed with the
preservation of Life as the flesh can be which is not necessary for Life; and
it is of three sorts 1. Musculous, which consists of Veins, Membranes, and
Arteries; 2. Glandulous, as that of the Breast anp Testicles. 3. Pure Flesh, as
that which is between the Teeth, and in the top of the Yard. These three sorts
of Flesh consume in this order. First the the Musculous Flesh. Secondly, the
Glandulous, and last of all the pure flesh.

The immediate cause of this Disease, is the frustration of nourishing, either
by the fault, 1. of the Aliment, being deficient and too little or vicious,
that it is not assimilated, or attracted by the parts of the Body; 2. or fault
of the Nutritive faculty, when the natural heat and radical moisture is
Defective. The nourishment and food is too little, when the appetite in the
Stomach and other parts is wanting (as in an Universal weakness, or) when it
is not distributed, the Meseraick Veins by their dryness are often so shut and
close, that the Chile cannot pass from the Stomach into the rest of the Body,
and so the parts are extenuated. So likewise as often as the meat is prepared
and sent another way, there is Leanness as in Vomiting and Fluxes, so it is by
worms consuming the nourishment that ought to be turned into flesh. The Blood
is faulty and cause of Leanness when it is too Melancholical, for where the
Spleen flourishes the rest of the body grows Lean, and where the rest of the
body consumes, the Spleen grows: So likewise when the Blood is too Choleric,
for then it is offensive to nature, for no blood can be turned into the
substance of the body that has Choler mixed with it, or if it be waterish,
whereby bodies also consume, as in Dropsies; so likewise if the blood be Salt,
leanness is caused, for Salt things are Earthy, Dry and contrary to
nourishment, and dry the body and is not assimilated, and therefore consume and
extenuate directly and naturally; by accident Salt may conduce to nourishment
by exciting an Appetite, and distributing the Food, but naturally it is
contrary to nourishment, insomuch that some have Writ that Fishes are not
nourished with Water or Juyces that are Salt, but with sweet things, or other
things that are found in the Sea. Nourishment is also hindered by the fault or
distemper of the Part that should assimilate the nourishment, when it is too
dry; so it happens to old walls to which Lime cannot be agglutinated by reason
of the great dryness of it: Moreover, Leanness is also made by causes that
dissolve the fat and flesh, as great Fevers do; but in Children it is caused
for the most part by the defect of nourishment, being either too little or
vicious and unusefull, proceeding from the fault of the milk; (wherefore it is,
that Children by one Nurse fattens, and consume by another) or Worms destroying
their nourishment; and sometimes by a distemper of some principal part, as the
Stomach, Liver, or Heart, and it is observed that an old and contumations and
native consumption, cannot be, without the Liver be affected and the
temperament dry, but that which is new may be from any one of the causes
aforesaid.

The external causes of a Consumption are a hot or dry Air, hence it is that
most Aethiopians are lean and most men consume in Summer, Watching and Care
consumes a Body and as it were eats it; Meditation, Grief, Study, Immoderate
Venery, natural Bathes that dry, Scarcity of Food and feeding once a day
consume men and Children, of which quality are sharp things. It is also
conceived that Children by reason of the softness and tenderness of their
body grow lean and consume by Fascination, proceeding from their touching
unhealthy bodies, or the unwholesome vapors out of the Eyes or Mouths of Women
not well; which truly is not Fascination, for Witchcraft is rather the work of
the Devil, then by any proper power of the Sages.

The Signs of a Consumption are manifest, for the Flesh and Fat are visibly
consumed, the face like one that is dead, and the figure of the whole hody
depraved. If it is from a cause that melts and dissolves the Fat and Flesh,
there was or is a violent Fever.

If from want of food, it is known in elder Children by their not taking what
is necessary; in Sucking Children, by the Flagginess and Emptiness of the
Nurses Breast, the ill diet of Nurses, the Child pisses little and does not wet
his Clothes, cries and Sucks eagerly. If the want of food is the cause, because
nourishment goes into other parts, it is known by the looseness of the Belly,
plenty of Urine and worms. If the defect is, because the meat is not exactly
prepared in the Stomach, there is belching of Wind, Vomiting, and want of
Appetite, or some hot distemper. If from the fault of food, if in Infants, the
Nurses milk is not good (for milk is made of food) by the color and ill
constitution of the Nurse it is easily known, if the Milk is bad, it will not
be very white, have an ill taste, not sweet, of an ill smell, and more thick
and fluid then it ought to be. The thickness and thinness of the Milk is
known, if some Milk is Milk'd upon the Nail of the Thombe, and if it presently
runs off, it is too thin, if it stays and moves not off, it is too thick; Or
if you curdle it, the whey and curds ought to be equal, else it is to thin or
to thick, besides if the Milk be thin andsharp, the Child is troubled with
Pain, looseness, and very ill breakings out. If the milk is thick, the Child
is costive and there are little Inflammations, Swellings and Vomitings, they
piss little, move and breath with difficulty, and are full of Phlegm.

In those that are elder, the badnesse of food is known by the color of the
Skin and outside of the body, wherefore if the countenance be ill colored,
scabby or pimpell'd; or if any other part is weak, as the head Stomach or
Liver; or if their be any infirmities, distempers or passions of mind, it is
certain the Leanness is from the fault of the food. Also it happens by the
weakness from some Disease. If these things had not been, the Child would have
had a florid and fresh color, good appetite, and would eat and not complain.
If Leanness be from Fascination, no art or natural means is effectual, and
there is no internal or external cause of Leanness in regard of the Nurse or
Child.

Presage, 1. All Sudden Leanness proceeding from a Fever is mortal, because
of the Vehemence of the cause, weakness of the strength, tenuity of the humor,
and laxity of the whole Body. 2. Consumptions that are seldom and not from
Fevers, especially those that are great and ill, are sometimes cureable. 3.
Lean bodies that are moist and have a moist Skin may be made fat, because all
soft bodies are apt and fit to be extended into any dimension. 4. Bodies that
are dry and have their Skin hard and rough, can scarce be fatned. 5. Bodies
that have the Skin dry and cleaving to the bones, that neither by the hand nor
Art can be stretched out, there is no hope of fatning them; but if the Skin be
wrinkled and rugged so that it may be drawn forth, and as it were separated
from the bones, there is some hope of making them fat.

The Cure is, 1. in Children that suck, if the Milk be too little or bad,
change the Nurse and choose one who has good Milk, the notes whereof you have
before, let her be of a good constitution, of a white and red color, of a good
converversation and behavior, not under 20. nor above 40. years old, having
had Children twice, and being not above 2 or 3 months from her last delivery,
broad chested, having breasts neither big nor small, but moderate. If the Nurse
may not be changed, let her be in a temperate Air, let her Sleep well, it
augments Milk, let her avoid Passions, especially Anger, Grief, and Love, (for
they corrupt the Milk) and congresse with a man spoils the Milk, or provokes
the menstruous Flux that the Milk is lessened. A Nurse that lives with her
husband is allowed coition and congresse with him, lest She be disturbed by
desire of it, and by experience we see that Mothers that live with their
Husbands, and use congresse, Nurse the Child without any hurt. The Nurse ought
to use moderate exercive, rubbing of her bosom and breasts before she eats is
convenient, let her not drink, or very little, and that which is sweet which
lest offends the head, lest by increasing Milk the Child has the Falling
Sickness; The meat ought to be of a good and plentiful nourishment, avoiding
sharp, salt and bitter things, the best bread, the Flesh of Birds, Veal,
Mutton, and the like, Fish is to be avoided, Broth especially, with the Milk
of Almonds increase Milk. If the Milk be faulty by the coldness, moisture and
thinness of it, the Diet must be hot for the correcting of it. If the Nurses
body abound with cold and moist humors, prepare and purge them, but with
gentle Purgatives, as the Syrrup of Roses or Rhabarbe, whose weak virtues are
extinguished before they are communicated to the blood; if you purge strongly,
let not the Child suck the Nurse two or three days after. If the Milk is too
thick the Diet is to be attenuating, Vinegar, Raddishes and the like are good,
a gentle Vomit is more convenient then a Purge. If the Milk be sharp and hot,
the Nurse is to be kept in a cold Air, Rest, Baths of fresh water are
convenient, Wine is hurtful; let the meat be Barley broth, with cooling Herbs,
especially Lettice, which cools and thickens the blood, and increases Milk,
avoiding salt, and things acrimonious, and Spices.

If the fault be not in the Milk, but in some part of the Infant, the Nurse is
to be dieted and purged, and the Infant is to take no inward Medicament, but
external, because these Ages bears not vehement Medicaments, wherefore external
remedies are only to be used; and therefore if the Child's Stomach be cold and
moist, hot or dry Plasters, Bathings, and Ointments are to be used, for the
correcting of them. Take the Leaves of Marjoram, Mint, of each one handful, the
Aromatic Reed, and the Flowers of red roses, of each half a handful, the water
of Calamint one Pint, of Sweet Wine two Ounces, boil them well, and with a
Cloth dipped in it, bath the Stomach if it be cold; Afterward anoint it with
this: Take the Oil of Mastick half an Ounce, the Powder of Cinnamon and Cloves
of each half a Dram, mix a little wax with them, and make an Ointment. If the
Stomach be dry, bath it with Milk, and anoint it with this. Take fresh Butter,
the fat of an Hen, of each half an Ounce, Saffron four grains, the Oil of
Wormwood three Ounces, mingle them and make a Liniament. If the Leanness is
from heat, Take Cichory, Endive, Water-lilly, and Wormwood waters, of each four
Ounces, Vinegar two Ounces, make a fomentation for the Liver, afterward
anoint the side with this: Take of the Ointment of Sanders, ^i^hory, and
Liverwort waters of each two Ounces, of the Vinegar of Roses, one Ounce, make a
Liniament. If Leanness is from Looseness, the Nurse is to use binding meats, as
Quinces, Services, Rice, Medlers, or Broth of an old Hen, and Calves feet,
Corral or Jaspers Stone hung about the child's neck is convenient. So is this,
Take of Mirrh and Quince of each half an Ounce, powder of Red Coral two Ounces,
of Oakwater two Ounces, the powder of Mastick and Tormentill, of each half a
Dram, mingle them, and make a Liniament, the senting of the Clothes with Fumes
of things that are binding, are also convenient. If Leanness arise from the
dryness of the whole body, use Bathing with fresh water, in which are boiled
Mallows, Lettice, Water Lillies, or Endive; and a Liniament may he made of the
Oil of Roses, Violets, Butter without Salt, and Hogs grease; Clysters are also
good in these cases made of Milk, or Bread boiled in broth, or made of Eggs,
because they may nourish Children, being they are next to Generation, that is,
the state which they had in the womb, in which they were nourished by the
Navil, without the Concoction and preparation of the Stomach. Observe, that
Plasters to draw nourishments to the parts, are not convenient for Children,
because their bodies are as Wax, and that sort of remedy by the heat of it,
does enervate and wast the flesh of Infants.

If the Child is bewitched, a Saphir or Carbuncle hung about the Child's Neck is
conceived good; so is Hartsthorn hung in the house, and many more which I omit
as superstitious or false.

If the Child does not suck, but is nourished with solid Meats, then the Cure
is by removing, 1. The External Cause, or the Internal Disease (if it be the
cause of it) caused by proper remedies to it. Afterward, by procuring a good
Nourishment distributed and assimulated, which is done by a convenient Diet.
Let the Air be temperate and moist, heat hurts, and be careful the Child is not
Clothed too hot; Let the sleep be long, the mind quiet, the Exercise moderate,
and that which is slow, fatness and swift exercise consumes, the Belly
moderately loose, Baths used seasonably, Wine that is thin (thick Wine
obstructs, and is not vehicle for the meat) Odoriferous, somewhat sweet, not
sharp, but very moderately used. The Meat nourishing somewhat fatty, Juicy,
neither salt nor acide (unless it be to provoke a Stomach) as the Flesh of
Fowl, Veal, etc. Eggs, the Brains of a Calf, or Hog-bread boiled in Broth, Rice
boiled in Milk. Parsnip steeped in Milk, Raisins, and Almonds. Besides these,
there are meats that fatten either by a quality, 1. Manifest, by helping
concoction, as Spices, by being gratefu to the Stomach, and increasing the
native heat of it, as Cinnamon, Cloves, and Nutmegs. Take the Pulpe of a boiled
Capon and Patridge, of each half an Ounce, of the Pine Kernel, Pistack Nut
steeped in Mallagoe Wine half an Ounce, of Sweet Almonds an Ounce, Cinnamon,
Clove, and Nutmegs, of each an Ounce, and an half; Fine Sugar, as much as
suffices; make Lozenges, they are pleasant and fatten much, or by apposing and
fastening the meat, as all Diuretics and Diaphereticks do which opens the ways
and carries the nourishment to the parts: So does Drinking likewise between
Meals, or by apposing and fastening the meat to the parts by their tenacious and
viscid humidity, which humidity in hot and dry bodies is to be cold, and in
cold bodies, hot: 2. By a Propriety and an occult quality, as Sarcocolla; now
the Indian Nut is in great use, the Marrow whereof being finely bruised, an
Ounce, or two, or half an Ounce, is mixed with broth. Take of sweet Wafers and
Sarcocolla of each one pound, make a past with Butter, and dry them; then
powder it, and use five Ounces in cold water. Observe cold water is praised by
many, and cold meats, but this is by a manifest quality, and good where
Leanesse is by the great heat of the Liver.

The Third Book Of Inward DISEASES of several parts.
CHAP. I. Of the Epilepsy or Falling Sickness.
IN the two precedent Books, you have the External and Universal Diseases, in
this Book you have Inward Diseases, belonging to particular parts of the body,
but in regard Children especially before 7. years of Age have not the use of
reason, reason being as it were drowned and drunk with moisture and humors,
which made one say, the Souls of Children differ nothing from the Souls of
Beasts, for whilst we are Infants we all live the Lives of Beast, using only
the faculties of the Vegetative and Animal Souls, therefore the faults of the
Actions of the rational faculty (as Phrenzy and Madness) are not considered by
Physicians amongst Childrens Diseases, which likewise I omit in this Book.

The Epilepsy has several Names, I shall only mention three of them here. It
is called, 1. A Child's Disease, because Children are most frequently troubled
with it, by the cold distemper and large moisture of the Brain. 2. An holy and
divine Disease, so diverse of the Ancients testify in their Writings. 3.
Lunatic (26. Matthew. the Lunatic there was the same with this) because as one
excellently says, they who are conceived in the change of the Moon, when the
Moon is in conjunction with the Sun, without Light, they have the Falling
Sickness.

The Falling Sickness is a preternatural involuntary and intermitting
contraction and retraction of all the Muscles and Nerves.

The mediate cause of an Epilepsy by consent, is a Vapor raised from the lower
parts, to the head (which some think is but seldom) whether it be from fear,
corrupted Milk in the Stomach, Worms, breeding of Teeth, the Small Pox,
Meazles, or Fevers.

The immediate Cause of the Falling Sickness, when the Brain is primarily
affected, is a thin humor or vapor, because it is made and gone quickly,
therefore the matter of it must be such as may go away and return quickly,
which cannot be in a thick humor, which must be dissolved by concoction, which
is done in time and not suddenly; which vapor or thin humor, by a peculiar
virtue, does prick the Membrane of the Brain, and part where the Nerves begins,
causing a Constriction of the passages, and exciting the sensible parts to an
Expulsion of what is hurtful, thence is the shutting out and Retraction of the
sensique Spirits, and by a defect of them, follows a diminution, or cessation,
or abolition of the Actions of the mind, and thereby all the parts of the body
have a convulsive motion.

A cold and moist temper of the Body, hereditary Disposition, and the Nativity
being in the Eclipse of the Moon, are Dispositions to this Disease.

The external Causes are, 1. Things which administer matter, as gross and
vaporous meat, as old Pigeons, Sparrows, Eales, etc. 2. Things that excite it,
as Moonshine, the smell of stinking things, also great fear, and tickling.

Signs of the coming of it in children are because the Child is born of Parents
that have the Falling Sickness; in those that are elder, Pains of neck, back,
heart, fears, and inordinate motions in the sleep, often spitting.

Signs of the Paroxysme, and when it is upon the Child, are as 17. Matthew. a
noise crying out, falls in the fire, foames out of his mouth, and is without
sense, so was the Child cured by Christ in the Chapter aforesaid, but that
Child was Epileptick and possessed with a Devil, as one learnedly says, or as
another says, the Child was Epileptick, but the Disease made in him by the
Evil of the Devil. The froth in the mouth, is made, because the Spirits, and
Fume which come from the Lungs is mixed with the Spittle and Phlegm that comes
from the head, which moved and exagitated to and fro turns into froth, as the
Seawater agitated and broken with many winds. The Noise is a kind of Voice
made from the motive faculty, hurt and depraved.

Prog. This Disease in Children is the most acute Disease, and therefore
mortal, because of the straightness and narrowness of the Veins, that cannot
receive the gross Phlegm, and so it remains in the Brain, or because of the
moistness of the Brain, and the weakness of the motive faculty, the humor
cannot be dissolved or driven forth far enough out of the Ventricles of the
Brain.

2. Those that are once cured, are never again Epileptick, because the
expulsive faculty continually expells, gathering of humors the same way it did
when the Disease was removed, whereby it cannot be gathered into the Ventricles
to offend.

3. The Epilepsy which is by Error of Diet, is incurable of it self without
help.

4. The Falling Sickness which is from the Birth of the Child and his Parents,
is cured of its own accord without any rethe great humidity which is the cause
of this Disease is lessened by Age, and the faculties are stronger.

If it happen after the change of Age, that is after 25. years, it is most
difficult and impossible to cure, because then the faculties are strong, and
congenited moisture lessned, and cannot overcome the cause of the Disease,
which is very powerful and as it produces it can preserve the Disease; and
because the humors which makes the Episepsy, are Melancholy and dry, and so
difficult of themselves to be taken away, and daily increase by Age.

The Cure is, 1. A convenient Diet, which belongs to the Nurse, for a sucking
Child, and the same is to be used by a Child that does not suck; You are to
choose and prepare the Air to be hot and dry, they that live in cold Countries,
their Children are often Epileptick, use moderate sleep, for this Disease is as
it were asleep; avoid unseasonable exercises, fears, and frighting (which has
often brought the Disease) Bathes, and fullness are hurtful, so is much
fasting, it fills the head. So Wine hurts the Nerves, and is to be avoided, the
Drink is to be such that heats, but not hurting the head, the meat hot and
attenuating, which has cured many: but that which breeds gross humors, is
windy, and with a certain propriety offends the head, is to be avoided.

2. If the Child suck, and the Disease be by consent from the Stomach (which is
most frequent) being oppressed with too much Milk, let the Child suck seldom;
Or from the ill quality and sharpness of the Milk, correct the Milk and apply
this Plaster to the Stomach, Take of the Powder of Aloes and Myrrh, of each
half a Scruple, the Powder of Mastick one Scruple, and mingle them with a
little Wax and Rosine, and apply it to the mouth of the Child's Stomach. If it
be by the fault only in the head, which is most frequently, the use of Honey is
profitable. Take of Paeony half a Scruple, of the Leaves of Stocados and Betony
half a Pugill, Cyperus one Scruple, powder them finely, put of this Powder in a
little Spoon, and put it into the Child's mouth and presently give him the
Breast, that he may Swallow the Powder.

A Seton in the neck is very profitable, so is the following Powder sprinkled
upon the head: Take Maidenhair, Cypress, Iridis of each two Drams, Cloves one
Scruple, powder them finely and mix them. The whole body may be anointed with
Camomile and the oil of Iridis: Take the Leaves of Coltsfoot one handful, of
Oak, Misseltoe, half an Ounce, boil it according to Art, and dip a Cloth in
it, and wrap the child in the Cloth, it is much commended, Paeony and Smaradge
is much commended to be hung about the Child's neck that it may reach to the
Stomach.

If the Child be somewhat great, and the Epilepsy be by consent, and from other
parts sending a thin humor or vapor to the brain, Purge him as he is able to
suffer and alter the distemper of the part. If it be outwardly in the Arm,
Thigh, Hip, or other part, rubbing is good and a discutient Plaster applied to
the part, then if it will not do, Blister the part. If the Disease be by the
fault only of the head, use first this Clyster, Take of the lesser Centaury
half an handful, of Mallows one handful, of Bran tied in a Cloth half a
Pugill, boil them according to Art, Take of that Decoction 8 Ounces, of Honey
an Ounce and half, of Chamomile 2 Ounces and an half, of Salt, half a Dram;
mingle them and make a Clyster, then prepare the humors, Take of the Leaves of
Stocados, Betony, of each half a handful, the seed of Paeony one Dram, boil
them according to Art, Take of that Decoction 3 Ounces more or less, as the
Child's age will bear, of the Syrrup of Stocados and Oxymel, Simple, of each
half an Ounce, mingle. When the humors are prepared, then Purge; but although
this Disease require vehement remedies, yet they are not to be used, by reason
of the Age. Two Scruples of Pillulae Aureae are sufficient; or take of the
Trochische of Agarick two Drams, infuse it all night in two Ounces of
Betony-water, strain it hard, then add two Ounces of the Honey of Roses
solutive, the Electuary di Psillie one Dram, mingle and make a Potion: this
Disease many times appears not in two or three months and is very stubborn,
therefore for the perfect curing it, Take of Guyacum two Ounces, of the Water
of Betony two pints, infuse it 24. hours, and boil them to the consumption of
a third part, and in the end add two Drams of the seed of Paeony finely
powdered, of Oak Misselto one Dram and half, of Coriander-seed one Dram,
afterward Strain it and make a Syrrup of it, then take the same Guiacum and
put four pints of common water to it, and boil the fourth part away, and in
the end add two Ounces of Anniseed, and use it as ordinary drink, and give of
the Syrrup three or four Ounces every morning, continuing so 40. 50. or more
days; Blistering is good, so are Fontanells and Issues. There is no Disease
that has more remedies commended by Authors then this has, I shall content my
self with the following remedies, Take of the seed of Paeony and take Misseltoe
of each two Drams, Cardamums one dram, Cantharades prepared two Scruples,
Powder them and make an Electuary of them, of which half a Dram may be taken
three hours before meat: Take Coriander prepared, Mustard Seed, Nutmeg of each
half a Dram, the Seed of Paeony 7 Drams, Dictamnes 2 Drams, make a Powder of
them, and give the Child of it in the morning at your pleasure, in Wine that is
hot. A long use of Mithridate, with a Decoction of Paeony cures any Epilepsy as
some think, so does a little fine Mosche given twice or thrice a day: Take of
the Oil of Amber, the Spirit of Vitriol of each two or three Graynes, with the
water of Betony, and it presently frees the Child from the Fit.

CHAP. II. Of Convulsion.
CHildren often fall into a Convulsion by the weakness of the Nerves, plentiful
use of thick Milk, Crudities, and by breeding of Teeth.

The matter of it is the same as is in the Falling Sickness, and it is very
like to it, so that an Eminent Physician said a Convulsion was an Epilepsie of
a part, and an Epilepsy a Convulsion of the whole body, both being a
Contraction of the Muscles: but they differ one from another, because in an
Epilepsy the Internal and External senses are hurt; but in a Convulsion the
Brain is not so affected, and the sense is not lost: in the Epilepsy the matter
in the Muscles is quickly discussed, in the Convulsion not, which is only also
a contraction of the part, but the Epilepsy is a Convulsion of the whole body.

A Convulsion is a preternatural Contraction of one or many parts of the body:
If it be a Contraction of the Anteriour parts of the Neck toward, it is called
Emprostonos, or a Contraction of the parts before us; If the hinder parts
Opistotonos; if both the hinder and anterior parts are contracted, it is called
Tetanos.

The Cause of a Convulsion, by consent, is when the knawing or pricking of the
Mouth, or Stomach, or any other part, hurts the beginning of the Nerves.

The Cause of an essential Convulsion is either repletion or exiccation, for as
strings filled with too much humor, or are too much dried, they are contracted
and break, so it is with the Nerves, if they imbibe too much humor, they grow
broader and shorter, and so contract; and if to dry they shrink up. Repletion
is from a Phlegmatic humor; the exiccation and dryness, is from a great
peculiar Fever, which does not universally dry the whole body, but wast the
Nerves more then the flesh, and that violently; So that though a Hectic Fever
does very much dry the body, yet it produces no Convulsion, in regard the
dryness is made leisurely and easily in all parts, so that the Nerves are not
dried with any great vehemence. Some say that this dryness proceeds from any
immoderate evacuation, or things that vehemently heat and dry.

The External Causes are a moist Air, wherefore Children have the Convulsion
most often in the full of the Moon, the Air being the most moist, hurting the
Nerves of the Child, Watching, Fear, which making the Spirits retire, the
Nerves are contracted; Bathes, Costiveness, and binding of the Belly, Drinking
of strong Wine, Milk plentifully taken, or thick, crying, the ill Diet of the
Nurse, and from other parts.

Signs are manifest, if it be made by consent, it is in a moment; if by
essence, it is always; if from repletion, it is made suddenly, and in a small
time; if by dryness and inanition, it is caused by degrees, and in a longer
time.

Prog. The Convulsion that begins from the back is mortal.

2. Children that have the Convulsion perish for the most part before the
seventh day from their Nativity.

3. Convulsions in Children are more easily cured then in men, because their
humidity is Airy, and is easily overcome.

4. Convulsions from a perfect and consummated dryness is incureable, but that
which is not from a perfect dryness is cureable, which as the dryness is more
or less, is easier, or with more difficulty.

The Cure of a Convulsion from repletion and moisture, is the same as in an
Epilepsy. The Members and parts contracted are to be restored gently by hands
to its straightness, then anoint and rub the part with a convenient Oil, as
of Lillies or Cammomile; The Syrrup of Betony and Staecados, with the Spirit of
Black Cherries, may be used; Carduus Water is very good. If the Convulsion is
from dryness, the Cure is by moistning of the body by Diet, and Medicaments, a
Bath that is hot and moist is convenient; and anointing the part with the Oil
of sweet Almonds, sweet Butter, and such things that soften and moisten.

CHAP. III. Of a Palsy.
IN the two preceding Chapters were considered the depravation of Motion; in
this place the Abolition and diminution of motion will be discoursed of; not
abolition of the whole body, for Children are never troubled with a universal
Palsy and privation of sense and motion in the whole body, which is called an
Appoplexy, appears by experience and observation; and Apoplexies are made for
the most part from 40. years to 60.

Although Children have often the Falling Sickness, which has the same matter
and part affected, as the Apoplexy, and differs from an Apoplexy, because it is
a Privation of motion, and an Epilepsy the Depravation: Nevertheless a Child is
not troubled with the Apoplexy, not because it proceeds from a Melancholy
humor, as some think, which a Child has not, which is untrue; for a Child may
have a Quartan Ague, which is caused by Melancholy, as you may see in the
Chapter of Fevers; but because the matter in the Epilepsy is not so thick, as
that which makes the Apoplexy, being only Phlegm, besides the Phlegm of
Children is Airy and flatulent; Moreover the expulsive faculty of the Brain is
strong in Children, so that it more effectually expells the humor, that it
stop not the Ventricles of the Brain, which happens not in those Ages in which
the humor is thick and less flatulent, and the expulsive faculty more weak.

A Numness and Palsy, is a distemper of the same kind, and differ only in
degree, for a Numness is but as it were an imperfect Palsy, and a Palsy is as
it were a certain great Numness.

The cause is a pituitous humor which by coldness and moistness thickens and
obstructs the Nerves, that they cannot receive the animal Spirits, or Influence
of thea nimal faculty; and as this obstruction and condensation of the nerves
and ways of the faculties is more or less, so it makes numnesse or weak motion
or want of motion. In a Palsy there is no motion because the ways of the
faculties are totally stopped, in a numnesse they are not stopped completely,
therefore the faculty operates, and there is a weak motion.

The external causes are compressions by falls, blows, binding tumors or
other causes which can compresse and condensate the nerves that a free ingresse
of the faculty is hindered.

Signs, if a part is affected with the Palsy it cannot move, and is called the
Dead Palsy; if with numnesse, the party can move but weakly and with
difficulty. If the Disease be in the Spinalis medulla the Arms and all the
inferior parts are hurt; if the right part of it is affected, all the parts on
the right side, if the left, the left parts. If in the Osse sacro the parts
above it are well and the parts inferior to it are hurt.

Prog. every Palsy especially that which is inveterate is difficult to cure in
Children but numnesse is more easy to cure.

If a Fever or trembling comes upon a Palsy or numnesse it is very helpful,
for the Fever dissolves the matter of the Disease and the trembling drives the
same matter from the nerves.

The Cure is the same as in the Epilepsy and Convulsion, and greater remedies
are to be used to the Palsy then Numnesse: Take of Earth, worms a large
quantity, burn them in a clean pot, afterward let them be powdered, take of
that powder half a pound, of Ginger and and Galangle of each half an Ounce,
make a Liniament of them with clarified honey with which annoint the Child three
nights, binding his Arm upon his Belly and covering well the Child, and beware
that the Child is not exposed to the cold unto the third day; and so in three
days the Child will be cured either of the Palsy or Convulsion as diverse affirm.

CHAP. IV. Of Childrens dreaming and troubled Sleep.
THe consideration of the chief Diseases belonging to motion, being past, it
follows in the next place to consider the Distempers of the common sense, which
in Children are Dreams and immoderate Watching.

Children never sleep moderately, for they are oppressed with sleep in the womb
and after they are born they sleep for the most part, because the infant is
mindful of the perpetual sleep he had in the Womb and because his body is very
moist, not only by the abounding with humors, but by the sollid parts being
moist and soft, the want whereof in old men and their having sollid and dry
parts of their heads (though they abound with humors) makes them most
watchful. 2. But this sleep is natural, but when sleep which should be for the
restoring of the spirits and natural heat consumed by watching, is unquiet,
troubled and terrifying, this is a distemper hapenning to Children here
intended. Disturbed sleep is an effect in the kind of depraved actions of the
Common sense.

This distemper in an infant is like to the Incubus or Nightmare in these that
are elder, and as that foreruns an Apoplexy, so terrifying dreams are Signs of
an Epilepsy and other ill Diseases.

The internal cause is a corrupted meat in the Stomach, they are made in
Children by the debility of the Stomach, (from which arises sad Fantasies, for
as men are sad and troubled as often as the Stomach is grieved) and the notable
sense of the mouth of it; the manner of it is this, Melancholy arises out of
the corrupted meat of the Stomach whose Phantasmes are carried to the
Imagination which they necessarily deter and consequently make terrifying
Dreams, which are the operations of the Imaginations about Phantasmes offered
from the senses.

The external cause is milk or meat corrupted, and by its acrimony knawing the
mouth of the Stomach.

Signs are the groaning of Children, shaking, crying out of Children in their
sleep, an unnatural color and heat and a stinking breath, by which many are
deceived and think they have the worms.

The Cure is, if the Milk be bad from the constitution of the Nurse change her,
if from diet, correct it, if it be good, it is vitiated and corrupted in the
Stomach by the plenty of it, therefore let the Child suck less. If the Child
suck not, let him not eat too much nor bad meat, and remove what is corrupted
in the Stomach, to this end the giving of honey to Children is commended because
it clenses the Stomach and Guts. A Suppository is convenient, so is a Clyster;
Take of whey six or eight Ounces, of Honey an Ounce and half, Salt a scruple;
mingle them and make a Clister. If the Child be somewhat big Hiera Pietra may
be used which wonderfully clears the Stomach, which being done, the Stomach is
to be comforted with half a Scruple of the powder called Diamosce, or as much
of London Treacle, may be used by the Child; or take of the Species of
Diamoschi one Scruple, of Diacalamint one Scruple and half, Sugar and Rosewater
as much as suffices to make them into small Lozenges, one whereof powdered may
be given every morning in Milk and suck presently after it. If the Child is
weaned, give it powdered in Broth or Milk.

Outwardly Ointments comforts the Stomach, anoint it with the oil of
Wormwood, Mint, Nutmegs, or Mastick, and Bathings made of Wormwood, Roses, and
Wine and Plasters also comfort it. It is convenient to hang red Coral about
the Child's neck which comforts the Stomach by a secret quality if it touch it
outwardly.

CHAP. V. Of immoderate watching of Children.
THe want of sleep in Children is very hurtful, being contrary to their nature,
who by the greatest and most large sleep, are not made sick; and being used to
sleep much, it causes sharp humors, alters the temper of the brain it makes
Fevers and Crudities, and weakens Children.

The cause is not dryness, as in men but the corruption of the Milk and meat
in the Stomach, from which sharp vapors ascend to the brain and offending the
Membrane hinder sleep. If the vapors are thick and ascend not to the brain,
then only sad Phantasme which only moves the Imagination and causes troubled
Dreams are made, but not watchings.

The Signs are manifest, they continually cry, mourn, and sleep not.

Prog. The want of sleep is an evil and hurtful, and in Children, because it
is contrary to their nature.

The Cure is in taking care the milk and meat be good in quantity and quality,
as in the preceding Chapter, let the Nurse use meats that are very good and
apt to cause sleep, as Lettice, sweet Almonds and the like, avoiding strong
Wine; let the Child be kept clean and washed, and change the Child's Linen,
which often causes sleep and whilst he cries appease him by motion, singing,
or giving the Child Suck, foment and anoint the Stomach with the Oils in the
preceding Chapter let the feet be washed with a decoction of Mallows, anoint
the feet with the Marrow of the bones of a Heart, anoint the Temples with the
Oil of Violets, or Juice of Poppies. Some use the Confection of Requies
Nichelai, and Sirrup of Poppies, when there is great necessity, but they are
not to be used often, for they stupifie and dull the brain of the Child.

CHAP. VI. Of the Inflammation of the Head.
IN regard the Diseases of the Sight and Hearing in Children have nothing
peculiar to them from the same Diseases in men, they are here omitted, and the
Diseases belonging to the natural faculty of the Head considered.

This Disease is called by a Word derived from another Greek word, which the
Latins interpret a Hole, because the Head is perceived as it were excavated and
made hollow, in the former part of the Head; it is called by some the heat and
burning of the head.

It is an Inflammation of the parts about the Brain and the Membranes.

The Cause is a humor, whilst it putrifies, it does resemble the nature of
Choler, not that it is true pure Choler, because it cannot be imagined how
heat, before the Disease or in it, can make the most hot humor (as Choler is)
in the head that is moist and almost water nor pure Phlegm, because it is cold
and moist, and the humidities of Children are hot, therefore old men wax gray,
because they abound with Phlegm; Children not, because they abound not with
Phlegm that is cold and moist.

The External causes are a very hot Air, blows, falls, Milk that is very hot,
by the Nurses using hot drinks; Milk has the power of making one drunk, and
one observes well, tender Kids of Goats are made mad with Milk, and there is no
doubt but the tender Brain of Children are much offended by the Milk of Nurses.

The Signs are, the Hole and cavity of the Anterior part of the head, because
the heat of the Inflammation dries the Brain, which being dry, the Skull is
deprest, and sunk with its own weight and makes a hollownesse of the eyes; by
the same cause is a heat of the whole body and dryness, continual Fever,
palenesse of Countenance, weakness, loss of Appetite, want of sleep, and a
looseness of the Belly.

Prog. This Disease is very dangerous in Children, because they are more easily
extenuated by their heat, it is wont to kill in three days, afterward there is
hopes, the Disease declines, and the strength increases.

The Cure is in 1. Diet, let the Nurse drink only water, and use such Meats
which greatly cool, as Ptisan, and Barley Broth, with the Emulsions of the Seeds
of Poppy-Broths, with Lettice and Endive; the Nurse and Child are to be kept in
a cold Air, in great quiet of mind and body. Purges are unprofitable or
hurtful, but if the Child be costive, his belly may be loosned with a common
Suppository, or this Clyster: Take of Barley water Three Ounces, of Whey Five
Ounces, red Sugar half an Ounce, mingle them. Outwardly use two Ounces of the
Oil of Roses, with the Yelk of an Egg, it mitigates pain, concocts and
dissolves the humor; the Juice of Lettice, Pomkins, and Melons, the flesh
whereof may be pounded, and the Juice pressed out, and the Leaves of Lettice
steeped in it, and laid upon the head, or a Cloth dipped in the Juice. These
Medicaments are often to be changed, lest by staying too long on the head, they
heat, and dry, and hurt as much as help; and in the Winter they are to be laid
on lukewarm; in the Summer cold: Nor is it safe to exceed these cold remedies,
and use the coldest, lest the temper of the Brain is destroyed.

When the Inflammation is appeased, then leave the use of the cooling remedies,
and use discussive ones; and first such as are gentle, the yelk of an Egg, of
Oil of Cammomile two Ounces, mingle them; afterward a stronger discutient,
Take the Flowers of Cammomile, the Leaves of Pennyroyal and Dill, Bran tied in
a Cloth half a Pugill, boil them according to Art, then take half a pint of the
said Decoction, the Oil of Cammomile and Anniseed, of each an Ounce, shake them
well together, and apply them warm to the Head.

CHAP. VII. Of the running at the Nose, Cough, and difficult Breathing.
THe running at the Nose, Cough, and difficult Breathing in Children, are the
effects and issue of a Distillation, which as some observe, is the mother of
all Evil, and is a desluxion of a petuitous humor, into the parts subjected;
if the matter flows to the Nose, it is called the Pose and running at the
Nose; if it descends to the breast, and is expelled by the Spirit that goes
out, it is called a Cough, but if the same matter falls upon the Lungs, and
stops the ways of the Spirit, and oppresses the body of the Lungs, it produces
a difficulty in breathing; this matter seldom makes hoarsness in Children,
because sucking Children by their daily use of Milk, cleanses the Phlegm that
it does not stick about the Jaws; in those that are elder, hoarsnesse is
seldom, because they are hot about the Jaws; which dryes up the Phlegm.

These Distempers are Symptoms and effects of a very moist Brain, sometimes
cold, because Infants draw Air more cold then they were used to, which cools
the Brain; and it is sometimes hot by its natural temper, which is very hot, by
Air that is hot, Fire, Smoke, too hot clothing of the head, and the gluttony
and intemperance of the Nurse.

The Signs are manifest of the Cough, Poze, and difficulty of Breathing; if
they come from a hot cause, the Child sneezes often, the color of the
countenance of the Child is florid and red, the Jaws are red, and whilst the
Child sucks, the Breasts are heated, that the Nurse perceives the heat. If from
a cold cause, there is seldom sneezing, no change of the Color of the
Countenance, no heat perceived in the mouth.

Prog. These Distempers are not dangerous if they be not neglected, otherwise
they produce Broken Bellies, and other Diseases, and often Death.

The Cure is 1. in Diet, let the Air be temperate without Excess, avoid Wine,
and Meats that are windy and gross, and such as fly to the head, as Spice,
and meats prepared with them; If the matter is cold, a little Spice and hot
meats may be allowed, but sparingly, for all which fly to the head are apt to
attenuate and loosen both the cold and hot matter, which causes these
Distempers and many others. 2. Evacuating and diverting the humor, by loosning
the Belly of the Child by a Clyster or Suppository, or by a Vomit, which is
very good to evacuate the Phlegm; which you may do by dipping your finger in
Honey, and pressing down the Tongue of the Child; also to evacuate the matter,
Take of the Honey of Violets one Ounce, of the Powder of Ocymi one dram, mingle
it, and put it in the Mouth of the Infant, and then give him the Breast; in a
cold cause Mirrh and Honey are commended. In a hot cause, Take one dram of the
Seed of White Poppy, of Tragacanthy half a Dram, of the Seed of a Goard three
Drams, bruise them all, and with a Decoction of Sobestens, make a Liquor; or
you may powder them, and take half a Scruple, and mingle them with a little
honey of Violets and give it the Infant to lick. If the Breath be difficult with
the Cough, use the Syrrup of Hyssop, in the place of the Honey of Violets. It is
also convenient to keep the Breast of the Child easy, and not straight, that
it may dilate, wherefore anoint the Breast and Back with the Oil of sweet
Almonds, which is also good if it be swallowed, and taken inwardly.

CHAP. VIII. Of the pain and humidity of the Ears.
THe pain of the Ears, is reckoned by all Physicians amongst the Diseases of
Children. It is a grievous sense which vehemently affects the parts about the
passage of hearing, which is very sharp, in regard the inward parts of the Ear
are very nerveous. Note, the outward part of the ear is fleshy and
cartilaginous.

The humidities of the ears are reckoned amongst Childrens Diseases by some,
but not the humidities of the Nose or Palate, because the Expurgation by the
Nose and Palate is natural to men and Children, but the expurgation by the Ears
is not natural. The Cause of it is the great humidity of the Brain, which
cannot be all evacuated by the Mouth and Palate, so that excrementitious
humors which abound are evacuated by all Passages; wherefore many will not
dry up this humidity, unless it ulcerate, or threaten obstruction, or
deafness.

The Cause of the pain in the ear, are the humors, especially Choler,
Ichorous matter, Wind, or Worms.

Prog. The Pain of the Ear is very dangerous.

The Cure is, 1. The mitigation of the Pain, with luke warm milk, or Water, and
the Oil of Roses mixed, and a Cloth dipped in it, and laid upon the Ear, a
Decoction of the heads of Poppy, and as the Causes of the Pain are, so ought
remedies to be for the taking them away; If the pain is from hot humors, the
part is red and hot, and cured by cold things; if from cold, by lukewarm
things; if from Wind, the Diet ought to be such as discusses Wind, for which
purpose Coriander is good for the Nurse to use, and that the Child sleep upon
the ear which pains him, thereby natural heat is augmented, and dissipates the
Wind, the Oil of Cammomile or Anniseeds poured into the Child's ear is very
good; if the pain be from an Ichorous matter, wipe and cleanse continually the
Ear with Honey, or Honey and water; if from Worms, put into the Ear bitter things
that kill the Worms, as the Oil of bitter Almonds. See the Chapter of Worms.

If there be humidity of the Ears, and the Child old enough to be purged, let
him take three days this drink, Take of the Leaves of Mirtles, Bettony,
Staecados, Violets, of each half a handful, let a Decoction be made according
unto Art, then take thereof two Ounces and an half, of the Syrrup of Wormwood
and Staecados, of each two drams, mingle them; afterward purge the head thus,
Take of the Pills of Agarick half a dram, of Castor one grain, two Cloves,
mingle them, and with the Honey of Roses solutive, make five little Pills. The
head being purged for the drying up of the humidity, if it be cold, infuse into
the Ears the Oil of Irnie or Rue. If hot, the Oil of Roses with the Oil of
Cammomile. Observe in the use of remedies, that they be always lukewarm when
you use them, neither hot nor cold; not in a great quantity, but by drops, and
that the Child lie on the Ear that pains; and observe the moisture flowing out
of the Ears is not to be stopped.

CHAP. IX. Of the inflammation of the Glandules in the mouth, called the Almonds
of the Ears.
THe Inflammation of these Glandules is reckoned by some amongst Childrens
Diseases, but only in Children after breeding of Teeth. Others say this
Disease may be in Infants, but in them it would then be very mortal by the
plentiful flowing of humors, which often strangles. If the Gums, are inflamed
in Infants, and the Glandules ulcerated before breeding of Teeth, why may they
not be inflamed, what should hinder that an infant may not have this disease
sometime, and not be choked? as I conceive;

The inflammation of these Glandules, is an Intumescency of them made by a flux
of humors.

The internal cause are all the humors especially Phlegm.

The external causes are a hot or extreme cold Air, violent exercises hanging
down the head vociferations, strong drink and meat that heat the blood.

The Signs are, if the mouth be opened, heat, pain, redness, and Swelling
near the root of the Tongue, difficulty in breathing and swallowing.

Prog. This Disease usually causes the Quinzey and inflammation of the Lungs,
and diverse other dangerous Diseases.

2. If a looseness of the belly happen upon this Disease, the Flux cures it.

The Cure is 1. in a good Diet, avoiding any excess of the air, smoke, the
Sun, all exercises of the body, vehement motions of the mind, especially anger,
bathing; if the belly be bound, move it with a gentle Clyster or suppository,
not by a remedy at the mouth, for it is dangerous; abstain from wine and use
Barley water with the Juice of Granates and Mulberries and Quinces, let the meat
be such as may be supt, as Barley Broth, bread boiled in broth with the Juice of
the Seeds of Limmon, the Yelks of Eggs in broth, with the Juice of Granates. 2.
In revulsion of the humor, by daily rubbing Ligatures, especially
Cupping-glasses applied to the Loins and lower parts, not the upper parts, lest
it draw the humor to the part affected. 3. Repelling the humor by cooling and
astringing remedies, as the Sirrup of Mulberry, Granate, Myrtle, with Barley
water, Rose water, Plantain or Oak-bud water, and wash the mouth with it, to
which purpose may be red Roses powdered finely and other astringent powders. 3.
Dissipating and evacuating the humor with remedies that by a moderate heat
attenuate and turns the matter into a wind, Take the leaves of Dill, Flowers of
Camomile, of each half a handful, of Bran half a Pugill, the leaves of
Marjarome, six Drams of Common water a pint and an half, boil it according to
Art, strain it and add three ounces of clarified Honey, gargarize with it being
Lukewarm.

If the matter cannot be discust but it begins to ripen help it with anointing
the neck with the Oil of Almonds, or by applying a plaster of Diachilon: The
ripening of it is helped inwardly by the roots of Mallows or Figs boiled, and
Gargarizing and washing the mouth with it.

CHAP. X. Of the Soreness of the mouth.
THe Ulcers of the mouth in Children are Ulcers of the Superficies of the
mouth, (that is the whole internal part of the mouth) with a fiery heat.

They are easily caused in Infants, by reason of the tenderness and softness
of the Palate of Children, they being unaccustomed to meat being newly born, and
by their greediness and sucking more then they can digest, wherefore it is a
great fault in Nurses, that whenever the Child cries to quiet them with
giving the Breast, for it is a rule amongst Physicians, that milk should not be
given not above three or four times in a day.

The cause is whatsoever is corroding or accrimonious or sharp, whether the
humors of the body, meat or medicaments. In Children they are chiefly caused
by the sharpness and corruption of the Milk, whereby ill vapors are sent from
the Stomach into the mouth.

The external causes are whatsoever may heat the head of the Child, as the air
being hot, the use of hot meats, immoderate exercises, and drinking of strong
Wine.

The Signs are Swallowing with pain and difficulty, if they are malignant they
for the most part follow ill and pestilentiall Fevers, besides they are fetid,
black or livid, causing pain, and are profound. If benign and not malignant,
they are without a Swelling or profoundity. If from blood, they are hot and
red. If from Phlegm, they are less hot, less painful, and are white. If they
are made by Melancholy, they are blackish and dark colored.

Prog. All Ulcers of the mouth are hard to cure, because the Medicament cannot
conveniently adhere, but those that are black, stinking profound and very
painful are very dangerous and is a most miserable and horrid death, of them
which dye and are consumed by this Disease.

The Cure, if the Ulcers are benign they are cured by altering the temper and
cicatrizing with cooling and astringing remedies: If the milk be bad change the
Nurse or correct the Milk by diet and purging the Nurseas has bin shown; the
Ulcers are healed with Honey of Mulberries, or Sirrup of Pomegranates, Mirtles
or Red Roses dried, with which the Nurse dipping her finger is to touch the
Ulcers, and if they be contumacious, mingle a little powdered Alum, with the
Sirrup of Mulberries, for the Powder of Alum hinders the spreading of the
Ulcer, and without any notable pain.

If the Child is somewhat great, the diet ought to be cooling, and meats that
may be sucked, is to be used, as Broths and Eggs with Broth or Verjyce. If the
Ulcers are great commonly causing inflammations and drawing of the humors,
Cuppingglasses applied to the Loins are convenient, and to evacuate by them
what the age and constitution of the body will permit then purge Gently; the
Medicaments to be applied to the Ulcers are the same as in Infants, or make a
decoction of Millefoyle, or Plantain, with Red Roses, Sanders, and take of it
four Ounces and mix with it an Ounce of the Sirrup of Mulberries, wash the
mouth with it.

In Malignant Ulcers in Infants, Take of the Scordiuum finely powdered one
Dram, of the rind and Pill of Pomegranes, finely powdered two Scruples, burnt
Alum one Scruple, Honey as much as will suffice. If the Child is somewhat great,
the use of the Juice of Granates (especially sour) is good. If this is not
effectual, use Aqua Magistralis Aluminis Unguentum Egyptiacum, or the Flower
of bra^s corrected with a little Sirrup of Mulberries These are not to be used
but in great necessity, because the Palate has two broad ways one to the
Lunges and another to the Stomach, and therefore it is dangerous any venomous
medicine should come thither, wherefore it is better to use remedies in such a
form as cannot go further then the Palate; as when the Ulcers of the mouth are
touched with the Oil of Sulphur or Sublimate water, which is an excellent
remedy against all inveterate Ulcers: Take of sublimated Mercury twelve Grains,
the water of Roses and Plantain of each eight Ounces, boil them to the
consumption of a half part; the use of it is that the Ulcer of the mouth be
touched with one drop, which if it cause a considerable pain then mitigate the
pain with Milk that has Steel quenched in it.

CHAP. XI. Of the Ranula of the Tongue.
THis Disease is an Inflamatory humor of the parts under the tongue and
especially of the Veins in Children, for the Veins under the tongue being with
a petuitous blood, sometimes Melancholy, which is sweat out, or goes out of the
mouth of the Veins, into the Passages of the flesh, and there being collected,
the humor is elevated into a Tumor or Swelling, which is called Ranula. It
sometimes resembles a soft Aedema, which being opened, a white matter, like to
the white of an Egg, flows from it.

The Cause is a petuitous blood, or as some say, a petuitous humidity.

The Signs are manifest to Sight, there appears a Tumor, with great pain and
heat, and a hinderance of Speech, the color of the humor is as it were mixed,
of the color of the Tongue and Veins.

Prog. This Tumor if it be neglected is dangerous, it sometimes makes a
Fever, and suffocates Children.

The Cure is by a cooling and astringing Diet, in using Vinegar, Verjuice,
Limons, and the like with meat. Clysters are convenient; Purges by the Mouth
are hurtful. If the Child is somewhat large, Cupping-glasses applied to the
Thighs are convenient, so are Friction and Ligatures; after, Astringents are
good; Salt of Armoniacum rubbed upon the part is commended by all, Maryroom
rubbed upon the part, stronger then it, are Flower of Brass, Allume burnt,
Sponge and Tragacanthum burnt. If these cure it not, the Tumor must be cut off
at the Roots, for sometimes the humor is in a Coat, which if it be not taken
away, the humor returns; after the Cutting of the humor, stay the blood with
salt, powder of Mirtles, Totmentil, or Bistorte, then Cure it with Myrrh, and
drying things that cures wounds.

CHAP. XII. Of Dentition and breeding of Teeth.
THE generation and perfection of Teeth, is the work and intent of Nature, but
in regard the matter out of which they are made, suffers not that this Work can
be done without trouble and pain; It causes that a Disease follows the
generating of Teeth, which Disease is not intended by Nature.

Dentition is an Eruption or breaking forth of Teeth, first conceived in their
proper holes. It is said by some, to be a violent work of Nature, and the gums
are as it were pricked with needles whereby great pain is caused, and a
supernatural heat in those parts is excited, which draws the humors thither
which are made putrid, salt and sharp in those parts, and being precipitated to
the Stomach and guts strongly excites the expulsive faculty, and consequently
causes loosnesse, and sometimes Dysenteries.

Bones and Teeth are the same according to kind and matter, but differ in
Species and name. The difference of Bones and Teeth in their nature and
particular beings, appears, 1. Teeth are made after the Birth of a Child, all
other Bones before grow to a certain time and have no sense, and never are
renewed, but Teeth grow during the whole life, have an acute sense and grow
again. It Is observed, that amongst the Bones the Teeth only cannot be consumed
by fire: Nevertheless they are corrupted, and consumed by a putrid Phlegm;
besides Teeth have no marrow and fat as other Bones have, and therefore they
are the most hard body: They are corrupted with hot things, as by washing them
with warm water, but preserved by moderate cold, as by washing them with cold
water, nor are they hurt by an actual extraordinary cold (for in Frost they are
not troubled) but by a cold that is potential, because Teeth have but a little
heat, and cannot resist a great cold.

Teeth were made for the breaking of hard meat, for speaking, and
distinguishing of Tastes, and therefore they have soft Nerves in them; and
although Histories relate several have been born with Teeth, yet for the most
part they break forth in Children about the 7th. month, sometimes sooner, as in
them which use more hot milk. They are very slow in some, sometimes to the
Third or fourth year, either by weakness or the fault of the matter of the
Teeth, (being not sufficiently glutinous and earthy) or by a privation of
matter by Worms, or a loosnesse, in the seventh year Teeth fall out, and others
grow in their places, growing of Teeth continues until fourteen years, and
afterward very few grow, unless they be those called Posteriores Gemini,
which sometimes grow at 80 years. The sooner Teeth come forth, the less pain;
but they are the weaker; Teeth come forth in the Spring and Summer more easily,
but with worse Symptoms and effects, in the Winter with more difficulty, but
with less danger, for they are less troubled with a Fever Looseness, or
Vomit, because their inward heat is more strong. But a modern Author says, that
in every time of the year, some are more troubled, some less, according to the
natural constitution of Children, which the times of the year cannot hinder.
The Teeth are of an equal number in men and women, being 32. The Cutting Teeth
which are four above and below, grow first, which are made of a thin matter,
and as they are made first so weaker, and are broke, fall out sooner then the
rest; the next are the Teeth called Dogs Teeth, whose use is to break the meat,
as to cut is before breaking, so the Teeth that cut are first, afterward the
Teeth that break the meat, afterward the great and grinding Teeth grow, whose
matter is more hard and earthy, and therefore they break out the more slowly,
and last of all the Gemini, which never are renewed and grow again. Hence it
appears why the breeding of Teeth causes so many evils, if they should grow in
the Womb they would not be troublesome, but growing after the Birth of the
Child, and in that time when the Gums are most soft, which being bruised and
crushed by a hard body as the Bone is, causes great pain.

The Signs are the Child's crying, loosnesse, pinching the Paps whilst they
suck, the Inflammation, and heat of their mouths, and when their Gums are
rubbed, they are eased.

Prog. The breeding of Teeth is always dangerous by reason of the great and
grievous Symptoms and effects it produces, as Convulsions, Fevers, and other
evils. If the Child is loose he is less troubled with Convulsions, and fat
Children more than lean; yet there may be Convulsions by the sharpness of
pain. If the Child has an acute Fever there is seldom Convulsions by
fullness, it being remedied by the Fever. Teeth come forth more slowly most
commonly, with a little Cough, because there is a defluxion in the mouth, which
argues the weakness of the brain.

The Cure is, in a cold diet of the Nurse, and the pap kept cool, which much
refreshes the Child; the Child is not to eat any hard meat, and the Gums are to
be cooled and relaxed; the Juice of Mallows and Lettice cools. Take the Juice
of Mallows, half an Ounce, of Butter, washed in Mallow-water half one Ounce,
half the yelke of an egg, mingle and anoint the Gums with it; this that
follows is stronger. Take of the Juice of Nightshade half an Ounce, of the
Oil of Roses, six Drams, of Butter washed in Lettice-water three Drams, mingle
them and anoint the Gums with it, it being cold, rubbing the Gums with your
finger, for it often mitigates pain.

The Gums are relaxed by things that are fat, as all fat of a Hen, and c. Oil
of Almonds, and the Brains of a Hare boiled, in the place whereof may be the
brains of a Hen; Honey boiled is much commended. It is conceived by some that
the breeding of Teeth is the more easy by hanging about the neck, Corral, a
Jaspis-stone, or the Root of wild Colothwiths, which others think
superstitious.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Hiccough.
CHildren are more chiefly affected with Diseases in the lower Venture, in three
parts, the Stomach, Bladder, and Guts, which follow in their order.

The Hiccough is a motion like to a Convulsion, in which the Stomach endeavor
to expel what is hurtful infixt in the mouth of it.

The cause is in Children the plenty or quality of the Milk or nourishment
being too cold, sharp, or corroding vehemently irritating the expulsive faculty
sometimes but rarely it comes from emptiness.

The external causes are a cold Air, hot and sharp meats as Pepper.

The Signs are manifest, for as the Proverb is Love and the Hiccough cannot be
hid; if it is from fulness the Child is greedy and Vomits, if from cold, it
is known by the Nurses using cold meats and external injuries that preceeded
it, if the Child's Stomach is fomented with hot Clothes it ceases presently, if
from evacuation, fasting, flux or vomit preceeded it, if from acrimony the
meats are corrupted or the milk is sharp and biting, and the Child often mourns
and grieves, and there are pains of the Belly, besides the Ordure shows it.

Prog. The Hiccough in Children for the most part is safe, if it be made from
emptiness it is mortal for Children which are naturally full and very moist, if
they are vehemently dried by a great cause they are hardly restored.

If a Hiccough be with the Fallingsicknesse, or another kind of Convulsion it
is Mortal.

The Cure is, if the Hiccough be from 1 cold, use hot things inwardly and and
outwardly, Take the Syrrup of Mint or Betony outwardly, the Oil of Anniseed,
Chamomile, and Wormwood, besides Plasters and Ointments that are hot, and set
forth in several Chapters. 2. Plenty or quality of Milk, correct it as is
showed in several Chapters; and if it be from the Acrimony of the Milk, let the
Child use a little quantity of this, Take of Saccharum Rosatum half an Ounce,
of Bole Armenick half a Scruple, mingle them. If from Evacuation the same
remedies are good, as are for Leanness from Evacuation, see the Chapter of
Leanness; Bathing with sweet Water, and Broth is good in elder Children, the
Yelks of Eggs, and all Meats that easily nourish. It is related by some, that
the Herb called Alyssus, held in the hand, looked upon, or smelled to, cures
the Hiccough by Propriety of Substance. Others say, that Sneezing, and holding
the Breath, cures all Hiccoughs: but these Helps are too difficult for Children
and Infants, Sneezing and Vomiting because they evacuate the matter, is
commended.

CHAP. XIV. Of Vomiting, and a vain desire of Vomiting.
BEsides the Hiccough, the vain desire of Vomiting, and Vomiting happens to
Children, for the matter that troubles the Stomach, is either infixed deeply in
the mouth of the Stomach, and so makes a Hiccough, or infixed, but not
profoundly, and either in the Mouth or Tunicles of the Stomach, whence it is a
vain desire of Vomiting, or else the matter is contained in the Space of the
Stomach, and so makes a Vomiting.

The Causes of Vomiting, or a vain desire of Vomiting in Children, are, The
humidity and laxity of the Stomach, the plenty of cold humors falling from the
head, the plenty of Milk or Meat, the Acrimony and coldness of the same Milk.

The External causes are, a bad Air, stinck, or an ill taste, the use of Oily
and fat things.

The Signs of Vomiting are manifest; it is known, if it be from 1. Coldness, by
the cold Diet of the Nurse preceding it, and the help from hot things: Besides
the Milk is kept some time; if the Stomach be cold, it presently rejects the
Milk. 2. Acrimony, then Children languish, and are afflicted before and after
Vomiting. 3. Plenty, then Vomiting eases, evacuating the cause of Laxity.

Prog. Vomiting, which is from taking more then the Stomach is able to bear,
and Vomiting only that which offended, and retaining and correcting the rest,
the Child is not sick, but more cheerful, the Stomach being strong, and the
fault only in the quantity of the Milk.

2. Vomiting immediately only what is taken, if it continue, causes a
Consumption and Death.

The Cure is, The Milk is to be corrected by lessening the quantity of it in
suckling the Child, and altering by purging and correcting the temper of the
Nurse, as is directed in several Chapters. If the fault be in the Child's
Stomach, by the weakness of it, Cloves or Coriander chewed by the Nurse, and
instill it into the Mouth of the Child, sometimes alone, sometimes with the
Syrrup of Mirtles, Quince or Granates is commended. Outwardly apply the
Plaster called Emplastrum de Crusta Panis; or take the Oil of Mirtles two
drams of the Juice of unripe Grapes, or one dram and an half, red Wine one
dram, boil them to the Consumption of the Wine, then add Mastick, Mirrh,
Acaciae and Frankinsense of each half a dram, Wax and refine as much as will
susfice to a soft Plaster, let the Child wear this constantly above the
Stomach.

CHAP. XV. Of the unvoluntary pissing of Children.
INvoluntary pissing, or not holding of the Water, in Children is more familiar
to them then those that are elder, because Children are rather governed by
their appetite then will, and cannot hold their water longer, but this
Incontinency of Urine is not here intended, it being not a Disease; but the
involuntary pissing here meant, is an Affection preternatural, by which
Children are forced and involuntarily make water at all times.

The cause is in Children, an Imbecility, and cold, and moist temper of the
Muscle of the Bladder called Sphincter, proceeding from pituitous and thick
humors; Sometimes the resolution of the Sphincter, the motive faculty being
not sent to it, by reason of the obstruction of the Nerves, especially about
the Spinal Marrow from the like humor.

The External Causes are the coldness of Air, and Meat, drinking of cold water,
blows about the Back, and falls.

The Signs are, elder Childrens wetting of their Clothes, their inward garments
being always wet with piss; but in Children newly born, it is hard to know
whither in an often sucking, an often pissing is involuntary, and that Age
gives no testimony of voluntary pissing.

Prog. Involuntary pissing is more hard to Cure if it come from an obstruction,
then cold and moisture. If it comes from an External Cause it is mortal,
especially from a fall or Luxation.

The Cure is in, 1. By a Diet which is hot and dry, as you have in several
Chapters; you are to abstain from meats that move Urine. 2. The Belly loosned
by a Clyster or Suppository; use this Syrrup, Take of the Leaves of Calamint,
Plantane, and Mint, of each half a handful, the Seeds of Rue, two drams, boil
them according to Art. Take of the Syrrup of Purslane, Red Roses, and Wormwood,
of each half a dram, mingle them together. After the humors are prepared,
purge with two Scruples of Pill Hiera cum Agarico: or, Take of Mirabuline,
Chebuline one dram, of the Seed of Rue half a dram, of the Flowers of Violets
and Roses of each half a Pugil, boil them according to Art. Take thereof three
Ounces, Trochische of Agarick two Scruples and an half, infuse it all night,
then press it, and add the Syrrup of Roses Solutive, two Ounces; the body
being purged, outward remedies are to be used, as Baths which heat, dry, and
are binding; it is good to anoint the Loins and Parts nearest to the Bladder
with the Oil of Wormwood, or the Oil of Worms; foment those parts with this,
Take of Calamint, Mint, Rue, Marjerome, red Roses, of each an handful;
Galengal, and Cyprus, of each two drams, boil them in red Wine according to
Art. If these will not prevail, then Blisters will be useful. Diverse remedies
are propounded by Authors, that are supposed by a Propriety to cure this
Distemper, as the Brain and Testicles of a Hare burnt and given to drink in
White Wind, the Bladder of a Sheep or Sow used in the like manner; and diverse
others.

CHAP. XVI. of the Strangury and Suppression of Urine.
THe difficulty of Urine is either when that no Urine is made, which is called
Ischury, or when the Urine is made by Drops, which is called a Strangury, both
which distempers differ only in degree.

The Causes are a coldness, sometimes alone, sometimes with moisture, weakening
the expulsive faculty, that it cannot expel the Urine, or if it does, not in
such a manner as it ought, so that the expulsive faculty is essentially hurt,
or the cause is either from a Stone, or the humors viscid and thick.

The External Causes are, an Air that is cold, gross, thick and cold meats and
drinks, especially the Milk of the Nurse, for as the manner of Diet is, such is
the Milk; as the Milk is, such are the Children that suck it.

The Signs are manifest, for the Child makes no water, or by drops, and with
groaning. If it be from a cold distemper, then if the parts be rubbed, heated
or compressed, the Urine comes forth; if from Obstruction, if you compresse
them, no Urine is made, it is known also by the course of Life preceding to
it, and by the Child's being said before to have Urine that was thick and muddy.

Prog. The Strangury and Ischury in Children are difficult distempers, for all
distempers in Children of the natural faculties are dangerous.

The Cure is, 1. In a good Diet, avoiding fullness, gross and thick meats and
drinks. 2. Expelling the Excrements in the Stomach and first passages, by
loosning the Belly with two or three Ounces of the Honey of Roses; then prepare
the humors thus, Take of the Simple Honey of Roses, Simple Oxymel, of the
Syrrup of Bettony, of each three drams; mingle them and give it alone, or else
with Broth; afterward purge, Take of Cassia five d^ams, of Species Hiera, one
dram and an half, mingle them: or Take the Honey of Roses Solutive two Ounces,
of Electuary Lenitive three drams, two Ounces and an half of a Cordial
Decoction of Violet Roses, mingle them and make a Drink. 3. Provoking of Urine,
the Decoction of Grownsell, Saxifrage, Centmade, or Red Cicers, is much
commended; or, Take the Roots of Asparagus half an Ounce, the Leaves of
Saxifrage, and Maidenhaire, of each one handful, red Cicers one Pugil, make a
Decoction according unto Art, give three Ounces of it with a little Sugar, the
Stomach being empty. Outwardly are useful the rubbing and compressing the
hands, being anointed with the Oil of Scorpions. If it help not, boil the
Pellitory of the Wall in the Oil of Rue, and make a Plaster and lay it to the
parts about the neck of the Bladder; or, Take a Cruce Glass in which Oil has
been kept a long time, put it in hot water, then put the Yard of the Child into
the Mouth of the Cruce Glass, and it is very effectual.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Stone of the Bladder.
CHildren are very obnoxious to the Stone of the Bladder, and are often
troubled with it by their much eating, causing much crude humors, which stay
not in the Reyns, but is expelled into the Bladder. Female Children are seldom
troubled with it, because they have the Channel of the Bladder broad straight,
not contorted and crooked.

The Stone of the Bladder, which is immediately made in the Bladder, is more
often made in Children then in old men, because Children are great Eaters, and
thereby abound with much crude humors, which is the matter of the Stone, and
falls into the Bladder; besides, Childrens native heat is strong, which easily
hardens the matter into a Stone; old men although they abound with crude and
earthy humors, because their heat is weak in the Bladder, the Stone is not
made, to which may be added the strength of the expulsive faculty, the
narrowness of the passage, and the tenuity of the humor in Children.

The Stone which is first made in the Reins, is in old men more often then in
Children, as is proved by experience, because old men's expulsive faculty is
infirm, and the Ureters wide, so that the thickest and gross matter, is
detained in the Reins, and consequently turn then into a Stone.

The material causes are humors thick petuitous, and tenacious; the efficient
cause is the greatness of the heat.

The immediate internal causes are chiefly the narrowness and straightness of
the passage or Channel, then the hereditary disposition and propriety from
parts, and the Milk of the Nurse being bad, either from Diet or temper; for
when the Child does suck impure Milk, if the Child has large Veins, from the
Stomach to the Bladder, the impure matter is carried to the Bladder, where it
settles with the Urine as muddy water shak'd together in some Vessel, and then
resting makes a Sediment in the middle, which Sediment of the Urine afterward
is conglobated and made round, by Phlegm, like a little hill, and is hardened
as Iron in a Furnace.

The External Causes are the same as in the Strangury.

The Signs are, 1. Groaning, and pain in making water. 2. The making water by
drops. 3. The Blood is often mixed with the Urine. 4. The water is somewhat
white, crude, sometimes with a slimy, sometimes with a Sandy Sediment. 5.
Inflammation of the Bladder. 6. Itching of the Preputium and foreskin, and
frequently scratching of the Privities. Prog. The Stone of the Bladder is very
dangerous, and difficult, by reason of the pain, and in curing Suppression of
the Urine, which often happens.

The Stone if it cannot be cured by cutting it is mortal for the most part,
because the Stone grows in Children so great, that as the years increase,
Nature cannot sustain it.

The Cure is, If the Stone be Small, and newly begun, by such things that break
and diminish the Stone by a quality that is either, 1. Manifest, as by Goats
Blood, Restharrow, Ceterach, Saxifrage, the Root of Parsley, and Fennel, Lapis
Spongia, Lapis Judaicus, the Stone that is found in the Call of an Ox powdered
and drank in White wine, or a Decoction of Restharrow; Take 2. or 3. drams of
Turpentine, washed and melted, and mingle it with two Ounces of the Water of
Restharrow, it is much commended. 2. Or an Occult quality and propriety, as the
Throat of a Hen burnt and powdered, and given in Wine. So Eryngoes boiled,
breaks the Stone by propriety. Before the use of these remedies the Child is to
be put into a Bath Water for some days, in which Mallows are boiled, that the
matter may be somewhat softened, and more easily and safe done in Children in
Men.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Costivenesse and being bound in the Belly.
COstivenesse is a preternatural disposition in Children, by which they
discharge not the filfth and Ordure of the Body, either in a due hour and time,
or in a due measure; The Filth ought every day to be expelled, and if much be
eaten, or that is not nourishing, the greater the quality of the Excrements
ought to be expelled.

The Causes are, the offending the Guts either not by sending the expulsive
faculty to them, by a resolution of some Nerve or Muscle, by a distemper or
obstruction, or because Choler is not sent to the Guts, by which the Guts are
stimulated and excited to an Expulsion. Or the Expulsive faculty of the Guts is
hurt by some Tumor or Skin, or some distemper.

The Guts are offended also by some Errors within, by viscid and thick humors
wrapped and mixed with the Filth, and so gather the Filth together, that they
fasten them to the Guts, that they cannot go forth, or with great difficulty,
or Externally by the coldness of the Air, for it is certain that Costivenesse
is more in the Winter than Summer; much sleep, idleness, great Meditations,
(they dry the Belly) drink that is thick and binding, and sparingly used; the
same Errors also in meats, as also preposterous eating, taking first astringent
things, afterward liquid, and they that are accustomed to dine, and omit it,
are bound in their Bellies.

The Signs are the Child's not discharging his Belly every day, and complaining
and if the Child is somewhat great, it is troubled in the head, and when the
Child empties it self it is with pain and groaning.

If it proceed from a cold distemper, the body consumes, is pale, windy and
belching; if from gross and viscid humors, they will appear in the Filth; if
from the want of Choler sent to the Guts; the Color of the body will be
muddy, and the Filth of the Guts white or somewhat Ash-colored.

Prog. The Astriction of the Belly in most are dangerous, especially in
Children which great eaters, for which Diseases are generated in them in time,
and in the Time of breeding of Teeth, cause Inflammation, Fevers, and
Convulsions, the body being full.

The Cure is, 1. In moving the Belly in sucking Children, that the Nurse use
meat that loosen the Belly, as Mallows, Dry Figs, Raisins, and the Broth of
Coleworts, and all such meats which can loosen the Belly; for as the Milk is
made out of Blood, and it out of meat, so it is not to be doubted that the Milk
is affected with such meats as the Nurse eats: The remedies that are to be used
to the sucking Child, ought raiher to be External then Internal; The External
are Suppositories made out of hard Honey or the roots of Mallows; Garlic
roasted in Ashes, and put into the fundament of the Child provokes Stool; So
does Coriander Candied with Sugar, put into the Fundament, for it tickles the
expulsive faculty and causes no pain. Besides these remedies to make the body
soluble, there are others to be applied to the Navil; as half the White of an
Egg boiled hard, and filled with Butter, and a little Coloquintida, or two
Grains of Scammony, the Gall of Beef laid to the Navil does the same; so does
the Juice of Cyclaminis with an equal portion of the Oil of Sweet Almonds, and
Hens grease. If the Child is somewhat great, the use of Turpentine is much
commended, it clenses the Liver and Spleen; Likewise Bread that has some Bran
in it, and Raisins continually used. The broth of Coleworts and Mallows may be
likewise used or the Suppositories directed above.

2. In removing not only Astriction, but also the Causes of it, therefore if it
be in an Infant, that the Nurse uses convenient Diet, and such as does not
bind, avoiding idleness, the use of Wine that is sharp and binding, meats that
are gross and binding, as Barberies, Medlers, Cervices, and the like, and
whatsoever is binding. If the Astriction of the Belly be in a Child that is
somewhat great, he is to use meats that loosen the belly, and to abstain from
those that are binding, his sleep, watching and exercises are to be moderate,
and to avoid North winds. If Astriction be from a cold distemper of the Guts,
if in Infants, the Milk ought to be corrected with meats that heat, or the
Nurse changed, and remedies applied to the Stomach or Navil of the Child. Take
half a Pint of the best Wine, of the Leaves of Calamint, Abrotanum, Mint,
Marjerome, of each half a handful, boil them, and with a Sponge foment the
whole Belly: or use this Ointment, Take the Oil of Spikenard, or Mint, of each
three drams; the powder of Cloves half a Scruple, a little Wax, mingle them and
make an Ointment. If Astriction is from cold and viscid humors, use such
things that are attenuating, as Oxymel, and the Syrrup of Harehound, these are
very useful if the Child lick them, or the Nurse take them. If from the want of
the coming of Choler to the Guts, then obstructions are to be removed, in a
Child that is somewhat great, a Decoction of Rubra Tinctorum, Red Cicers, the
Roots of Fennel, or Asparagus, and the use of Maidenhaire is convenient;
stronger remedies in Children are not to be used.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Flux and Loosnesse of the Belly.
THe Flux, is too great a Laxity of the Belly, by which Children do expel more
filth, and more often then ought to be by reason of the Meat and Drink.

The cause is a cold Distemper of the Guts, by which the Concoction is
vitiared, and so the corrupted Meats cause the Flux, and also a moist
distemper, whereby the retentive faculty, which consists in dryness, is
weakened, and being not able to retain the filth, causes that the expulsive
faculty excited by them, expells more and more often then it ought; to which
may be added the humidity that comes from the head to the Stomach, and from
thence to the Guts; also corrupt meats, which when they have Acrimony, and are
past to the Guts, irritate their expulsive faculty; likewise sharp and biting
thin humors, do the same; such as are in the Breeding of Teeth.

The External Causes are the South Wind, immoderate exercises of body, the use
of liquid meats, and such as are apt to loosen the Belly.

The Signs are manifest, Children very often evacuate the Filth of their Belly,
and it is more fluid and liquid then it ought; If it be caused by the
Corruption of meats, the Ordure and Filth stink, and appear unconcocted, and
the Child breaks Wind often; if from breeding of Teeth, the Signs you have in
the Chapter of Breeding of Teeth; If from Bilious and Ichorous humors, the
Filth and Dung is bilious, and yellow, and if they have hurt the Guts, the Dung
will be bloody, and covered with a bloody slime; If from a distemper, there
will be the Signs of a moist or cold distemper, and no Signs of any other
causes; If from a Distillation, the Child will have a Catarrhe, not falling to
the Lungs, and the Filth will be frothy; It it be from external Causes, it is
known by a careful and diligent observation of the manners and life of Children.

Prog. A Dysentory in Children is very dangerous.

The looseness of the Belly one or more days is healthful, if there be no
Fever, and if it is stopped within 7 days.

An unseasonable stopping of the Flux in Children is mortal.

If the Flux continues and perseveres, and is very long, it causes a
Consumption and Death.

The Cure is, 1. In an Infant, if the Milk be bad, by changing the Nurse, in
long Fluxes nothing has been found better, if it cannot be corrected; If the
Cause is hot, the Nurse is to use a cooling Diet, abstaining from Wine, and
using water in which Steel has been quenched, or Wine somewhat binding, but a
very little of it; also meats somewhat astringing and cooling, as Barley Broth,
with the Juice of Quinces, Rice, and the like; Anoint the Child's Navil and
Stomach with this, Take the Oil of Mirtles, Quinces, of each three drams; the
Powder of Mastick, Red Coral, and Acaciae, of each half a Scruple, a little
Wax, make a Liniament. If the Cause be cold, the Nurse is to use a Diet that is
hot, as Wine somewhat binding, Spice, the best Flesh, Mint, Marjerome, boiled
in Broths. Take the Oil of Wormwood, and Mastick, of each three drams; the
Powder of Sothernwood, Comfrey, and Bole Armonick, of each half a Scruple, a
little Wax, mingle them, and make a Liniament; the Bag of a Hare is very good,
but the Child is not to suck when it is used; but let the Child take Pannado,
with the Milk of Almonds, for as the Bag thickens Milk outwardly, so if it
should be used unseasonably it would be dangerous if it should do the same, and
not above half a Scruple at a time is to be used.

The Cure of a Child somewhat great, is; If the Flux comes from, 1. Corrupted
Meat, stop them not nor retain them, but only comfort and strengthen the
Stomach; Take of the Oils of Spicknard, and Mastick, of each five drams; of the
powder of Red Corral one dram and an half; of Wax a little, mingle them. 2. If
from petuitous humors falling from the head, provoke Urine with a Decoction of
the common Seeds of the Roots of Parsley, Fennel, Asparagus, Birtcher Broom,
for they divert the Phlegm from the Guts. 3. If from bilious humors, temper
them, and take care they do not exulcerate the Guts, wherefore let the Child
abstain from Wine, meats that are hot, salt, acrimonious, and sweet, and use
Barley Btoth with the Syrrup of Barberies, Quinces, or Granate. Take of the
Decoction of all the Myrabulous six Ounces, the Juice of Millet strained four
Ounces, mingle them, and make a Clyster, which is very good; So is this, Take
of Mullen, the greater Comfrey, of each half a handful, boil them according to
Art; Take thereof two Ounces and an half, of the Syrrup Deribes one Ounce,
mingle them; Whey in which Steel is quenched is good, and may be given to six
or eight Ounces at once; If the Guts are sore, this Confection is very useful,
Take of the Conserve of Barberies one Ounce; of Thus one dram; of Mastick half
a dram; of the powder of the great Comfrey two Scruples, mingle them; the
quantity to be used is two or three drams every morning. The Broth of an old
Hen in which Mullen is boiled, is good for all old and petuitous Fluxes; So is
the heart of a Beef burnt and powdered, taken in Milk, in which Steel is
quenched, or in the Decoction of Mullen, half a Scruple of it, or a Scruple is
to be used at once. Clysters are good, Take the Water of Barley in which Steel
is quenched eight Ounces, Red Sugar one Ounce, make a Clyster, this is good in
the beginning, because it moderately dries, absterges, and mundifies the
Ulcers; afterward the Ulcers are to be dried and healed, to which purpose use
this, Take of Whey in which Steel is quenched, nine Ounces, of Thus,
Bole-Armonick, and of Comfrey the great, of each three drams, Sanguis Draconis
five drams, mingle them and make a Clyster.

CHAP. XX. Of the Tenesme.
AFter a Looseness, and in the Looseness, and from them, a distemper usually
arises, called a Tenesme, which is a certain vain desire of evacuating the
Filth of the Belly with pain and trouble.

The Cause is, A hot or cold distemper of the Spyncter of the great Gut, most
commonly from a humor thick, viscid and sharp, adhereing to it, where it
stimulates the expulsive faculty, which endeavoring to expel the viscous and
sharp matter, but cannot in regard of the tenacity of the humor; the Tunicle
of the Gut is as it were strained into pieces, and in the same divulsion the
appetite and pain is made.

The antecedent causes most frequently, are Preceding Fluxes, for the humors
continually touching the great Gut, distempers it; if the humors are hot, the
distemper is hot; if cold, the distemper is cold; whereby sometimes there is
not only made a distemper but an Inflammation.

The Signs are manifest, because the Child desires and endeavors often to
expel the filth of the Belly, and with such endeavors, that sometimes the
Fundament falls and comes down; the Filth that is evacuated is very little,
slimy, and bloody; if it be from a hot cause, a heat is perceived by the
Children in the Fundament, there is a redness; and cold remedies help; if from
cold, there is a lesser pain, a little or no heat, no redness, and hot things
help.

Prog. This Disease if it be diligently handled in the beginning, ends well;
but it sometimes happens by continual pains, watchings, and crying of Children,
that it brings them into mortal Fevers and Consumptions.

The Cure is of sucking Children by ordering the Nurse; if a Child somewhat
great by abstaining from meats that are acid, sharp, salt, and sweet, and to
use such as provoke Urine. If the cause be hot, to assuage the pain, then
lessen the desire of going to Stool. Make a Decoction of Mullein, or Dyptams,
and sit in it. Take Mirabulous Chebules, and the Leaves of Mullein, and boil
them in Red wine, and dip a Sponge in it, and apply it to the fundament.
Turpentine put upon the Coals, that it fume and smoke the fundament, is very
good; if these will not help, Take of Opium four grains, of Saffron one
Scruple, of Thus one Scruple, and make a Suppository of it, with the White of
an Egg roasted, put it into the Fundament, it takes away pain, dryes up the
humors, that causes the distemper, especially the hot humors.

CHAP. XXI. Of the pain of the Guts.
THe Guts being very full of Turnings and windings, and rowlings, and very
long, retain the humors a great time in them, which makes the internal Tunicles
of the Guts bare and naked from the slime (which covers the Guts, and makes
their sense dull, for their receiving of hard and sharp excrements) and
corrodes the substance of them, and distends them, whereby there is a vehement
torment and pain.

The cause is either wind that cools the Guts, and oistends the Tunicles of
them, or humors that are cold or hot, which distemper them, or causes a
Solution of continuity, and sometimes Worms is the cause.

The external causes are the coldness of Air, Feet, and meat, also sweet
meats, and Summer fruits.

If it be from Wind, the pain is sometimes vehement, sometimes gentle, goes and
comes, breaks forth upwards and downwards; If from humors, the pain is more
durable and constant; if from Phlegm, that Filth that is evacuated is but
little and slimy; If from Choler, the Excrements of the Belly are yellow; If
from the corruption or sharpness of Milk, there are notes of the badnesse of
the Milk, and the Filth and Excrements evacuated resemble corrupted Milk.

Prog. Pains that are persevering are dangerous, especially the vehement pains
in the Guts of Children, proceeding from Worms, which many times kills them.

The Cure is, If the pain is from corrupted Milk, change the Nurse, if the be
so vehement that it will not allow time to correct the milk; if from wind, the
Nurse is to abstain from all windy meats, and use Coriander and Fennelseed; So
ought, the Child that is elder to use Auodynes, such things which heat in the
first degree and evacuate the matter of pain, and attenuate and dissipate it,
anointing the Child's Belly with the Oil of Anniseed. If it is not effectual,
put a Clysterpipe in the Fundament, so the Wind is drawn forth sometimes; if
not, make three Ounces of the Oil of Anniseed lumbricated, is sufficient for a
Clyster; If the Child be great, use Cummin or Anniseed in Sweet Oil, and the
Oil afterward being strained, take of it 6. or 8. Ounces for one Clyster.
Observe the Wind ought to be expelled out of the Guts, by gentle remedies, if
more hot are used the pains usually are increased, if the Cause of the Wind be
in the Guts; If the cause is a petuitous humor in a Child that is somewhat
great, the gentle remedies above mittigate pain; afterward take the Leaves of
Dill, Marjerome, Cumminseed, of each half a handful, boil them according to
Art. Take Take of the Decoction three Ounces, of Oxymel Simple, and of the
Syrrup of Byzantine of each three Drams, the humors being prepared, purge with
one dram of Hiera in Wine, if the Child will take it, and there being no
Fever; otherwise, Take of Electuary Lenitive 5 drams, of Hiera Picra one dram,
mingle them and make a Bolus. If the pain is from hot and sharp humors, use
outwardly the means as is said before; Take of Barley water six Ounces, Oil of
Anniseed two Ounces, the Yolk of an Egg, and make a Clyster. Afterward, to
evacuate the humors, Take of the Decoctions of Tamarinds two Ounces and an
half, of Rhubarb two drams, of Spike 10 Grains, infuse them all night, then
strain them well, and add half an Ounce of Electuary Lenititve, and make a
Drink; If all these remedies are ineffectual, use half a Scruple of Laudani
Opiati, in one of the Clysters, as is above directed.

CHAP. XXII. Of Worms.
WORMS are very familiar to Children, by reason of crudity and corrupt
Phlegm, from their eating of fruits and milk after other meats, for it is
observed that sucking Children which eat Flesh are most troubled with Worms
because their tender Stomach cannot concoct solid meat, and therefore it
corrupts and breeds Worms, besides Milk is presently concocted and passes into
the Guts, if flesh unconcocted be mingled with Milk, and passes with it into
the Guts, it putrifies there.

Worms are Annimals generated in the body, variously hurting the Operations of
the Body.

Worms are found almost in all parts of the body, as appears by the diffection
of Bodies, and the Excretion of Worms, but it is doubted, whether the Worms
were bred in those parts, or crept there, especially Worms found in the
Stomach. Some think Worms may be bred in the Stomach, because the matter of
Worms is no less communicated from food or defluxion, or otherwise from other
parts, and that the efficient cause being also not wanting in the Stomach, but
more frequent they breed in the Guts.

The Cause is, a petuitous crude and viscous humor, which arises from
immoderate eating, meat easily putrefying and causing a thick Juice, as Cheese,
Milk, Summer fruits, things that are sweet, sugared, honied, and the like,
having something that has an analogy to seed, instructed with a formative
virtue, which disposes the matter to receive this form of a Worm, and not
another, and informs the matter so disposed; as we see peculiar Worms to
proceed out of Wormwood, the Salt of the Sea, Milk, Honey, and other things.

The difference of Worms according to their Figure is threefold, some are round
and long, others broad and long, and some small, compared with the other two
sorts. Worms differ in their colors, being white, red, livid, ash color, or
yellow, the variety of which colors proceeds either from the crudity or
coction of the matter, out of which they are made, or from the variety of the
nourishment or diversity of corrupted matter, out of which they are generated.

The Signs of the three sorts of Worms in common are many, a Stinking breath,
unquiet sleep, with starting, trembling, grating of the Teeth, Itching, and
often rubbing of the Nose, paleness of the Face, red by Intervals, the Eyes
hollow and darkish, the white whereof being turned pale or yellow, spitting
much Phlegm, the swelling of the belly, with murmuring and noise in it, the
Griping of the Belly which is worse, when one is fasting, sometimes looses,
Vomiting and Epilepsy.

The Signs of the particular Worms; if they be long, then the biting of the
Belly is more vehement, a little dry Cough, Hiccough, a vain desire of
Vomiting, abominating meat, sounding, troublesome dreams, with trembling,
rising up, and crying out.

If the Worms are broad, they are known by Excrements, not unlike the Seeds of
Goardes, an unsatiable desire of eating, sudden dejection of things newly
taken, leanness and consuming, a great pain sometimes in the right side
sometimes in the left.

If short Worms, the pain is continual, a most troublesome Itch about the
Fundament, with a continual desire of evacuating.

Prog. Broad Worms are the worst, because for the most part they continue
longest.

The short Worms are the least hurtful because they are little, and thin, and
are bred in the thick Guts, most remote from the noblest parts, and easy to be
expelled with the Excrements, and for Medicaments to be applied to them.

4. Worms that are great, fat, thick, and filled with blood, are worse then
thin, short, and extenuated, because these show the scarcity of matter, those
the abundance of matter.

5. White Worms are scarce dangerous, but Worms that are yellow, livid, or red,
are much worse.

6. Worms that are expelled dead, where there is no Fever, or a Fever that is
benign, dye by the scarcity of the matter, but in malignaut Fevers they dye,
rather by the venom, and so worse then living Worms.

The Cure is, 1. In a convenient Diet, the Air is to be temperate and inclining
to dryness, sleep, and watching moderate, avoiding sleep immediately after
meat, immoderate Exercise, avoiding idleness, and rest, the Belly soluble, if
it be bound loosen it with a Clyster or Suppository; the Drink, if there be no
Fever, ought to be Wine and Water somewhat binding, bitter or sharp, not
sweet; Vinegar and Water is good, so is sharp Wine: but if there be a Fever,
in the place of Wine let there be a Decoction of Pruines that are sharp or
facid, Cherries or Granates, The meat ought to be easy to digest, attenuating,
and penetrating, wherefore convenient meats, are such as are sharp, acid, and
bitter, and oily, and sweet things, viscid, thick, and fat things, are hurtful;
the flesh of Birds is much commended; Beef and Veale are greatly discommended,
with what is not convenient, mixed Vinegar, Verjuice, the Juice of Granates, or
some other sharp Juice; avoid all Fish and things made of Milk, only such
fruits are to be used which are acid, as Granates, Oranges, Limons, Services,
Medlars, sharp Pruines, avoiding all crudities and indigestable meats, either
from the quality or quantity of them. 2. In the use of Sena, Tamarinds, or
Mirabulous; but above all, Aloes, for the consuming of the matter of Worms
which is in the Stomach or Guts. Take of Aloes Succotrinae two drams, Mirrhae,
Scordum, White Dictamus of each a Scruple, with the Syrrup of Wormwood, make
Pills, the quantity at once is half a dram or forty grains. 3. In the killing
or dulling of them, that they cannot resist the remedies, which is done by
things that are bitter, sharp, salt, acid, oily; in the use of which observe,
1. That bitter or salt things, or such as kill Worms are to be mixed with sweet
things which delight them, and draws them to that which kills them, otherwise
they avoid it. 2. Remedies used by the Fundament ought either to be sweet
things alone, or else to prevail in sweetness above other things which are
mixed with them, for the Worms drawn by sweetness, move the lower parts of the
Guts; but remedies taken in at the mouth, ought to be more sharp, and bitter,
then sweet, otherwise the Worms would move into che Stomach, and cannot be
conveniently killed. 3. The remedies ought not to be vehement, because they
would offend the Stomach, and the Worms agitated by them would be more
grievous, and offensive. 4. The Stomach ought to be empty when the remedies are
used, else they would be obtruded and extinguished, in regard they are weak. 5.
There is no remedy which commonly kills all Worms, and there is no remedy so
present as Coralline and Sea Moss. 6. If the Child has a Fever, then
remedies which are cold ought to be used, if not, then hot remedies may be used.

Every kind of Worm has its proper remedies, and the Long Worm being in the
next place to the Stomach, requires not such strong remedies as the oother
Worms do; wherefore Wormwood, Southernwood, Coriander seed, or the Decoction of
Calament are sufficient, which may be used in powder, or a De^oction. The
Syrrup of Mint, Wormwood, or Purslane, is very good, so is a Decoction of
Sebesten. Outwardly apply above the Navil (for Long Worms are in the first
Guts, a little above the Navil) this Ointment, Take the Juice of Wormwood and
Southernwood of each one dram and an half, the Powder of Scordum, Aloes, of
each two Scruples, of common Oil one Ounce, of Wax a little, make an Ointment;
or, take of Mirrh and Aloes, of each a dram, Powder of Scordum, and the Seeds
of Wormwood and Citron, of each half a Scruple, with Wax and Rosine, as much as
is sufficient, make a Plaster; Treacle dissolved, with the Juice of Limon or
Vinegar, is good, applied above the Navil, or taken inwardly, so are the Seeds
of Nettles, Fennel, Cummin, and Mint; and in regard that Worms that are killed
are not expelled, therefore use such remedies as kill and expel them, as
Rhabarb, Hiera, Aloes, Agarick; take 2 drams, or half an Ounce of the Syrrup of
Sychory, with Rhubarb, with an Ounce of the Water of Grass which given every
day is much commended; If there happen a looseness that is not moderate, and
dejects the strength, restrain it gently with Plantane or Purslane boiled in
broth.

The Broad Worms are cured like the Long Worms, but require stronger remedies,
because this Worm is greater, Fern, Cardamon, Costos, and Treacle are
commended.

The Ascarides or Little Worm require stronger remedies then the Long and Broad
Worms do, because they are most remote from the Mouth and Stomach, wrapped in
viscid humors, and are made of viscid and thick humors; These Worms have also
peculiar remedies. Take the Leaves of Wormwood one handiul, Lupines one Pugil
and an half, boil them, then take of that Decoction 12. Ounces, Honey of Roses
3 Ounces, of Salt one dram and an half, mingle and make a Clyster. Take of
Nitre, of Salis Gemma of each one Scruple; of the Gall of a Bull one dram, of
Honey as much as suffices, make a Suppository, or foment below the Navil, or
about the Fundament with the Decoction for the Clyster; Also is good, flesh
salted and the fat cut from it, and made in the form of a Suppository, and put
into the Fundament; So is old Cheese. Many things are propounded by Authors to
be taken in at the mouth, as Scammony and Co'oquintida, which are too strong
for Children; the Juice of Ireos will be better and convenient, for it moves
the Belly, and consequently expells the Worms, and by a peculiar faculty kills
them, Pillula Ruffi, Hiera cum Agarico, are also good.

FINIS

