A NEW NARRATIVE OF A Fiery Apparition Seen on several days about TOWER HILL.
OR, A JUST RELATION Of the unjust Proceedings of Mr. Sherman, Churchwarden of
All-hollows Barkin, London.
By JONATHAN SANDERS, Lecturer of the said Church.
OF Late the Common Prints have made a great pother about an Image erected in
the Parish Church of All-hallows Barkin, London, which Image was indicted at the
last Sessions at the Old Baily. The upper Churchwarden without advice, and
contrary to Order, was pleased to plead Guilty; how far he may be concerned in
the Guilt I am not to enquire, but since the proceeding may have afforded
matter of Scandal to some distant persons, I thought it was my duty to give
some brief Account of the whole matter, which is as follows.

On Sunday, March the Sixth, Mr. Sherman acquainted Dr. Hicks, and my Self,
that there was an Indictment preferred at the Old Baily against the
Churchwardens for suffering an Image in the Church, not making any mention
that the Doctor, or my Self, were concerned in the Indictment, though a Copy of
it had been given him for that very purpose.

On Monday, the Seventh instant, Mr. Sherman took down from the East end of the
Church the (pretended) Figure of the Archangel St. Michael, by the assistance
of the Clerk and Sexton, against the advice of the Doctor, and without the
Knowledge or Consent of the Vestry.

He carried it on the same day to the Sessions House in the Old Bailey, and did
(singly) plead Guilty to the Indictment; of which the Court took so little
Notice that they would not accept his Fine.

This (pretendedly) superstitious Image was brought back the same Night,
continued in the Church all Tuesday, and conveyed thence on Wednesday. When Mr.
Sherman being asked how he had disposed of the same, and by what order, he
replied, That he had sent it to Mr. Sheriff Bethel by order of the Court.

On the Sunday following it was intended there should be a Vestry, which
accordingly was called, in the Name of the Doctor, Mr. Sherman having given
Order to the Clerk not to use the Name of the Churchwardens.

After Sermon, the Vestry being Assembled, Mr. Sherman refused to take his
place as Churchwarden, telling them that the Poor wanted no Money, and that if
in any thing he wanted their advice, he would call them when he thought fit;
adding withal, That the Doctor had no power to hold a Vestry without him,
therefore he would not stay any longer, but told them (imperiously enough) that
he dissolved them.

The Vestry, notwithstanding this huffe, Sat and made some Orders, but they
were no sooner broke up but Mr. Sherman returned to the Church from his own
House with a part of (his God-son St. Michael) the Image, which with some
vainglory he burnt in the Vestry.

On the Sunday following he caused another part to be laid on the Fire before
Evening-Prayer. And whereas he then burnt a Wing of the Angel, affirming, that
neither the Pope nor St. Peter should have any piece of it; so after Sermon,
before all the Gentlemen of the Vestry then present, he pulled some part of the
Feet of it out of his Pocket, telling them, That as it could not fly, so
neither should it walk to Rome.

But the Poor innocent Figure could not escape thus, for on the Sunday
following, viz. March the the 27th. he brought some other pieces of it into to
Vestry before Evening-Prayer, and burnt them in the presence of Mr. Tomlyn, one
of the Vestry, who seriously asking him what he meant by so doing, Mr. Sherman
replied, That he would not suffer any part of the Image to remain. All of these
are most significant Expressions of zeal against Popery.

This is clearly the state of the Affair as it has been gradually carried on.

Now any one that hears of all this, together with the Confession of the guilty
Churchwarden, might be induced to think there were some great matter at the
bottom of such an Eminent proceeding.

Without doubt it has made a great Noise not only in the City of London, but
also in places more remote whither the News of it has been industriously
carried for the Example of all other Churchwardens, who, by one of our London
Scriblers of Sedition, are advised to tread in the Steps of this worthy
Gentleman. People are hereby made to believe that Popery is coming in apace
among us, and that it must have its first entrance at All-hallows Barkin.

But to prevent any such mistake, it is requisite that they who take the
trouble of reading this Paper would seriously consider these few necessary
Additions that I am to make.

I. This Image (as they call it) was not a thing erected of late, but set up in
the Year 1658. or thereabout, and had no relation but to the Two Figures of
Death and Time, betwixt which it might handsomely enough stand with its Trumpet
and Motto, to mind Men of the last Judgment. It is strange that no body could
discover either the thing it self, or the mischief of it, till 1680. But the
Wise man tells us their is a Time for all things, and it is the good luck of
our discerning Churchwarden to hit it.

II. This Figure was so far from having any respect or veneration paid to it,
that few or none of the Inhabitants took any notice of it; and had the Doctor,
or Lecturer, been asked Two or Three weeks before this bustle, where it stood,
I dare confidently pronounce they had been to seek for an answer.

But this also was the happy discovery of the Churchwarden, who knew when it
was fit to prefer an Indictment, and has the good fortune to know the Critical
Time of One Year in Ten, when a thing is done pravae mentis, and when a Man
bows to an Idol under the color of adoring his God. Yet I must be so just to
the Gentleman, as to protest that I don't think that in his own Conscience he
believes that any of us had this Image under any religious Consideration; and
if he fails here, as most disingeniously he does, it is not to pass for a
failure in his Understanding, but for a voluntary, a designed, and a malicious
Prevarication.

It Is possible he may please himself with the delightful apprehension of
gratifying some one party of men; but then he ought to remember, that he that
sells his Neighbor's Fame for a little unsavory popular Breath, will in the
conclusion gain nothing but Infamy and Disgrace.

Every sober Man will allow the liberty of saying this, when he may know that
there is not a more serious and regularly-devout Parish in the City of London
than this of All-hallows Barkin is: And when they shall be exposed to the
censure of the World as Popishly-affected, it is not only an ill thing, but it
is an ill sign; it is a token that some among us are either ignorantly, or
cunningly, running into that Popery which they pretend to hate and fear.

This is the mighty Engine that carries on the business of the Jesuits, and
other Papists at this time; for if men can at pleasure take away the reputation
and honor of the Church of England, then the Romish Faction have gained the
Field, and have no more to do but to sit down and divide the Spoil. Yet so it
is, we are fallen among a generation of things (whom I was going to call Men)
which call every Man Papist, and every thing Popish, which does not just jump
with their little self-conceited Moddels. And this Course is so irrational and
absurd, as well as irreligious, that I can see no reason for it, unless it be
that these pretended Protestant-zealots carry on the same design with the
Papists, and intend to share with them at last, as the late Lambert who aimed
at the Protectorship, proves since to be a known Papist, as Mr. Oats informs us.

III. It Is pretended that this Figure was Condemned by the Court at the Old
Baily: A suggestion as far from truth, as the Godfather was from the right
Name of his Child. It may seem strange that the Churchwarden should pretend an
order of Court when there was none, and when Sir George Treby the Recorder
declared, that the proceeding was not grounded upon any Law that he knew of.

Yet such is the insolence of some Men, that they dare lay their ill-favor'd
Brats at whose door they please. In the mean time the Ministers and
Parishioners of All-hallows Barkin have this Comfort, That they are slandered
and indicted by none but those that have the Confidence to act by such Orders as
they never received.

This I tender to the public as an impartial Account of what has passed since
this business came upon the Stage; I could have wished with all my heart that
the thing had made no noise abroad, but since it has taken air, I thought it
requisite that the honest Apology should be as open as the unjust Slander.

I know how unhandsome it is to interrupt Men of business with little
particular Concerns of our own, and I very well understand that Liberty of
Conscience, and Liberty of the Press, are things that have an unhappy influence
upon the Nation; and therefore as I am no Friend (in the present wild Notion)
to the one, so I should hardly have been Guilty of using the other, had there
not been this too just occasion for it.

If this short Relation have not its wished effect in giving satisfaction to
any that are honestly jealous, I shall give e're long a fuller Account, such as
may clear us from any suspicion of Popery that may lurk in any credulous and
unwary Breast; in the mean time here is

THE END.

