A SATYR, By way of DIALOGUE Between Lucifer, and the Ghosts of Shaftsbury and
Russell.
Shafts. WElcome, dear Brother Traitor to the Laws;
Thrice welcome, bold Espouser of our Cause.
Infernal Tribes of Fiends their Homage pays,
And your false Head bedecks with fiery Bays.
Heaven had almost over Hell a Conquest won,
Had not your Prudent Conduct theirs outdone:
For when the tottering Cause did faintly droop,
Her Friends being fled, brave you alone stood up
For her Defense, that you with Potent Hand,
And Prudent Heart confounded half the Land:
For still so soon's they viewed your awful Face,
Each Rebel did himself in's Posture place,
Then with uplifted Voice, and hideous Cries
Proclaimed your Praises to the troubled Skies,
Geneva's Hopes had turned to damned Despair,
Had not your daring Mind dispersed her Care.
You from her Eyes all Tears clean wiped away,
Banished her Darkness, and confirmed her Day;
And had the juster Heavens adjourned my Fate,
I Would wrought both Downfall of the Church and State;
Had not the All-seeing Power descried my Crime,
And snatched me from God's Earth before the Time.
What Judas or Achitophel ever hatc'd,
And more should been by my Adventures matched;
I Would made both King and Bishop tumble down,
I Would rent the Surplice and consumed the Crown:
Who dared but lisp'd the Name of King or Pope,
Without a Sentence past should stretched a Rope.
Geneva, Hell and I, to Heaven and Rome
In spite of Law would soon denounced their Doom.
Your Tub-men Prelat's Flesh should served to feast,
Because they speak the Language of the Beast.
With Hellish Darts against both Church and Laws,
And rably Guards I Would fortified the Cause.
Three Kingdoms wearied of a peaceful Reign,
Should been embroiled in Blood with our Design.
Father should Son, and Children Parents killed;
But our damned Plot by Hell we would fulfilled;
And when the Fiery Trial crowned the Day,
We Would still been cleared by Ignoramus Sway.
In Fine, in Golden Letters each Whigg's Name
should blazed be in the Records of Fame.
But now too late, I'n vain condole my Day,
My Tap was run, I could no longer stay.
I hope the World knows still I did my worst,
And in promoting Plots was still the first:
TO each common Vice I was by Nature moved,
In higher Crimes by Art and Age improved:
Yet for all this, our Plot's like to decay;
Our Leaders faint, and Brethren go astray.
Oh could the juster Judge of Israel's Tribes
Found m' Ignoramus for Fanatic Bribes,
And had your Earthly Jury found thus, even
This makes me curse our Laws since used in Heaven.
Now with damned Furies since confined to lodge,
We Will never give over, but bear Mankind a Grudge.
Let them conspire above, and we will plot under,
To furnish Hell, and all the Prisons plunder.

Russ. Why this Address, bold Wretch, dare the own thy Guilt?
Do know how many thousand Bloods thou'st spilt?
Cursed be the day when first I saw thy Face;
I banished Reason to give Treason Place.
Traitor to God, thy King, and Friend, that is worse;
Crowds that adored before, thy Fame does curse:
In Prime, Of the damned Plot against State and Church,
You sneak't away, and left me in the Lurch,
With dull mechanic Monsters, and a Crew
Of Thick-skull'd Fools, who did our Snares undo.
Thrice happy Thoughts had sure possessed my Mind,
Had I but made you leave your Head behind:
Which had I done, I should enjoyed your Brains
With my poor Head, and saved the Hang-man's Pains.
But now alas, the dismal days are come,
Which our Cabals did still design for Rome.
And in Infernal Caves damned must I lie,
Plotting in vain with Devils for Liberty:
Nor did I, as some Traitors did to peach,
To save my Soul, nor our black Guilt did preach
To Tory Blades: For had I cut my Throat,
My Blood would cried, A damned Fanatic Plot;
But I, true Traytor-like, in Flower of Age,
With an undaunted Mind did mount the State;
Where to the World I'n spite of King and Laws,
With my last Gasp of Breath pressed home the Cause;
Cried for our Liberties and Countries Good,
In open Shame is shed my guiltless Blood,
Which squeezed salt Tears forth from each Traytor's Eyes;
With Sighs and Hellish Groans they filled the Skies:
Such bold Examples still prevail much more
To smother Plots, than any Sham before.
I hope there is not one Covenanter left,
That is not of his Sense and Soul bereft,
Who dares deny he is Debtor for his Breath
To my good Service done at the hour of Death:
My Life to an end renouncing God and King,
The Devil, the Dr. and my self did bring.
With Reverence I must remember's Gown,
That seldom but at fatal Hours is show'n:
And for my sake I hope he will save my Watch,
Which I did him present with, not Squire Katch:
Against the Maxims of both Sense and Reason,
I blessed my fatal Hour, and hugged my Treason.
Of two great Ev'ls the greater did I chose,
My Life by Law, not for the Law to lose.
I thanked my Stars, like some Turk, Jew, or Tartar,
That there I died a Traitor, not a Martyr.

Shafts. Most brave audacious Champion of the Cause,
Our chief Deformer of both Church and Laws:
Let Us still persist in Vice, shun doing Good,
Oh could we cool our Tongues in Royal Blood;
Old Noll, the Devil, proud Cataline consult,
What from the worst of Plots may most result.
Those upstart Traitors must not be compared
With one whose Family was ever feared,
But for my part, you will grant I Am an Old Rogue,
And while on Earth amongst Traitors bore a Vogue;
Know by Compulsion you are sent here to dwell;
But I my self came Volunteer to Hell:
Yet next to Beelzebub and me you shall
Be still preferred before the whole Cabal:
For Rebel-like you still contrived new Plots,
And filled each Loyal Scutcheon full of Blots;
And in your utmost Minute showed more bright,
Than Phoebus mounted in's Meridian Height.
You vouched your Blood for Protestants was spilt;
Nay more, confessed the Fact, denied the Guilt.
You did not, like mechanic cowardly Fops,
Confess so soon's they saw their fatal Ropes;
But, Traytor-like, joined to the Cause new Growth,
Expiring, like a Rogue, with Lie in Mouth;
By which I hope the Multitude you moved
To plot anew, since all you said's approved:
For sure the Rabble will believe you sooner
Than Wallcot, Rouse, or any Whiggish Joyner.
Well, let us plot on in spite of Laws and Reason,
We'll please our selves in Flames, contriving Treason:
We'll still conspire below to ruin Earth;
Till Friends and Foes both curse our fatal Birth.
We'll send Advice to Titus and your Friend:
For Oaths and Prayers with them are Blasts of Wind;
And can procure a Pack of Helter Skalters,
To furnish Necks as long as Katch can Halters.

Russ. Well, since poor Mortals cannot revoke the Day,
When past; but to succeeding Fate give way
must, then let damned despair seize every Heart,
And Fiends their Hellish Malice t'us impart.
We'll take the Covenant from its Maker's Hand,
To's hellish Laws, and him that firm we'll stand;
Against Heaven and King we'll straight go levy War,
Cursed Hosts of Hell shall aid us from afar.
Would that the House were once assembled here,
We'd pass the Bill in spite of any Peer;
And if our Plots cannot perplex the Nation,
The Devil himself we will depose from's Station;
And if our Shams take not as they are appointed,
To touch the Person of the Lord's anointed,
We'll straight a full Discovery then make,
And on our Friends a whole Revenge we'll take:
For naught but the whole Ruin of Mankind,
Can please a Rebell-Whigg's Blood-thirsty Mind.

Lucifer, Bravely resolved, true Whiggs, by Hell, I swear,
Such ploting Heroes dare not think of Fear.
Old Noll and I were quite wore out of Hopes,
Till now revived by you the Causes Props.
Now for its sake and mine we'll march about,
To keep the kindled Fire from dying out:
New Treasons I Will convey'n your Speaker's Ears,
TO incense the Rabble with Seditious Fears;
To tell the King's a Tyrant and a Papist,
Worse then a Jew, yea, worse than Turk or Atheist;
And that he with his Bishops daily prop
The Interest of the French King and the Pope:
If that is denied, I Will bid them mark the Skies,
What dreadful flaming Meteors there arise.
I Will say these are the Missioners of Rome,
To signify True Protestants their Doom:
And when, like Deluges the Waters stand,
Shows that the Beast will float within this Land.
Let Us term the Papists dying words but Wind,
Equivocating Shamms to ensnare the blind:
And since the City Charter has been gone,
Both Judge and Jury Papists ev'ery one.
Swear Howard was a Papist born and bred,
The Joyner a rank Jesuit by Trade:
Tell 'ts more genteeel conspiring and a ploting,
Than Tory-like to Whoring, lie and Sotting.
When any Mischief's acted by our Sotts,
Make Titus blame his horrid Popish Plots;
But's Hand is out, 'ts long since he kissed the Book,
Which makes me fear his Oaths will never be took:
If any frailer Brother should confess,
Straight have him swore a Priest in Trades-man's Dress;
And doubtless every Goal before 't be long,
Will by the Faithful Traitors be made strong.
At last with Whiggs when surfeited they swell,
They Will spew them forth by Cart-Loads into Hell.

London, Printed in the Year, 1683.


