THE FELICITY OF A Christian Life.

angel

By Hierome Savonarola.

Printed, Anno Dom. 1651.

The Felicity of a CHRISTIAN LIFE.
The I. Conclusion.
THat among all Creatures of this world man only works for some certain end.
That only thing we say works for its end, which designeth unto it self some
particular end or reason of its working, and for the gaining thereof uses
convenient means. Now this being impossible to be done without discourse of
reason, and that being proper only unto man, it follows that man only can be
said properly to work for some end: And that Bruit Creatures are rather Acted,
that is, carried by a swing of natural propensity, to their several ends,
then that they act or move themselves.

The II. Conclusion.
THat there is some ultimate or last end of humane life. In all things which are
essentially ordinate one to another, we see that the first and principal being
removed, all the rest which were subordinate unto it must fail: So the first
mover or cause of all things being denied, all inferior Agents and second
causes must of necessity cease. Now in all humane Actions there is a certain
order observable, by which one action is subordinate and directed, as it were,
unto another; as for example, in the building of an house, we provide stones
in order to rear the walls, the walls we intend for the house-sake, the house
for our dwelling: But in things of this nature, that which first exciteth the
mind of the Agent, and moves him to work is the end, or aim which he desires
to compass by duemeans; if therefore there were not some ultimate or last end,
beyond which nothing else could be intended or desired, the appetite of man
would never be fixed, but perpetually desiring this thing for that things sake,
and that thing again for some other, and so in infinitum: whereupon it would
also follow, that there could be no Term or period of his Action, which were
absurd. We must therefore of necessity grant some ultimate or last end of the
life of man, I mean which shall be simply and absolutely such, and from which
man (who is truly master of his own Actions) shall always begin to work: and
although it be not necessary, that at all times his mind be actually and
distinctly upon that end, yet that habitually and virtually it should be, as
upon the thing, which does in the first place and more then any thing else move
him to work: for so we see, all men are moved to do what they do, either to
avoid misery, or to procure themselves happiness, for as much as all men have
this general end, as it were, ingrafted into their minds; and the difference
that is among them is not, whither they should all desire to be happy or no,
but in what Thing True happiness does consist.

The III. Conclusion.
That man's happiness consists in the fruition or possession of his last end.
Happiness is such a perfect good, as does absolutely satisfy and fulfill the
desire of man: for as much as we count him only happy, who both enjoys
whatsoever he desires, and can desire nothing more. As on the other side, every
thing when it attaineth its proper end, is reconed perfect, because it does all
its other things only in order to attain that; when therefore that is
obtained, it has nothing else to desire, it is therefore then perfect: for
that which is not perfect, is still thirsting, still seeking or desiring to be
perfected; But that which is acknowledged to be already perfect, must not in
reason be supposed to desire perfection.

The IV. Conclusion.
Man's happiness consists not in any outward goods. By outward goods, we
understa^d Riches, Honors Dignities, Power, etc. in which we say The happiness
of man consists not. For proof whereof I could allege an infinite number of
Arguments, but the Thing it self being so clear as it is, and acknowledged by
all, I shall insist only upon some few. My first reason is, because happiness
is the supreme or chief good of man, which admits not the least mixture or
participation of evil, no more then the highest degree of heat does any degree
of cold: Blessedness therefore cannot consist in the fruition of such goods,
which (as continual experience tells us) do admit variety of evils, not of
fortune only or chance, but (which is worst of all,) the evils of sin: for so
we see, very wicked men have their share in these goods. Secondly, because
Blessedness is a Self-sufficeing good, such as once being had, no other content
can be wanting; but we see, though a man be never so well provided of these
goods, yet it is possible he may be still in want of others no less necessary;
as a rich man is not always wise, nor a man of Honor healthful. Thirdly,
because Blessedness is such a perfect good Thing, that from it no evil can
proceed, which is not true of Riches, Honors, Power, etc. because by occasion
of them, through the envy indeed and malice of others many mischiefs do arise,
Murders, Parricides, Treasons, and what not? Fourthly, because the principles
which dispose a man unto True happiness are intrinsecall or from within him, it
being the end whereunto he is naturally ordained and fitted; But unto the goods
we speak of, Riches, Honors, etc. a man is rather disposed by causes
extrinsecall and from without him, yea many times, by mere chance, and
therefore they are called commonly Goods of Fortune: it is clear therefore,
that in them Felicity cannot consist.

The V. Conclusion.
That man's happiness consists not in the goods of the Body. By goods of the
body we mean the life of man, Health, Beauty, Youth, Strength, Courage, and the
like, in all or in any of which, it is manifest, true happiness cannot
consist. Because first, this body is not made for it self, but for the soul;
as the matter is always for the form, and not the form for the matter.
Therefore it is, that all goods belonging to the body, are ordained indeed for
the soul as unto the proper end for which they are made. Besides, should the
happiness of man be placed in such goods as those, this absurdity would
follow, namely that many even Bruit Beasts should participate of happiness
more then man; for certainly as to the fruition of such bodily goods, there be
many beasts which do far excel man: as for example, in length of life the
Elephant, in strength and courage the Lion, the Stag in swiftness, the Eagle in
sharp sightedness, and in perfection and soundness of health almost all of
them; for experience tells us, what a number of helps and how much art is
requisite to support this frail carcass of ours, more then of any other kind
of creatures; Therefore 'its impossible true felicity should be found in it.

The VI. Conclusion.
NEither does it consist in the goods, that is to say, in the pleasures and sat
is factions of the sensitive part of the soul. Every thing the nearer it
approaches to its proper end, the perfecter it grows (for its end is its
perfection) if therefore Blessedness consisted in those sensitive delights, A
man should become so much the more perfect, by how much he lived more
sensually, and gave himself up to all kind of Luxury and voluptuousness; that
is, he should be so much the more a man, by how much he lived more like a
beast: which is very absurd. And so again (as was touched in the precedent
Conclusion) Beasts also would be found capable of happiness, as well as men,
yea rather of a more perfect happiness then man; for as much as they have no
fear of death, no apprehension of future miseries, no knowledge of God, no
fear of Judgment, no Laws, no Shame, no repugnance of flesh and spirit; in
brief they have nothing, which can either abate the sense, or restrain the use
of their present pleasures: if therefore the Felicity of man did consist in the
pleasures of sense, we should all desire to be metamorphiz'd and become Beasts:
why? because Beasts (upon this supposition) are more happy then men. But this
was confessed to be absurd before.

The VII. Conclusion.
THat the happiness of man consists in such goods, as pertain unto the
Intellectual or superior part of the soul. For as the body is ordained for
the soul, so of the soul the vegetative or lowest part is ordained for the
Sensitive, and the Sensitive for the Intellectual. Seeing therefore that the
Intellect or Rational part of the Soul, is (as it were) the end of the Body
and the thing whereunto both it, and also the inferior parts of the soul be
subordinate and directed: it is manifest, that in the Act or exercise of this
Intellect, and in the goods, that is to say, in the perfections thereto
properly belonging, the final happiness of man does consist. Besides, seeing
that happiness belongs only to a perfect man, and that the perfection of man
as man, consists in such goods as belong either to his understanding or will;
it is hence also manifest, that in such manner of goods as are Intellectual
and rational, his proper happiness consists.

The VIII. Conclusion.
But yet this happiness of man does not consist in any created good, although
intellectual. For, as we said before, Blessedness is such a perfect good, as
does totally satisfy or fulfill the appetite; for otherwise it could not be
the ultimate or last end, supposing there remained any thing else further to be
desired. Now the object of the will, (that is, of the appetite of man as man)
is good in its latitude, or the universal good. For we find, that as the
understanding of man comprehends an infinity of particular verities; that is
to say, it never comprehends actually so many, but it is still apt and
capable to comprehend more successively even in infinitum; so also we find,
that the will of man is as able to desire and effect an infinity of particular
goods; that is to say, that it also never actually desires so many, but it is
still ready to accept and embrace more, whenever offered, and this
successively in infinitum, and that therefore it can never be fully satisfied,
until it attains to some universal or infinite good; which is not to be found
in any created Thing: for the goodness of every Thing created, is at best but
derivative, particular, and finite; therefore in no created good can the
Felicity of man consist.

The IX. Conclusion.
That the happiness of man consists solely in the contemplation and fruition
of God. We said before, that the understanding of man rests not, that is, is
not satisfied in the knowledge of particular verities, nor his will in the
fruition of particular goods. The last end therefore of them both must be Truth
and Goodness universal, or in its full latitude, which God only is:
therefore in the Contemplation and Fruition of God alone the Beatitude of man
consists. Besides, man being what he is, viz. a creature naturally desirous
to know, and that our knowledge of every particular thing seems then to be
complete, when we comprehend its proper and true cause; hence it follows, that
whenever we observe any thing to be, that is to say, any effect; we
instantly, yea naturally desire to know its cause, why, what, or whence it is.
Now all things, beside God, appear unto us, and in truth are, but effects of
some other cause; and therefore, whatsoever a man knows beside God, he knows it
either perfectly or imperfectly: if imperfectly, his desire is never satisfied,
until he attains perfect knowledge thereof (for that is natural, viz. for
every thing that is imperfect to desire perfection) and seeing that Felicity,
as we have said, is the perfection of man, and the full satisfaction of his
Intellectual appetite; it is manifest, that by such imperfect knowledge of any
thing he cannot become happy: But if he knows the thing perfectly, suppose it
be some one singular, or many, yea perhaps all particular things that be, yet
he cannot but apprehend them still as effects, that is, as depending (in their
very beings) upon some other cause. Seeing therefore, as we said, that man
observing the effect, does naturally desire to know the cause; it is manifest,
that this appetite of his cannot be completely satisfied with the knowledge
even of all particular things that be, but still it will be endeavoring and
desiring to see also the cause of them all; and that so much the more
earnestly, by how much it finds the effects themselves to be more excellent; or
that it self apprehends them more perfectly: for so it is always seen, that
every natural motion, the nearor it draws to its period or proper term, the
stronger and stronger it grows. In the sole knowledge therefore and fruition of
God (who is the universal and first cause of all Things) does man's
Blessedness consist: according as S. Augustine has excellently well observed,
Thou have made us O Lord (says he,) for thy self, and our heart is restless
and unquiet, until it finds its repose in Thee.

The X. Conclusion.
That this Beatitude formally, and as it were in actu primo, consists in the
understanding or seeing of God, as he is; but exercitatively, operatively, and
as in actu secundo, in the will, or in that ineffable pleasure and delight
which is enjoyed by the knowledge and contemplaton of him. The Act of the will
always presupposes the Act of the understanding, because the object thereof
is always some known or imaginary good. Seeing therefore that Beatitude
formally and in its own nature is nothing else but the attaining of our last
end, as soon as ever a man attains that he is happy. But man attaineth his last
end (which is God) so soon as ever he sees, that is, perfectly knows him.
Therefore in the knowledge, and by the knowledge of his last end, man becomes
essentially happy. But yet because this knowledge or contemplation of the
Divine Majesty is inseparably accompanied with a certain infinite and ineffable
joy or pleasure conceived upon that sight, and by which the sight or
contemplation it self seems to be perfected, therefore we say that in regard of
operation or the exercise of Beatitude, that it is completed in the will,
which with an infinite delight does embrace that good sight, and consent to be
absorpt and drowned in the glorious Abyss thereof to all Eternity. As in like
manner we say of man, that he consists essentially in the union of a rational
Soul with the body, but yet that he is perfected in regard of operations by
such accidents as do either necessarily or contingently follow that union: to
which sense the Philosopher also says, Delight has the same relation to
Felicity, which Beauty has to youth.

The XI. Conclusion
That perfect Blessedness cannot be attained in this life. First, because in
this life we have no immediate knowledge of God, we see him not but by and
through the creatures, and as it were in such a glass, as the Fantasy or
some inferior faculty of our soul is able to present unto us: which manner of
knowledge being so imperfect, the soul of man sinds no satisfaction therein,
that is to say, no Beatitude, no full content. Secondly, because, as Boethius
says, Blessedness is a state consummate, or perfected with a concurrence of
all good; but in this mortal life, there never was seen, (nor ever shall be)
such a general confluence of All Good Things upon any one man, as that nothing
should be wanting either to his body, or to his soul: especially seeing that
Immortality (the Crown of the Bodies perfections) cannot possibly be attained
here, no more then the certain hour of a man's death can be foreseen; and that
knowledge (which is the prerogative royal of the soul) is found but by very
few, and that never absolutely clear in this life, never but darkened and
eclipsed with a multitude of errors. Not to speak of those inferior and less
valuable goods of fortune and the body, health, wealth, etc. the least of which
yet being wanting does infinitely disturb our union with God, and daily, yea
hourly deject us from that state, wherein True Felicity consists.

The XII. Conclusion.
Yet notwithstanding a certain Inchoate Felicity (or as 'twere the First Fruits
of happiness) may be had in this life. In the heart of man we may conceive a
double rest, viz. either of the appetite it self, or of the motions and
stirrings of the appetite. The former, which is indeed a beginning of
happiness, a man may, perhaps perfectly, obtain in this life; for it is
nothing else, but the determining or settling of our desire upon that object,
which is in Truth our last end. It Is true, in a general notion all men do
naturally desire to be happy (because it is natural for every thing to desire
at least that perfection which is proper to his kind,) yet in particular, or in
regard to their endeavors or motions to attain happiness, they do as
generally mistake, few of them knowing where to find it, or in what Thing it
consists: and therefore we see their desires thereof are commonly unequal,
irregular, and restless. But when once a man has found, that his happiness
consists in the Contemplation or knowledge of God, and is resolved to make it
his chief business, study, and care to advance himself therein, his appetite
becomes in that respect satisfied and quiet: But yet again, because this
knowledge of God is not perfect in this life, but rather in continual
advancement toward perfection; therefore we say in that second sense, that the
appetite is not satisfied, that is to say, not the motions and stirrings
thereof, which indeed never cease, but are continually laboring and
endeavoring after greater perfection in that Contemplation; and this so much
the more incessantly and strongly, by how much a man comes nearer to perfect
Beatitude, and receives, as it were beforehand, some glimpses and Irradiations
thereof. And this is that we call Felicity Inchoate or in its First Fruits.

The XIII. Conclusion.
That Christians have this Felicity Inchoate in a greater measure, then the
best of Philosophers. The reason is, because the Contemplation and Fruition of
God, which good Christians have, are in themselves greater and more perfect,
then those which the most excellent Philosophers could ever arrive unto. By
what I have elsewhere said, it is manifest, that a Christians life is not
founded upon any natural principle either within or without man, but in
something supernatural, that is to say, in the Grace of God, by which also he
is elevated unto a participation of the Divine nature. Seeing therefore that
the operation of every thing follows its Essence, (for every thing works,
so far as it can, agreeably to its own nature) by how much the nature or
essence of any thing is more perfect, by so much perfecter also is it in its
operation or working: But Grace is a thing of a much nobler and more perfect
essence then nature; and therefore the operations or effects which proceed from
thence, must needs excel those of nature. And seeing again that by how much
the operation or Action of any Thing is more perfect, by so much a greater and
more perfect delight is conceived thereupon, it must needs follow, that those
spiritual Contentments and Gusts which good Christians have with God, and in
God, do infinitely excel those of philosophers, which a best are but natural,
and such as the principle is from whence they proceed. Besides, seeing that
happiness consists in the Contemplation of God, the greater knowledge a man
has of God, the greater, that is, the more perfect is his Contemplation and
Fruition of him: But this is certain that Christians have greater knowledge of
God, then philosophers; as well in regard of the light of Grace, which perfects
that of nature, and reveals unto Christians many excellent mysteries altogether
unknown to philosophers; as also in regard of that Purity of heart, which, as
we have showed elsewhere, true Christians do enjoy in a more excellent measure
then others: The delights therefore which Christians enjoy in their
Contemplation of God are much greater in themselves and more perfect, then
those which the best of philosophers could have. And seeing that this
happiness Inchoate, which we speak of, does consist in that Contemplation and
Fruition of God which is attainable in this life, it follows, that it is more
perfectly attained by Christians then philosophers. Lastly, this happiness
Inchoate is so much greater and more perfect, by how much it comes nearer to
Felicity consummate, or that of the next life: But the Felicity of Christians,
which is here begun, comes much nearer to Felicity Consummate, then that of
philosophers; for as much as no man shall ever actually attain heaven but by
Grace, (which the philosophers neither had nor knew;) it is manifest therefore,
that true Christians are more justly esteemed happy in this world, then
philosophers: and if then they much more then any other sort of men.

The XIIII Conclusion.
THat the delights which good Christians find in the Contemplation of God, do
surpass all the delights of this world, whither sensitive or intellectual.
Three things commonly concur to the causing of delight, First the object, or
presence of some good; Secondly the subject or Thing whereto that good is
present; Thirdly the union or Conjunction of these Two together, which is
always accompanied with some knowledge or reflection of the faculty upon its
proper Act; as for example, in delights of the taste, there is required some
pleasant meat perhaps or such like thing, Secondly the organ or subject of taste
rightly disposed, Thirdly union of these, that is, application of meat to the
palate, together with attention of the mind to what is done; for indeed without
this nothing is done: For should the meat be never so delicious in it self, yet
if it were put into the mouth of a man asleep, certainly he would be little
affected with it, for no sensation would be. We are therefore in the first
place to observe, that the Good which delights us, the perfecter it is in it
self, the greater delight it causes: now it is certain, that Intellectual
natures are much more perfect, then things sensitive; and that the first verity
is infinitely more perfect then all the rest: it is therefore most able and sit
to cause the greatest delectations. We are to observe in the second place, that
the faculty likewise, by how much it is more exquisite and perfect, so much the
greater delectation is co^ceived in the work thereof: for the quality of
delight follows immediately that of operation; therefore the more perfect
operation is, the perfecter is the delight; but as we said, the perfecter the
faculty be, the perfecter is also the operation: now of the same faculty, that
is to be accounted the more perfect operation, which does more perfectly
comprehend and reach its object. Seeing therefore the understanding is a more
exquisite faculty then sense, the operation thereof must needs be more perfect
then that of sense, and consequently a greater delight must be had in the Acts
thereof, then in the Acts of sense. But now among all the Acts which the
understanding exercises, incomparably the most perfect is the Contemplation of
the first verity; in that Contemplation therefore the most perfect delight is
found. Thirdly, we are to consider, that the nearer or more intimate the union
of the object and faculty is, the greater also in that respect is the delight;
But the object of the understanding is far more intimately united unto the
faculty Intellective, then the object of sense is to the sense; for always
spiritual things do more strongly and vehemently unite, then corporal, and
especially God, or the first verity, whose union with all things is
inexplicably intimate; therefore of necessity by the union of God unto the
understanding that is, by Contemplation of God the greatest delight is
obtained. We see therefore both in regard of the nature and perfection of the
object it self, as also of the faculty, and union of both, that the delights
which follow the Act of the understanding do infinitely excel those which
follow the operations of sense, and that those which follow upon the
Contemplation of God Almighty are incomparably greatest of all. Now seeing that
God is more perfectly understood by Christians, then by any other sort of men,
yea then by the most excellent philosophers themselves, as before we have
shown; and that the natural light of their understanding is by the light of
grace infinitely perfected, and that the union of God with the soul, and of the
soul with God through the means of Grace is the most admirable of all unions,
it follows, as we said, as well from the nature of the object it self, as of
the faculty and union both, that the delights, which Christians have in the
Contemplation of God, do infinitely surpass the delights of this world not
only sensitive but Intellectual also. Moreover, seeing that in every
particular sort of Things there may be observed some one that is chief,
principal, and most excellent in that kind, and as it were the measure and
rule of the rest, by approximation whereunto the rest are judged to be more or
less perfect in that kind; as for example, in the Classis or praedicament of
hot Things Fire is reconed to be supreme, and as it were the standard of all
other heats, every thing being judged to be so much the hotter, by how much it
comes nearer to the degree of fire: seeing therefore that God Almighty in the
order of blessed and Glorious objects is incomparably supreme and more
excellent then all others; Those Things which approach nearest to the
perfections of God, or are most like him, must needs be not only more perfect
in themselves, but also more capable of the most ravishing contentments: but
it is certain that the u^derstanding of man or his Intellective part, comes
nearer unto a likeness with the divine nature then the sensitive, and
therefore the delights of that must be greater then those of sense; and seeing
that the soul of a Christian by means of Grace and other supernatural
privileges bestowed on her, comes nearer unto God, then any other which is not
in Grace, as is manifest by what we have elsewhere said, it follows, that the
True Christian does more participate of divine pleasures then any man
whatsoever. But this is to be understood principally of perfect Christians: for
we confess such as be imperfect do meet with many impediments, by which their
Contemplation of Divine Things is obstructed and troubled, and consequently the
delights, which otherwise they might receive, and which perfect men certainly do
receive in such Contemplations, sometimes is utterly lost, always much abated:
yet not withstanding even that very little, which they do receive, through the
fervor of Charity or divine Love, becomes so sweet and pleasant to them, that
for it alone they do absolutely despise all the contentments of this world,
saying with the Prophet Better is one day in thy Courts, then a Thousand
elsewhere. Whence also it follows, that seeing all true Christians more or less
do a void the pleasures of this world, and with studious affection at least
pretend unto divine Contemplation, yea even when their taste and feelings of God
are but yet imperfect; it follows, I say, that the least delight proceeding in
this manner from God does infinitely surpass the greatest of the world,
according as one servant of God has told us in the name of all the rest: my
soul says he upon a time, refused to be comforted: I did but think upon God;
and I was drowned in delight. And although this may seem incredible to carnal
men, yet we ought not to wonder, for such have not the taste of the spirit. But
be washed, O ye sinners, and make you clean: Away with your evil devses; cease
to do perversely, learn to do well Come, disprove me if you can: or, if you
cannot; Confess, that the things which we preach unto you are True.

The XV. Conclusion.
THat Christians in the Contemplation of Christ crucified also do find
inestimable delectations. We come to the knowledge of Invisible things in this
life by the means of things visible; because, as philosophy teaches, our
understanding naturally follows the fantasy, that is, apprehends nothing, but
what is prepared, as it were, and offered to her from thence. Now there is no
visible object in the world which can more effectually lead us unto the
knowledge and contemplation of divine things, then the Consideration of Christ
crucified proceeding from a lively Faith. Because indeed nothing can more
effectually declare the goodness and inestimable charity of God toward man.
For seeing, that to be loved is a thing of it self very agreeable to nature, to
be beloved in this manner of God, that is, unto so high a pitch, that he should
vouchsase to be crucified himself for us, who can think, but that it is a
pleasure of all pleasures to conceive? Now such a love of God toward us, does
the consideration of Christ crucified present unto our minds, and therefore of
necessity must cause in them ineffable delectations. Besides, hope of Good is a
thing which naturally causes delight, as making in some sort the good we hope
for, present to us: and the greater and more certain the good is which we hope,
so much the greater and more perfect delight is caused: But there can be no
greater good imagined, then that which Christians hope for by the Passion; nor
more certain, for as much as they are assured thereof by God himself, who for
that intent, namely that he might make it sure to them, was Crucified:
Therefore from such hope, so great, so sure, Christians cannot but receive
singular Consolation. Thirdly, Admiration is naturally accompanied with
delight, for as much as he which wonders at any thing is commonly possessed
also with some great desire and hope to know what the matter is, at which he
finds himself to wonder. Now what more admirable, yea astonishing, then that
God Almighty should be made man, and dye upon a Gibbet to save men? Seeing
therefore that Christians in the Contemplation of Christ's Passion do consider
this, and also conceive most firm hope, to attain one day unto an absolute
assurance and sight of so rare a mystery, how can they be otherwise affected
then with excess of delight? Fourthly, seeing God Almighty is so infinitely
perfect and great, it was not possible, that by any one creature he could be
competently expressed, but it seemed necessary to his Divine wisdom to create
an Universe of Creatures, that is, this whole world, in the latitude and
variety whereof the Spirit of man might have scope enough, and find infinite
examples, wherein to contemplate, even unto ravishment, the singularities of
his perfection. And seeing in like manner that the goodness of the same God
our blessed Savior does as infinitely surpass all humane understanding, not
one only, or some few, but a million, a numberless multitude, of divine,
gracious, and stupendous works were requisite by him also to be done; but to
express it in some part, in the meditation of which our souls are fed, yea
glutted as it were, with admiration and content: Amongst which none bearing
more lively or legible Characters of his Love, then that of his Passion; it
follows that in his Passion, and the Contemplation thereof, greatest content
must be found: as experience also proves in an infinite number of Christians,
who by their actions have more then sufficiently shown the sense they have had
of the Cross of our Savior. It were an endless labor to go about to
express them, the infinite variety, the multitude and excess of those joys,
which the servants of God have tasted from time to time, and do daily taste in
this kind: The lives, yea, the deaths of those ancient Christans do abundantly
testify how great they were; who in infinite multitudes of both sexes, and of
all Conditions, men and women, for the name and for the love of this crucified
Jesus, not only patiently endured all sorts of persecutions and affliction,
but even exulted and leapt for joy in the midst of their tortures, dying rather
through the extremity of their delights, then pain. The number of Monks and
other solitary persons is infinite, who in all times for the love of Jesus have
withdrawn themselves from the world, and made choice to live in wildernesses
and caves of the earth, poor, naked, destitute of all things, save the comforts
of divine Love, only to attend unto this Contemplation. Lastly the learnedest
Doctors, and wisest men of the world, how often have they abandoned not only
the pleasures and vanities of the world, (which were scarce worthy of them) but
even their most pleasing and most commendable Studies, yea their own selves
also, for the love and Contemplation of this Jesus?

The XVI Conclusion.
THat the holy Scriptures do exceedingly elevate the mind of good Christians
unto these Contemplations. First, because All Scripture generally does relate
unto Christ crucified, according to that of the Apostle. The end or scope of
the law is Christ. And for as much as writing in its own nature, is but the
sign of words spoken, as speech is of conceptions or thoughts; because our
thoughts do always proceed from some interior light or Illustration of the
mind, by how much that light is greater and more excellent, so much the greater
also and more perfect must the Conceptions be, and the speech consequently more
powerful, and the writing, wherein that speech is represented more admirable
and profound. Now light supernatural is always greater and more perfect then
natural; And seeing also that there be several degrees in that light, it
cannot be doubted, but the Prophets, Apostles and Evangelists, had the greatest
measures thereof, as being the men whom Almighty God was pleased so singularly
to Illuminate, as that neither in writing nor preaching they could so mistake,
as to deliver falsehood for truth: Therefore also were their meditations, their
speech and all expressions of themselves always profound, powerful, and
serious: He therefore that presumes to understand their writings without
supernatural Illustration, is as wise as he that would have a bird to fly
without wings: of which sort yet there are some in the world, viz. certain
Philosophers, Rhetoricians, Grammarians, Poets of this age, who not knowing or
not considering the profundity of sacred Scriptures, do venture upon them with
the same temerity, as they do upon Tully, Hortensius or some other of their
windy Authors; and perhaps not finding in them those flashes of elegance, or
subtilty, to which themselves are accustomed, presently they fall to flight and
think meanly of them, imagining (weak men) nothing to be so sublime as Plato's
Philosophy, no eloquence comparable to some piece of Cicero. But he which
dwells in heaven, shall (one day) laugh these men to scorn, yea our Lord
shall have them in derision. For indeed, the natural man perceives not the
things of the Spirit of God, for they seem foolishness unto him, neither can
he understand them, because they are spiritually discerned. But the true
Christian, the man that has supernatural light in him, shall discern them:
and if with pure intention and an humble heart he set himself to the reading of
holy Scriptures, meditating or considering well what he reads, and begging the
grace of divine illumination, with constancy and perseverance, from God; This
man, I say, shall doubtless be wonderfully elevated by reading, and fitted for
divine favors, and shall find those endless and immortal pleasures in them,
which do incomparably exceed the greatest of this world. For this is certain,
every Thing is best delighted with that which is connaturall unto it, as
different humors do always affect different recreations, according to that of
the Poet -- -- Trahit sua quemque voluptas.
Every man has his own fancy.
But unto him that is endued with supernatural light, the most natural, that
is, most agreeable study of all is certainly the study of holy Scriptures,
which proceeded from that same fountain of light. Therefore also in the reading
and contemplation of them the true Christian finds his greatest content.
Besides, every Thing is best pleased in such kind of Action as is most proper
for it self; But there is nothing more proper for a Christian then the
Contemplation of Christ crucified by the study of Scripture: For should he go
about to conceive or meditate of him merely according to natural reason, or
the principles of Philosophy, neglecting Scripture, he would certainly find
less proficiency, and perhaps run himself into some hazard of dangerous
error: for such contemplation were purely natural, imperfect, and by which he
should never attain unto the mysteries of Faith: of which thing we have
examples in our modern Divines, who seeming to give themselveus wholly to
Aristotle and the study of Philosophy are become generally less devout, less
Contemplative then the meanest of the people. Besides; Truth which is the
object of understanding, the higher it is the greater delight it causes in the
acquisition; now the verityes of holy Scripture are the most high and
mysterious of all other, because they treat principally of such things as be
undiscernable by natural light. Again in regard of the inconstancy of man's
nature, which is never long delighted with the same thing, but always affects
variety and change of pleasure, the sacred Scriptures do become a most
agreeable exercise to our spirit. For how admirable, how ravishing is that
variety we meet with in them, of Histories, of senses, of Types, of Figures?
and yet a most exquisite harmony between them all, All the parts, All the Books
of the Old and New Testament, exactly consenting in one, and pointing unto the
same general and supreme verity or end, which is the love of God and our
neighbor: of which while they treat sometime historically and plainly,
sometime more mystically and profoundly, they do as it were, present a nose-gay
of celestial and various flowers unto our soul, which continually changing, do
yet most constantly increase spiritual content: We conclude therefore, that in
the reading and meditation of holy Scripture most exquisite delights be found.

The XVII. Conclusion.
THat a good Christian, the more simply, that is to say, sincerely he lives,
the greater consolation he has from God, from our Lord Jesus Christ, and from
the study of holy Scriptures. This is true, whither we speak of simplicity only
Interior, or that of the heart: for the understanding or mind of man together
with his affections, the more pure and sincere they be, so much the more do
they render him fit and capable of divine Illustrations: For this simplicity of
heart does indeed require that we be altogether purged from terrene and gross
affections, to the end that a man's spirit might be entirely set upon God, and
by this simplicity or purity, as much as may be, made like unto him. It is true
also, in regard of simplicity exterior, or that which consists in the
Actions and conversation of men, as is manifest: For to contemplate well divine
mysteries, it is necessary that the heart of man be in great rest, and very
well composed in it self: and therefore we see commonly, that those who desire
to partake of divine Illuminations, do retire themselves, as much as may be,
from the noise and disturbances of the world, as of the Spouse in the Canticles
it is said, I will lead her into the wilderness, says he, that is, into
solitude, and there will I speak to her heart. And in an other place, He shall
sit alone, and keep silence because, by so doing, he shall be lifted up above
himself. And contrariwise we see, the richer a man is, and more incombred with
worldly affairs, the less is he affected unto contemplation; but where a man's
outward affairs are few or none, there is always less distraction of mind.
Therefore our holy Fathers and predecessors in the Contemplative life, were
always wont to renounce their affairs of the world, and retire themselves into
Solitude, thereby more promptly and readily to attend Divine Meditations. Every
man therefore in his particular degree and quality shall find, the more simply
and uprightly he endeavors to live, the greater Consolations he shall receive
from God and from Christ.

The XVIII. Conclusion.
THat the Christian life is the only Blessed life. Never was there, nor ever
shall be found out any kind of life more happy then that, because none better.
If therefore the life of any men may be accounted happy in this world, it is
certainly that of Christians. For if we observe, it comprehends all those
perfections, wherein the Philosophers anciently placed happiness, and so has
whatsoever they judged good and desirable: as for example, if we place
happiness, as some of them did, in the Contemplation of God and things Divine,
there is none more excellent and perfect then those which the Christian life
affords. If we place it in moral virtue, and in the life active, that is, in
good government of our selves and others, there is no better to be desired by
man, then that which Christian Philosophy prescribes. If we place it in
riches, honors, powers, dignities, or other goods of the body, (though this
may seem hardest) yet the Christian life is not altogether incapable of these,
and has no absolute repugnance to them: for we say, Whatsoever perfection
appears in the effect, is some way or other in the cause; as the Sun, which
causes heat in all inferior bodies, is it self also, at least virtually hot:
it is not indeed necessary, the cause should contain every particular
perfection of the effect formally and in the same manner as the effect does; it
suffices, that it be contained eminently, as we say, or by some more excellent
way, then it is in the effect. So in proportion we also say, that the Christian
life does comprehend, yea afford all those goods which Secular men do so much
desire, though not in such manner as they commonly affect and hunt after them,
but in a better, that is, in a due and congruous subordination of them unto
superior goods. For the Christian life, being as it is a life of wisdom, a
life of most perfect prudence and discretion, when we see that the things which
the world so much admireth, riches, honors, pleasures, etc. are by them ( viz.
good Christians) in a manner neglected, we cannot but conclude that they find
themselves satisfied otherwise; that is, possessed of riches, honors pleasures
etc. of a more noble and more excellent nature then those be, which they seem
to despise. For having the grace of God, and our Savior Christ himself
dwelling in them by Faith, they conceive themselves thereby in possession of so
great a good, that in comparison thereof, there is little else worthy of their
desires. They have also hereby an assured hope to recover in the Resurrection,
whatsoever Beauty or other ornaments of the body, here they might seem to want,
yea in that degree of excellency and glory, which the heart of man cannot now
conceive, and to enjoy with Christ for ever, that life and endless felicity,
of which the Apostle speaks. Eye has not scen, nor the ear heard, neither
has it entered into the heart of man to conceive, what Things God has prepared
for them that love him. And hence we observe, that good Christians be generally
of a cheerful and pleasing Conversation, not seeming either to desire, or to
fear any thing overmuch in this world, and to be as it were, out of the
Gunshot of inordinate sorrow; according as it is written, Nothing shall grieve
the Just man of whatsoever happens unto him; and as it was said of the
Apostles of our Savior, They went from the Council rejoicing, that they were
held worthy to suffer reproach for the name of Christ.

The XIX. Conclusion.
THat it is no hard matter to attain Christian life, and therein by Gods help
to persevere unto the end. The principal thing required thereto is the grace
of God, that grace I mean, which is not only a mere gift of God, or freely
given, but that which makes a man formally gracious with God, or just. This
indeed is only to be had from God, but he, through his Infinite and Immense
Goodness being so ready and inclined to give it unto them that ask, in that
respect there is no difficulty to attain Christian life. For if he spared not
his own son, as the Apostle argues, but delivered him up for us all, how
shall he not with him give us, and that easily, all Things? There is also
required some disposition on our part to receive the grace of God, which yet
renders not the attaining of Christian life, nor perseverance therein through
Grace, difficult or hard. For can it be hard for a man to do that which is in
his own power? Can it be hard for a man to do that which natural reason tells
him is best, is for his own good, and in his own election? Let a man therefore
but observe three precepts, and he shall find the attaining and perseverance in
Christian life by Gods grace, easy. The first is, That he have continual
Thoughts and reflections upon the miseries of Humane life, and especially upon
the hour and issues of his death. For seeing that man dies, as all other
creatures do, he ought often thus to think and reason with himself; To what
purpose do I thus labor? What good do all these Riches and Honors do me? I am
sure to dye and leave them all. I am sure to dye, yet the hour and time of my
death is most uncertain. What if I dye to day? as it is possible enough, what
good would it then do me, to have had the whole world at command? Or thus; If
the condition of man and beast be alike (as in death we seem,) truly we men are
a great deal more unhappy then they: for unto bruit beasts Nature it self
provideth a convenient food, convenient clothing, houses, and other
necessaries for their life, which we men have not, but with a great deal of
labor and pains. Beasts are satisfied with that only which is present, never
taking care for the future, as man does, who is never contented with what he
has, but still desiring insatiably more, and vexed with a Million of cares for
that which is to come. Beasts are not subject to half those infirmities of body
which man is, sickness, weakness, weariness, etc. and for those of the mind,
tribulations, anxieties, distresses, which we suffer in infinite variety every
day, they know them not. Beasts are content with a little, their desire is
presently satisfied with but a small provision; but the desires of man are
without end; his heart is restless, inscrutably perverse and miserable with
all. Lastly, beasts have no Thoughts of any future life, nor of the Immortality
of Soul, about which men are extremely perplexed, almost in continual dread
and apprehensions of going, after all the troubles and toylings of this life,
unto pains eternal. If therefore our soul be not indeed Immortal, there is no
creature so miserable as man: But if it be Immortal, then certainly our final
rest is not here, but must be sought in some other life. And seeing that it
were an absurd thing to imagine that man, whom both God and nature have made
the most noble and most excellent of all other Creatures, should yet be found
to be of them all the most miserable, we must confess some other happiness
reserved for him, or else deny the providence of God over his works. For seeing
that in the world many Things daily appear new, which were not before, and that
nothing can possibly make it self, or give Being to it self; it cannot be
doubted but that every Thing in the world is made to be, by something else
which was before it; unless we will be such fools, as to say, All things come
to pass by chance, that is by nothing (for chance is nothing but our ignorance
or non-praevision of the true cause) a paradox sufficiently confuted by the
very order of the universe, and that wonderful regularity which is observed
yea sensible in all the proceedings of nature. And seeing again, that in causes
subordinate, we may not run from one to an other in infinitum, we must pitch at
last upon some one, which shall be the first and general cause of all; and
This is confessed to be God: whence also we see, that without any discourse of
Argument, but by mere instinct of nature men generally acknowledge God, and
also worship him in some way or other: nor was there ever man found that could
settle in the opinion that There was no God. And that God has providence over
the world, the course of nature, as we said even now, sufficiently shows, and
the Philosophers themselves confess, saying, that the work of nature is the
work of an Intellect which erreth not. And although it has come in dispute
among them, whither God has providence over humane affairs (perhaps in regard
of the great irregularities and deviations which seem to be in them, more then
in other things) yet certainly it cannot be denied by any wise man, but that he
has over them, and over all, and over the least, as much as over the greatest.
Because Providence in every Thing is so much the more perfect and more
excellent, by how much it further extends it self and takes care of more
Things; seeing then that the Providence of God must be acknowledged the most
perfect of all, it must also of necessity extend it self to all Things, it must
leave nothing unprovided for, it must overpasse nothing. We observe also in all
causes a natural and vehement inclination, as it were to govern and perfect
their effects; as for example, in bruit beasts, what an admirable and great
care have they of their young ones? Seeing therefore that whatsoever good is in
the second causes, they have it from the first, to which they do all naturally
desire, so much as may be, to assimilate themselves, it is manifest that the
first and general cause of all things (as it were a Common Parent) must have a
great and exact care over all particular effects, seeing he is the cause of
all. Beside, if God has not providence over humane affairs, what is the
reason? is it because he cannot? or because he knows not how to govern them? or
lastly because he will not? none of these can be imagined of God. For shall we
think of God, that he cannot, or knows not how to execute that, which man
both knows and also is able to do? and if but a good man, who has ability
and skill to order affairs is also ever willing of his own part to do it, shall
we think of God, who is most able, most skillful and wise, and also insinitely
good, that he should be less willing? Again, if God Almighty had not care of
humane affairs, why has he given man such a natural instinct and inclination
to worship him? God and nature, we use to say, do nothing in vain. We conclude
therefore, that it is an argument only of madness or a distempered mind to
say There is no God, or that God is, but has not providence or care over us
men; and that it is the part and duty of a wise man not only to know, but
continually to consider that there is a Governor over the world, who has the
same particular providence over men, that he has over other natural Things,
that is, to conduct and guide them all by due means unto their proper and last
ends. And because it is his property to dispose All Things sweetly, he guides
every one of them to their ends in such manne; as is most congruous and
agreeable to their several natures, and man in particular Freely according to
that liberty of his will, which is natural to him. From whence it is also,
that among men, some are good, and some are evil: The good are they whose life
is agreeable to reason, conforming themselves to such Illuminations and
Inspirations as they have from God, in all things studying and endeavoring to
please him: The evil are those who follow not reason, nor observe any
rectitude or regularity of life. If therefore the Divine Majesty has
providence over humane affairs, and be Just, as he is, he must certainly have
determined with himself both to reward the good, and to punish such as be
evil: But this we see not done, at least not exactly, not particularly, in
this life, therefore we must confess some other life to come, wherein the
rewards of the Just and punishments of the wicked shall be more eminently seen.
Which if it be so, how much does it concern us to please God by a good life?
And seeing, as we have elsewhere shown, that there can be no better life, then
the Christian life is, it is to no purpose for us to seek any where else how to
live, or how to please God: for a life so led cannot be without its due reward,
cannot be frustrated of that happiness which is promised to it; if it could,
there were no life sure of happiness: for the life of Christians in many
respects shows that God has peculiar providence over them; and therefore if
their faith were not true, neither could their life so much be governed by it,
nor would God sufter them long in that error, whose Goodness it is to
Illuminate those which are Good and right of heart, and to harden and leave in
blindness only those which are evil. If therefore These Things be so, let us
believe in Christ, and let us live Christianly, for so doing, as is manifest by
what has been said, we cannot perish, but must be happy in this world and in
the next.

After a man has by this first consideration prepared himself, and is resolved
to do what he can to attain Christian life, the second Precept to be given him
is this, viz. That he seriously consider what that thing is, wherein Christian
life does as it were essentially consist; which is the grace of God; I mean that
grace, which as we touched before does justify and make a man good in the
sight of God. For we observe some men as soon as they begin to have a desire of
living Christianly, they presently apply themselves to the Ceremonies of
religion, and performing them exteriourly, they imagine all on the sudden, that
they are become exceeding good Christians: with which vanity many deceive
themselves, pretending to be Christians, but falsely, being indeed a foolish,
lukewarm, yet very arrogant sort of people. Men indeed looking only on the
outside, praise what they see, but God beholds the heart, and says to these
men, as our Savior said to the Pharisees, ye are they who justify your selves
before men but God knows your hearts; for many times that which is of high
esteem with men is abomination before God. He therefore that desires indeed to
live Christianly, let him endeavor with the utmost of his power to obtain the
grace of God not resting, til by some good signs and arguments he can probably
persuade himself that he has obtained it. And because the Grace of God is
given in and by the Holy Sacraments to all those who devoutly and worthily come
unto them, let him prepare himself in the second place to receive the
Sacraments, with the best disposition and diligence he can: In particular, If
he be a believer, but yet not Baptized, let him prepare himself, and come to
the Sacrament of Baptism, with atrue, sincere Faith, and good Intention; If he
be already a Christian, but guilty of sins, let him come with true Contrition,
pure Confession, and perfect Satissaction, and submit himself to the Sacrament
of Penance, and thereby also devoutly sit himself for the Sacrament of the
Eucharist: and in this course let him persist constantly, until by some good
conjectures he find, that he may have obtained the Grace of God. Now the best
of that sort, especially for beginners, seem to be these, viz. if he find in
himself a great and carnest dislike of his sins past, and of himself for them,
a serious intention never to return to them again, a firm purpose to live
hereafter according to the law of God, and the duties of that state wherein he
is, a delight and taking pleasure in divine matters, and in doing of good
works, a contempt of the world and of all worldly things, lastly a longing
desire of the life to come, with a weariness of this present. He that by such
signs as these shall perceive, that by Gods grace he is become a Christian,
must also know, that in the way of God, not to go forward, is to go backward;
and that he only goes forward, who finds himself to grow daily stronger and
more fervent in the grace of God, and in all virtue: Now this is chiesly
procured by continual Prayers, as we have said elsewhere, which no man can
make rightly, but he that studyeth Simplicity; that is to say, Sincerity or
purity of heart, integrity of conversation, together with neglect or renouncing
of whatsoever is supersluous. He therefore that desires to live Christianly
according to the duty of that State, wherein he intends to fix and settle
himself, must be careful (as we say) to live Simply; that is, Innocently,
Purely, and undissemblingly, and in a word, answerably in all things to what
his profession requires, so as he may be always, as much as possible, intent
upon Divine and Good Things; I mean, upon the Service of God by Prayer,
Meditation, and other Duties of Religion, or upon the Service of his Neighbor,
by works of mercy, spiritual, corporal, at home and abroad. But because it is
difficult, yea almost impossible to give instructions here, proper for all
persons, by reason of the different estates and conditions of men, I shall
advise every one, who has desire to live indeed this life of a Christian, to
address himself to some good Ghostly-Father, who by his learning and
experience may be able to direct him; and according to his counsel to govern
himself in his spiritual affairs. But let him take heed, that he fall not into
the hands of these lukewarm and indifferent Confessors, who have indeed some
form or show of piety, but renounce the power thereof. It may be thought
perhaps very hard to escape such persons, who have outwardly pretenses of
sanctity, and God only is the discerner of hearts: Nay whereas it is said, by
their fruits ye shall know them, though they be indeed but a kind of
hypocrites and dissemblers, yet have they some appearance of good works. How
then shall we know them? I say still, it shall not be difficult to know them,
for any man that desires to walk uprightly; seeing it is written; Light is
sprung up even in darkness, to the upright in heart. And in another place,
Your anointing shall teach you all things. And even in natural things we see,
those which have different forms can never absolutely agree, especially if
those forms be contrary: now the form, that is to say, the spirit and
disposition of a true Christian, and of a formalist, are as contrary as can be;
the one, that is to say, the true Christian, looking only at the service of
God; the other, ever to his own interest; therefore it is impossible they should
resemble in all things, and consequently impossible, that the true Christian,
who is himself zealous for God, and of a right intention, should not disoern
him who is but lukewarm and an hypocrite; especially after some conversation,
and that the Anointing of the Holy Ghost, as was said, Illuminates him. As soon
therefore as it appears that the Father, whom he has chosen, is one of those
who are not as they should be, let him fly from him as he would fly from a
Serpent; for as Solomon says, He that walks with the wise shall be wise; but
the friend of fools shall become like unto them. But having found a good man
indeed, let him open the very secrets of his heart to him, let him often and
plainly confess his sins, and according to his advise let him frequent the
holy Communion: for as we have shown elsewhere, amongst all the Ceremonies of
Religion, the Sacraments of Penance and of the Eucharist are most efficacious
both to cause, to augment, and to preserve Grace. And therefore it is the duty
of every good Christian to keep himself diligently in estate, to frequent those
Sacraments with devotion.

After that a man is thus become a Christian, and labors to live Christianly,
the Third precept I am to give him is This, That he consider well, that by many
Tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of God. For we say in Christian
Religion, that to live well we must do good and suffer evil, and so persevere
unto death. He therefore that desires to live like a Christian, must prepare
and fit himself for tribulation, according to that of the wise man, My son
when thou come to serve God, says he, stand in fear, and prepare thine heart
for Temptation; because adversity foreseen does less trouble us. And that he
may more easily endure that which comes, let him often remember the labors and
passions of our Blessed Savior, and of his Saints, as well of the New as the
Old Testament: let him read frequently the histories and lives of the Saints,
because, as the Apostle faith, Whatsoever things are written, for our learning
they are written, that we by Patience and Consolation of the Scriptures might
have Hope: let him often, yea continually if it were possible, have before his
eyes the shortness of this life, and the eternity of that which is to come,
that is to say, the eternity of our glory or pains. For seeing nothing can
hinder, but that this short life of ours must quickly pass away, and that at
the end of this we must of necessity arrive at the other, which never shall
have end, whosoever shall seriously and duly think of this, will surely less
regard the troubles of the world; nay, he will think himself happy, if by them
he can escape those eternal pains of hell, and gain heaven though at last. He
must also remember, that God Almighty has prepared most excellent rewards for
all those who for his Sake, suffer temptations and persecutions here, as it is
written, Eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, neither has it entered into the
heart of man, what things God has prepared for them that love him. He that
thinks of this, will not certainly much shrink at any temporary tribulations,
but rather be ready to cry out, confessing with the Apostle, that the passions
of this present life are not equal to the Glory which is to come, which shall
be revealed in us by the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. To whom with the
Father and the Holy Ghost be ascribed Glory and Dominion through all ages for
ever. Amen.

FINIS.

