An additionall Answer to a Pamphlet called A Remonstrance, written by Mr.
George Lilburne, or to so much of it as concerns Thomas Saunders; Esquire.
AND to so much of the Remonstrance of George Lilburne (stiling himself
Esquire, though it would puzzle a Herald to make it appear) as concerns
Thomas Saunders, who (being Familiae Equestris on both sides for descents not a
few, but Genus and proavos and quae non fecimus ipsi vix ea nostra voco-) may
challenge to the like. I the said Thomas affirm and say* That Mr Lilburne has
not dealt with me as a Gentleman, who being by my late employment his equal,
and he by his iterated professions my friend, confirmed again by a late visit
at my house, where eating of my broth he (to borrow an old homely, but true
proverb) now pisseth many dish, and asperseth me, (as maliciously, so untruly)
for confederating with Mr Blaxton and Mr Colston (both whom it is not unknown
he mortally loves) to cheat the State of above one thousand pounds. And (to
that end) the hand of one Mr. John Duncalfe (says her) was counter feited (to
challenge me in person, he neither can nor dares, and therefore Dolose versatur
in generalibus) to a threehanded Certificate, to make the Act valid. But to the
particulars (or to so much as concerns me) I might say and answer, as once Sr
John Salisbury did, to a voluminous and scandalous Bill in Star Chamber, That
there was nothing therein to be found true, saving only his Defendants name.
I say, it is true, that Mr Lilburne, my self, and others, su veyed the
mentioned Lands and Woods of Frankland. As true that we called (and impaneled
too if he please) a Jury (some of them perhaps wiser then our selves) of 15 men
for our Assistants. But that they with us, surveyed the same upon Oath, who at
any one time were never together with us on the said grounds, or examined all
Writing and Records concerning the Manor, (as he affirms) is nothing true. And
Mr Lilburne forgets that it is the part of Surveyors (of which every man so
caded is not capable) to examine Writings and Records, and make Returns
(proper) and not of Jurors, who are usually men of an inferior understanding
and alloy To Mistresle Blaxtons (as follows in his paper) coming to Mr
Lilburn in her hasbands name, and that by his means (desiring his favor)
(observe only his, and that here was a particular application though not a
confederacy) that a Right for Howsboot, Free-boot (he means Fireboot surely)
might be returned as belonging to the Manor of Newton, for which no Evidence
or Writing was (for the present) produced, and his answer thereto in the
plural, that we (meaning the Surveyors) could do no such unjust act. Mr
Lilburne may remember, that ^aches were then made, and examinations taken, and
that some of the July did aver they had lately seen such a Deed, and whereof use
and fruit had been made and taken, for many years, to their own knowledge. And
I believe Mr Lilburne would be loath to lose his rights, because he may
(possibly since these times) have lost his evidences. And he may further
remember, that some bo then refused, for his rigidity in this and some other
particulars (Mr Lilburnes old love to the parties whom it concerned) to set his
hand to the whole Survey, although he might not untruly say, Hos ego
versiculos feci, tulit alter honores. That Mistress Blaxton gave many
upbraiding speeches to the rest of the Surveyors, is nothing so (there was no
cause) or to Mr Lilburne himself that I remember. But this I remember, (and
blushed for his sake) that he then showed himself to be rather the more woman
of the two. As to the cheating of the State of above one thousand pounds by
confederacy with Mr Colston and Mr Blaxton, with the last of whom to my
knowledge) I had never exchanged syllable til long after the said Survey was
returned, and till after the re-survey and the quarrelled defalcations were
like wise returned; I say (and Mr Lilburne knows but wilfully suppresses it)
that orders were sent to the Surveyors, commanding them to make and return
whatsoever reprisals were due and issuing forth the saidlands, and to make up
and return with all speed, surveys of other lands not formerly perfected. And
he knows it will be proved to his face, That he was earnestly invited by Mr
Colston and my self, further to act in and by the same Commission with us
taken, in discharge of his duty to the public, as a Surveyor, which he utterly
refused to do, for very fear, the Country then being full of troubles, and he
not daring openly to adventure his so much (without any rival) beloved person.
As to the Defalcations themselves, I willingly refer me to the Records, where
it will appear that Mr Lilburne himself was guilty in returning of about 60.
l. per annum Estates due by two several patents for life, issuing forth of the
said lands (whereof one indeed of 42. l. 17. s. per annum, is his very friends.
Others doubtless were returned on as solid grounds, viz. the late Bishops
Covenant per Indenture, to allow timber and wood for the repair and upholding
of several Collieries and Mils during their leases. And these being all but for
short continuance (though most justly to be allowed) will not amount to near
the pretended sum. For the residue, allowed to the repairs of highways, and
of several bridges upon two navigable riv^rs, it amounts to 35. l. per annum,
which at 10. years purchase is easily computed. Neither is there ought of this
allowed, but upon proofs made by oaths, or custom known to all. And all this
upon supposition. viz. if these allowances are to be made out of Frankland wood
(as we know none other woods of the late Bishops now remaining and being fit
for the said uses in all that part of the Country) but I refer, as I said,
to the Records themselves, and am confident (and not without good grounds which
I suppose by this time are well known) that Mr Blaxton, though the Defalcations
be allowed to him, will willingly quit his Contract, and be contented that Mr
Lilburn shall have the bargain; provided he will prove a better chapman for the
State. See then the confederacy and cheat (by which sure I am, I am nothing
enriched) of above ^000, l. and that malice seldom, if ever, speaks truth.
But my charity compels me to hope (though some men doubt) that Mr George
Lilburne will in no wise cheat the State of greater sums, which he as a
Sequestrator (or Farmer to sequestrations by himself of his instruments) is
thought to be accomptant for. As to the counterfeiting or putting to Mr.
Duncalfes hand to a Certificate, (although it concerns not me who did it not,
yet) I shall unfold that Riddle also for truths sake; It is true that Mr.
Duncalfe was not then present, but 50. miles distant upon other business of
the State, when that Certificate was returned, but that his hand or name was
thereto put by the command of one of his fellow-surveyors, to whom he gave
power so to do, that the return might be made valid by having three hands
thereto: Mr. Duncalfe has often since averred, and approved of the return
made, and has (I think) lately given under his own hand, thereof an
attestation. But if to set his brother-Surveyors hand being absent, (and not
without his consent) to a Survey to make the same valid, be a crime, Mr Lilburn
has in his own knowledge (and others too) been shamefully abused (but I hope
no cheat to the State) that has had his hand and seal put to whole Surveyes
at which he never was, or at the most and best for a day or two, and that
principally, to adorn a charge Chair
. And I will be bold to aver and prove, that Mr. Lilburne has not for an
120. l. received of the State, done them the service of 40 days (I may well
abate ten of the number) upon all their surveyes of Lands or Collieries, in
which latter only, (and not without his own end) he is suspected to have good
skill; and good reason, for once he was a Cole-filler himself, but now a
Cole-owner. But I hope this is not in him to cheat (absit) but to do very good
and dear service to the State. You see Longiori opus est mora questionem ut
solvas quam ut proponas. And that had it not been to answer M. Lilburn in his
-- (lest he should grow wise in his own ^^nceit) I should hardly have been
induced to be as himself is, a -- in print.


