TAMERLANE THE GREAT. A TRAGEDY. As it is Acted by their Majesty's Servants AT
THE Theater Royal

By C. SAUNDERS, Gent.

-- Neque adhuc virtus in floribus ulla est,
Transit in AEstatem post Ver robustior annus,
Fitque Valens Juvenis --
Ovid. Metam. LONDON. Printed for Richard Bentley and M. Magnes in Russel
Street near Covent Garden, 1681.

THE PREFACE.
THIS Play, as it was Writ only for my divertisement at Vacant Hours, or
Recreation after severer Studies, was never designed to see the light, at least
not betray the weakness of its Author so publicly on the Stage, or more
universally in Print, had not the Communication of it to one or two Friends
spread the rumor of it so far about the Town and University, that running like
Wildfire through every place, it kindled a general expectation in all that
either knew me in my self, or by my Friends to see it in Public.

Nevertheless, their persuasions and inducements could not make me Presume, to
trust so far to my own small abilities, or to rely so much on my own weak
Judgment, as to send it forth into the World, until it had past the Censures of
some (I may say) the greatest part of the Witty and Judicious Men of the Town;
until it had received some Rules for Correction from Mr. Dryden himself, who
also was pleased to Grace it with an Epilogue, to which it ows no small part of
its success.

After this, I thought I might safely enough commit it to its Fortune, and
having had the Approbation of the Greater, I presume it was Protected from
falling under the Censure of the Lesser, and half Witted Judges.

But no sooner can a young Writer appear in the World, but he is looked upon by
those squint-eyed Pretenders, to wit, no less than some Notorious Malefactor,
or Branded Outlaw, whom all may Prosecute, Attaint, Judge, Condemn, or what
they please, cum Privilegio.

For passing by some, whose more nice Judgment, or rather prying appetite, can
find faults where few others would suspect them, some whose sharper Wit is
Satyrically employed in turning the best thoughts into Ridicule, to Ruin a
Writer, as it were betwixt Jest and Earnest; There are others who wanting the
sense to discern, what is, and where a true Fault lies, nay, sometimes to
distinguish it from a Beauty, will yet in spite of Stupidity have their share
too in Damning the Reputation of an Author; and the means they took, was to
give out, that this was only an Old-Play Transcribed.

But I hope I may easily unload my self of that Calumny, when I shall testify
that I never heard of any Play on the same Subject, until my own was Acted,
neither have I since seen it, though it has been to^d me, there is a Cockpit
Play, going under the name of the Scythian Shepherd, or Tamberlain the Great,
which how good it is, any one may Judge by its obscurity, being a thing, not a
Bookseller in London, or scarce the Players themselves, who Acted it formerly,
could call to Remembrance, so far, that I believe that whoever was the Author,
he might even keep it to himself secure from invasion, or Plagiary; But let
these who have Read it Convince themselves of their Errors, that this is no
second Edition, but an entirely new Play.

Moreover, utterly to overthrow this Objection, I must acquaint you that I drew
the design of this Play, from a late Novell, called Tamerlane and Asteria,
which I Am sure bears not half the Age of the Tragedy before mentioned, and I am
confident the Characters are quite different.

The last and worst aspertion is cast upon me, is, that I was helped by others
in the performance. But if I have not Friends that can clear me of this also, I
hope the Congruity of the Style throughout the whole Play will testify the
simplicity of the Author.

This I think may satisfy my more equal Judges, that this Trifle is mine own,
or if you will, honestly begotten between me, and my Muse, which I hope is yet
so Chaste, and her Reputation so sound, as not to have her Issue Branded with
Plurality of Fathers.

Thus we see what kind of Critics we have now-a-dayes, that can lie by the
whole sale, and Damn a Play in a Breath, that we may the more easily bear with
them who pique at word by word, and thought by thought, in a more modest retail
manner.

I shall not now strive to defend this Trifle in any particular Circumstances,
but leave it to those of a more impartial Judgment; hoping first they may not
find as many faults, as they expect, next that they would be so kind as to wink
at those which do occur, attributing them to the Youth of the Author, and
consequently his want of experience, and Judgment.

To my ingenious Friend Mr. Charles Saunders, on his Play of Tamerlane.
WHen Night has thrown her sable Vest away,
And the Sun's mounted on the Wings of day,
Bright as Parnassus all around he Guilds,
First the young Trees, and then the Mother Fields,
To Youth, and Morn such Glories offers he,
Which Age can only wonder at and see,
But when the God has reached the middle way,
He the World visits with a courser Ray,
Whips his dull Steeds, and hastens to the Sea,
Cooling his Tresses on the Amber Shore,
Then hates what he so well did love before:
Or as an Infant spring, that from the side
Of some lone Hill does through the Meadows glide,
Whose Crystal Waters as they silent pass,
Aford the Nymphs both Dress, and Looking Glass,
Who take the yellow Sands that lie below,
And on their Heads the Golden Powder throw,
Whilst the Rich Flood most prodigally decks
With Rings their fingers, and with Pearls their necks
In whose clear Stream the Heavens delight to play
Phoebus to wast the tedious Summers Day,
The Moon and Stars, the live-long Night away,
Beneath it is Spring, above, Eternal Ray,
It Is Winter Bloom, and every Season May.
But track these Beauties, and before they have run
More Miles than Youth has years, they all are gone,
Strong Tides molest its' wanton Course and over
It Is hoary swelling Head huge Tempests roar,
And all it is Glebes are Sandy like it is Shore.
Till sick with Storms and every surly Blast,
It Is forced to make the Sea its Grave at last.
On then brave Youth with Harp Divinely strung,
And sing more sweet than ever Ancients sung,
Than Orpheus, Homer, or than Cowley Young;
E're Age shall come and thou shall live to see
That Fumbling time of Love and Poetry.
Now of the Young, you all the vigor show,
And of the Old the solid Judgment too:
To you the Merits of them both belong,
Not Alexander fought so very Young,
Nor Conquered he the mighty World so soon
As you have charmed, and all the Muses won;
And wise Minerva, like a Mother fond,
With her own Wreaths thy darling Temples Crowned,
Has thee over all thy Elder Brothers placed,
And with a Benjamins large Portion graced.
But let me not in wondering at your Youth,
Forget what is due to Friendship and to Truth.
Know Wit, like Beauty, pleases where it harms;
A Checkered Serpent it is with Sting and Charms:
And happy's he that never thinks at all,
And far more happy is that lavish Fool,
That dully wastes his Fortunes on a Whore,
Than he that splits upon this dangerous Shore.
Not Spencer dead, nor Spencer now alive
Could ever find a way by Wit to thrive:
It is a Dream of Wealth, a Fairy Land,
A fickle Treasure grasped like Golden Sand,
Which, as it is held, does vanish through the Hand.
The Lethargy of the best natured Mind,
A Foe to Business, and to all unkind;
Like that too kills insensible and sure:
For he with Verse diseased, does still the more
Court his loved Plague, and itches to be poor;
A Mark where vile Pretenders lose their aim,
And even the best get but an empty Name.
Launch out young Merchant new set up of Wit,
The World's before thee, and thy Stock is great,
Sail by thy Muse, but never let her guide,
Then without danger you may safely glide
By happyer Studies steered, and quickly gain
The promised Indies of a hopeful Brain,
Bring home a Man betimes that may Create
His Country's Glory in the Church, or State.
J. Banks.

Drammatis Personae.
Tamerlane Emperor of the Tartars. Bajaset Emperor of the Turks. Sons to
Tamerlane. Arsanes Mandricard
Counselors. Odmar Abdalla
Friends to Arsanes. Axalla Zanches

Women.
Asteria Daughter to Bajaset Ispatia Wife to Mandricard Zayda Confident of
Asteria. Priests, Guards, Attendants, etc.
Scene Samarcanda.

PROLOGUE.
HOw modern Prologues differ from the Old!
Those su'd and prayed, but these huff, rail, and scold.
Now sure the Poets of our age presume
They have outdone the wits of Greece and Rome;
Who by ill-natured Satyr strive t'obtain
What they by low submission sought to Gain.
What bold Offender ever yet found Grace
By spitting vilely in his Judges Face?
Yet they so fondly do themselves esteem,
They hiss at you, yet think you should Clap them.
Nay Branding you for Fools in open Pit,
Hold it your Duty to cry up their Wit.
Vollies of Curses on your heads they send,
Damn one of them, They injured right pretend;
And with unreasonable Confidence
Excuse their Failings by your want of Sense.
Some things you may not understand, it is true;
It Is more then Oedipus himself can do.
None of your Actions can their Censure pass
Your Cravat, Wig, French-dress, or Pocket-glass,
No not so much as Whore --
Do you dress well? then rudely they Suppose
Your Tailor made your Wit, as well as Cloths.
Have you a well-becoming Wig, They Will Swear
You Bought Your falser Senses in false Hair.
Thus turn your Wit to Scorn, yet think it much
If you their husky Farce, or puffy Bombast touch.
Thus Malcontents would Laws to Rulers give,
But think it Tyranny if they receive.
Let not their railings Loyal Poets blind
That you are no Fools we by your Patience find
Fools will be Angry, but you still are Kind.
Then in that Old, not this Newfangled way
To you our Author does his Thanks repay
For your kind meeting on this happy Day
If he Offend he does your Grace Implore,
And Swears to mend, or Trouble you no more.
Theives for one Crime have often Escaped the Rope,
Nay Priests, and Plotters are not out of Hope.
Then Spare our Author for a Nobler Fate
He yet deserves your Pity, not your Hate.
(...)Magnes, in Russel Street, near Covent Garden.
ALL the Tragedies and Comedies of Francis Beumont and John Flesher, in one
Volume, containing fifty one Plays.

Tartuff, or the French Puritan.

Forced Marriage, or the Jealous Bride.

English Monsieur.

All Mistaken, or the mad Couple.

Generous Enemies.

Andromacha; A Tragedy.

Calisto: or the Masque at Court.

Country-Wit. A Comedy.

Destruction of Jerusalem, 2 parts.

Miseries of Civil War.

Henry 6. with the Murder of the Duke of Gloucester.

Nero, a Tragedy.

Gloriana, a Tragedy.

Sophonisba, or Hanibals overthrow.

Alexander the Great, or the Rival Queens.

Mithridates King of Pontus.

Caesar Borgia, Son of Pope Alexander 6.

Oedipus, King of Thebes.

Theodosius, or the Force of Love.

The Plain Dealer.

The Town-Fop, or Sir Timothy Taudry.

Abdullazar, or the Moors Revenge.

Madam Fickle: or the Witty False one.

The Fond Husband, or the Plotting Sisters.

The Virtuous Wife, or good luck at last.

The Fool turned Critic, a Comedy.

Squire Oldsap, or the Night Adventurers.

The Mistaken Husband, a Comedy.

Mr. Limberham, or the Kind Keeper.

Notes and Observations on the Empress of Morocco.

The Orphan, or unhappy Marriage.

The Soldiers Fortune.

Sertorius. A Tragedy.

Tamberlane the Great.

King Lear.

Novels Printed this Year, 1680.
The Amors of the King of Tamaran.

The Amors of the French King and Madam Laniler.

The Amors of Madam and the Count de-Guich.

The Pilgrim: A Satirical Novel on the horrible Villainies of those Persons.

The Secret History of the Earl of Essex and Queen Elizabeth.

The Policy of the Clergy of France, to suppress the Protestants of that
Kingdom.

Tamerlane the Great.
ACT I. Scene I.
The Curtain being drawn up discovers the Temple of Mahomet, in it Tamerlane,
Mandricard, Odmar, Abdalla, and Priests who sing the following Hymn. Pr. SIng
we, Alha, Lord of Fate,
Father, Ruler of this State,
In whose hand are War and Peace,
Overthrows and Victories
Sing we to thy Power Divine
At whose Nod the Heavens Bow,
To whom Gods Allegiance owe,
Whose just Favor Kings does Crown,
Monarchs perish at whose Frown,
Sing we at thy Holy Shrine.

Chapter Accept our Thanks, accept our Praise
Our solemn Vows, our Eulogies,
The Altars which our Hearts do raise
Accept the humble Sacrifice.

Pr. To thee, Alha, Virgins Sing
To thee Tune each Tender String,
Carried by an Holy Zeal
Of the Pious Matrons tell
To thy Grace Triumphant Youth
To thee glad Old Age does Kneel,
Nor do Kings, thy Power Conceal.
But all admire, all Confess
iTs thou Cursest, thou do Bless
To thee owe their Rise, and Growth.

Chapter Accept our Thanks, etc.

Pr. See the Trophies see the Spoils
The glad Harvest of our Toils
See the Scythian Majesty
Crowned with Peace and Victory
To his Scepter Turk given;
To him Conquered Asi^ bows
To him the Earth her Freedom owes.
Fear we now no blow of Fate,
It Is Just Alha rules our State,
And our King's the Care of Heaven.

Chapter Accepted are our thanks our Praise
Our Solemn Vows our Eulogies
'The Altars which our Hearts do raise
Accepted is the Sacrifice.

After the Hymn Tamerlane, Mandricard, Odmar, Abdalla, with Guards, come
forward on the Stage, and the Scene changes to the Palace. Tam. After our
Sacred Rites to Alha paid
It Is fit we show our second Thanks in Joy
And Triumphs which to Victory are due.
Let Scythia now Arrai'd in all the Pride
Of Conquered Asia dart her Glory to
The utmost Gades, and to the utmost Ind.
Let all her sleeping Monarchs rise and see,
How far her new-got Liberties Extend.
And as of Old her Virtue has alone
Assyrian and Pellaean Arms withstood,
Nor dared the flying Parthian to look back
Upon his Enemy, but by retreat
Sought Life, not Conquest. Our Faim'd Ancestors
Then boasted how they could a Foe repel,
Far greater's our Renown in Glorious Arms,
Who know to Conquer too, enlarge our sway,
And Teach the Haughty Ottoman to bow.

Man. Needless, Great Sir, was that far Boasted Gift
That Law which to your Tartary entailed
The Turkish Empire, when their Kingly Line
For want of Heirs should cease, you scorned to wait
The slow Event; (or should it be) to take
Even Empire at a Gift; but Gazing on
The Golden Prey, you thought it looked too great
To be so cheaply Bought, then Seizing it
With Danger, and the famous Lot of War
Made it your Merits due, and Valors right.

Abd. That Man who threatened all the World with ruin
That fierce, that yet unconquered Bajaset,
Whose dreadful Name so often shook Greece with Terror
And struck her Princes Dumb with fear, That Man
To whom all Asia Bowed, has Learnt to Kneel,
To Tamerlanes more Mighty Power; Avert
Ye Gods, all Nations Cry, from us the Hand
Of the all-Conquering God-like Tamerlane.

Odm. Abdalla, no; the World is pleased and silent,
Amazed, and wondering at the sudden Change,
The happy change of Monarchs, Bless their Stars
By whose kind influence doubtful Victory
Flew where Desert, and working Virtue called.
While to your Arms all Nations wished Success,
To you who should Revenge the Injured Earth
And for a Tyrant give the World a King.

Tam. Stain not with flatteries the famous Day
But rather let our Victory appear,
By her own Trophies absolute, and sure.
Let Blaze through all our Streets the Captive Moon
That Superstitious Idol of the Field.
In Solemn Process March our Slaves of War
Each Tartar to his Turkish Prey a Guard,
Your Heads with Laurel Crowned, your Hands with Spoils,
Filling with wel-come Joy the shouting Crowd.
For a Just Trophie to our own Ambition
Call here the Captive Monarch to our sight.
I would Survey each Limb of that Great Man,
Try his fierce Temper, see what awful Pride
Held in such fear the Subject Nations.

Bajaset and Asteria are brought in Bound. Baj. Death,
I Have viewed thee in a Thousand, Thousand Shapes,
When not the fear of all thy Murdring Engines,
E're shook my Soul so much, as now the thought
Of this Tongue-Combat -- give me Patience, Alha!

Tam. What Mutters he?

Baj. Infectious be my Breath,
And Blast thee ere thy Taunts can vex my Soul,
For I conceive I shall be talked to Death.

Tam. Think not, O King, we come in Proud Disdain
To thy fallen State, or scorn thy Ebbing Fortunes,
Or with Vain Glory to Commend our Deeds
Which of themselves do loudly Praise the Doer.
But as thy Conqueror and Prince to claim
A just Submission to our Power; Live,
But to our Mercy owe the Life we Give.

Baj. And do thou think the Glorious Bajaset
Can stoop so low? speak, Alha, say, my Stars
Is It just that I who held the fate of Kings
In this Right Hand, and scattered Death's among
The Tyrants of the World, as fast as words
Could mingle them; at last should hold my Life
On any upstart Power? First shall the Enfeebled Sun
Stoop down, and Borrow from the Earth his Heat,
The Stars from Northern Fires take their Light,
And Gods of Kings shall Mortal Blessings ask
E're I to thy scorned favor own a Debt.

Tam. Talk on, fond Slave, and Glut thy self with thinking,
For words and thoughts are all thy Weapons now,
Which yet thy Abject State shall prove but Vain
And make thee a much greater --

Baj. Emperor!
The Brave are always so; nor can the Fates
Debase an inborn Virtue, Oh that Frown
That Frown suits wondrous well the baleful Brow
Of an Exalted, Stern, fate-looking Tyrant!
So stretch thy self Ambitious Arrogance,
Stretch on the Wheel of Pride thy straightened Nerves
Till thy Cramped Limbs yield Music to my Ears,
Proud, Vain Usurper --

Tam. Such was Ottoman
He Built his Throne by Virtue, and I mine
Speak, if thy Pride can give a Vent to Truth
Which is the Nobler Title, fairer Name,
A Crowned Usurper, or a Captive King?

Baj. Gods! that I live to hear that vile Reproach*
By Alla it is too much -- Now could I fly
Like some Fierce Lion escaped the Hunters Hand
(His Strength by Rage Improved, Rage by Despair)
Against my Victor -- ha, Inform me Slaves
Who, or from whence was that bold Son of War
Who durst with me in dreadful Combat Join?
That Chief in sable Arms! for yet I see not
His Face in all this Crowd.

Tam. Behold thy Greatest
Most Dreadful Foe, see me Heavens fatal Scourge
Sent from above to Purge the sickly Earth
By Blood from Bloody Tyrants.

Baj. No, fond Man,
Mistake me not; that Conqueror was one
One Nobler far, and fairer to behold
Then any thy thronged Court does to my Eyes display.

Tam. Spightful and false thy base Reproaches are,
Say Odmar, speak the Valiant Mandricard,
The Mighty nothing of that Strangers Acts.

Man. Not Sir, to Lessen or Eclipse your Fame
Do I to that brave Strangers high Desert
Due Honors pay, not that the Fierce Abdalla,
Wise Odmar, or the Valiant Aldegar
Did less then God-like acts; yet Sir, to speak
His Worth I Envy, not those Numerous Bands
To Conquest by your Royal* Conduct led
Equaled that Heroes Fame, who followed by
A Guard of Horse in Mournful Black Arra'id
Over ran our fainting Enemies; none durst
Withstand him but their Warlike Emperor,
Whose rashness caused his Fate, the brave unknown
With force Superior drew him to our Camp,
Threw him into my wide-spread Arms, and Cried
Take here a Present from the Man you hate;
Then adds, I ask but this for my Reward
He was a King, be sure you use him so.

Tam. Gods! I shall jealous of my Conquest grow!

Odm. Nor he, nor Heaven your Glory could obscure!
Since Mandricard was sharer in the War:
For by him fell the great Ortobulus
The Hopes of Turkey, and the Prop of Battle!
Him did he Disinherit with his Sword,
And snatched his Birthright World as his Reward.

Man. Curse on thy Tongue! what Frenzy broke thy silence?
[Aside to Od. Thy Breath has Blasted me, and for a flash
Of Honor, Damned me to Eternal Flames.

Tam. My Noble Son --

Baj. It Is false, ye spightful Powrs,
Ortobulus (I Will never believe it) slain
By that weak Arm, what Millions backed the Coward?

Tam. Fair Virtue was his Guard, approach me nigh,
Embrace me round; now claim thy just Reward
Ask freely; for the Glory of the Act deserves
What ere thy Swollen Ambition can Demand.
What Will not Conquerors on the Brave bestow?
What sad Disorder moves my Mandricard?
What foolish Passion dares disturb my Son?

Man. Who can withstand the vastness of such Hopes?

Tam. Have we not given our Word, and can we Lie?

Man. Far-bee't from me such Blasphemy to think.

Tam. Odmar, Abdalla, witness to my Vow,
If ought I can deny to him! I Love
Above the World, which he can ask with Honor,
Sudden Destruction seize my Perjured Soul.
Faith is the brightest Jewel of a Crown.

Man. Speak my Souls great Ambassador, my Tongue,
Pronounce thy Message loud; a King Commands:
O speak what thou desire most to speak,
Pard'n Sir, my too rude Carriage,

Tam. Say Noble Youth.

Man. Low as the Earth two Monarchs I Implore,
Rather two Gods in saving pity great,
As Heaven may bless your Throne with Victory,
[ To Tam. As Heaven may raise you higher by your Fall,
[ To Baj. I beg this Princess from your Royal hands.

Ast. With all the force a Virgins Tears can press
On any Soul, I here implore my Death
Ten thousand Deaths e're yield my Innocence
To be polluted by his loathed Embraces.

Baj. Curse him, Asteria, curse the fatal Source
Of thine, of mine, of the Worlds wretched State,
Upon a Fathers blessing curse the Race
Of Perjured Tamerlane, there is poison in it
And rank Infection, and consuming Plagues.

Man. Is she not Fair, my Lord!
Is she not Innocent as Babes new Born?

Tam. Mean Soul, degenerate Boy, I charge thee cease,
Can thou behold this haughty slave in Chains
Outdare our Power, and scorn our offered favors,
Nay Curse thee to thy Face, and hold thee worthless
The gift thou ask'st? deny thee with Contempt?
And thou yet stoop to him, kneel, pray to him?
Wipe off, rash boy, thy growing Glories stain
Or quit the Name of Son --

Man. How all things to my ruin do concur?
Father, and Daughter, Emperor all are joined
To make me wretched, O the killing Flames,
Of a despairing passion, oh my heart!

Baj. My Miseries have given me leave to smile
To see thee Traitor find an Hell on Earth.

Man. Approach my Fair.

Ast. Oh I am ruined, stained,
With hands scarce cool from my dear Brothers blood
He catches at the Sister for reward
And Im'e become a partner in the Murder.

Baj. Oh the bold Ravisher, that he should dare
To touch her -- purge then Villain with thy blood
Her fully'd beauties, Dye.

[Snatching a Sword from the Guards. Tam. Disarm the Traitor,
Presumptuous Fool, this Act has forfeited.
The Life we gave.

Baj. Have I driven Troops before me
And am I thus held in by a crowd of Slaves?
Vile, fearful Mice to pluck the bristled Main
Of a bound Lion, rise, my Passion, rise
Swell every Vein up to an Artery.
Return the famous Lightning of my Eyes,
Work, Oh my Heart, my Soul, in my revenge,
For I am killed, choked with disdain and fury.

Tam. He Raves and we lose time to hear him, have,
Take, force him from my sight.

Baj. Do not think me King,
One that has nothing but a Life to lose;
Death! it is the common Scourge of coward minds,
A Goblin hatched to fright base vulgar Spirits.
Life I contemn; nor would I stoop so low
Beneath my Majesty to take it up,
Though with my Empire it might be redeemed,
Since he must grant it whom I scorn and hate.
A Grace from Tamerlane would load with shame
My inward memory far more then all
My risled Crowns, or the base name of Slave.
Now, Tyrant, to thy last destruction hear
What Alha moving in my breast Commands
Me speak, thy Glory, Tartar, is short lived,
There are a Royal Race of Ottemans,
(See thy Guards tremble at their very Name)
And so must thou, I see thy Glory sink
And Heaven in Arms against thy Perjured Soul

Tam. A way to Death to speedy Torture with him
His boasted courage this last Act shall frye.

Baj. Yes, I will make a Trial of my Heart
I Will bear my wrongs with such a noble Courage
So far Transcending mean Tartarian spirits
That thou shall burst with envy to my Fate.

[Is led off. Man. Thus does the Naked Beggar gazing stand
On great Men's wealth and starves, O cursed spite.
That I must perish all my Joys in sight.
[Exit.
A Wood. Arsanes, Axalla. Ars. Urge me no more, my Lord, my fate is sealed,
And Heavens fixed will stands uncontrolled by chance,
Now to return (by Heaven I never will)
Were as to seek a second Banishment,
Or Death the lesser evil for returning.

Ax. Yet Sir the King --

Ars. Is most unjust and cruel
Lead by the voice of every fawning Traitor,
And gives all power to him that Flatters most.
My Brother! Yes, by all that is good it was
That fatal Brother, that ambitious Boy,
With the deep plotting Odmar wrought my ruin,
And built their greatness on my ill-timed Virtue,
While I --

Ax. While you here in inglorious sorrow
Quit your just Title to your Fathers Throne.

Ars. A Throne Axalla, can it yet be news
My Father owns no Son but Mandricard?
He shares his Crowns of Laurel and of Gold,
And all the shining Scepters of each Clime,
Where if a friend but chance to name Arsanes,
Or fetch an inward sigh for his misfortunes,
A pointed frown marks the kind Spirit dead,
And choaks with mournful groans his pious wishes.
Oh my Nerina! --

Ax. That fever still, my Lord?

Ars. It like the Liver of the Earth-born Monster
O'respread nine Furlongs of the burning Lake
Feeds on the fiery Diet of fond hope,
To be renewed a prey to black despair.

Ax. Yet Sir she may be found

Ars. She may! O trifler, may!
May be is quite impossible to Love;
She must -- ye Gods, appoint the happy time,
Like that when softest Hours in Greece I drew
Then when the Hospitable Emperor
Saluted us as Princes, treated us
At no less rate though both by Law enslaved,
An exile I, and she a Pirates prey.
Long in that state we lived in Bliss and Love,
I Adanaxus, she Nerina called.
But Oh, my Friend, that Golden Age is past!

Ax. Ah, my dear Lord --

Ars. Speak, Friend --

Ax. If any charm
Of specious truth your passion can over sway
And raise belief in your distracted Breast,
The sight of her --

Ars. Do not Delude me thus.

Ax. No false Delusion, or diverting Fable
Can here reside, take, take the naked truth,
Axalla in her rifled Tent beheld,
Gazed on, and knew the fair Nerina's charms.

Ars. But did you see her like Nerina? bright
As the first Sun when on the Eastern Shore
He Rises fresh, and Decks the Infant Day.
Did you behold among the Beauteous Crowd
One by all envied, and by all admired?
A Triple Goddess, Fair, Majestic, Wise?

Ax. She Is all, my Lord, that even your Love can speak her;
And though all bash'd and shrouded over with Tears
Yet could not even those thickning Clouds of sorrow
Obscure the shining luster of her Eyes.

Ars. Methinks, my Friend, I see those Pearly drops
When taking on my Breast her last farewell,
She cast her Ivory Arms about my Neck,
And cried, my Love; Oh should we meet again,
Nor spoke she this with the least sign of Bliss,
For with a Smile she promised it a truth.

Ax. As great and faithful as the Sybills Voice,
And can you then, my Lord, leave all those Joys
For want of seeking them? Think, think, Arsanes,
When this hot Fever has dried up to Ashes
Your slaming Heart, and Parcht your vital Spirits,
Then you will cry (but oh 'twill be too late)
What mass of Golden Treasure have I lost?
Then curse your self for your unkind distrust,
Your little Faith to your Axalla's Counsels,
That ruined the unfortunate Arsanes.
But let us behold, the faithful Danches comes
[ Enter Danches. From your Great Fathers Court, his joyful look
Denotes some glad Discovery -- The News?

Zan. Great Prince! what still may please, and make you happy,
I went to Samarcanda; but I passed,
Me thought, through Streets blocked up with moving Castles,
So thick, so numberles^ the People stood:
While they with Voices undistinguished filled
The Air, that Echoed nothing but the Stranger,
The Stranger is the business of the Court:
The Sweet Discourse of every Ladies Mouth
Is, what the Stranger did; to you they owe
Their Trophies and their Fame.

Ars. And is the Court so monstrously infectious,
That scarce an hour gone thou'st learnt to flatter?
Speak, speak thy Errand, what of the fair Nerina?

Zan. Great Sir! the Lady which your Friend discovered
Is Daughter to the impetuous Bajaset,
The tender sharer of her Fathers Fate.

Ars. Ha! Withers not my Hand, start not my Eyes
From their cursed Orbs?
Am I not all an Ague? So loud a Clap
Of sudden Thunder, and yet live? Ye Gods!
Have I to ruin her my Sword employed,
My greatest Strength her Country to destroy?
Was it her Father too whose Fate I sought?
Then on my self, my more than hellish act
I thus Revenge.

[Draws his Dagger, which Axalla wrests from him. Ax. Dear Sir.

Ars. 'Twas friendly done:
For I confess a death so quiet, and
So short, had been a Balm to ease my Heart,
Rather than punishment to expiate
My great offense; to die? perhaps the News
Might satisfy some Relics of the War,
That their great Enemy is dead -- What then?
What had I done for Bajaset? what for
His ruined House, his flaming Palace? what
In lieu of all his pillaged Scepters, Crowns?
What for Nerina's wrongs, whose every Tear
Deserves a Life? No, no, Axalla, that
Which can but once be done, let it be long
In doing.

Zan. Dear, my Lord, divert those thoughts
And go where Piety and Honor call.
The Royal Slave not brooking his disgrace,
And yielding not himself to Tamerlane,
Is most unfaithfully condemned to Die.

Ars. To Die? Shall then Nerina's Father Die?
Basely and poorly be a prey to Fate?
And leave his weeping Daughter all alone,
'Midst a rude Multitude of Savage Men?

Ax. Arsanes cannot think a thought like that.

Ars. No, my Axalla, have we from this place
With all the swiftness of a Love in fear,
That he shall come too late, and lose the Prize,
The Beauteous Prize, for which all that have Souls
Must needs be Rivals; Guide me, O my Stars,
Shorten my Journey to my Paradise.
By all my hopes Nerina's Father lives;
Then snatching to my self the Glorious Prize,
I Will reap the Fruit of all my Victories.

[Exeunt. ACT II. Scene I.
Bajaset is discovered on a Scaffold, an Executioner with an Axe, and others
with Hallbirds, Swords, etc. Enter Tamerlane, Mandricard, Odmar, Abdalla. The
Executioner being about to strike; Enter in have Arsanes, and Axalla. Ars.
HOld, stay thy bloody hand, I charge thee strike not.

Tam. What bold Invader dares thus countermand me?
Speak, say, what art?

Ars. Lay down, O mighty Prince!
A little of thy Thunder, and I Will speak.
O thou to whose high care Heaven does entrust
The Rule of Nations, Monarch of the Earth,
So may you Laurels bear from either Pole,
As you to them shall peaceful Olives join,
And in your Conquests God-like Mercy show.

Tam. The Accent of that Voice I sure have known;
Nor am I unacquainted with that Face:
All day I could with patience hear thy Story.

Ars. Not to recount the Changes of my Life,
Which but for one, one only happy Fate
Does not deserve a Name; yet, Sir, I Will tell you,
There Is Glory in that Fate, and to have done
You Loyal Service, is a Noble Bliss.

Tam. By all my Laurels the Triumphant Stranger!
O Prince! for I consider thee no less;
What shall I, what Reward can I repay
To thy great Virtue?

Ars. Not a Thirst of Wealth,
Or Sacred Famine of Reward, or yet
A vain Ambition to commend my Deeds,
Made me presume to meet your Royal Eyes.
But since, Great Sir, you do esteem my Acts
Worthy a price, O hear the Prayers I make;
By Alha, by the Soul of Mahomet,
By the ne'r-cancell'd Bond of your strict Vow
In Heavens bright Eye, I do conjure thee spare
The Royal Captives Life.

Tam. Thou cou'd'st not ask
A thing but this, we could not grant.

Ars. O Heaven!
If with a Princes Life you needs must Seal
The Glory of your Conquest, rip these Veins,
And draw what Blood is left in expiation
For his dear Life -- Oh hold me not in doubt.

Tam. Did I but think I did the Slave a favor,
Spite of my Vow by Heaven he should not live;
But as it is that he fears far worse than Death,
I by one Act will wisely satisfy
[Aside. This Strangers hopes, and glut my own Revenge,
Yes he shall live; remove the Fatal Pomp,
And lead him to our Palace; but know, Slave,
It Is to this generous Prince thou owst thy Life.

Baj. For me his Prayers; ye Stars shed ruin on him,
Beg in my Cause? Precacious Fool, be silent.
[ To Ars. Ha.! Villain! why's my Fate so long delayed,
[To the Exec. Is the Axe not sharp enough? or am I held
Here to be gazed at for a Mark, a Show,
A Property to please the Idle Vulgar?
Strike Villain, or I Will spurn thee into Ashes.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, O I could burst with laughter,
To see these Apes, these mistaken Fools,
Who think they have been generous and kind,
While they are dully cruel; Tyrant, blush,
And know, were thou my Slave, thus would I glut
My self with vengeance on thee, so farewell,
And some Plague seize thee e're we meet again.

[Is led off. Tam. Thus to your Prayers we sacrifice our Justice,
And to your mighty Merits our Revenge.

[ To Arsan. Ars. Thus at your Royal Feet I cast my self,
And may those Powers that raised and guard your Throne
Reward you for this greatest highest favor,
For which I vow you everlasting Service.

Man. Hail, O great Soul of War, matchless in Might!

Odm. Fair Guardian Angel of the Scythian Throne.

Abd. Desire of Nations, Bulwark of this State.

Ars. Your Vassal, Princes, knows not to bear
These loads of Praise, unable to repay
Your noble kindness even in Thanks.

Man. So may
You always knit fresh Laurels to your Brow,
As we to you our Turkish Conquests owe.

Tam. It Is true, I as a Warrior must adore
Thee in thy Virtues, thy Success admire,
Thy Actions love, reward thy Loyalty.
But something nearer calls thee to my Breast,
Stamps thy dear Image on my Soul, and tells me,
There is a mightier reason for my love
Than any I have yet alleged. O Nature,
My Eyes, my Heart, both challenge thee, my Son!

Ars. Father, if I may dare to use that Name,
[Pulling off his disguise. Behold your wretched Son, your Darling once;
Now less than Stranger to you, banished, spoiled
Of all my Honors, Father, Country, Name,
By their vile Arts, who with false Counsels armed
Against my Innocence your mildest Nature.
Here could I wish I were for ever fixed,
Here breath my last, and leave my flying Soul.

Tam. Ye Powrs, my Son, the wronged Arsanes here!
Heaven knows with what regret I rob my Throne of
So great a Pillar, my Kingdom of so good
A Prince; Heaven knows how I have mourned thy absence,
And cursed my fond belief to busy Flatterers.
Credit me, Prince, I always thought thee injured.

Odm. O damned, deceitful, spightful Queen of Chance.

Man. Hell, that I as a Basilisk could dart
Poison from my Eyes, and blot his growing Greatness.

[Aside. Tam. O Mandricard! my other Blessing, share
This mass of Joy that fills my heaving Breast.

Man. And can the Stranger prove so near a Friend?
A Brother? Oh that Name! Now by my Arms,
If ever hate were grounded in my Breast,
You Valiant Deeds have dispossessed it all.
Such Virtue never can find an Enemy:
[Imbraces coolly. Now all the subtilest Plagues of Hell prevent thee.

[Aside. Ars. O happy day! the whitest of my Life.

Tam. All who are present at this Solemn Meeting,
Behold your Prince, your wished for Prince Arsanes;
In whose just Cause you have so often mutinid,
And even assailed our Throne for his revenge*
Receive, take, share with me his Royal Heart,
And with loud shouts of Joy accompany
Us to our Palace: Thus from their sad Urn
Thy Phoenix Virtues to new Glories burn.

[Exeunt. Odmar manet solus. Odm. Furies and Death, and all the Family
Of dark Infernal Powers, can you see,
So tamely see me your Chief Instrument
Sworn to your Counsels, so lost, so successless?
For this?
Have I trod in all Paths that Hell-ward led?
Has Envy lost her Snakes, and Fraud forgot
Her Art? Is Malice satisfied so soon
To glare, and snarl, and not destroy? for this
Have Guilty Thoughts disturbed my Nights, and Blood
Started my Soul in Fancies, broke my Sleeps.
Bled the Kings Son committed to my charge,
An Infant to no-purpose; is it nothing
That my Themyre supplies his Place, and Name?
But does Arsanes still prevent us? Nay,
He Is grown much higher by his fall; our Plots
To tread him down to Earth have mounted him
Above the Clouds. This must not on, again
Brain whet thy sweet Invention, while he climbs,
That he may fall, and set the World in Flames.
[Exit.
Asteria's Apartment. Asteria, Zayda. Ast. Give, give my Passion vent, or I
shall burst;
Yes, yes, ye Powers 'twas he, 'twas Adanaxus
That ruined me, my Father, Country, all.
It Is the same charming Tongue moves Tamerlane,
That caught Nerina's Heart, just so he wept,
And knelt, and prayed for Mercy at my Feet
For his own Life; as for my Father's, now
*It Is the same Rival of Andronicus,
The same Triumpher over the Grecian Slaves,
Turkey destroyed. I and this faithless Man,
Crowned with the Pleasures of a Smiling Field,
While we each others Story did relate
So tenderly, and with so much concern,
Promiscuously we gave our Hearts away,
Born on the Wings of interchang'd Discourse.
Then first we sighed and smiled, and smiled and sighed,
And looked, and wondered, and discoursed again,
While the young God stood laughing on the Plain,
And wondered at our Sympathy of Souls.
Would you believe it? This same Under-Lover,
This very Adanaxus, from the World,
From all Mankind, was chose to work my ruin.

Zay. Has he not saved your Captive Fathers Life?

Ast. Did he not make him so? O trifling Comfort!
How now, what Air, what Heaven is this, what Sky,
What Country? whither am I led? alas,
What am I now become? Still, still my Eyes
Behold those various Images of Death,
And Fatal Ruin they in Prutia saw.
All pale, and shivering there my Mother lies,
And there my Royal Brother bleeding groans;
All this and more this dear, this trayt'rous Man,
This smiling false Deceiver has performed.

To them Arsanes, Axalla. Ax. See there, my Lord, and think on what your Friend
Advised you to.

Ars. I see my Heaven near,
Am ravished with the light, wish, and admire,
Court and hope, yet dare not enter in
With such a clog of guilt encumbered round,
I tremble at the Presence of my Judge.

Ax. If Conquest were a Crime it was the Gods,
Not yours; nor can she blame your hidden fate;
How full of Fears is Love?

Ast. Bless me my Stars,
Oh I Am betrayed, look, Zayda, see that Man,
Oh let us shun that swearing, perjured Man,
And never let me trust my Heart again.

Ars. Madam --

Ast. What means this rude Assault?

Ars. Thus low I fall
To Beauties and to Mercies Shrine, while from
Their Oracle I learn my Life or Death,
Present Despair or Happiness.

Ast. Expound
These Riddles, Heaven!

Ars. Ha! am I grown so strange
So altered, neither known, nor understood?
Or rather are you so forgetful grown?
If so, let these recall your Memory,
[A Bracelet. The Tender Labor of your busy Love.
This witness of your Vows.

Ast. What shall I say, or do?
Ungrateful Man! -- but let me not recall
My Grief with Words, and stab my bleeding Wounds.
The Gods revenge my Injuries --

[Is going out. Ars. Oh hear
Your Guilty Penitent his Crime confess.

Ast. Some weak Evasion, or deluding Fable;
Oh what excuse, or wile, can you invent,
In recompense of all my Sufferings?

Ars. Her every word a bleeding Heart-string cuts,
Her every Tear a Vein; your Sufferings?
Oh cast on me the burden of 'em all;
For I can bear for my. Nerina's quiet
The Pains of Hell, with Heavenly delight.

Ast. Ill shall I trust so known an Enemy.

Ars. An Enemy! what Horrors seize my Soul?
Oh clear, clear me of that wretched Name.
Who could have thought the Ridling Fates and meant
I should have sinned in bringing help to him:
Who gave me birth?

Ast. It Is plain you have betrayed,
For empty Duty have betrayed your Love.
What Name could make Nerina to forget
Her Adanaxus thus --? ah cruel Man!

Ars. Forget you? had I drunk dull Lethe dry,
Its Waters had on me wrought small effect.
Nerina always was, is present here,
My Mind, my Soul is nothing but Nerina.
This very impious Act was for Nerina,
When losing her, I sought in dreadful Battle
My long wished End.

Ast. Excuses are but vain;
For by your Actions I your kindness weigh*
Captivity, and shameful Bands are all
The mighty Gifts of your protested Vows.
Have I not heard you say? yes, I have heard,
To me the Tribute of the World was due,
How fit I was to be a Queen, how well
A Diadem would with my Beauty Suit.

Ars. Oh my Nerina, if I then must stand
Guilty of all the malice of the Stars,
And what great Heaven decreed, if it be nothing
That by my Prayers your Royal Father lives:
Yet sure I Have loved, and for your love despised
All dangers, opposed Princes in your Cause;
Witness the Fury of Andronicus;
Nerina may remember too some Months
Imprisonment, harsh Chains, and hardest usage.

Ast. How quickly passes a Woman's Rage that loves!
[Aside. Now could I lay on Fortune all his Crimes,
Oh Adanaxus -- but I have been wronged.

[Turning from him. Ars. Then Heaven overtake me with thy swiftest Justice;
While from your Mouth I here beg leave to die.

Ast. Oh how I melt to Tenderness and Love!
I cannot now dissemble with my Heart,
Nor curb my Passion with a seeming Fierceness.
Ah, my dear Lord --

Ars. Pronounce the Fatal Sentence.

Ast. While your Nerina lives you must not die,
Your Life is linked with hers.

Ars. And can I hope
For Absolution?

Ast. If you have any Faith,
See, see it Sealed, while I due Thanks repay
To Heaven, which has restored my dearest Lord;
By this one Gift my Stars have recompensed me,
For Mother, Brother, Father, Country, all.

Ars. Such words as these mixed with that Grace of Speech,
Would charm the praying Hermit from his Cell,
And draw the rigid Cynick's Heart to Love.

Ast. But see, we are observed --

[ Mandricard passes over the Stage. Ars. It Is Mandricard,
That Raven bodes ill Fate.

Man. Ha! what so close
Billing? believe me Brother, it is too much.

Ast. Did not you mark his black disordered Looks?
Between his gnashing Teeth what silent Curses
He muttered forth, and threatened us with Frowns?

Ars. Though he were armed with Lightning we'd not fear.

Ast. Again then we must part --

Ars. So willingly?

Ast. Part now to meet again with greater Joys,
More Ravishing Delights; mean while we will live
On hope.

Ars. And nourish Nature with the Thoughts
Of Joys to come; now drive thy Chariot, Time,
Incumbent on the Wings of all the Winds;
Nor cease thy flying Pages to maintain,
While I and my Nerina meet again

[Exeunt. A Garden belonging to the Palace. Mandricard alone. Man. Dull, Coward
Heart, weak Flesh, and what is worse,
A Mind ambitious, yet without revenge.
Rise, Mandricard, let not thy Glory sink
In vain Complaints, and feeble Murmurings.
By this I should have filled the World with Ruin,
And on its Fall my early Glory built:
By all my Fury I could laugh to feel
The ruined Palace crush my burdened Limbs,
So that Arsanes might partake my Fate.

To him Odmar, Abdalla. Odm. A happy Morning to my Gracious Lord!

Man. Gods, that I live to see this hateful day!
No Serpent winged, or Dragon-breathing-flame
Could raise my Soul to this unbounded rage,
As does Arsanes Presence; O ye Furies
Prepare some sudden deadly Pest to blast him.

Odm. He Is fired, and now to blow him into Flames --
Busy, my Lord, and full of rolling thoughts?

Man. Do thou not see Revenge hang on my Brow?

Odm. Divide the heavy burden of your Breast,
And witness for me, Hell, there is not a Path
That leads to your Ambition, vast desires,
Your Odmar dares not tread to make you happy,
Though with the fatal hazard of his Life.

Abd. Speak but the word, and I Am a true born Son
Of Scythian breed, can strangle, poison, kill,
When e're your Interest shall arm my Fury.

Man. Now these are Men according to my wish,
[Aside. First swear to keep the Secret --

Both. Should it be
To blaspheme Mahomet, we swear.

Man. Why sticks
My Tongue to speak the happy Deed my Mind
Long since has acted? were you bred in Blood,
And nursed with Milk of Tigers, have you each
Murdered your Thousands?

Abd. All my Life has been
But a continual practice how to kill
Most silent, and most sure,

Odm. I from my Youth
Have conversant in Plots and Treasons been,
And artfully have studied by the fall
Of Men above me, how to raise my self
To highest Place, and Power.

Man. Instruments
As fit as Hell cou d make, for my Design.
How long shall I, like some vile Shrub beneath
A spreading Oak, stand overshadow'd by
Arsanes mighty Power?

Abd. Does it hit there? this Steel
Has entered Brass, and cut through Coats of Mail,
And will serve still to lop or branch or so
From that tall Oak.

Odm. We Will take it by the Roots.

Man. His Heart.

Odm. And drink his Blood.

Abd. And eat the Corse.

Man. Like Tartars spoke; the Means?

Abd. By force of Arms.

Odm. By Stratagem, Fate-working Stratagem.
Then first the Captive Princes, to deceive
Must be our care, that she in spite of all
The tenderness she to Arsanes bears,
Be brought into your Arms a Glorious Prey.

Man. That serves but for one half of my revenge,
That for my Love, but what for my Ambition?

Odm. You have no sooner thought, but I have acted;
Lies are the steps by which black Treason climbs
Confederacy with Turkey, dark Designs
With Bajaset, and contracts with the Princess.
This Head, that Hand can fail in no Attempt.

Abd. Where you the Platform lay, I swear to build.

Man. My Noble Lords, now you are Friends indeed,
I envy not Arsanes now with all
His crowd of supple Flatterers, that cringe
And buz about his new-reviving Greatness;
Let them speak Friendship which you act, and now
To our great Charges silent as the night,
And hushed as our Designs, we go; Farewell.
[ Exeunt Odm. Abd. It Is sure, these Men with Traiterous Designs
To the destructive part may much avail.
But on what Ground to build my happy Love,
And how to gain the Fair Asteria's Heart,
Instruct me, Alha; O Prince, it is enough,
Enough thou see to gain her mortal hate,
That by thy cursed Hand her Brother fell;
What will she say? -- but oh what can thou say
In thy excuse? when by thy Hellish Arts
She hears Arsanes basely, poorly Murdered?
Yet, Mandricard, cheer up thy drooping Spirits,
She loves the Man that sought her Fathers ruin,
By Heaven her Brothers Murd'rers less in fault.
It Is fixed; and on that hope I build my Bliss.

To him Ispatia. Isp. I would not harbor such a jealous thought
Within my Breast; can Mandricard prove false
To his Ispatia, O unequal Gods!
Prevent this mischief; what disast'rous chance
Has summoned me to this unhappy place
With Eyes and Ears, to see and hear his falsehood,
To which my Soul could never credit give?
But yet I Will smother it, and try if words,
With all the force of Tears, may turn his mind.
Health to my Noble Lord, Great Mandricard,
How fares your Highness?

Man. Well, Ispatia, well,
The better that I hear thee ask me so;
But I am busy now, leave me, Ispatia.

Isp. My Lord!

Man. I prithee leave me,
We shall have idle hours enough for Love.

Isp. How, my dear Lord? I little did expect
To meet you thus on this Triumphant Day.

Man. Blame then the Fates, not me.

Isp. Does any Wound
Disturb your Rest, my Lord? If so, behold
Your weak Physician, do not scorn my help.

Man. Thanks to your care, your Mandricard is whole.

Isp. My Care? O trifling word -- He should have cast
Away that cool Endearment on the Crowd
That fawned, and welcomed him at his return.
Are all my longing Wishes come to this?
And is it, is it thus, I must receive you,
Is this the Fruit of all my early Moans,
And Midnight-sighs, when shall I hope for Rest
If I must now despair?

Man. The Curses of
A Wife are most unsufferable, now could I --

Isp. Are not my broken Slumbers worth a Look?
Not one kind word for all my long Complaints?
One Smile would be as much as I dare claim,
Though I could wish for Millions.

Man. Give me leave
I prithee to repose my self a while;
'Twill add a fresh, and stronger Life to Love.
Heavens! is she senseless?

Isp. And can Mandricard
Think me unwilling to partake his Grief
That I have always done; and when I heard
Of any Princes Fate, half dead with fear,
I listened with impatience for the Truth
Of all the Story of my Life or Death,
Lest Mandricard should prove that hapless Prince.
But still those fears did joyfully deceive
My Heart, reviving with the welcome News,
The dear, dear hopes of seeing you again,
So Great, so Glorious!

Man. Oh that my inward Prayers
Could move with pity some relenting Power
To raise a Mountain, or a Sea betwixt us;
And snatch me from the Daggers of her Tongue.

Isp. Believe me, Prince, you over-load my Soul
With Thoughts of what should move such discontent,
Knowing the innocence of my Breast.

Man. You Are not in fault, Ispatia, give me leave
To think on those who are.

Isp. If to be freed
From your Ispatia's company be Rest,
Then I Will not rob you of those pleasing Minutes;
Though I could willingly for Ages gaze
Over all that Field of awful Majesty,
And wonder how it ever open lay
To entertain so poor, so mean a Love.
I go, my Lord, and leave you to your Rest;
For which I would all Joy, all Bliss resign,
Your Rest which me delights, for it is mine.
[Exit.
Man. So, is she gone at last, then farewell Wife,
And welcome Love, thou highest Bliss of Life.
While through my Rivals Heart I cut my way,
And with a Mistress my past dangers pay.
And this fond Wretch shall the sweet War begin,
Arsanes shall conclude the Bloody Scene,
I Will, while they groan in death, enjoy my Queen.

ACT III.
Ispatia sola, Isp. He Is gone, he is fled like Water shrunk away,
The more I strove to hold him fast; Cursed Fate!
When every Matron sprightfully with fresh Joys,
And every Virgin full of harmless mirth,
Share the glad Pastimes of this happy day;
Happy to all but me, whom one would think
Its Triumphs most concerned, since Mandricard
Bears all its mighty weight of crowding Honors,
The haughty Conqueror Tartary adores.
Yet after all his far-blown Victories,
I blush to say this Great, this Glorious Man
Is vanquished, vanquished even by his Slave,
And wears the Fetters of a Captive Maid.
But sure I have misconstrued all he said;
He did but try me, my Eyes dazeled
When I beheld his Gestures, when I thought
I see him frown, I Will not believe my Thoughts,
Poor Women's Thoughts are wandering Iealousies;
We fancy, dream, and real things suppose.
Yet go thou silent trial of my Fate,
[The Letter. Her Characters I Have here exactly drawn,
And every Letter subtly have copied,
Which might I think deceive Arsanes self,
Which he might see, and not perceive the Cheat.
But oh why do I thus delay my Wishes!
Within there, Hamzeh, trusty Slave, appear.

[ Enter Hamzeh. Ham. Most Honored Princess, what is your great Command?

Isp. Provide this Letter carefully be sent,
As from Asteria, to your Royal Lord,
Be gone; and wing to Mandricard your way,
Each minute seems an hour, each hour a day.

[Exeunt. The Palace. Enter Tamerlane, Odmar, Abdalla. Tam. Make me believe as
soon the Stars are fallen.

Abd, Yet, Sir, with any but a Fathers Eyes
Black discontent is seen to hover over
His darkened Brow, his wild unstable Looks
May render him suspicious.

Tam. Wash thy Mouth*
Thou foul Fomenter of suggested Lies,
And politic Deceit, think not you, Slaves,
We Are ignorant from whom this Message comes.

Abd. See what your Plotting comes to.

[To Odmar aside. Odm. Dreaded Prince!
This Tongue was never known to fill your Ears
With painted fraud, and poisonous deceit,
My Counsels hitherto even you have thought
Loyal and wise, and grave as Cicero's,
And have preserved your Happiness as much
As his did Romes -- yet, Sir, your Slave
Confesses all his Projects had been vain,
Had not your Virtue perfected those Actions,
Of which we but the bare Idea showed.

Abd. What Is all this to Arsanes?

[Aside. Tam. Speak thy Thoughts,
And do not flatter, nor thy self, nor me,
Thy Words fly wide from all thy former Sense;
Thou nam'dst Arsanes, tedious Slave, proceed.

Odm. Now witness for me all ye Powers Divine,
And thou that know the Secrets of my Heart,
Punish me strangely, Alha; if I speak
Ought that I feared to speak before the Altar,
Or swear it on the Alcoran for truth.

Abd. He Is at his Prayers now, sure his Conscience bites him,
Heaven, he will confess, we are ruined.

Tam. Odmar, rise,
Give me but patience, Gods, to hear him out.

Odm. Though loath, I must unfold the burning Secret,
Both for my Conscience, and my Country's sake;
The proud Arsanes, jealous of the Love
You show deservedly to Mandricard,
Bears mighty Projects in his laboring Brain,
Envy, Revenge, with all that natural hate
He ows his Brother, stir him up against
The Laws of Man, and Nature; his Ambition
Flies Sir no lower a pitch, than at your Crown.

Abd. Ha! I begin to find him, he talks Sense!

Tam. Now, Villain, give me Proof, substantial Reason.
For what the poison of thy Gall has vented,
Or else by Heaven thou dy'st.

Abd. Ha! goes it so;
Villain, and Death! Plague of your Stratagems.

Odm. Scars will remain after their Wounds are whole;
The highest Palaces stand most to view,
And are most looked at, when their Luster fades.
Arsanes cannot brook his late disgrace,
And thou forgiven, blushes with disdain
That he was banished; scarce an hour ago
The Valiant Mandricard in Pious Suit
Sought Reconcilement with his raging Brother.

Abd. This does not sound like truth, it has no face
Of Probability.

[ To Odm. Odm. When in a lone
And vacant place we found your Royal Son.
But oh how changed from what he fain would seem,
Must'ring up such a train of impious words,
And bitter curses; Heaven, we could scarce believe
It had been he; but strait approaching nigher,
We overheard him in a murmuring Tone
Say thus; The House of Ottoman shall soon regain
Its Empire by that Arm it newly fell;
Hearing all this, the pious Mandricard
Came near, saluted low the proud Arsanes;
He frowned, and lifted high his haughty Head,
Then flung away, and left us in amazement.

Tam. 'Twas done as to his well-known Enemies,
And, Traitor, was it not that Loyal Son,
That brave Arsanes? (whom by Heaven I Am proud
That he should call me Father) was it not he,
Who spite of all the base indignities,
Under whose load he sunk to banishment,
Came with new Strength so wonderfully fierce?
So unexpected was all kind of Succor,
Not one among our gazing Troops,
Scarce I my self, but thought him Mahomet.

Odm. Too well, dread Prince, he fought, if all were known,
He has already half eclipsed your Fame,
Witness all Tartary, which bowing low,
Kisses the very Ground on which he treads.
Do not you hear Arsanes mighty Name
Echoed through every Street, long live Arsanes,
A Thousand Voices even in your Court reply,
While Tamerlane must stand neglected by,
And wait upon the Triumphs of his Son.

Abd. By Hell thou art the very Soul of lying.

Odm. Nay more I fear, it is no false report,
The specious Acts he wrought in your defense,
Cut but his way into your Peoples Hearts,
And a wide Path to his Ambition made.
This I may safely swear, my Lord, he is false.

Abd The same swear I.

Tam. You both are Villains,
False, treacherous, perjured, damned Villains,
Whose spotted Souls regard not Innocence,
Nor Conscience trembles, when you dare accuse it.
And now to let you know how little Faith
Your seeming Counsels fix upon my Soul,
Call here the Prince Arsanes -- spite of yours
And Mandricards more hateful Policies,
I Will Crown his Virtue with Rewards so large,
Shall raise your envy high, as is his Fate.
Enter Arsanes. Come to my Arms my best, my Loyal Son,
Let me embrace thee all, my long-wish'd Joys
At last are come; rise my better self:
See there the Authors of thy former woes,
See them, that would renew thy Miseries;
Villain, is this a Face shows discontent,
What wild unstable looks are here, what frown,
What gesture that may render him suspected?

Ars. I always thought those Men my Enemies;
Yet I confess, Great Sir, I have deserved
All that their envy or your juster wrath
Have made me suffer: For whom e're he be
So just a Prince thinks false, or but suspects,
By Heaven he is false; nay then it is a Crime,
A Crime unpardonable in innocence
To say she is wronged.

Abd. He has a Tongue as smooth
[To Odmar aside. As yours, pray Heaven it may but prove as fatal.

Tam. You false, believe me; nor thy Conqueror
Your injured Virtue claims a Recompense
So large, with guilty thoughts I blushing hear,
That now to share that Empire you have saved,
With that your Arms have won, will be a light,
An empty Offering to your vast deserts;
Men style us Scythians barbarous and wild,
But I appeal to the Immortal Powers,
If ever Rome in all her Pomp could show
An Act like what Arsanes has performed.
An Act so good, Athens would blush to hear,
As wanting fit example to compare.
An Act to brave the Heroes from their Orbs,
The famous Senate of unconquered Minds,
Start back, and think their Glory faintly won,
So much Arsanes has surpassed their Deeds.
An Act --

Ars. Of which I thought the insolence
Might rather raise your Anger, than your Love,
To see an Exiled Slave, who durst return
Uncalled to share the Trophies of your Fame.
Yet let me plead but this in my defense,
My Duty to so just a Father, and
So good a Prince, worked high my ravished Soul,
Nor could my Blood be chilled with outward fear,
Or inward grief, but boiling in my Veins,
As one should say 'twas part of Tamerlanes,
Stirred me to go where Fame and Duty called.

Abd. Ruined as handsomely as Hell could wish us.

Tam. Now in the Face of thy worst Enemies
Receive the highest Honors we can give;
Let loose thy vast Ambition, let it fly
At Riches, Honor, Love, or once at all.
Your Word shall guide our Heart, your Wishes bind
Our Will; your Prayers command what e're they crave,
Ask, and believe it granted e're you speak.

Abd. Now could I cut thy Throat instead of his.

[ To Odm. Ars. Laurels, and Crowns are Tamerlanes alone,
And the Rich Entrails of the Golden Earth
Serve but to fill the Luster of his Name.
It is, Great Sir, a light Request I make,
And yet in my esteem worth Worlds, so great
A Prize the fair Asteria seems to me,
That were I seated on the Scythian Throne,
With swarms of Tributary Kings about me,
And subject Princes waiting my Commands,
By all my wishes I should scarce enjoy
One moments rest, without the beauteous Bride.

Tam. Ye Gods, that ever such antipathy
Should be united; Oh could I but taste
The sleepy Waters of dull Lethe's Lake,
That I might now forget those hateful words.
I tell thee, Prince, thy fond Request is vain,
Which nor consists with Duty, nor with Honor.
She is thy Enemy, Arsanes, cease
To think of her.

Odm. Take Heart, Abdalla, see,
The Prince is Planet-struck, and Tamerlane
Pursues his ruin.

Ars. Duty bids me not
Dispute your dread Commands, yet I must blame
The coldness of my Stars, and too hard Fate.

Tam. It is not fancy sure disturbs my mind,
And leads my wavering thoughts to jealousy;
Yet I could shun thee now, Arsanes, here
Thy dark Request sticks deep: Farewell, and when
You make your next, if not as a Son,
Ask what is fitting for a Friend.
[Exit.
Abd. It Is just,
As Hell and we could wish.

Odm. Now is our time,
To shed out all our Poison on his Soul,
Which Heaven nor Arsanes may control.

[Exeunt. Ars. Now from a fairest Heaven of surest hope
Am I thus fallen? O sudden turn of Fortune!
Quite ruined e're I scarce perceived a Change.
Thus stands some mighty Tower, the Bulwark of
A Nation, shooting up her lofty Head
Above the Clouds, gazed and wondered at,
But in a moment see to Ashes turned
Its tot'ring pride on some base Traitors Guilt,
And scarce the marks of all its Glory left.
Thus -- But oh the Star that guilds my days.
She comes; and now my fading sorrows pass,
Like showry Clouds before the Glorious Sun.

Enter Asteria. Ast. My dearest Lord, so may you find all Joys
My Heart can wish you, as you shall unfold
The Mystic Secret of that sad Complaint
Just now you sent to Heaven.

Ars. Most impious were I
Could I while I possess those numerous Worlds
Of fullest pleasures hanging over your Brow,
Those endless Comforts basking in your Eyes,
And all the Charms which wait upon your Smile,
Ungratefully and foolishly complain.
Pard'n me ye Powers, if I have offended,
For to Arsanes you are wondrous kind,
Most bountiful, who in the fair Nerina
All I can ask, all I can wish, have given.

Ast. Yes, Adanaxus, we are free to love,
And I without a crime can give a Heart,
With Honor, Duty, and a Fathers Will.

Ars. What is it I hear? what sudden happiness
Raps my glad Soul?

Ast. It Is true, as strange.

Ars. O Bliss!
O Harmony! but how the wondrous Change
Was wrought, dulls all my busy thoughts to guess.

Ast. Then first I knelt, and wept, and kissed his Feet,
And told how I had been his Darling from
My very Infancy, and what Delights
My Childish Sports afforded him -- how dear
He prized my Mother, made him sensible
Of his past Joys with her, and then conjured him
By her blessed Ashes, and Eternal Name,
To have compassion on me.

Ars. Words like these
Would charm the rav'ning Wolf with hunger pinched,
With a strange softness to forego his Prey,
And make him tender as the panting Lamb.

Ast. But yet the joyful Grant he had not sealed,
When once again I did embrace his Knees,
And called to his remembrance how he lived
By your kind intercession, though he scorns
The Life you gave; yet frankly he confessed
It was a Noble pity in a Mind
So great as yours.

Ars. Oh the Angelick Sound!
Could yet the moving Argument be vain?

Ast. It was, my Lord, till turning to a Theme
Of more concern, I told him I loved,
How I was loved, with what a generous Flame
You answered my Affections, how by you
I was protected from the violence
Of rash Andronicus; and then he smiled
And said 'twas nobly done, and as a Lover.

Ars. And yet could he deny? Oh what remained,
What could you farther urge?

Ast. Your Noble Acts,
Your constant Virtue, and unviolate Faith,
How weighing not your wrongs then thick upon you,
Banished by your great Fathers jealous rage,
Your Loyal Virtue still unshook, unconquered,
Brought Kingdoms to his Throne, and Laurels to his Head.
This he was strangely taken with, and lost
Much of his fury; wondered, and grew kind,
And swore he could not be a Foe to Virtue
Of so sublime a Nature, then he rose,
And gave a soft Command, and charged me love you,
Not as a Prince, not as the Tyrants Son,
But something more than Man, and nearer to the Gods.

Ars. Thus kneel kind Angels at the Feet of Heaven,
When ready to destroy the impious World,
They with soft Prayers recall the bolted Thunder,
And even o're-take the swiftest Lightnings Course.
Blessed that I am in thy most charming, sweet,
Prevailing Oratory; thus could we move
But Tamerlanes far more obdurate Heart,
Then were we blessed.

Ast. Then were we blessed indeed.

Enter Zayda confusedly, and in have. Zay. O dismal Chance, O fatal Destiny!

Ast. What means this dreadful Voice, not Croaking Ravens,
With Midnight-shreiks, e're thus disturbed my Soul.

Zay. Your Father --

Ast. Say, what can his ill-timed Fate,
Malicious Chance, and inauspicious Stars,
Do to advance his full-blown Spring of Sorrow?

Zay. Unheard Of Cruelty! the Faithless Tyrant,
Incensed by your great Fathers haughty Rage,
Who though in Chains, with his great Spirit frights
The Jealous King, and with a Princely scorn
Vexes his raging Soul; which to Revenge,
Fierce Tamerlane (O cruel Artifice!)
Locked in an Iron Cage his Rival Slave,
While he in barbarous Triumph mounted on
His Shoulders to his Chariot.

Ars. Savage Prince.

Ast. O Cruelty! Oh more than Hellish Torment!

Zay. Impatient of his wrongs, the Royal Captive,
As he through Samarcanda's Streets was led
A public Trophy in his moving Prison,
Against the massy Bars with rage he dashed
His Royal Head, while from the fatal Wound
Gushed out that Blood, which long the greatest Life
The World could ever proudly boast preserved,
Who in a Storm of --

Ast. O I faint, I faint,
To hear you out will send my Soul away,
E're I can to his Fate my Duty pay.
Farewell, my Lord.

Ars. O my dearest Life,
Let me, let me support thy fainting Beauties.

Ast. O Adanaxus, now we are lost again.

Ars. Unhappy Fate! thus ever in our Joys
A sudden Thunderbolt divides us.

[Exeunt severally. Enter Mandricard alone with a Letter. Man. What shall I do?
shall I not go? not now?
When thus the true Idea of that Face
Calls my glad Soul, which we adore in Angels?
(Great Mandricard, I Will sing thee in my Lap)
[Reading. I come, I come, Asteria, Mercury,
Lend me thy winged Buskins, that in thought
I may in swiftness penetrate the Air.
O welcome, welcome be thou to my Soul,
I kiss thee for her sake, whose Ivory Hands
Have deep engraved these Golden Characters.

To him Ispatia unseen. Isp. So now, Ispatia, thou have viewed his Heart,
And seen it flaming with another Dart;
Then to complete the Sum of all my Pains,
Death is the only Torment that remains.
Exit.
Man. To thee, sweet Saint, I come, I fly to thee.
But what ill Fates have intercepted me?
[Enter Arsanes. Arsanes here? would Hell it were his Ghost,
Now by my Arms a far more welcome sight.
Yet now for my defense a well-forg'd Lie,
With a false show of Penitential Kindness,
Will be most exquisite.

[Coming near and bowing to Arsanes. Ars. What would this Woman?

Man. Ha!

Ars. Art thou
Offended with the Name, then change the Art:
For all I yet can see in thee is Woman,
Forced Tears, feigned Flatteries, and deep Dissembling,
These seldom sure possess a Manly Breast.

Man. If ought I Have done, can be by what I Will do --

Ars. There Is death in thy deceitful Eyes and Tongue.

Man. Deceit, and Death, what mean those Mystic words,
Which strike like double Daggers to my Heart?

Ars. Art thou not false?

Nan. Destructive Fame, thy worst
Blow all thy lying Trumpets through the World,
And to all Ears pronounce me false, yet not
The blasting Breath of all thy hundred Mouths
Can on my injured Virtue cast a blot.

Ars. The Careful Pilot riding on the Main,
May tack about, and shun the highest Rocks;
But those he fears which skulk beneath the Waves,
The unseen Instruments of grinning Death.
You work my ruin, not with Hand, but Heart,
The lurking Treasure of black Designs.

Man. Had I by any other Man been drawn
In such a Character, so much unlike,
So inconsistent with a Princely Mind,
That Man had with his final ruin brought
Swift vengeance on himself for what he said;
By Heaven! had he but thought it, he had died:
With you quite otherwise I beg my peace,
Nature commands you seal my happiness.

Ars. Ha! are the Wounds I bear so light?

Man. What Wounds?
This Tongue, this Heart, and Hand are innocent.

Ars. Ask'st thou what Wounds? So did fell Atreus ask
His fainting brother, drunk with humane Blood,
And heavy with the weight of his own Bowels
Set to him as a Banquet; what he ailed.
I tell thee Brother, 'twas wretched thing,
An exiled Slave, and Heir to Tamerlane.

Man. Is that not blotted out? I Will hear no more;
Since you my Friendship, and my love contemn,
I scorn all Treaties of a further Peace.
Come on, Revenge; like Wolves, and spotted Tigers
We Will live together in perpetual strife,
And when we meet it must be always War.
Of which be this the Sacred, binding Gage.
Throw him the Letter and Exit.
Ars. 'Twas boldly spoke, and much unlike himself,
He never professed himself my Foe till now.

To him Axalla. Ax. Saw you not Mandricard, my Lord?

Ars. I did;
Behold this witness of his treacherous hate.
[Opening the Letter. Dazzle my Eyes? or is it from Asteria?
What sudden madness seizes my lost Senses?
And makes me think what is impossible?
It Is all delusion -- Ha -- from my Nerina!
Directed too to Mandricard? Oh Heaven!
At her Apartment.

Ax. Oh the Monster Woman!

Ars. It Is sure some feigned device!

Ax. Her own false Hand,
Her Hand that writes her Hearts unconstant Love.

Ars. How often have I such tender Characters,
Of the same size and make, locked in my Breast,
And kissed and worshipped 'em like little Idols.
They Are like -- what though they are? so polished Glass
Resembles Crystal mimically Fair,
And is not so.

Ax. But Women are most Women.
When they are truly Hypocrites.

Ars. But my Nerina, glory of her Sex,
How have I always thought her more than Woman!
In whom the Almighty Painter had expressed
The Fairest Pattern of exactest Angels,
Her Soul he drew the very Lively Image
Of some blessed Saint, or ever-happy Martyr;
But oh she of that Rank of Angels Proves,
Whose due Commission's only to destroy,
Armed with fierce Judgments of the Wrath Divine.

Ax. Then shun those Judgments which you see so nigh,
So plain, so manifest, and now should you --

Ars. I cannot, and I pray thee do not curse her,
It Is punishment enough she has given her self
To one that is unconstant as her self,
And I with pity leave her to her choice.

Ax. O the glad Sound! and will you quit this fondness,
And follow Honor, and hunt after Fame?

Ars. No, my Axalla, think not I can see
Her Beauties in my presence ravished from me,
And all the Sacred Store profanely rifl'd.

Ax. Then work your just Revenge, on him, on her,
On all --

Ars. Be hushed, and dare not name Revenge;
The Name of Brother aws my rising Fury,
And for Nerina, she is yet so dear,
I Will suffer all things for her, quit my Honors,
My hopes of Scepters, and my right to Crowns,
Nay her dear self for her more certain ease.

Ax. Strangely resolved!

Ars. Like Love undone by Fate,
Oh could I tell where blear-eyed Sorrow dwells,
Where bellowing out her Soul in discontent,
The empty Walls reverberate her woe.
To some such place, Axalla, let us fly;
There will I on some cold hard Stone lay down
My mournful Head, while from my furrowed Cheeks
My frequent Tears promiscuously fall;
One day I will bewail my own misfortunes,
Another will I kindly dedicate
To the loved Memory of Nerina's Father.
Whole Months and Years in tedious sorrow pass,
For my Nerina, that false, much-loved Maid,
Complain of all my angry Foes above,
With mournful sighs the hollow Echoes move,
And the last Groans of a departing Love.
To Heaven these only Vows, these Prayers I Will make,
Nerina may her fatal Choice forsake,
And from her bosom cast the lurking Snake.

[Exeunt. ACT IV.
A Councel-Table. Enter Tamerlane, Odmar, Abdalla, with other Lords and
Attendants. Tam. It Is time to look about me, I have slept
Too long, lulled into visionary Dreams
Of fleeting pleasures, which I waking, find
Most dangerous, and for a seeming Son
My Bosom has received the worst of Foes.
Arsines fled? and Conference with Turkey?
O Viper, Parricide, but say, my Friends.
What timely Fortune has his Crimes revealed.

Abd. Even that which ruins all Conspiracies,
A squeamish Conscience, and a light Reward.
The Ministers he hired to his Designs
Stand Witnesses against him.

Tam. Bring 'em forth.

Exit Odmar, and reenters with two Slaves. Odm. Now act the Villains home, now
is your time.

[Aside to Slaves. Tam. Friends to our Crown, for Friends you seem to be,
Whose care has been employed to serve our State
From those apparent Dangers threatened it.
We charge you in our Holy Prophets Name
Lay forth the Traitors Heart before our Eyes.

Odm. Swear on the Alcoran your Accusations
Are just and true -- Oh the unhappy Prince.

Abd. S'heart, well played Fox, he seems to hear with grief
What he suborns false Witnesses to swear.

[Aside. 1. Slave. By all the Orders of Tartarian Powers
Bound by Allegiance to our Sovereign,
We here are present to accuse and swear
Arsanes guilty of these Articles:
No more than which himself did testify,
And gave us in Commission to perform.
First that this Prince holds private Conference
With the surviving Race of Bajaset.
That with the fair Asteria's Love enflamed,
He seeks his Rival Brothers hated Life;
Then with Axalla that he does combine,
To Poison Tamerlane our Royal Master,
And with Asteria to usurp his Throne.

Tam. Treach'ry unheard beyond the Thought of Man!
But tell me, Friend, where bides the Traitor?

Odm. Speak,
Say any where.

[Aside to the Slave. Sl. n a lone Wood, my Lord,
After a long Complaint against the Prince*
His Royal Brother; full of envious hate
And proud disdain; after he had rehearsed
All his pretended wrongs in Banishment
Received; blushing Scarlet deep with Shame,
He rose to an Arraignment of the State,
And our established Laws --
Then impiously against his Father raged,
And swore Revenge.

Abd. Methinks now Stratagem
Comes on to something.

[Aside. Odm. These are practiced Villains.

2. Sl. Himself he said was straight for Prusia bound,
Where the young Rebel Princes wait his coming.

Tam. Perdition on the Viper! how he bites!
Could e're such baseness spring from Tamerlane.
Is this his Piety so far renowned?
That Loyalty which seemed inviolable?
Those Oaths that could have forced all Heaven believe him?
Is this his scorn of Honors and Rewards?
And did he starve his hungry Appetite,
That with a stronger Fury he might run
Wolf-like upon our Life and Diadem?
And gaping, swallow all the Golden Prey.
Fly, fly, Arsanes, breath on what Soil thou will
Thy hated Life, though every Sea should join
In one vast Ocean, their assistant Floods
To part us ever, though thy adverse Feet
In unknown Tracks kick at our upper Earth,
Though over the Starry Pole thou soaring fly'st
Above old Winter, and deep Beds of Snow,
Our painted Vengeance shall pursue thy Soul,
And spy thee in thy darkest Caverns hid,
Pierce through thy Mansion with our sharp Revenge,
Or send our Curses, where we cannot reach.
[Exit.
Odm. See there, Arsanes, how the rolling Waves
Come on amain, and dash thee on the Rock.

Abd. Methinks we two now like the Sea-born Giants,
Great Otus, and tall Ephaltes stand,
And grow out all their Acres in a moment.

Odm. Our Fortunes Friend in this vast Enterprise
Have made us free to give the Scythian Throne
To whom we please; Come, Mandricard, and claim
Thy vast Possessions, ask us Heaven next,
And we will do more with these two Fertile Brains,
Then e're Briareus with his hundred Hands.

[Exeunt. Asteria's Apartment. Who is discovered lying on a Couch, a Cupid in
Soft Music descends over her and Sings. Song.
HOw pleasant Virtue are thy Slumbers,
Sound thy Sleeps, and sweet thy Dreams,
While thee no Fear, no Guilt incumbers,
Danger frights, or Thought condemns?
2.
Thou naked with resistless Armor
Do thy self revenge, and shield,
Thou silent art so sweet a Charmer,
To thy Reasons all must yield.
3.
On thy fair Brow sits smiling Honor,
Justice waits thy awful Voice,
Thou Heir to Blessings art, thou Owner
Of Rich Fortunes Richest Ioys.
4.
Thou, what is Heavens greatest Blessing,
Art the Darling Child of Love,
Though Heaven yet hinder from possessing,
It will all thy Pains remove.
[The Cupid ascends. Asteria awakes in great disorder. Ast. What Mystic
Objects entertain my Soul,
And hold me in amazement? how confused
Are all my Thoughts, kind Joys with Troubles mixed,
Hope with dread Fear, disordered mass of Fancy!
The End seemed good, but oh that End is vain,
As fleeting as its Shade, as womanish
And fond a Dream, as to my wearied Eyes
Thought could suggest, or Mimick Fancy play.

Is going out. Enter Mandricard staying her. Man. So on fair Paphos Isle the
wanton Queen
Her Shelly Chariot drawn with sporting Doves,
Had lightly entered in a smiling Calm,
Ready to cruise upon her Parent Seas,
When from a-far the Warlike God espied her,
And brought her back to more substantial Pleasures.

Ast. What means this fatal Comet to our House,
Near what new birth of mischief does he shine?

Man. At length my Prayers are heard, my Vows have reached
The Deity, to which they were addressed.
Accept, O Fairest Power, from a Prince,
The Faithful Sacrifice of Humblest Thanks,
For all the Blessings you have poured upon him.

Ast. What Blessings, or what Prince? yet should there be
Any my tenderness has gratified,
He Is chose an ill Ambassador I Am sure
To pay his just Acknowledgments, which needs
Must taste ungrateful from the Man I hate.

Man. Heaven, how discordant are her Hand and Tongue!
Think not, Asteria, Mandricard could trust
To any Second his most Bosom Secret,
I the Receiver-kneel to pay the Debt.

Ast. If you from me a Kindness did receive,
I Am sure 'twas small, and may be paid with ease.

Man. How unconcerned she speaks, and looks disdain!
Yes, Madam, Heart for Heart is easy change;
Flames will meet Flames, and Fires join with Fires,
Ravage through all, and leave no middle space.

Ast. Rav'st thou, or do my Ears drink in a Sound
As real, as it is monstrous? Oh my Stars,
Protect me, and remove the hateful Object.

Man. Yet Princess, your fair Hand has otherwise
Deciphered me -- the Glorious Mandricard --

Ast. My Hand!

Man. Your Hand, which on the happy Paper pressed
The Praises of your much loved Mandricard.

Ast. Cursed be that Hand that writes thee ought but Fiend,
Cursed be that Tongue that speaks thee ought but Monster.

Man. Unfold, Great Alha, this Mysterious Secret!
Come, you dissemble, and a modest shame
Defers our Joys.

Ast. I Would clasp a Serpent sooner;
Had my base Hand e're thus belied my Heart,
As an infectious Limb I Would tear it from
My tainted Body, for the Wild Beasts, or Flames.

Man. You need not now, Asteria, use such Language,
There are no Oaths, no Promises, no Vows
To be kept now: Sure Death has swallowed all,
And cold Arsanes in their ruin lies.

Ast. Yes, I will keep 'em still to punish thee,
My Faith shall be the Scourge of my Revenge,
My Constancy shall keep thee on a Rack
Of Everlasting Torments, and my Oaths
Shall one by one strike thee with mad despair;
Thou art my Slave, and thou shall live like one.
Think thou, fond Fomenter of my Grief,
I do not hate that Man to Death, nay Hell,
That caused Arsanes Ruin? Proud Prince, I do;
Remember, Sir, my Brothers, Fathers Wrongs,
And blush to ask a Grace of me; to love?
No not to look, or visit me with Monsters.

Man. You treat me, Fair one, so severe a way,
As forces me to plead in my defense.
If in the War your Brother fell, not I,
But Fortune guiding my far-wandring Steel,
Cut off the forward Youth --
For your Great Fathers, and Arsanes Wrongs,
I Am innocent as harmless Infants are.

Ast. You innocent! so's Hell; so is your Train
Of Fellow-Villains, Infernal Ministers,
Are they not Prince?

Man. What e're you will have 'em be
They are, they must; and which of 'em but dares
Offer to plead his Innocence, he dies.

Ast. Fine Flatterer! thus did that supple Tongue
Sooth Tamerlane to hate the best of Princes:
Nor have you ended there, but cherish still
Your Breast with thinking with what subtle Art
You spread your Snares to catch the Prey designed,
And glory in the Murderous Success.

Man. How sweet her Looks, yet dreadful to approach!
Madam, a Prince repentant begs your Pardon,
And as the Fury of the Scythian Sword
Is now asswag'd, untaught to hurt or kill,
So let your Anger be allayed with mildness;
So will the World in peaceful Triumph sit,
And smilling, pall the envious Fates designs.
To them Ispatia. Ha! whence that Hellish Fury like her self
Has brought her here? Curse on the twining Serpent!
Shall I never shake her off! by Heaven it comes!
A swift Contrivance whets my sudden Thought,
Which shall divide us ever, far as Heaven,
Or far as Hell their Center hold from Earth.
[Exit.
Isp. Art thou the watery Sourse from whence this Stream,
These daily gushings of my Mourning Eyes
Burst forth, and almost drown my fainting Heart?
Are those the Comets, whose dire Influence
Sheds Ruin on me; is there in that Voice
So sweet an Harmony, so full of Charms,
It can bewitch the Sense of Mandricard?

Ast. Yes, Mandricard has learnt to stoop to me,
And at my Feet his daily Homage pay,
Which thus I scorn, and spurn even into Wind.

Isp. Unsufferable Creature, does she scorn him?
Oh more, far more than this, I could endure
Her Love; contemn him? nay that is not all,
She Rivals me, and yet professes scorn;
Is It not enough you have ensnared his Love?
Caught with a Golden Bait his yielding Heart?
But you must on his Honor raise contempt,
And make him cheap -- Oh Torture, Oh my Soul!

Ast. Know then, Ispatia, if you are resolved
To sound my Heart, I frankly must confess
I hate him, hate my Brothers Murderer
To death, and pray the Gods he may so love,
So burn with Passion, till I pity him,
Which Furies first shall do unto the Damned.
Nay do not rage, but thank me that I hate him,
For had I loved, Ispatia, had I loved,
You might have found him locked within my Arms,
Not prostrate at my Feet, nor had you e're
Have been admitted to reprove me for it,
As now you do.

Isp. It Is like I should not, Captive,
Nor am I now perhaps, by your good leave;
Yet I Will maintain the happiness I Have sought,
Stay here and pierce through either Heart, as far
As Sharp eyed Jealousy can look.

Ast. Complete
With this one Promise then my Happiness,
To hold him ever after from my sight.
But see, he comes --

[Enter Mandricard with a Priest. Isp. A Priest! what Omens now
Swell big that holy Harbinger of Fate?

Man. This holy Man, Ispatia, as of old
He joined our Hands before the smiling Gods,
So would he now our Hearts; one Kiss upon
The Sacred Alcoran, and our Love is Sealed.

Isp. Blessed Alteration!

Ast. O thrice happy Hour!

Isp. What sudden Ague seizes my chilled Limbs?
How my Eyes dazzle, and my Senses swim!
What have we done, my Lord?

Man. O nothing, nothing,
It Is but a Fit, a Qualm, a certain Scout,
Or flying Messenger from Deaths Tribunal,
To summon thee to Everlasting Rest.

Isp. What means my Lord?

Man. Oh it is a Sovereign Balm,
A Cure to all Distempers -- to be plain,
The Book was poisoned, and thou have drunk the Venom.

Isp. O Traitor! yet e're I expire, hear me.

Man. Speak quickly then.

Isp. Not long ago, my Lord, you did receive
A Letter from that Princess.

Ast. Me!

Isp. With all
The Power of Penitence I here implore
Your Pardon.

Man. What means the Fury?

Isp. In her Name
You took, embraced it, locked within your Bosom
The outward Manuscript, within your Heart
The sweet Contents.

Man. Which do enrich my Soul!

Isp. But now, ungrateful Man, be it spoke at last.
To fright thy Lawless Passion be it spoke;
I, not Asteria, wrote those Fatal Words
Which cause my Death.

Man. Then would to Mahomet
They may prove thy Damnation too.

Ast. Oh Heaven!

Isp. Well, Traitor, thou have had thy Fatal Wish,
As it is sure I die; but know base Poisoner,
Thy wily Treasons have not set thee free,
Nor will Ispatia leave thee even in Death,
I Will fright thee in thy Dreams, I Will haunt thee waking,
I Will scourge thy Conscience with Whips of Remorse.
The Sting of Serpents shall be nothing to it.
Yes, I will have Revenge, I will; I Will strike
Thee mad with terror, when thou dare approach
My Rivals Beauties; Clasp her, and I Will glide
All Cold between, and dash the fancied Joy.
O Alha, Mahomet, O Courteous Heaven,
Give me but Power as here I yield my Soul
Up to your Mercy in Deaths cruel Pangs.

[Dies. Man. Remove the hated Body from my sight.

Ast. And are there Powers in Heaven, and can they see
This Sacrilegious Mischief go unpunished?

Man. What ever Deities in Heaven there are,
They prove the Deed, and smile upon the Doer.
And thus by giving thee reward it; now Priest.

[ Mandricard and the Priest take her up, and are carrying her off. Ast. Look
down, O Mahomet, from Heaven, behold
My hard distressed Fortune; save, oh save
A Virgins Chastity, unsoil'd, unstained,
And right with Miracles thy Power contemned.

Enter Axalla and Zanches, their Swords drawn. Ax. This way, this way the
mournful Ecchoe calls.
Oh the bold Traitors, Sacrilegious Villains.
[They fight, Mandricard and the Priest are beaten off. They run, they fly; now
injured Virtue, seek
[ To Ast. Thy safe Retreat, while I pursue the Villains.

[Exeunt. Ast. Who e're you be just Mahomet reward you.
[Exit.
SCENE a Wood. Arsanes sitting melancholy on a Green Bank, while his Page
sings this SONG. BEhold ye Sylvans that frequent
This silent, sighing, mourning Grove;
Behold the Fountains, Birds lament,
Unhappy Damons fatal Love.
Chloris to him her Heart denies,
For which the gentle Shepherd dies.
Chapter Chloris to him etc.
Bright Chloris fairest of her kind,
That charmed with Smiles the yielding Swain,
False Chloris falser than the Wind,
That turns his Fairy Ioys to Pain.
Her Vows, her Oaths which tired Heaven,
Were for so many Curses given.
Chapter Her Vows, her Oaths etc.
Then fill with hollow Sighs the Day,
With Cypress strew the mourning Green;
Let nothing fresh, let nothing gay
Over all the fading Plain be seen;
^or see the Swain lies bleeding there,
Wounded by Love, dead with Despair.
Chapter For see the Swain etc.
Ars. Thus in a Chaos of cold discontent
I pass the weary Minutes, breathing forth
My daily Passions from my wasted Spirits;
Unhappy, wretched Prince, how Destiny
Allots unjust misfortunes to thy Youth!
Which to others is a flowing Spring of good,
To thee's a frosty Winter of cold Sorrow.
Oh my Nerina! how thy doubtful Faith
Strikes deep my Heart; nor can I think thee false
To thy false Hand against thy Virtue plead.
So, thus -- I may gaze here till I am blind,
[Looking on the Letter. But never here shall satisfaction find.

[Throwing it away. Enter in have Axalla and Zanches. Ax. Live, live Arsanes.
In just Obedience to your great Commands
I went to the Apartment of Asteria;
Where first I heard what seized my Soul with horror,
And num'd my Senses with a Marble Fear;
I heard, Arsanes, your Nerina shrieking,
With all the Struglings of a Ravished Maid.
When from her Chamber rushed in furious have
The Villain Mandricard, and the prophaner
Villain a Priest, who grasped the Sacred Store.
Raised by the Power of so just an Anger,
Your Old Man's Blood glowed with a Youthful Heat,
While with our Swords I and the Faithful Zanches
Pursued the Traitors, forced 'em quit their Treasure,
And made 'em thankful to their Stars for Life.

Ars. O Golden Minute! Thanks O Gracious Heaven!
And thou its kindest happiest Instrument.

Ax. What Past before her fair Hand will unfold,
This Letter to your Hand she charged me bring.

Ars. They Are welcome on what ever Errand sent,
Axalla, see the wondrous mighty Proof
[Reading. Of her wronged Innocence, she writes, not she,
But fond Ispatia, as dying she confessed,
Was Author of those Lines which drove us hither
In so much Fury, and so much Despair.

Ax. It Is as Axalla's Heart could wish it should be.

Ars. How could I trust these Characters which are
Unlike, as Faith and Falsehood, Love and Hate,
Hope and Despair; and should I then have cursed,
Cursed her sweet Virtue for another Crime?
Such words would sure have blasted me, such words
Had gave my Heart the lie, had swollen my Tongue
With its own Venom, nay had pressed and gripped
My thoughtful Sense with wrecks of dire remorse,
And the black Scourge of self-tormenting Conscience.

Ax. But see, my Lord, the tenderest words she writes!
See at the end of her Complaints her Prayers,
She begs Protection from your Royal Hands.

Ars. Protect her! yes, against the Universe,
Brother, and Father; Fortunes Darts, and Fates
Decrees, the business of our Watchful Eyes
Shall be to mark her Enemies, our Strength
And well-collected Virtue be her Guard
Where e're she moves: Let us not wast in words
One moment of our Life, these happy Hours,
A swift Obedience calls our Hearts and Hands,
For from Nerina came the soft Commands.

[Exeunt. ACT V.
Arsanes, Asteria. Ars. WIth equal Joy, as when the firstborn Man
Through a sweet Paradise led his Infant Bride,
With all the Pleasures of a welcome Love
Do I unsatiate with Asteria's Charms
Pass the glad day.

Ast. Did not my Fathers Fate
Oppose the sweet delights of growing Love,
This day I could with mighty Queens dispute
The Number of blessed Minutes.

Ars. Oh my Soul.

Ast. My Heart, I can profus'dly wish!

Ars. My all that I can ask, and Heaven can give.

Enter Abdalla, with Guards. Abd. Or I Am mistaken, or
This is the Traitor, apprehend him.

Ars. Whom?

Abd. Arsanes, Sir, me thinks you much resemble
That great, outwitted Statesman Prince.

Ars. It Is he; Slave, speak thy Errand.

Abd. From Tamerlane.

Ars. No more; it is Blasphemy
To ask, or to dispute the Cause, I go
Where e're he calls to shameful Bands, or Death.
Lead on -- but oh, my Heart, forget her not
Asteria --

Ast. My Lord --

Abd. We must not wait
Fond Lovers tedious partings; Lead away.

Ars. Farewell, Fair Star, for ever.

[Is led off. Ast. He Is gone, he is gone;
Hurried away by Traitors to his Death,
And oh, ye Powers, I had not power to speak
My last Farewell; I Will follow though, and pierce
Without regard of Life or Being, through
All that does, can oppose me; break through Fire,
Through Flames, over Mountains pass, and swelling Seas,
Through Files of Tartars, Swords, Lances, Javelins.
Armed with resistless Love, and Rage, I Will fly
Like Lightning in a moment to his Cell,
With all the force of parting Love embrace him.
Bath with my Widow-Tears his panting Breast,
Bask in his Eyes, share that Eternal Rest
His Noble Soul shall claim among the Blessed.
Exit.
Mandricard is discovered asleep, the Ghost of Ispatia by him with a Dagger in
her Hand, threatening him. Gh. Rest, rest, my Soul, at last great Heavens Care,
Let never Innocence of Heaven despair.
Thus sent, thus armed, an injured Shade I come
To scourge thee, Prince, for thy untimely Doom.
Thy Conscience thus just Alha does unseal,
And to thee all the horrors of thy Crimes reveal.
With Frenzy shall thou rage, with Sorrow groan,
And in deep thought thy dazzled Senses drown.
An inward Hell thee, Poisoner, shall burn*
Nor shall thou ever to thy self return.
Exit.
Mandricard rises frighted and raging. Man. I would have torn her, and have
sacrificed
Her Members to Ispatia's wandering Ghost;
Nay haunt me not, dear Shade, I Have sworn to do it,
With as much Art I Will work thy Rivals Fate,
As the wiliest Devil of 'em all can wish.
What Sorcery this Turkish Beauty bears!
Ha! where so swiftly fled! have Harlots Wings?
Then to the Icarian Flood I Will steer my Course,
Drain it, and rob the unexperienced Boy
Of his ill-manag'd Quills, born on whose Force
I Will mount, and catch her in her hottest Chase.

Enter Odmar, Abdalla. Odm. My Lord, Lord Mandricard.

Man. Did not you see a Monster up the Hill.
Sharp radiant Arrows armed her Magic Eyes,
Her Face, or no Face, or her double Face,
Showed crooked, Nature shrouded by false Art,
These well-known marks make ill for her escape.
Hey follow, seek, it is worth our pains, and more,
Millions to one but we shall seize the Witch.
See ho! see there over yonder Plain she fleets!
O for an Arrow from Diana's Quiver!
Spread wide your Nets, mark where to Autumn Gray
The verdant Spring is changed, that, that is her Road,
Made hoary by her Sorcery and Charms.
She Is near, she is near; my Nostrils draw the Scent
Of Paints, of Powders, Daubings, strong Perfumes,
A Whore will scent a Mile -- so nimble -- ha,
It Is noble Sport, so hei, follow, so hei.

[Runs up and down, and out. Odm. Was ever such a Change in Nature wrought!
So sudden, yet so perfect!

Abd. This your Plots,
Your Stratagems have done, had I been heard,
He had e're this have worn a Crown by Arms
Nobly achieved.

Odm. Thine were the means to sure
Destruction, this we may amend.

Abd. Ha, ha!
Do thou not see our hopes in frenzy drowned?
Brave had you fell my way, as shameful this.

Odm. We Will follow him --

Abd. In vain.

Odm. Our Counsels may --

Abd. Make him a Fool, as they have made him mad.

Odm. What shall I do?

Abd. Die in the Act like Men.

Odm. Or live, and work more Ruin.

Abd. And be found
Traitors at last, most infamous and base.

A Noise of Fighting. Odm. What Noise is that?

Abd. It Is the dear Shout of Battle,
Abdalla, to thy loved Vocation.
[Exit
Odm. Go,
I Will follow, and thy dangerous Fortunes share.
[Exit.
The Scene opening, discovers Tamerlane, Odmar, Abdalla, encountering Axalla,
Zanches, and others. Ax. Arsanes, live; or perish all thy Friends.

Peo. Revenge, Revenge our Prince Arsanes wrongs.

Ax. They fly, they fly; see, O the wronged Arsanes,
Thy Succor nigh.

[ Tam. and his Party give back* Abd. We must not thus give up
To Slaves our Laurels while Abdalla lives.

Ax. Die then perfidious, base, eternal Villain!

[Kills Abdalla. A Retreat is sounded on Tamerlanes side, the Scene closes.
Enter Tamerlane, Odmar. Tam. Dead or alive he will my Ruin prove.

Odm. Dispatch him strait.

Tam. You Are rash, and unadvised;
Prove thy self worthy of the Name thou bear
Our Counselor, or die.

Odm. Your Slaves Advice
Meets your Commands; let, Sir, Arsanes live;
Free him.

Tam. Ha! say thou!

Odm. These Reports will quell
The incensed Crowd; while I in Ambush laid
In some dark secret Corner of the Palace,
Rush on him swelled with pride, and reeling with
The drunkenness of Love, end him, my Lord,
Big with large expectations of delight,
And from your Royal Scepter take the Guilt.

Tam. Thou art my Soul, my Empires Prop, and Refuge,
Who have revived it sinking from its Ashes;
Next to our own, when thy Blessed Hand performs
The happy Work of thy projecting Brain,
I Will Crown thy Head with Laurel and with Gold,
Boasting of thee our Life and Throne to hold.
[Exit.
Odm. Now Odmar, for thy share expect no less
Than Scepters for thy dear contriving Wit;
Ha, ha, ha, ha, to see the Shallow King
Expect Security and Bliss from me.
Vain Fools who think we work for any Ends
But for our own -- How tamely the dull Crowd
Lay down their Arms, and leave their Prince defenseless;
Die, die, Arsanes, and live Mandricard,
And I thy happy Father; with what ease
Odmar a Crown has purchased to his Race!
Me thinks I see my numerous Royal Offspring
Steal softly by, all Crowned; no more, let others
By Blood and Civil Wars an Empire gain.
It Is Fraud alone false Titles can maintain.
[Exit.
A Chamber. Enter Arsanes. Ars. I wonder how the Grave and Wise define
The uncertain motions of ambiguous Chance,
While equally she flatters, and destroys.
It Is true I Am free, live, have large promises
To Love and Reign, as my high Birth requires.
But oh, what safety's in that Freedom found
From the sweet quiet of the Mind exiled!
That I in Chains!

[Enter Axalla. Ax. My Lord!

Ars. What have my Friend,
To view this Load of Shame?

Ax. Ha, Prince.

Ars. I said my Shame.
Am I not marked in every Limb a Villain?

Ax. This Temper suits not with your Fate, my Lord,
Thick Crowds of Friends expect you at the Court,
Waiting to Crown your vast Desert with Honor.
Which Tamerlane by me commands you take.

Ars. What sort of Honor is to Rebels due?

Ax. Rebels?

Ars. Am I not one? how came I here?

Ax. Leave those jealous Thoughts:
Ranked in long Rows the gazing People stand
An endless Multitude; while smiling Virgins
From Windows, mixed with Joyful Matrons, lean,
All hoping, and all wishing, praying too
For your Approach; Arsanes is the Sound,
The only Sound the Gods can hear from Earth.

Ars. Triumphant Villain that I am!

Ax. Ha! Villain!
Fool that I am to court a dreaming Zealot
To sublime Honors; stupid, thankless Prince;
Is this the Character our love deserves?
Traitors and Villains! Oh the hateful Name!
Go, Prince, and as thy unmanned Soul requires,
Neglecting Palaces, in Dungeons dye,
Slave-marking Iron press with vilest pain
Those Limbs, which Sword, Steel, Fire have sustained.
Farewell, Arsanes, neither Prince, nor Man.

Ars. Hold, Noble Friend; pard'n, oh Axalla, pard'n
A few rash words; the Act in you was good,
Friendlike, and Just; and were it not forbid,
Forbid by Duty, it were so in me;
But oh!

Ax. Still dreaming?

Ars. Oh my Innocence
Thou sacred fort, fair Guardian of my Breast,
Where art thou fled? me thinks I Am left alone,
Disarmed, defenseless, since I saw thee last.

Ax. Still in the tedious maze of fearful doubts!

Ars. Where e're I turn I see my Ruin nigh.

Ax. Mark then your surest way to Life or Death,
Bright Honor, or base Shame; the King, Arsanes,
Brooks heavily the scorn of his Commands,
Your Friends their ill accepted Love repent,
And sad Nerina all in Tears protests
She never thought Arsanes could deny
Her any thing.

Ars. Hold, thou have said enough;
Words of such wondrous sense, so moving, full
With Arguments of such prevailing Power,
Would raise the dull Lethargick from his Dream;
That Threefold Chain of Duty, Friendship, Love,
Would bind the Roving Sylvan Honors Slave;
Faith draws the Wills of Men to my defense,
Duty and Love Auxiliary Gods.

[Exeunt. Odmar solus. Odm. Traitor! it is a Name of vast import!
Not armed with furbish'd Brass, nor locked in Steel,
He bears the noiseless Weapons of Deceit.
Lies politic, and subtle Flatteries
Raise him to trust; what cannot Villains trusted?
We change, destroy, make Princes, and unmake.
Unenvied be henceforth Cassander famed,
Dire Sylla, Close Sejanus, Cruel Marius,
Seditious Gracchi, God-like Catiline,
With all the Glorious Traitors of each Age;
Not the false Smerdis with his Magic Train
Could sound the dark Abyss of Odmars Plots.

Peop. Long live Great Tamerlane, and Prince Arsanes.

[Shout within. Odm. Hark, now me thinks I see this Lover come
Hot with desire; see how the too rash Fool
With what large hasty steps he meets half way
My Daggers Point; now, Heart, for thy Revenge!
Heaven guide my Hand where I resolve to strike!
Here will I make my Vigilant Retreat,
All Passages but through this Gate are barred
To the dear Lodgings of his loved Asteria;
While the dark Night shall shrowed me and my Guilt.

[Retreats. Enter Mandricard. Man. No not so much as one poor Cypress Torch
To light her to her Grave -- ah the much-wrong'd Ispatia!

[ Odmar rushes on him and stabs him with a Poniard. Odm. As sure a Thrust as
ever Malice made.
Lie there thou empty Blaze of Fame; while I
Run with false Tears, devulger of thy Fate.
Oh how the Crowd will fret! the Prince Arsanes,
The Noble Prince lies murdered in the way.
Help, help, the Prince is murdered. oh, oh, oh, oh.
[Exit.
Man. Darkness and Horror! whither am I going?
What greedy Horse-leech sucks my Vital Blood,
And draws me to a Being like Ispatia's?
Laugh, laugh, ye Furies, and ye Devils grin,
Scourge me with Scorpions, punish me with Flames,
Eternal Flames; tear, consume, devour me,
Let Hell surround me with her greatest Torments,
Severest Plagues prepared for blackest Souls;
But turn the wronged Ispatia from my sight,
Ispatia's Presence is a Thousand Hells.

[Dies. Re enter Odmar with a dark Lanthorn. Odm. But to be sure you are dead,
it much concerns.
By Heaven it is Mandricard, Death, Furies, Hell,
And thou, cursed Hand, false Author of my woe,
Thou Traitor to my Will, and Rebel to my Aim;
Oh the black Curse of Chance --
And plague of Accidents! so gross an Error
Was wrought sure by the envy of the Stars.
My Mandricard, my Son, oh, oh, my Son.

Enter Tamerlane. Tam. Keep back the Rabble, and your selves retreat,
While I survey and mourn my hapless Son.
Well, Friend, thou'st done the business.

Odm. Very well,
To make the Strumpet Fortune frisk and laugh.

Tam. What mean you Friend?

Odm. I mean there is in Heaven
A Jubilee among Arsanes Stars.

Tam. That he is come there --

Odm. That he is not come there.

Tam. Thy Mystic Speech I cannot comprehend,
Nor sound thy Sense, no nor thy Ghastly Looks.

Odm. This will explain 'em all --

[Points to Mandric. Tam. By all the Gods
It Is Mandricard, Cursed Villain -- Oh my Son.

Odm. Ha, ha, ha.

Tam. What would thy Mirth?

Odm. Seeing once a Corse
On a Black Beer to gloomy Pluto born.
^laught to see the Sympathetick Crowd
Howl, yell, lament, as they were Parents all.
What was the Corse to them, or they to it?

Tam. Yet Ridling, Slave? what hoa my Guards -- who waits?
Seize there the Murderer.

[Enter Guards. Odm. I scorn to perish by a Fate so base.
Thus do the Noble dye --
[Stabs himself. What mean those Tears?
[ To Tam. Know, King, thou should have shed those very Tears
Some twenty years ago, when Mandricard
Your Son, my Charge, a tender Infant died;
Then the wished Glory of my days began;
He dey'd; I to his room my Son advanced,
My own Themyre, supposed your Mandricard.
My swelled Ambition yet did higher aim,
A King, at least the Father of a King
I was resolved to raise my self. Think, Sir,
By me how often Arsanes has been made
By me a Traitor, never of himself.
This was the last unlucky Cheat I acted,
Which the cursed Fates had otherwise decreed,
And turned on me the Ruins of my Wish.
Scarce can I more; my Death comes swiftly on;
While from my Actions I this Glory draw,
None could but Odmar, Odmars Plots destroy.

[Dies. Tam. Remove the wretched Bodies from my sight,
The hated Traitor, and the cursed Impostor!
First let 'em hang a public Spectacle
In our high Road which to the Palace leads,
Then when all Eyes are glutted with the sight,
Cast 'em to Birds and Beasts a welcome Prey.

Enter an Officer. Off. Prepare, Great Tamerlane, for your defense,
Uproars and Tumults every where are risen.
Fame of Arsanes Death has armed the Crowd,
With Fury, Rage, Suspicions, Frenzies, Fears,
Your self the sole Promoter of his Fate
Are sworn, arraigned, on you they vow Revenge.

Tam. Have quickly, and with Trumpets Sound pronounce
The Rumor false; their loved Arsanes lives;
By blessed mistake it is Mandricard is fallen.
[Exit off. Call to my Arms the Noble Prince Arsanes,
And his fair Mistress; at last my Eyes are open,
Unsealed to Truth, I see and am confirmed
No close Conspiracy, or black Design,
But Love, and only Love, their Hearts did join.

Enter Arsanes and Asteria. Tam. Thanks, O Propitious Heaven, thanks my Stars,
And all ye Angels Guards of Innocence,
Which have restored, and brought into his Right
The wronged Arsanes, welcome O my Son,
Thy Enemies are dead, the Impostors dead,
And with them all Suspicions of thy Faith,
Thy Injuries are dead -- Oh my Arsanes,
A Father in the Face of Heaven salutes thee
A happy Bridegroom, from a Fathers Hand,
Receive thy Fairer Virtues, Fair Reward.

Ars. O Ecstasy! Oh Paradise of Joy!
I come scarce hoping for a Pard'n, and find
A full Reward, Inestimable Treasure,
Eternal Bliss; nor is it Fairy Treasure!
No, no, I have it here, I hold it, grasp it,
A Real Pleasure, and Substantial Good.
But oh let not the fullness of my Joy
Make me unmindful of the Noble Giver.
Oh, my Asteria --

Ast. My Lord!

Ars. Thus let us kneel,
With Thanks unto our Father.

Ast. Our Preserver!

Ars. Our new Creator, thus let us lie prostrate,
And wonder at our sudden Happiness.

Tam. Rise and believe it granted; now witness Heaven,
And ye kind Stars, that smile upon our Throne,
With what untroubled Joy I join the Hands
Of the blessed Loyal Pair.
The Sacred Tie just Alha shall confirm,
And as we Sign, Seal your Eternal Loves.

Ars. Thanks O our Royal Father, God-like Prince,
And double Author of my happy Being.
So may Great Alha all your Actions Crown,
And with Eternal Blessings Guard your Throne.
As I your worthy Praises loudly sing,
The Kindest Father, and the Justest King.

[Exeunt. EPILOGUE, By Mr. DRYDEN.
LAdies, the Beardless Author of this Day,
Commends to you the Fortune of his Play.
A Woman Wit has often graced the Stage,
But he is the first Boy-Poet of our Age.
Early as is the Year his Fancies blow,
Like young Narcissus peeping through the Snow;
Thus Cowley Blossomed soon, yet Flourished long,
This is as forward, and may prove as strong.
Youth with the Fair should always Favor find,
Or we are damned Dissemblers of our kind.
What Is all this Love they put into our Parts?
It Is but the pit-a-pat of Two Young Hearts.
Should Hag and Gray-Beard make such tender moan,
Faith you would even trust 'em* to themselves alone,
And cry let us go, here is nothing to be done.
Since Love's our Business, as it is your Delight,
The Young, who best can practice, best can Write.
What though he be not come to his full Power,
He Is mending and improving every hour.
You sly She-Iockies of the Box and Pit,
Are pleased to find a hot unbroken Wit,
By management he may in time be made,
But there is no hopes of an old battered Jade;
Faint and unnerv'd he runs into a Sweat,
And always fails you at the Second Heat.
FINIS.

