A VIEW OF THE SOUL, IN SEVERAL TRACTS. The First, being a DISCOURSE of the
Nature and Faculties, the Effects and Operations, the Immortality and Happiness
of the SOUL of MAN. The Second, a CORDIAL against Sorrow, or a TREATISE against
Immoderate Care for a Man's own POSTERITY, and Grief for the Loss of CHILDREN.
The Third consists of several EPISTLES to the Reverend John Tillotson, D. D.
and Dean of Canterbury, tending to the further Illustration of the former
Arguments concerning the SOUL of MAN, and the proof of a particular PROVIDENCE
over it.

By a Person of Quality.

I am fearfully and wonderfully made,
Psalm 139.14. In the multitude of the sorrows that I had in my heart, thy
comforts have refreshed my soul,
Psalm 94.19. LONDON, Printed for George Downs, at the Three Flower de Luces
in Fleet Street, over against St. Dunstan's Church. MDCLXXXII.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
ALthough the worthy Author of this Book has in the Prefaces belonging to
each Part given some account of the occasion, manner, and method of Writing it,
sufficient to justify the order in which it is laid; yet since we live in a
captious age, wherein persons are apt to value themselves from the skill they
pretend to in discovering the faults of others, and to judge before they have
taken time to consider, or even to read what they so boldly disparage and
traduce, it may be necessary to prevent that inconvenience at the beginning, by
showing the Reason of the following order, viz. of placing the Discourse upon
Sorrow before that which treats of the Nature, the faculties, and the
operations of the Soul. A method, it is confessed, that is not usual or natural,
to set the particular before the general; but yet will appear to be very proper
and convenient here, with respect to the occasion upon which they were penned;
which was the disconsolate condition that this Gentleman was reduced unto by
the loss of several Children in a short time; a condition that tried all the
powers and force of his Soul, and which as it gave him the opportunity, so it
made it necessary for him to find out and to consider the arguments and ways
that might tend to the quiet and satisfaction of his own mind, and to arm him
against the violent assaults of that melancholy passion. These make up the
First Part, relating to the particular case, which consists of Considerations
against immoderate care, etc. By this means his Soul by degrees began to feel
it self, his thoughts were more his own, and he had some leisure to reflect
upon the strength, violence, and influence of that passion; and from thence was
led to the contemplation of the wonderful Effects, Powers, and capacities of an
human and reasonable Soul; a subject that he thought would abundantly requite
his pains, if he took it into serious consideration. This at his leisure he did
so successfully improve, that he from thence composed his Second Book, or the
general discourse de Anima. Having thus arrived at some degree of quiet, he
then thought himself not the only, afflicted person in the World, but that
there were others that might need, and yet not have leisure or opportunity to
think, or if they had, might not hit upon the same arguments; and that what was
a diversion and satisfaction to himself in the considering and composing, might
be so to others in the reading; this inclined him to make them public. This
was a new consideration; and however qualified by his Genius, Temper, and
Education, yet being distrustful of himself, he resolved to submit it to the
judgment of another, and of one that was a Stranger to him, from whom he might
therefore expect the freer censure. This brought him to the Reverend the Dean
of Canterbury, a person well known to the world no less for his integrity than
accurate judgment, who with his wonted freedom did communicate his thoughts to
him about it, and encouraged him to proceed in his design. This candor with
which that Judicious Person treated him, did at once both increase his esteem
for him, and induced him to think over his Arguments again, and try what he
could further add for their confirmation and improvement. This by times and in
several ways he did prosecute, and sent his thoughts in so many Familiar
Epistles to the Dean, whom he had now made his Friend; which being furnished
with many peculiar observations serving his former design, and tending more
especially to the further illustration of his Treatise de Anima, it was not fit
to separate them from the other: These make up the Third Part of the Book. But
now having ventured thus far, he began to retract what he had done, and to
think that he had done too much, and after the Papers were sent to the Press
would have recalled and stifled them, had he not been restrained at last by
better Reasons: And now they are published, thinks it best to conceal his name,
that he may more unconcernedly abide the censure, or more easily obtain the
pardon of his Readers, and that more especially for the 5th Epistle, which
respects the Imagination; a subject truly nice and intricate, and which as it
cost him more pains to trace and examine, so upon examination he was most
distrustful of it, and most unwilling to publish what he had composed upon it;
designing it rather to be perused, than Printed as it is: And therefore he
cannot so well own that to be his, as if it had been reviewed and corrected to
his own mind. If there should be any Errata's that have escaped the Corrector's
hand, the Author's distance from the Press will, I hope, excuse them.

THE PREFACE.
IT is, I think, the Saying of Terence, Facile omnes cum valemus, recta
consilia aegrotis damus. But in no distemper shall a man find more Visitants
with their prescriptions, than those of the mind. Let him be but oppressed with
grief or sorrow, he shall have many, like Jobs friends, Job. 2.11.
come every one from his place, and perhaps with less modesty (not attending
silently seven days) shall forthwith apply their remedies, before the humor be
gathered to an head. But if to any of these when seized upon by the same
distemper, the Proverb should be retorted, Physician heal thy self, It Is to be
doubted, most of them would prove like to a late famous Physician, and sink
under that distemper, for the knowledge and Cure whereof he had at the same
instant a Treatise in the Press.

The Mind of man is a Labyrinth, but it has four chief passions, from whence
indeed all others do flow, as from their native Heads, or Fountains, and those
are Desire and Joy, Fear and Sorrow. The first being or proceeding from an
opinion of a future Good; the second of a present; the third from an opinion of
a future Evil, and the fourth of a present. Now since it is Opinion (as Sir.
Walter In his Preface to the History of the World.
Raleigh has prettily said) and not Truth that travels the World without a
Passport, and these passions which hurry us headlong, we know not whither, are
grounded in opinion and fancy; It Is not barely application of Truth from
without, but serious consideration of Truth within, must cure us; And every one
perhaps will do it best, in following Cicero's way (when he could receive no
comfort from his friends, upon the death of his Daughter Tullia) and compose a
cordial de consolatione himself.

This was the way of my cure, and this I conceive is best for every man. But he
who cannot do this of himself may yet think well of that medicine, the
operation whereof has been experimented by the Author, and rather take his
probatum est than another opinion; and to such do I propose my case and the
considerations respecting it. And because the perfect knowledge of the cause
may be sometimes thought as material and necessary as the disease it self; and
men being apt to take up that exclamation in relation thereunto, Lament. 1.12.
Was ever sorrow like my sorrow? etc. and think another man's cause but trivial;
I am content whoever sees this, should know and judge of mine.

It was thus, My Ancestors having continued many descents, possessed of a small
but competent Estate, under the notion of ancient Gentlemen, left me the
eldest, and I fear the last, of the family to struggle with, and retrive their
several former encumbrances; which my care and assiduity, with God's blessing,
performed. I married the daughter of a Gentleman of an ancient honorable
Family, and by her had several Sons and Daughters, to reap the fruit of my
care, as I thought; whereupon I was ready to say, I had all that my heart could
desire. And though I might place my Affections on some other things, more than
was either becoming in bare sobriety, or requisite in prudence; yet these stole
away the strength thereof, and I took greatest complacency therein. After I
began to sing this earthly Requiem to my Soul, it pleased God to put some stop
thereto, by taking away one or two of my children, and at length to leave me (a
pledge of his mercy I trust, and not a subject for his future trial of me) one
only Daughter remaining. The death of each of my children, were arrows which
stuck fast in me, and pierced me sore; but the last coming on the sudden, upon
the most healthful and least expected, and in the neck (as I may say) of
another, made so deep a wound in my Soul, that it caused me to despise all
other his worldly blessings, and to begin to question with him like Abraham,
Genesis 15.2.
Lord God what will thou give me, seeing I go childless? Such an overflowing
frothy sorrow it begat in me, that the very allaying thereof in some measure I
have Reason to impute to the merciful loving kindness of a bountiful, good, and
gracious God, assisting and strengthening me. It Is true, there yet remain such
relics of the Disease, that whenever either the countenance, or pretty
Sayings of any of my Children offer themselves to my thoughts, it causes a
chillness over all my Spirits; which I look on as remediless in any one, who
carries about him the least bowels of natural Affection, and such, I trust, may
well consist with Grace; But I have brought it to that, that the smart is no
greater than the Flagrantior aequo non restat dolor ille meus, nec vulnere
major.
Wound requires in any one, whose bowels are not petrified, and whose heart is
not wholly senseless and mortified.

Next and immediately under God's grace, this cure has been thus far effected,
by my own thoughts and consideration, (if they may be said to have been mine):
And after the cure, I was willing to make them public, that I might not Ps.
40.10.
hide his righteousness within my heart, or keep back his mercy and truth, but
declare the same to those who come after. Indeed I cannot but here acknowledge
that these thoughts or Meditations brake forth very abruptly (and it may be in
many particulars blameworthy) from the heat within; But to hear one man speak
feelingly, may sometimes work deeper impressions upon an Auditor, than another
eloquently; and a poor Prisoner who has found out a way to free himself from
his Fetters, may gain more attention from his discovery, than a great Professor
in the Art. My thoughts have been too much busied, God knows, about the World,
(and besides that, my Calling and Profession never required Books adorned with
Rhetoric, as some of those who may chance to see this, know) to make their
exit in any artificial dress: and if in a plain garb, they shall work any good
Effect upon any other, laboring under, or in danger to labor under, the same
or the like disease; Let that person then assuredly know, that God had a design
for his good, as well as mine, in my particular Affliction. And indeed such is
the universal care he has of Mankind, that every one might if he would, reap
some benefit in another loss. He who is not at present assaulted, may yet
prepare himself for a defense, and he who beholds the bruises of another may
walk more carefully and take heed lest he fall. He who has lost no Children, or
has none to lose, may yet see and consider the vanity of disquieting himself,
Psalm. 39.6.
in heaping up riches, and knowing not who shall gather them. These my rude
thoughts, which have eased me, may possibly incite another to more sober
considerations of God's Wisdom and Providence, and Man's folly. And then, I
hope, that man will not blame me for thinking only according to those abilities
God has given me; since every one of us will confess, that the wisest of us are
but the best conjecturers, and it is God only that knows; and though I have
thought rudely, and amiss, yet it being not willingly, I hope my want of
Learning or Wisdom may receive Pardon from God, and at least a charitable
Censure from man.

I was somewhat the rather induced to commit these my rambling Thoughts to
Paper, from some hopes, that such as chance to see them would not look on them,
as the Cry, or Trumpet of one that endeavors to drive men into the Sanctuary
from a gainful Art, and yet stays himself without the Vail, but the genuine
search and effect of trouble and sorrow, which never finds Rest till it enters
there. Here are indeed some little Essays of our own sufficiency, but tending
and pointing to a better Physician of our Soul and Body; to one that is able to
show us the true method of cure, and without whom, we shall never be able to
find the shadow of any certain rule, but groap about, till wearied and
fainting, and find our Errors only on the other side of our Graves.

THE CONTENTS.
BOOK I.
SECT. I. Considerations against immoderate care for a man's own Posterity, and
Sorrow for the loss of Children; taken in general from the Providence of God,
from the usefulness and necessity of Afflictions, and those brought down to the
case. Page 1 SECT. II. Particular considerations to moderate our passions, such
as (1) the advantage of God's choosing for us. (2) The folly of our own Choice,
with respect especially to the Goods of fortune, and particularly to Children;
we cannot foresee how they will prove, or what may happen to them to make them,
and us by them, miserable. (3) Our sins are the cause of all Evil and exceed
our sufferings, and which are often to be discovered by them, as is exemplified
in the loss of Children. (4) Our remaining enjoyments surmount our sufferings.
page 8 SECT. III. Of the Nature and Origin of Sorrow; that it arises chiefly
from Love, which is the root of all passions. The cure of sorrow by the love of
God. page 20 SECT. IV. The remedies ordinarily prescribed against Sorrow,
considered, and showed to be of little force toward the cure of it; as that
death is a common thing, that we cannot recall our Friends, that they are happy,
that our case is not singular. That its not to be cured by Reason and
Philosophy alone, and by nothing less than an influence from above. What graces
are exercised in Affliction. page 29 Ejaculations used in the state of the
disease. page 36
BOOK II. A Treatise of the Soul, containing several discourses of the Nature,
Powers, and Operations of it.
The Preface showing the occasions and Reasons of writing such a tract. page 45
PART I.
SECT. I. How far the Soul of man is similar with that of Brutes? The Soul
considered in the three prime faculties of the Intellect, viz. the Imagination,
Mmory, and Reason. That Beasts work more regularly in order to their end than
men. That man only beholds things at a distance. p. 52. SECT. II. Wherein the
Soul of man exceeds that of Brutes? Its immortality considered, and proved from
Scripture, and particularly from the writings of Moses. page 56 SECT. III. Its
Immortality maintained and illustrated from its obstructions in its operations,
as deliriums and dotage. page 57 SECT. IV. Its Immortality proved from the
manner of its acting in the inferior faculties, similar with Brutes. page 60
SECT. V. Its Immortality further illustrated from its different operations in
different persons; whereas Beasts of the same species do all agree in their
desires and delights. page 61 SECT. VI. The Immortality of the Soul of man
illustrated from the difference between Parents and Children, and its
difference from it self. page 63 SECT. VII. The immortality of it showed from
its unweariedness in acting, from its reflex acts, which cannot proceed merely
from Sense. page 65 SECT. VIII. Its immortality showed from things peculiar to
man, as Weeping, Laughter, Speech; and the nature of these considered with
respect to their different causes, and which cannot be extracted out of matter.
Reflections on Atheism, and the immortality of the Soul showed from the desires
that are to be found even in the defenders of it. page 67
PART II.
SECT. I. Of the several faculties and operations of the Soul, and therein of
voluntary and involuntary motion. page 75 SECT. II. Of the Affections of the
Soul, the severals of them. The nature of Envy, etc. considered. page 76 SECT.
III. Of the rise of the Affections; Love the primary mover of them. What part
in the Soul is the seat of the Passions; Of the Heart, the Stomach, and Spleen.
page 78 SECT. IV. Of the Imagination, which receives several names according to
its working, as, Invention, Conception, Reflection, Apprehension, Cogitation,
Fancy. A Syncope or swoun peculiar to man, in which Imagination cease to
work. In all the ramblings of Imagination there is a dependence. Its a faculty
Reason has the least power over; And the benefit of not having an absolute
power over it. page 83 SECT. V. Of Memory. He that has a smart invention
seldom wants a good Memory. The impress in it on the Imagination is according
to the strength of Affections and Reason. page 87 SECT. VI. Of Reason, that
saving graces are ingrafted on it. page 88 SECT. VII. Of the Will. The Will
free as respecting self, but depending on God. No other will in Brutes, but
what receives immediate impression from Sense; such a will as arises from, but
cannot put a stop to thought. page 89 SECT. VIII. Of Conscience, what it is, of
a tender Conscience. page 90 SECT. IX. Os the faculties of the Soul working
upon each other. Sense works upon the Imagination, and the Imagination upon the
Affections, and both upon Reason; and Reason again on the Affections, etc.
Reason influenced by the Divine providence. page 93
PART III.
SECT. I. Of the prevailing faculty of the Soul, and wherein the primacy seems
to be. Of the concurrence of the Imagination and the Affections; and the power
of the Affections. page 98 SECT. II. The potency seems to be in the Affections,
if we consult Scripture. p. 101 SECT. III. It may seem to be in some Affection
from humane conjecture. p. 103. SECT. IV. Of the potency of the Affections.
They are not to be subdued by Reason alone, but Reason is often subdued by them.
page 104 SECT. V. Some Affection is the substantial part of the Soul. page 109
SECT. VI. How the Affections move from the Imagination, or otherwise, as from
Revelation, Reason, or Sense. page 110 SECT. VII. What light the Imagination
receives from Reason. Of the weakness of Reason. Of the dependence which the
Soul has upon the Body in its operations. page 112 SECT. VIII. Of the
excellency and advantage of Reason, notwithstanding its inability and
dependence. page 115
PART IV.
SECT. I. Means to reclaim the Soul. The Affections not opposed, forthwith
cool. Reason shows us our Errors, but neeeds Faith to enforce it. p. 118 SECT.
II. Of Love. Love toward man a principle of Nature, and what Faith does not set
us at liberty from. It should be Universal. page 122 SECT. III. How Love may be
regent. Though Love be the principal grace, it ows much of its vigor to the
concurrence of the rest, as is exemplified in Humility, Justice, and especially
Faith. page 129 The Conclusion. Against Censuring. That we search not into
things too high for us, but make the word of God our guide. page 132
BOOK III. Containing several Epistles to the REVEREND, the DEAN of CANTERBURY.
EPIST. I. Wherein the Author, after some Apology for the not making public
his Treatises de Dolor and de Anima, makes some reflections on Atheism, and
blames the unnecessary and extravagant dsputes and writings against such as
seem tainted with it. That the way to convince such is by the practice of
Religion. That opposition does often continue, that which if neglected would
fall of it self, as men of sharp wits delight to find Antagonists. page 1
EPIST. II. Wherein he treats of the cause of action or motion under the notion
of Spirit. That a Spirit conscious of its own work is durable. That the
flashes, thoughts and actions of our own Spirits are often mistaken for, and
applied to the operation of the Spirit of God. Four ways of Gods operation with
respect to man, 1. By his common Providence. 2. By his merciful Providence, or
restraining Grace. 3. By his bountiful Providence, or common renewing grace. 4.
By his Spirit, or special renewing Grace. How God according to all these may be
invocated. The danger of applying the operation of the Spirit to every work in
man; And how fit it is to clear the mind of such Error. Of the use of solitude
in some particular Seasons, as the most ready and likely way to discover Truth.
page 13 EPIST. III. Wherein he sets down some further grounds and Reasons of
his opinion of the Mortality, or utter annihilation of the Souls of Brutes upon
their death. No durable Spirit in any visible Creature but man, of Sympathies
and Antipathies in Plants and Animals. The soul of Beasts essential with the
Body, and so subject to the same fate. The Intellect in them in its height at
the first, whereas that in man is gradual. Acts peculiar to reasonable
Creatures, as desire of dissolution, and voluntary abstinence. The Spirit of
Brutes determined by Sense. No Creature besides man lays up more than is
sufficient to maintain it self. We attribute greater gifts and Sagacity to mere
Animals than they have, as in Ants. That there may be as much Intellect in
Creatures we converse not with, as those we do. The opinion of the utter
annihilation of the spirit of Brutes has no tendency to Atheism. page 39
EPIST. IV. Wherein the Author Treats of man's ignorance, in his search into the
most ordinary work of Nature, and concludes how much more dim-sighted we are
when we look into the frame and structure of man's Soul. Solomon's knowledge of
Nature not universal; much in Nature found out accidentally. No one work of it
fully to be understood. How Nature does change in its operations. Of change in
Colors, and that the variety in them is unaccountable. That there is a
transcendent Wisdom ruling and appearing in all far above our reach: And so
there is great Reason for caution in our enquiries or affirmations. page 60
EPIST. V. Wherein he further illustrates the inherent or native Power and
Predominancy of the Affections above the other faculties of the Soul; but more
particularly treats of the Imagination, its deception in us, our miseries
thereby, and the remedies against its delusion. Imagination in Brutes arises
only from Sense; That in them receives its objects in their proper Nature; they
are seldom mistaken in the face of the Heavens, etc. they cannot revolve in
their mind, or recall Imagination; Imagination in them changes according to
its objects; Imagination in us sometimes supplies the place of Reason, as in
the case of Transubstantiation, etc. deceives the Affections, Imagination, and
in Conjunction with them, is the cause of Error, as in malice, etc. The good
man the only rational man. The difference 'twixt Reason and ratiocination.
Reason deceives not, and is the chief principle of governing the Thoughts. The
advantage of sorrow in curbing the Imagination. The Imagination subject to
infection from the humors of the Body. When we are answerable for its
transgressions? Thoughts cannot arise from Sense. page 68 EPIST. VI. Wherein he
treats of the various impress of the Divine Power upon each particular created
substance, much more upon the Souls of men (wherein there is great
dissimilitude) And further shows how prone we are from thence to mistake in
judging of the temper of others and our own. Thence he proceeds to discourse of
the Nature, grounds, measure, and ends of Friendship. page 128 EPIST. VII. Of
the different pursuits of the Souls of men, wherein we are ready to accuse each
other of folly, though not our selves, and yet in a degree are all weak and
foolish. That no pursuit of the Soul here, is praiseworthy or commendable,
further than it intentionally advances God's glory, which is the mark set
before us, and which if we do not behold in all our travails, our labor in the
issue will prove of as little profit as comfort. page 156 EPIST. VIII. Complete
Happiness here is merely in speculation. That natural endowments in the Soul do
conduce to the ease, peace and quiet of it, and are therefore desirable though
we attain not happiness thereby. Learning and Knowledge, Wisdom, Prudence and
subtilty considered. That even Prudence, the most likely conduct to Happiness
was never yet the constant concomitant of the clearest human Soul. No
satisfaction without the belief of a Providence. page 166 EPIST. IX. Wherein
the Author maintains a divine Wisdom, and Providence, ruling in and over the
Soul of man, more especially, and more apparently (if considered) than any work
of Creation: And that the Affections in the heart of man seem that part of the
Soul, whereon God more especially exercises his Prerogative, moulding and
changing them on the sudden, to his secret purposes beyond and even contrary to
any foresight, conjecture, or Imagination of the Soul it self. page 185 EPIST.
X. Of Credulity and Incredulity, the rise of both, and that Credulity of the
two, is of more pernicious consequence. And of the evil of imposing on others,
or creating or raising a Belief on false or uncertain Principles. Of the word,
notion, and grace of Faith. Of the strange variety of Beliefs in the World. Of
Liberty of Conscience. page 195
ERRATA.
PAge 21. l. 10. for Esau's vine, r. Isaiah's vine: p. 44. l. ult. for Hawk, r.
Hare: p. 45. l. 39. for Have, r. Cave: p. 46. l. ult. for substance, r.
subsistence: p. 47. l. 2. for submit, r. subsist: ibid. l. 14. for gifts, r.
Fits: p. 52. l. 9. for life, r. Fly: p. 53. l. 15. for their, r. the: 54. l.
25. dele since: p. 56. l. 11. for that, r. they: ibid. l. 30. for piece, r.
Pease.

CONSIDERATIONS AGAINST Immoderate care for a Man's own Posterity, and sorrow
for the loss of Children.
SECT. I. Of Afflictions in general, their Usefulness and Necessity; and in
particular, the loss of Children considered, with the use and end of it.
THE first thoughts which presented themselves to me (and what I ever before
firmly believed) were these; That, first, as there is one Eternal wise God,
Creator of Heaven and Earth, and all things therein; So, secondly, the same God
has a care over all the works of his Creation, and continually rules, and
disposes all things, according to his infinite wisdom, which act of his we call
Providence.

To doubt of this, were not only to deny all Scripture, and relinquish my
profession of Christianity, but even to abandon my very Reason; For, from this
first part of my belief, I think there are few dissenters, and although this
Age affords a number of David's jolly sanguine Fools, who at some time think
otherwise in their hearts, yet those same hearts from afflictions, will think
the same with mine, unless they have hardened them on purpose, to shut out all
Deity; and since at first they would have none to serve, now they are resolved
to let in none (so long as they can oppose it) to punish.

As to the second part of my belief, opposed by the more moderate Atheist, I
think it has, and might be made good; not only by Scripture, but Reason: Yet
seeing it is not the thing, I am about to take in hand, nor whereof I doubt;
let other men seek their satisfaction from more Learned hands. I, for my part
think, that if God take care of the Sparrow, he will take care of me; and if
the hairs of my head are numbered, God will not take less care about my Body,
than the Excrescencies thereof.

All that I shall say hereabout further, is, I cannot conjecture, by what new
methods the Devil has brought in Proselytes for open Atheism, since his ancient
method was to nooze men by Polytheism; but I am verily persuaded, that since
his Trade failed him therein, and the Temples of Idols began to be thrown down,
so as he could not reap so large a Crop that way; it has been none of his
slightest policies, nor the least covert Trap or Ginn to take men in, to infuse
slily into the brains of a number of men, (who account themselves Sages) That
God has allotted the Government of Sublunary affairs, to inferior Powers; and
from hence have increased and multiplied, the strange opinions and notions of
Fate, Destiny, Necessity, Fortune, Chance, and the like. Now if he can persuade
us to ascribe to these, any sole or chief operation in our actions, he obtains
by consequence, e're we are aware, what by express terms he could not so easily
do; For if we attribute any ruling Power to ought else then one Eternal God, we
do in effect deny such an Existence; because Unity is the inseparable and
essential attribute of Deity, and by acknowledging more than one, we do in
effect deny that there is any.

I will not dispute what Influences, or benign or malevolent Aspects celestial
Bodies have over us: But this I am assured of, and am no whit afraid by God's
assistance to maintain, That there is a Superior Power ruling in them, one
Psalm. 147.4.
who tells the Stars, and calls them all by their names, that does order
and determine them according to his good will and pleasure, from whom we are to
look for all our good or evil in this World. And thither it is, that the
Apostle St. James directs us plainly, when he tells us, Jam. 1.17.
Every good giving, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from
the Father of Lights, with whom there is no variableness, nor shadow of
turning. On which place, says one, would not any man have thought it a more
proper attribute of God, for the Apostle to have said there, From God the
author of all good things, or the like, then, Father of Lights? No, says he,
there is something more in it: He would have us look higher than those Lights,
(from whose influence so many place their good or evil) and think, they have
not their wisdom from Mercury, etc. And upon that very Text does the Bishop
Andrews.
Author very prettily observe, that in the foregoing verse. 16 (which is, Err
not, my dear Brethren) that the phrase Err not, is in the original, (...), of
which very word, says he, come the Planets. Indeed were any man assured, that
all our inclinations and actions, all our good or ill success, were under the
sole uncontrollable disposition of a few wandering Planets, or the government of
a blind Goddess Fortune, or Chance; he need not be very earnest or solicitous
(for that were vain, since they are inexorable) for the life of himself,
Children or Friends; but rather rejoice at the exemption from such a dominion
by death, and conclude then with Job, that there only shall we Job 3.13. and 17.
be at rest.

But having granted this to my self, That there is nothing happens here on
Earth, but what is ordered and disposed by the first Creator, who by rooting up
one, and planting another* does, as the Psalmist says, in that ravishing
subject of his providence, Psalm. 104.30
Renew the face of the Earth, my thoughts in the next place, tended unto this;
whether the loss of my Children were an angry correction of God, against which,
Psalm. 6.1. and 38.1. Jer. 10*24.
David and Jeremy so pray. If it were, I thought even then, I had little reason
like a sullen Ass to lie down under the burden, but rather to get up, and bear
it with patience, lest the same Master should lay a greater weight upon me, and
not only so, but even draw forth his Sword and slay me too; nay Reason prompted
me, rather to examine my self, wherein I had more chiefly provoked him to wound
and pierce me through with these Darts, and to stay his hand if it were
possible, not barely by a sincere repentance for the same, but a full purpose
and resolution to depart from every evil way; and certainly in all God's ways
and methods, this is the chief end and design, to make us wise unto Salvation.

But since as the Prophet says, Psalm. 36.6.
His righteousness is like to an high Mountain, visible to every Eye, but his
Judgments are as a great deep, past finding out, or fathoming; I thought it not
good, to make too curious an enquiry thereinto, nor dive into his secrets, nor
despair of his mercy and loving kindness, but to purpose and resolve of
amendment, and to trust, though Jer. 30.11.
he will not leave us altogether unpunished, yet that his correction may be in
measure; and since he has been pleased to promise, Romans 8.28.
that every thing shall work for the good of them that love him, it may not be
presumption in us to think, that whatsoever happens, is not only what he sees
best for us; but that we may turn the Perspective, and look on his Judgments
sent in mercy, not in wrath: And, seeing he has given us the grace to behold it
is his doing, we may therefore conclude with Manoah's Wife, If he were pleased
to kill us, Judge. 13.23.
he would not have showed us these things.

Now first, let us look on afflictions, losses, crosses, and calamities, in
general so termed, and see whether there be such evil in them, as men generally
opine. Indeed so wonderful are the goods of affliction, as Bacon in his Essays.
one of the learned of our Nation has highly admired Seneca for that saying
of his, Bona rerum secundarum optabilia, adversarum mirabilia; That the good
things that belong to prosperity are to be wished, but the good things which
belong to adversity, are to be admired: And indeed although the Apostle tells
us, that Hebr. 12.11.
no affliction for the present is joyous, but grievous; yet if we look (as wise
men should) upon the end, we shall find cause to glory in tribulation, Romans
5.3, 4, 5.
knowing (as its said) that tribulation works patience, and patience
experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed. Now if from
tribulation, as the first seed sown, there is once grown up in us, a
well-grounded hope, and our Romans 8.20.
subjection to vanity becomes a subjection in hope, we shall Verse. 18.
reckon the sufferings of this present life, not worthy to be compared with the
glory that shall be revealed in us; then have we got on an Ephesians. 6.17.
Helmet, as St. Paul calls it; then have we an Hebr. 6.19.
Anchor sure and steadfast; then instead of sorrowing, are we become Romans 12.12.
rejoicing (as he terms it) in hope.

David (styled the man after God's own heart) could find Psalm. 23.4.
comfort in his rod and his staff, and was both sensible of the goods of Psalm.
119 67, 71, and 75.
affliction, and that God out of very faithfulness sends it. But beside these
Cordials to be extracted; Adversity has other natural fruits, and is a School,
wherein more have profited many ways, than Prosperity; it is indeed the fire
most apt to refine the whole nature of man, and take off those drossie humors,
which disquiet the mind. We shall find little, either purity or virtue, in our
settled Waters; there must be certain seasons, for the Angel of affliction to
come down and trouble us, like the Pool of Bethesda, before virtue shall arise
from us. It is a common old Fable (but has a good Moral) of the Wager between
the Wind and the Sun, which should soonest rob the wayfaring man of his Cloak;
all the stormy blasts which came from the first, made him but to hold it the
faster, and closer to him; but the bright shining rays of the later, did so
insensibly melt him, that he was forced to throw it off, and expose himself as
it were naked to danger: Our moral virtues are our coverings, which we embrace
in adversity, and cast off in prosperity. It has been observed, that Rome never
had braver, or better men, than at that time, when Hannibal stood before the
Walls. And the best man of Rome (if we may take the Oracle of Apollo's word for
it) Scipio Nasica, did afterward oppose Cato in open Senate, against the
razing of Carthage, for this very reason, that it might stand as a bridle
against Rome's exorbitances; since peace and prosperity, would as well destroy
them, as it had done other Nations, ( viz.) the Persians, Graecians, etc.

And although prosperity was the blessing promised in the Old Testament, and
God's peculiar people the Jews, possessed in peace a Land flowing with Milk and
Honey, and Deuteronomy. 6.11.
Houses full of all good things, which they filled not, Wells dug which they
dug not, and Vineyards and Olive Trees which they planted not; that Kings
bowed down unto them, and their Posterity multiplied like the Sand of the Sea:
yet not only David, who had his particular affliction in his Children, tells us
it is good, etc. but in the full height of their prosperity, his Son Solomon,
their most flourishing King, who enjoyed as many worldly comforts, as any man
whatsoever, and wanted none of those things, the World calls felicities; when
he had considered all things, and sufficiently described the vanity thereof,
and told us they are not only vanity, but vexation of Spirit; he gives
adversity (as we term it) the pre-eminence, and tells us, that Eccles. 7.2* 3,
and 4.
it is better to go to the house of mourning, than to the house of feasting;
that sorrow is better than laughter; that the heart of the wise man is in the
house of mourning, but the heart of fools in the house of mirth. Solomon has,
in the Christian part of the World, obtained the reputation of Wise, and surely
we may justify him in these sayings to the residue of it; if men would
consider the nature and quality of each of these kind of passions apart. For
joy or mirth (Worldly) is a dilatation or relaxation of all the faculties of
the Soul, and so, apt to loosen or slacken the reins of Reason, and give the
Soul a free range over the World and Worldly objects; when as, sorrow is a
summoning of them into the heart, holds them in for a time, draws, and
contracts again the reins of Reason, and, unless it degenerate into fearful
despair, never breaks them, but has at length a kind of inward joy to accompany
it: so as, if in laughter the heart may be sorrowful, (which I doubt not many
have experimented) men want but the contrary motion, or sorrow barely and
simply, without other ingredient, to experiment, that in tears, the heart may
be joyful.

If we descend to the New Testament, which is our chief Tenure, there we find
no benediction on prosperity, but the contrary; and a wiser than Solomon, our
Savior himself, (whom the Scriptures term to be vir dolorum) in his Sermon on
the Mount, begins with a blessing on adversities, Mat. 5.4.
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted; and Luke 6.21.
Blessed are ye that weep now, for ye shall laugh; nay in mundo pressura, has
been thought so sure a mark of a Christian, that some of the Ancient Fathers
and Saints, have earnestly prayed for it, and have been ready to doubt of their
Sonship for want of Hebr. 12.8.
chastisement.

Prosperity it self, is in no kind exempt from vexation of Spirit; neither
Solomon's great Estate, nor his honor, nor his very increase in wisdom excused
him; even there he found, the Eccles. 1.18.
increase of knowledge to be the increase of sorrow. Prosperity at the best,
has its cares, and its troubles, its anxious thoughts and fears, and there we
are generally our own Lictors and Tormentors. And when we once take up the
Cross in that sense, and become our own Executioners upon the Rack, we can find
no Physician to fly to, but Psalm. 39.6.
disquiet our selves in vain, as the Psalmist says; whereas, whenever the Cross
is laid on us, we have recourse to God, the Physician of our Souls, who is
ready to sweeten and allay those troubles, he sees not fit, wholly to remove:
And indeed the one is the ready cure of the other, and often, I doubt not, in
mercy sent, to take us off from afflicting our selves, and to teach us to throw
down that burden which is so heavy, and take up his, which in comparison
thereof, through his gracious and merciful assistance, is light and easy. So
true is that of David, 2 Samuel 24.14.
it is better to fall into the hands of God, than into the hands of men, whether
others, or our selves.

Having somewhat considered Afflictions in general, my next step was, to
descend to the particular loss of Children, who, being the express Image of our
selves, and in whom we expect to live after we are dead, are most apt to creep
insensibly into our hearts, and to steal away the strength of our affections
from all other objects; wherefore the loss of them usually works so deeply upon
us, that thereupon we are ready to think, God is very angry with us, and that
therefore he will blot out our name and memorial from off the face of the
Earth. Yet as in Afflictions in general, so in this here, I thought it not
amiss for every one, who professes himself a Christian, to look in the first
place, how far Children are, or may be as a blessing to us. These we find in
the front of blessings in the Old Testament, Genesis 1.28.
Be fruitful and multiply, which is also repeated to Genesis 9.1.
Noah immediately after the Flood; and Abraham is brought to look on the Stars,
and told, Genesis 15.5.
so shall thy seed be. Fruitfulness in this kind is all along promised as the
reward of a virtuous life, and Genesis 20.18 2 Samuel 6.23.
barrenness pronounced as a curse, and the taking away a man's posterity, the
severest Judgment, (not only all, Male and Female, but even Male alone, as that
of interficiam de Ahab mingentem ad parietem 1 King. 21.21.
) as may be seen, by the destruction of the Exodus 12.29.
Firstborn throughout the Land of Egypt, and in the case of 1 Samuel 2.33, 34.
Ely, Ahab, and others. Yet even during the Law and the Prophets, beside the
instances in that particular affliction laid on good men, as Job and others;
David himself, who had as large a promise as any man, for the continuance of
his posterity on an Earthly Throne, did not look upon it, as the only special
mark of God's favor: For in that 17th Psalm, where he speaks of the men of
this World, who have their portion in this life; he says of them, Psalm. 17.14.
they are full of Children, or have Children at their desire, and leave the
rest of their substance for their babes. And his Son Solomon, the wisest of
men, has made a counterpoize of that Earthly gift, whether they are given us as
a blessing always, or as a punishment; for if Pro. 10.1.
a wise Son make a glad Father, a foolish one is the heaviness of his mother,
and Pro. 17.21, 25.
Father too: And even in that sense, his saying may be verified, that if a man
beget an hundred Children, and live many years, yet an untimely birth is better
than he.

But in the New Testament, where we claim as Legatees only, we find no promises
of the inheritance of an Earthly Kingdom, or Children to inherit it, but are
rather commanded by Christ, to forsake all to follow him, to set our affections
on things above; with this threatening caution, that Mat. 10.37.
he that loves father or mother, more than me, is not worthy of me; and he that
loves son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me: nay St. Luke uses the
word Luke 14.26.
hate in the case of comparison; and it is observable that those who seemed to
express it as a happiness in our very Savior's parent, with this acclamation,
Luke 11.27.
Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps that gave thee suck, received
a very short and sharp reply from him. And indeed this ought above all things
to be our Sovereign comfort in this affliction of loss of Children, that Romans
8.32.
God spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all; and therefore it
should make us become true Sons of Abraham the Father of the faithful, and
readily part with our only Son, when he is pleased to call for him.

And now if this severe punishment be no sign of God's forsaking us, but may be
taken as a Fatherly correction as well as others, why then should we not look
on it, as an Alarm to Repentance? An intent to wean us from the World, and make
us yield up our hearts, and place our affections on that true object of love,
himself? An invitation to more fixed joys then this World affords, to find out,
and taste, and see, how good and gracious he is?

SECT. II. Some Considerations offered to moderate our Passions.
TO help us whereto, these following frail humane Considerations may be some
furtherance, or at least may somewhat abate the fury of our headstrong
passions.

Isa. 55.2.
spend our labor for that which (in the end) profits not: But Verse. 8.
his thoughts being not our thoughts, as the Prophet there speaks; and he at
one intuition, beholding all things, past, present, and to come, does by an
infinite, unerring wisdom, and beyond our conceptions, so work, as may in the
end, best tend toward the true and perfect happiness of every one of his
Creatures.

Let us but recall to our memories our often eager pursuit, after many things,
whereabout, in the conclusion, we have either rejoiced at the missing of them,
or been cloyed with their enjoyment, and we shall better see, and believe this
wisdom of God in his disposals, and find from thence our volumus is often let
and hindered for a malumus. Some of the very Heathen, who never had any of those
immediate precepts from God, of taking no thoughts what they should eat, or
what they should drink, or what they should put on; nor were expressly
commanded, to 1 Pet. 5.7.
cast all their care on God, for he cared for them; by the very light of
Nature, saw, and rested in the wise disposal of a Deity: Socrates his rule was,
to pray for blessings in general only, because the gods knew best to choose
particulars for us. And in this very case, of Conjugium petimus, partumque
uxoris: at illis Notum, qui pueri, qualisve futura sit uxor. Juv. l. 4. Sat. 10.
Children, the Poet, amongst other things, in that excellent Satyr, could show
us the folly of our desires for them, when the gods only knew, what happiness
would spring from them, and does advise us in all things to a perfect Permittas
ipsis impendere numinibus quid Conveniat nobis, rebusque sit utile nostris.
resignation of our will to that of the Divine power. According to that saying
of Judas Maccabeus, Mac. 3.60.
Nevertheless as the will of God in Heaven is, so let him do; or that of good
old Ely, 1 Samuel 3.18.
It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. Indeed our little knowledge
as Children, might properly acquiesce in God our Father's infinite wisdom;
since we our selves would take it as a character of stubborn wilfulness from
our own, not to do the like, between whom, and us, there is not so vast a
disparity.

And God beside his written Precepts to instruct us, has given to most of us,
so much natural light and knowledge, as a spark from his infinite wisdom,
though not to comprehend him, yet to admire him: And though the knowledge that
he has given us, does in some sort quicken our sufferings, by discussing all
natural dullness, and stupefaction upon every event; yet our reason is not given
us only, to argue our selves into sorrow, nor purposely to Eccles. 1.18.
increase it by our knowledge, according to the wise man's Essay thereof, but
to bend and incline our wills by its dictates. For though they are free
faculties (and Romans 7.18.
to will is present with us) not to be forced, yet thereby they may be
persuaded to yield, and surrender up themselves, and cease to be in a manner.
Now does not reason dictate this to us? That when we do see a will working
contrary to ours, and which there is no Romans 9.19.
resisting, that our commissionated wills should cease, and yield themselves up
in the presence of the greater, and not combat with God's will, contrary to
our daily prayer: And indeed our Savior (besides that form of prayer to direct
us) has given us a most excellent pattern thereof, Luke 22.42.
Nevertheless not what I will, but what thou will.

This entire, perfect, and absolute resignation of our wills to the free
working of an infinite wisdom, and uncontrollable power, is a thing we cannot
deny in very reason: And it is so coessential to our content and happiness
here, that the one can never really subsist without the other. But because in
opposition to it, there happen often strong reluctancies of flesh and blood* to
calm and quiet that, we may do well, not only to consider God's wisdom, and
goodness in his Elections for us: But,

Bona animi, Bona corporis, and Bona fortunae; and those of Fortune, we shall
ever find, amongst wise men, placed in the foot of the Inventory, as the last,
and least necessary toward man's happy being; because, without them, we have
all those goods which go to the composition of a perfect man, Soul and Body:
and the Apostle remembering us, that 1 Timothy 6.7, 8.
we brought nothing into this world, and how sure it is we can carry nothing
out, advises us to be content with food and raiment, as the only necessary
things of keeping the Soul and Body united together with their several goods in
this World; as if, these were only the pursuit and prey of reason, and the
other of imagination. For the goods of our mind, viz. our natural dispositions,
as promptness of wit, quickness of conceit, fastness of memory, clearness of
understanding, soundness of Judgment, readiness of Speech, and the like; As
also the goods of our body, viz. beauty, strength, or the like, being the gifts
of God with the very form of us, they become our own as it were by Birth, are
inherent in us, and grow up together with us; for we might be said to have them
in our very Infancy, in potentia, and so in right reason we might look for
them, and endeavor to improve and preserve them as our own, and be sensible of
the loss, as a proper part of our selves. But the goods of Fortune, amongst
which Children are reckoned, are of an after distinct acquisition or grant, and
so, not so properly our own, nor in truth therefore so much to be valued by us.
Now why the loss of an accidental acquisition, or gift external and extrinsick
to the mind and body both, should raise greater storms, and work more upon the
mind, then the loss of its own goods, or the Bodies, wherein it resides or
cohabits, would receive some disquisition; and as it can never happen otherways
than by false Optics, so must be imputed to folly.

Surely the Soul of man is out of its proper Region, and becomes regardless not
only of it self, but its present Mansion too in some sort, by its struggling to
unite it self again to somewhat out of the Body, from which it is at present
disjoined, and would settle and take up its rest in somewhat, it knows not what
at present, for want of a renewing of its light, or at least a dissipation of
those mists and foggs which arise before it from the Body. Well, it is agreed
by some of the ancient and most learned Philosophers, as well as Divines, that
it has not its original from any of the four Elements, but is immediately from
Heaven, and breathed into us from the Almighty, whereby we become in a sort
after his similitude and likeness. And therefore until that Soul return to God
who gave it, it can never be in perfect and true complacency, but being
enclosed in a Body of flesh, has only now and then (besides the hope and
assurance of a perpetual rest hereafter) some little delights as in a weary
Pilgrimage. Now according as this lump of Earth will suffer, it finds out its
several pleasures, which we properly call, terrenas consolatiunculas; which are
as various, as there are objects in the World, and these are pointed out to us,
by a roving and wandering fancy or imagination, (especially as to outward
things) according to our cloudy constitution and frame; not that there is any
more real good in one of them, than another, but that we accept it so, from our
fancies dictates. The Poet has, methinks, very well described this various
roving fancy of ours, in matter of our delights, and begins his Book with,
Sunt, quos curriculo pulverem Olympicum Collegisse juvat, etc. And truly he
might have filled a large Volume, with inserting the various vain joys and
pleasures of men: For as to outward things, there is such a dissonancy therein,
as that there might be found out, a Sunt quos for every thing under the Sun.
Otherwise a man would wonder to see some persons as fond of their Dogs,
Monkeys, and Parrots, as of their Children, and have made as sad lamentation
for the loss of them. And certainly, though I for my own part, should never
agree to stay with the -- Manet sub Jove frigido Venator, tenerae conjugis
immemor.
Hunter in that first Ode of Horace, yet, probably, such an one might wonder
almost as much at me, (as I at him) to see me play with a Child, or to place
any exuberant affection thereon, since the one, no more than the other, does
add to a man any thing of real worth.

Now since all outward things please, quatenus fancy or imagination approves or
dictates, why should not I by reason endeavor to stop the current of my fancy?
Why should I be disturbed, or almost distracted, for the loss of that very
thing, which many wise men have not only contentedly wanted, but desired to
want? Our imagination will never find out the summum bonum here, which
Philosophers so much talked of, and never found themselves. For surely if there
were any thing here on Earth truly good, it would be universally desired of all
men; which no one thing, which is perfectly to be attained to in this World,
ever was; and as to these goods of Fortune, (as we call them and define them)
surely in the general opinion of men, Children are the least desirable. The
Italians (it has been observed) make no difference between Children and
Nephews, and near Kinsfolk: And, so as they be of the same lump with
themselves, they are not desirous their particular Bodies should be the
Conduits of them. And, amongst us we daily see men more forward to venture
their Bodies (and their Souls too, often) for the obtaining of Riches and
Honors, than for Children; and a great Dowry, though with assured barrenness,
shall be sooner courted by most, than the bare promising hope of a fruitful
Stock. So that doubtless in relation to the loss of the one, and the other, as
well as to the obtaining, the Poet might (though I have wondered at the
expression, as disagreeing with my temper) speak the Majore domus gemitu,
majore tumultu Planguntur nummi, quam funera.
true sense of a great many men: Our Friends and Offspring to the Grave we bear
With far less sorrow, than our Wealth we spare.
Certainly there is little honor, if we consider it, in barely being Fathers:
If the care of perpetuity possesses any man's thoughts, he should endeavor to
raise that structure, in some nobler action than Generation, which is common
with him, not only to the meanest Man, but the Beast; nay inanimate Plants have
a peculiar property of bringing forth Seeds, and Fruits according to their
kind. The Luke 8 15.
fruit a Christian Soul should endeavor to bring forth, is by hearing the Word
and keeping it: This is it, on which Christ pronounces a blessing, rather then
on the womb that bare himself, and the Paps that gave him suck. We should beget
and travail in birth like St. Paul, which will prove a more lasting monument
and glory to us, than our Children: For even in very inanimate Bodies, that
Tree which becomes a beam or rafter in the Temple, is of greater esteem and
value, than one from whose slips or seeds, have proceeded a thousand branches.

But admit we do enjoy this present seeming happiness, of seeing Psalm. 144.12.
our sons grow up, as the young Plants, and our daughters as the polished
corners of the Temple; and Psalm. 128.3.
our Children continue like Olive-plants about our Table; have we any assurance
there may not spring up from themselves a Bramble, that may quite hide and
deface all their beauty; or from others, that shall choke and wither them? And
if we did consider it, have we not as much reason to weep over them, when we
enjoy them, as Xerxes had over his Army, to think we were the certain entailers
of miseries, as well as death upon our Children; and might we not think our
selves happy to see them have finished their course, and be at rest before us?
Is there any of us, now the time is past, would not have thought our King
Edward the Fourth, more happy in following his Sons to the Grave, than to have
left them to be murdered by their own Uncle; with the loss of thousands of
others, and the danger of his Kingdom? This was a Judgment not so remote, but
that his own Queen saw it. And were there an exact Chronology of every Nation
from their first Plantation; the highest now, might readily find, how likely
they are to fade and wither away in time: For doubtless as the poorest Beggar
might derive himself from Kings, so must the greatest Monarch too, from a
Beggar; and this, from the wise providence of him, Psalm. 113.7, 8.
that takes up the simple out of the dust, and lifts the poor out of the
dunghill, that he may set them with Princes.

It has been already well observed of the greatest Monarchs, that have thought
not only to make themselves, but their Issue too, Masters of the World; that
neither Sir Walter Raleigh in his Preface to the History of the World.
Babylon, Persia, Egypt, Syria, Macedon, Carthage, or Rome, have either fruit,
flower, graft, or leaf remaining of those Seeds. Indeed it pleases God in few
Ages so to transplant, and metamorphose all Nations; that notwithstanding all
our Histories and Genealogies, we shall quickly be at a loss and confusion, and
as if Heaven and Earth were to pass away, and not one jot or tittle of his
Word; it has, and will be verified, that the Name of the wicked (for some have
so been of every Family) shall perish.

The Jews themselves, God's peculiar people, (whose Genealogy the Pen of the
Holy Ghost has for many Ages described) though yet possibly some of them will
vaunt, of their direct descent from Kings, yet further than Christ's day, their
Father Abraham would scarce rejoice to see; but might rather have been
troubled, and wept over them (as Christ over Jerusalem) to have foreseen them a
miserable people, hated of all Nations, and dispersed and scattered over the
face of the whole World.

The memory of our first Ancestors of this Nation is already lost with us, and
ours shall be lost with our Successors, notwithstanding any care of
perpetuities. And the wise Preacher's saying will hold true, that as Eccles.
1.11.
there is no remembrance of former things, so, neither shall there be any
remembrance of things to come, with those that come after; for though Verse. 4.
the Earth abides for ever, yet one generation passes away, and another comes.
Which is true, even of all Creatures: for let a man for one ordinary Age,
observe it in the generation of Beasts, and be as careful as he can, to
preserve a breed; he shall find (as to locality or knowledge) so quick an
extinction, that he need not wonder at the fate of the white Hens, or Laurel
with the Caesar's, but may see that every Soil quickly loses its Inhabitant, and
as if the Earth were weary of the same Creatures for any long continuance, (as
it is experimented she is of Seeds) we all so pass away, as, at least, the place
knows us no more.

And as if God were more particularly angry with us, in thinking by generation
to get us a name, he has to industrious builders in that way, usually sent a
more speedy confusion than others; whereof every one might find instances in
his own, and others times: if not, our last Henry may suffice; or Herod the
Great, who although he had many Wives together, and a numerous Issue, besides
Brothers, Sisters, Nephews, etc. yet Josephus de Antiq. Judaeor. lib. 18. cap.
7.
Josephus tells us, in his time, (who lived with Vespasian, and the other with
Augustus, no long space) that there was scarce Branch or Slip left thereof.

That our sins exceed our sufferings.

I do not think there was ever any man to be found of that Sect of the (...),
old or new, that would have exempted himself wholly, out of the number of
sinners. Nay I think I have read it observed, that our late ones, who cavilled
at the Church-Liturgy in most places, found no fault with our Confessions. If
they had, and denied to own themselves sinners in word, I doubt their
consciences would at some time, have told them, what St. John has done, that 1
John 1.8.
if we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
us: Nay, I think, there is no man but may turn St. John's no, into St. James
his many, and say truly, Jam. 3.2.
In many things we offend all. He that looked down from Heaven upon the
Children of men, has said as much, that Psalm. 14.3.
they are all gone out of the way, they are altogether become abominable, there
is none that does good, no not one. And truly nowadays, as well as then,
there is no man need to fear the old kind of death amongst the Jews, if he who
should cast the first Stone, must be without sin.

David, the man according to God's own heart, when he went about to account his
own sins, could say, Psalm. 40.12.
they are more in number, than the hairs of my head: He could say, that Psalm.
7.11.
God is provoked every day; and in that Psalm of Asaph, which is a Roll of
Reports, how God's peculiar people, from the time of Moses unto David, carried
themselves toward him, we find it, Psalm. 78.18, 41, and 58.
many a time did they provoke him; and those words are thrice repeated there.
And in that 106th Psalm of the like subject, the cause of the Plagues breaking
in amongst them, is showed to be, their own provocations; Psalm. 106.29.
Thus they provoked him to anger, with their own inventions, and the plague
brake in amongst them. And doubtless our provocations, in these days, are not
lighter in the Balance.

Now let a man seriously consider, how some of the very Heathen loved Virtue
for it self, and admired it in its native dress; and how little she allures us,
when she is daily presented to us, adorned with the promises of a Temporal, and
of an Everlasting happiness: When notwithstanding the terrors and threats of
the Lord on the one hand, and the alluring passionate invitations on the other,
we do provoke, and as it were challenge God to strike, by the most trivial acts
which profit us nothing: And he will find little reason to wonder at his
stripes, unless that they are so mild and so few. Of which, although every man
can keep a perfect Inventory, and is ready to declare them with enhansement and
aggravation; yet if he be questioned of the causes, his sins, he would be
forced to answer with David's exclamation, Psalm. 19.12.
who knows how often he offends? And can any man expect, even in this World,
to separate God's two great attributes of Justice, and Mercy? Indeed the latter
is here in this World usually Psalm. 145.9.
above all his works, and it is Lam. 3.22.
his mercies that we are not consumed; but if we would separate them, it is best
for us to feel his Justice in our life, and his Mercy at our death.

Let us I say consider our own deservings, and we shall find but little reason
for complaint, but may well cry out, Micah 7.9.
I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him.
Are not all his Temporal blessings on condition? and shall we be disturbed at
the loss, when we voluntarily commit the forfeiture? If we sell our Inheritance
for a Mess of Pottage here, or a less thing, we should rather grieve, and be
troubled at our own follies, than our want. Let us turn our thoughts upon the
first cause, which is indeed the right way of cure, and instead of being
grieved at our loss, be grieved at our sins, the causes of our loss; and there
I suppose it will be no offense, to wish with the Prophet, our Jer. 9.1.
heads fountains of tears. This will prove the properest method for our cure,
to try to effect it by diversion, or revulsion, and by pouring out our tears
for our sins or provocations, stop the perpetual dropping and distillation of
our losses.

Besides our general, let us search out our particular provocations: I am
persuaded there are but few men, but, with a very little search, might find our
their sins, in their very peculiar sufferings; I do not mean only where their
sufferings are the very native consequent effect of their sins, (as pain is
sometimes from Intemperance, and poverty from Riot) but in the case of God's
more immediate hand, as the death of Relations and Friends; whether we even in
reference to them, have performed our duties as we ought; whether we have been
true Fathers, and true Friends, in respect of their Eternal welfare; or at
least, whether we have not rather loved them for our own sake, than his, and
rejoiced more in the gift, than in the giver. I have often thought on that
saying, storied of Cardinal Woolsey when he was arrested for his Trial, That if
he had taken so much care and diligence to please his God, as he had done his
King and Master he would not then have left him in his old age. And I am sure,
did but any of us place his affections aright, and take delight and complacency
in the Author and giver, as much as in the gift, we should never find such
perturbation in the loss of the latter, but comfort our selves in this, that we
yet enjoy him, who is able to give us all things: Nay we that have lost our
Children, or perhaps some of us that never had any, have yet had thoughts or
desires, our Families should endure for ever, and would have our Lands called
after our own Names; and it is but just therefore, we should have no Psalm.
49.13.
posterity to praise our (foolish) sayings. Perhaps we have like St. Peter,
said, It is good to be here, (and wot not neither what we said) and have had
thoughts of building Tabernacles; and therefore are our Houses become desolate.
When we have directions on whom to cast our cares, when we have had
instructions or information of another Kingdom, and another Inheritance, with
cautions not to set our affections on this: when we love our Wife, or Children
better then Christ, shall we think our selves worthy of him? No; It is rather
fit, if we forsake not them, they should forsake us, that we might follow him;
and since we cannot, or will not wean our selves, God should wean us, and
embitter our delights we so much low after.

4. And now, if the sight of our viciousness does not, yet our remaining
enjoyments yet, surmount our sufferings.

To convince us in this, there needs nothing but a recollection, or rubbing up
of our memories; which indeed are like to Tables of Brass, covered over with
dust; whereon, all the benefits we receive from God, we write with our Fingers,
and all his chastisements we engrave with aqua fortis, that it may eat deep
enough; and in the doing the one, quite wipe away the other. Otherwise the
multitude of those slighter characters, might keep us from complaint, nay they
would so fill up the Table, as that there would be no room left for the other:
That Psalm. 51.1.
multitudo misericordiarum, as the Psalmist calls it, would so fill us, as that
we should turn our Psalm of Deus ultionum, or Domine ne in furore, into Benedic
anima mea, and cry out, Psalm. 103.2.
Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his benefits. Indeed in this
notion we may extol his attribute of Mercy above all the rest, without hurting
our selves; and if we knew in what particular to begin, I am sure we knew not
where to make an end of God's bounties toward us; but that has been so well
particularized by diverse Pens, that every man may find enough to satifie
himself. I for my part, in general have cause to bless God with Jacob, and say,
(though I cannot say I am become two bands) that, Genesis 32.1^
I am unworthy of the least of all the mercies, and the truth which he has
showed me; and in particular, amongst the multitude of blessings I still enjoy,
I have this ready at hand: That he has given me, and yet left me, a consort, so
every way virtuous, and so helpful a sharer in my sorrows, that without
ostentation, or just cause of reply, she might well put the same question to
me, that Elkanah did to Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.8.
Am not I better to thee then ten Sons?

Now if any other man want that blessing, I am sure he may join with me in
thanks for this, (for the dead do not complain) that he is yet living, and on
this side the Grave, which is the sole benefit that renders him capable of
either having, or desiring. Indeed adversity has made many men Stoics in
words, and to commend death to us, but I doubt upon trial, every man would find
Satan the truer Naturalist, Job 2.4.
Skin for Skin, and all that a man has, will he give for life. And if I should
so far Catechize any man as to ask him, to what end he was created; I suppose
the answer would be, to serve God, and save his own Soul. Now so long as he
enjoys all those helps and means, which tend to the end for which he was
created, he has little reason to complain. But if there be any man, Job 3.21,
22.
that longs for death, more then hid treasure, and rejoices to find the grave,
and thinks that there only the weary are at rest: yet until he obtains that
desire, if he have but reason left him, (which is the gift of God too as well
any thing) he would hardly cast that overboard, and be willing to part with it,
to save or regain all his other lading, however he might value it before his
losses.

But to descend to any man's particular losses: It is a rule, that every
privation presupposes a habit, and from that every man may find reason with Job
to be content, and bless God; since he that takes away, first gave. It Is true
the word habit, in no good sense, is made the phrase of the World: Every one
can look upon his tenure of Habenda and tenenda, without the premises of dedi
and concessi; but James 1.17.
St. James calls those gifis, which the Heathens called habits; and we ought
to look upon all our goods as gifts. This was the voice of Jacob upon his
Brother's question, (when he saw the Women and Children) who are those with
thee? Gen 33.5.
The Children which God has graciously given thy Servant; though Esau's reply,
in case of the Cattle, only was, Verse. 9.
I have enough my Brother, without reference to the gift. St. Paul joins the
having and receiving together, 1 Cor. 4 7.
What have thou, that thou did not receive? Let us interrogate our selves
with St. Paul's question, and likewise whether concerning almost all goods of
Fortune, (as I may call them, because it was the old denomination) there was
not a time, when we wanted them, and were content without them; and when we
have so done, and looked for what is left, we shall find a remnant, perhaps a
surplusage of enjoyments; for there is not the meanest person but has
plenteous enjoyment. In the case of privation by death, there are but few that
lose a Friend, but may reckon too, they have lost an Enemy; which may be in
some sense accounted a benefit: and certainly there are but few, from whom God
has taken a Child, but he has before taken away some Relation from the same
person, who living, might have interposed between him and his (it may be most
delightful) enjoyment. And can we be content to part with the one, but on no
terms to be deprived of the other? Shall others make room for us, and ours none
for others, whom perhaps God has designed to advance, by our seeming loss? And
shall we make our Eye evil, because his is good to others; who is Judge of all
the Earth, and as the Psalmist says, pulls one down, and sets up another?

But admit we cannot, or will not, see our enjoyments elsewhere, yet God is so
gracious to us, that they may be found even in our very sufferings, and we
might even in them rejoice. What greater cause of joy can any man have, than
that it has pleased God to make him instrumental, in adding Saints unto his
Kingdom of Heaven? and undoubtedly such are all Children baptized and dying
before wilful sin. So as a man in this case, might make the like reply to any
one who should pity him, as Cornelia Mother of the Gracchi, after the loss of
all her Children, twelve in number, did to her condolers; That none could
account her an unhappy woman, who had born the Gracchi into the World. And it is
a right rational inference for us to conclude, that we are no ways unhappy, by
the translation of our Children into Glory, where they are at rest, and
delivered from the evil to come. But this happiness is the peculiar prospect of
a Soul disjoined from the Body, and through the casement of the Flesh,
introduces but a weak and faint light: and therefore let us endeavor to look
every way for comfort. And having considered seriously, as I said, 1. God's
wisdom for us in our choices, and our follies in our own Elections. 2. That the
very foundation of our sorrow, we thus build on, is but Straw and Stubble; and
3. That notwithstanding our sins are the cause of all. 4. That we have yet left
us variety of Worldly objects, sufficiently pleasant and comfortable, (if we
would but make them so) not only to support us from fainting, but also to go on
rejoicing in this our Journey: Let us not, by moaning, or lowing after what we
least need, disrelish all our other (more necessary) comforts; expecially, let
us not take up Jacob's resolution, of Genesis 37.35.
going down into the grave mourning, and refuse to be comforted. That
resolution of, noluit consolari, applied to Rachel, is, in my opinion, a
stubborn temder; and methinks every one who is diseased in mind, should as
readily seek out, and hearken after all means of cure, as if he were diseased
of body, (unless his Reason be infected too) because, of the two, the wise man
concludes the first is harder to bear Prove. 18.14.
. And therefore, although I thought the foregoing considerations of force
enough, (if duly applied) to put a stop to this headstrong passion of sorrow;
yet I was willing to search and try all ways and means to be thought on, for a
recovery, and look into, and examine every usual prescribed Antidote against it.

SECT. III. Of the Nature and Origin of Sorrow: That the rise of all Passions
is from Love; this particularly demonstrated in that of Sorrow.
IN order to which, I did in my troubled thoughts endeavor, as to define
Sorrow, what it is; so, to find out the right and true origin thereof, and
other turbulent passions of our mind. I think it has been truly defined, that
Sorrow (with the rest, etc.) is Animi commotio, aversa a recta ratione, contra
naturam: And so they are not natural, but consequential (as I may say) from
somewhat that is good, implanted in our nature, although misguided and mislead.
For that God, who is goodness, and has attested every particle of his Creation
to be very good, would not naturally implant in us our turbulent passions,
which are evil. But they are raised by our Has perturbationes, stultitia quasi
quasdam emittit furias.
follies only, in forsaking that Good, with respect to which we were created.
Now that Good is God, and God being Love, (as St. John has defined him) has in
us, his Image, naturally implanted Love, the tendency of which should be
chiefly toward him, and all other his Creatures in reference to him. And this
is the Epitome of our whole duty, and that great natural Commandment, of which
the Law and the Prophets are but the Comment and Explanation.

But this natural plant of Love, rooted in us from our Birth, and growing in
us, necessarily finds out some object or other, whereon to lodge its branches,
and to be the support and prop thereof: which, if it be wholly or chiefly
lodged upon some Worldly object, the decay and fall of that object, leaves it
withering on the ground, and this is Sorrow. But if it fix it self aright, and
spread its branches over mankind in general, although it may more especially
lean on some one or more particulars; yet, those failing, it holds it self
fresh and verdant, and obtains the blessed title of Charity, whose property is,
1 Cor. 13.7.
to bear all things, and to endure all things: so as I cannot define immoderate
sorrow to be other, than a drooping withering love, or the spurious offspring
of a misguided love, in the absence of perfect love and charity. Neither can I
resemble the product thereof, to any more proper thing, than Esau's Vine,
mentioned of God's planting, Isa. 5.2.
who looked it should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes;
that which is planted in us for joy and delight, when mislead produces only
misery and sorrow.

Now if in holding this natural Love, mislead (or rather misguided) by opinion
and fancy, to be the source of all our evils whatsoever, and in talking thereof
I shall seem to differ from the Judgment of the Learned, and betray my
ignorance in terms of Art; all that I can say for my self is, that I both
thought, and speak according to that ability of understanding God has endowed
me with, (without any great improvement of it by study, or much reading) from a
desire or endeavor to ease my self, if I could, in finding out the readiest
and shortest way of cure; which undoubtedly is best found out, by discerning
the original defect of some part of Nature out of order, and not performing its
office aright, and so hindering and obstructing that perfect Harmony which
otherwise might be in the Soul of man. And whether that be it, I leave to other
men to weigh and consider from their own reason, without any endeavor to
confine them unto mine.

God has, as I said, in us, and I think in every sensitive Creature, (being the
workmanship of his hands too) implanted some seeds and sparks of Love, that
they might have in them all some image, or at least some impress of their
Maker: and as his universal love (who is himself termed Love it self) extends
it self toward all the works of his Creation; so, every particular of his
Creation has its bending and inclining, by way of Love, to somewhat according
to the capacity given it. This inclination of Love is visible in the most
Savage Beasts toward their young ones, and their Mates, and others often of
the same species: And in some of them, their Love is not terminated in their
own kind and species, but extends it self to others of a different kind; as is
observable, and we have seen in Lions to Dogs, and other Creatures bred up with
them; but especially in Dogs to Men.

Now this Love works and moves only in these Creatures by a natural instinct or
fancy, and is terminated upon a few objects, and is not capable to extend it
self beyond sense, and therefore is not found to be extreme upon any thing, so
as to work any great disturbance, or to be of long continuance; yet I think we
may affirm, that their mourning or their sorrow (if I may so term it) proceeds
from their love to their young, or the like, and so their rage and fury to
those who rob them thereof: And so their fear must needs proceed from a love
they have for themselves, whereby every Creature has an inclination to
self-preservation.

This same natural Spring or Fountain does man bring with him into the World;
which, though it lie longer hid under ground, usually breaks out into more
various and rapid streams, by reason of a more quick and roving fancy to help
and assist it, if not to stir it up: yet it is not long e're it be seen, and the
first discernible effect of the Soul, besides motion, is a love to it self, by
crying when any thing offends it; and to its Nurse who nourishes it, by
cleaving to her, and avoiding others; which after by degrees shows its more
peculiar inclination or tendance. For whatsoever may be storied of Timon the
Athenian, it is sure he loved himself; and besides there is no one so inhumane,
but his love will find some other receptacle or reposure than himself, though
it be but some one person, to whom he may show that rancour or poison he bears
toward others.

But man also, being the more immediate hand-work of God, and created more
expressly after his own Image, has not only this natural Spring of Love in him
moved by sense and instinct, and also by a roving conceit of imaginary
goodness, beyond that of other Creatures; but Reason, and Understanding also,
to guide and direct this Love, and bend and incline it toward that chief good,
for which it was created: That it should not stand as a Lake, like that of
Beasts, nor yet water some adjacent parts only, by violent out-lets, but
diffuse it self into several Streams and Channels, leaving its fruits and
effects toward the whole good of mankind, and yet tending to that infinite
Ocean which gave it its first being.

Now when it thus has its free passage, although it may have some lets and
stops, that disquiet it somewhat in its course, yet they never cause any great
Billows or Surges to arise: But when by opinion and fancy, we too much confine
it to some particular, and Jer. 2.13.
forsake the fountain of living waters, (as Jeremy expresses it) we hew us out
Cisterns, broken Cisterns, that can hold no water; so as from the ill-husbandry
of this native Spring of Love, arises the chief disquiet of the mind.

Love will be hunting after some good, and often takes an imaginary one for a
real: For indeed nothing being properly good but God only, and all other things
in reference to him; if they be aimed at in any other respect, they lose that
goodness they had, as to us.

Now according as we by our foolish fancy direct this Love, it obtains its
denomination from the World: If it be chiefly centered in any man, from the
good opinion he has of himself, we call it Pride; if it chiefly run after the
applause of men, we call it Vainglory; if the common vain pleasures of the
World, Voluptuousness, or Epicurism; if Women, Amorousness; if we lodge it in
our Children, Fondness or Dotage; if in Riches, Covetousness; and so for the
like.

Now if this Love be exercised in the obtaining, then it is termed Desire; if
in the fruition, Joy; if in the losing, Fear; if in the loss, Sorrow. For why
does a man desire any thing, but because he loves it? or why does he rejoice in
the fruition, but because he loves it? why does he fear the losing it, but
because he loves it? or why does he sorrow for the loss, but because he loves
it? This one thing Love, is the primum mobile (as I may call it) of all: the
other passions are but its necessary Attendants; and whatever definitions are
made of our Animal faculties, it is this, like the principal Spring in a Watch,
that sets them all on going, and whatever evil happens to us, is from the ill
motion, or ill setting of the Spring, for want of reason; for as our Love is
good or bad, so are its Attendants.

If we chiefly place it on God and goodness, it has its desires, its joys, its
fears, and its sorrows; from which, Philosophy need not exclude a wise man.
Surely a man may, with St. Paul, desire to be dissolved; he may desire to
persevere to the end, and receive the crown of his warfare; he may rejoice in
hope; he may fear to offend; he may sorrow for sin; and all this, without
committing evil or folly: for affects arising simply from the love of good,
cannot have any thing of evil in them. These good affects or passions, we see
in the man according to God's own heart: His soul brake out for very fervent
desire; he rejoiced as one that found great spoils; his flesh trembled for
fear, and he was afraid of God's judgments; he was horribly affrighted for the
ungodly that forsook God's Law; his soul melted away for very heaviness; he was
troubled above measure; his eyes gushed out with water, because men kept not
God's Law; trouble and heaviness had taken hold on him; it grieved him when he
saw the transgressors. And all this, proceeding from Love, as it appears by the
often expression of it, in word, in that excellent 119th Psalm, (the title of
one part whereof is, Quomodo dilexi) wherein he professes what he loved above
gold and precious stones, and what was dearer unto him, then thousands of gold
and silver.

But if our Love be chiefly placed on other things, and too much wander and
stray from the chief good, though it take along with it the same concomitants
of Desire, etc. yet they are in an amazed, distracted, and uneasy dress, and
can own nothing but a misguided Love, to be their principal Captain and Leader.
For although, as I said before, Love may take its denomination from the thing
it pursues, yet still its proper attribute and name is Love. And not only the
Poet, in case of Covetousness, cries out, Amor nummi; but St. Paul himself
gives it its true and proper definition, for the root of all evil, he plainly
terms, 1 Timothy 6.10.
the love of money; and when he reckons up a number of the greatest Vices,
Pride, Blasphemy, etc. he begins them thus, 2 Timothy 3.2, 4.
men shall be lovers of their own selves; and concludes with these words,
lovers of pleasures, more then lovers of God, as if some sort of love were the
mother of all Vices. Indeed, when any one Worldly thing has taken possession,
and as it were monopolized a man's heart, it brings with it a number of
disquiet Inmates, as solicitous cares and fears, etc. and amongst the rest,
sorrow shall never be wanting: For in that case, of love of money, as it causes
men to err from the Faith, by St. Paul's rule, so it causes them to pierce
themselves through with many sorrows; and he might well say, many, for even in
its first desire of obtaining (besides what attend it in the fruition and loss)
sorrow often goes along with it, as may be instanced in Ahab, whose 1 King.
21.4.
heart was sad, and he could eat no bread, in the very primary effect of this
covetous Love, viz. desire of Naboth's Vineyard And I think we may affirm,
vexing sorrow never yet entered into any man's heart, without some precedent love
to usher it in: For take sorrow in both St. Paul's senses, Worldly and Godly
sorrow, apart, or both together, the rise thereof is from Love; for if we are
first sorrowful for our sins, it is because we shall one day feel the smart of
them; that proceeds from the love of our selves: and then if we be further
sorrowful, that we have offended a gracious God, though there were no
punishment attending sin, that proceeds from the love of God; so as Love is the
motive of all, and we cannot but conclude, that sorrow has its being and
existence from Love.

But herein, as to a vain sorrow from a misguided Love, whether the inferior
and more brutish part of man, the sensual appetite, or the will, (which is in
some sort in Brutes, for they have choices as well as we, though those choices
are necessarily determined by their appetite, for want of reason) or the
understanding be most to be blamed, is to be enquired into. Whereabout, we must
first acknowledge, that the three prime faculties of the Soul, to wit, the
Understanding, the Will, and the Affections, do all concur in every fault we
commit; yet so, as though they be all faulty, the chief obliquity springs
most immediately from the more special default of one of the three. As in the
present case of sorrow, however the other faculties may be concerned, yet the
understanding is most to blame, and this our error is through ignorance. Indeed
our ignorance is so far wilful, that there being imprinted in us the common
principles of the Law of Nature, (as well as the written Law) if we had but
carefully improved them, we might in right reason have discerned, that our Love
ought more chiefly to tend to our Creator and Governor, than our own natural
product; but yet I think no man will arraign the Will as principal, unless in
that case of noluit consolari: where notwithstanding a man's reason inform him
he ought not, yet he is resolved, like Jacob, he will go mourning to his grave.
Neither are the affections chiefly to be blamed, because Love of it self is
good, and only misled through ignorance; and sorrow, as I have said, is but the
consequent of a misguided Love.

Now then toward the cure, our ignorance is to be discussed, and our
understanding cleared, that so our wills and affections may become obedient,
and follow its dictates. This right understanding, is indeed an immediate
influence of the Almighty, by whose powerful rays there is a gracious
dissipation of these sublunary Mists and Fogs, which hinder and obstruct the
clearer prospect of our Souls. And, as I so in all humility own it, I cannot
rationally expect any one should take it barely by reverberation from me, or by
looking into these Papers. He who is Brightness, and the Mirror of wisdom,
grant unto me, and every man, so much of true reason and understanding, as that
while it is time, we may in some sort behold the errors and follies of our own
ways; For, though I and others may cry out, Why art thou so troubled, O my
Soul! and why art thou so disquieted within me? yet they and I shall never
argue our selves into patience, without trusting, that he is the help of our
countenance, and our God.

But if I may in humility present my thoughts to others, (who may by his gift
believe with me) I cannot think any rule herein, or hereabout, to be observed
of so much weight as this one, in two words, custodi cor. The wisest of men,
after he has partly showed us the manner of wisdoms entrance into the Soul, and
her excellencies; that the merchandise thereof is better then silver, and the
gain thereof then gold; that she is more precious then Rubies, and all that can
be desired, in the three first Chapters of his Book: And after diverse
commendations of her, and exhortations to attention in the fourth, he does as
it were lay the first groundwork of attaining her in this precept, Prove. 4.23.
Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of life.
Surely God has placed that in the midst of us, to be the magazine and treasury
of our Soul, and has required it for himself of every one in express terms, My
Son, give me thy heart. I will not here in this place, and upon this occasion,
enquire whether the functions of the intellect, or the affections, do follow
the cogitations, or the cogitations are actuated and stirred by them, or which
is the most proper seat of either: The Soul is of so subtle a composure, that
it self could never yet find out the manner of its own operations; but this I
hope may be affirmed here, that if the heart be the more peculiar seat of the
affections, and Love the chief of the affections, the aim thereof must be good;
and what that good is, our Reason, under God, will certainly best direct us.
For Reason as in a Watchtower beholding as well absent as present good, and
the affections only beholding the present; it is Reason only that must reclaim
the imagination, and bring it in subjection to it self, and place the
affections upon a right object there. And surely, Reason tells every man that
has her, that, That from which the Soul it self had its primary being and
existence, is the chief good, and ought to take up the chief room in our Soul.
I, for my part, with my little reason, cannot find any such Engine, as will
remove the whole World, unless it be the Love of God; nor any place to fix this
Engine in, more proper then the heart. If this Love do once possess the Citadel
of our Soul, we are safe; we all too truly find, that while we are clothed
with flesh, it will let in sometimes other more visible and sensible objects,
which may make some mutiny in her, but still she has this Love as a safe and
sure Captain, that will keep her from taking. Surely methinks if Reason be but
consulted, this Love must be the predominant affection: Were it possible for us
to give being to some Creatures, and to endue them with Reason too, should we
not desert them for deserting us? and for too close an union amongst
themselves, and to other Creatures without respect to us? And if God had never
instilled into us by his Word, that he is a jealous God, who would punish for
admittance of a Rival to his love, could we expect less? And therefore ought
not we in reason, as much as may be, to keep out all Rivals? It Is a strange
fascination in us to confine all goodness (which is the aim of Love) within our
own bowels, and sometimes the bowels of the Earth too. No wise man will think,
neither can we justly own, the affections in us to be moved from any habitual
or inherent goodness in our nature, or that we do thereby express any
similitude or likeness to that Image, whose goodness is universally diffusive
to all. Since our Love (though it be owing to the whole Race of mankind, as we
are made of one lump from one Eternal power) is concentred in particulars: From
which cause, as our Love does often thereby, upon our loss, convert into
sorrow; so should that sorrow, in reason, convert into shame. For to say (I
think) the truth, we excessive mourners in this case, may be defined to be
persons who have locked up our hearts from the love of God, and shut up our
bowels from mankind in general, and confined them to work only within our own
imaginary Sphere. And were we accosted with that rough speech of Ioab to David,
2 Samuel 19.6.
That we hereby declare, that we regard neither Princes nor Servants, but that
the World may well perceive, that if our Absalom had lived, and an hundred else
had died, it had pleased us well; we could find no sufficient reply to justify
our selves, but must confess our own error.

And now if our gourd be withered, shall we sit down in a sullen mood? And if
that perfect love, that should have held place in us, be dispossessed, shall
not reason and understanding struggle for her? Sure the most rational way of
cure is, since we have given up our hearts to follow that which flies from us
as a shadow, to leave the pursuit, and catch hold on something else if may be.
Though our Children are gone, the World is yet full of various objects of
delight: But that which makes all or any of them so, is God, and from that
original, must they so glide into the heart; and therefore we most of necessity
reduce and bring back our wandering love to its proper state and original, for
which 'twas first implanted in us, and fix it upon that delightful object, and
through that Mirror, all things will have a more lovely aspect.

Understanding, and the Love of God, are always so coupled and linked together,
that the one cannot be, or subsist without the other: If a man love not his God
and Creator, it is for want of understanding; and if a man has not a right
understanding of his present and future well-being, it is alone because he
wants that love. For that love will infallibly fix every man's thoughts upon a
hearty endeavor to perform the whole will of God. Thus has St. John truly
defined the love of God to be, a keeping of his Commandments; 1 John 5.3.
This is the love of God, if we keep his Commandments. And our John 14.15.
Savior himself has made that the test and trial of love: And both David and
his Son Solomon, the wisest of men, have assured us in sundry positions, that
understanding takes her possession of the Soul with it, and that through his
Commandments it is, that we are wiser then our Teachers. And surely if there
were not some defect in every man of these Graces, by the intetposition of Sin
and Satan, he would, sooner or later, hear that gracious and effectual Echo
resound in his Soul, from the Spirit of all true love and comfort, Verse. 1.
Let not your hearts be troubled. This is the only rational way I think of
cure, Redire ad cor; and to get that clean swept and garnished, that the Spirit
of true love may enter in, and keep possession against all unruly passions, and
I dare say, whoever tries it, will subscribe his probatum to it.

SECT. IV. The Remedies which are ordinarily prescribed against Sorrow
considered, with respect to their force and efficacy; and how little Philosophy
of it self can do toward the conquest of it.
BUt as I said, let us not altogether reject every prescribed alleviating
Medicine: Indeed there are many from our common undertaking comforters, and we
are ready to catch at them like Reeds in a sinking condition. Although they are
firm Truths, and such as have been used by the greatest Philosophers and
Divines toward the cure; yet barely and simply considered, all or either of
them, have not the efficacy to bring a man to any safe or quiet Harbor. They
may keep a man from drowning, but withal they may and do often leave him
plunging in the deep, without the cooperation of some more Sovereign
Medicines; and are, some of them, fitter ingredients for a complicated disease,
where murmuring and repining are joined with it, than bare sorrow: which I
bless God, I never was infected with, for I own his Judgments just, and am more
apt to have St. Gregory's noise in my ears, Tu vero, bona tua, in vita tua,
etc. than the contrary. But I mention them, as I thought on them, and leave
them to others to make their best use of them, which are these following.

1. That death is a common thing, and a debt we all owe to Nature, and must
shortly pay, and therefore it should not so much trouble us, to behold it in
another. 2. That we cannot recall our Friends and Relations by our mourning,
and therefore our sorrow is vain. 3. That they whom we love are at rest, and
happy, which is rather cause of joy. 4. That it is not our case alone, we are
not single, but others daily suffer the like.
As to the first, the thing is very obvious to the meanest capacity, Aesop's
Lion to his Fox, not altogether so terrible; but yet he will be a Lion still,
and as Aristotle calls him, omnium terribilium terribilissimum: and further, if
we did look upon him at hand, ready to seize us; then, together with us, all
worldly things would change their hue, and put on, as it were, another face.
It Is sure, that Romans 5.12.
Death passes upon all men, (but as St. Paul says) because all men have
sinned; and from thence it is, that death has such a sting. And it is sin that
has made sorrow and trouble attendants on death, as well as death on it, both
for our selves and others: And therefore the contemplation of the primary cause
of our sorrow, should rather take up our thoughts, as I have already said, than
the secundary. For the thought of death certainly was never wholly absent from
any man in his sorrows, nor ever cured any; but the true sense of his own
deserts have.

As to the second, every man knows it as well as the other, who thought to
revive his Friend or Relation thereby, or to awake him with his shrieks and
cries. It is every man's deepest corrosive, that there is no redemption from the
Grave: And though in truth it be a vain thing, to persist in that which
profits us nothing; yet that vanity will not be driven away, by another
barely telling us so, or our own thinking or knowing it so: The faculties of
the Soul will not cease to work, though there is knowledge that the operation
is oft-times in vain; it is in vain we know to fear death, but that knowledge
will not cure a man of his fear. Certainly the wounds of the Spirit are sharper
and more malignant, than those of the Body, and it is the same reason must argue
us into patience of both: But, let her set us upon the Rack, it is in vain to
cry out, it will profit us nothing; we shall scarce hearken to her, and keep
silence. This advice best comes when we begin to be weary of our mourning, and
not before, and then only will this reason be hearkened unto. In the mean time,
let us consider, if we can, All things are vanity, which are the causes of our
vexation of Spirit.

etc. think it received into Eternal bliss: And therefore if these thoughts had
in them any present sanative virtue, they would rather keep us from sorrowing
at all, since they possess us as soon as our sorrow, and are contemporary with
our distemper. The wise Son of Syrach allows us a moderate sorrow, bids us
Ecclus 22.11 and 38.17.
weep for the dead, but not overmuch, because he is at rest: And St. Paul's
advice or caution is, that we 1 These. 4.13, 14.
sorrow not as others, which have no hope; that is, with a desperate, faithless
sorrow, as if they were eternally lost, and that Christ should not raise them
up at the last day. But surely no man will charitably deny, but that a strong
Faith, and a deep worldly sorrow, may sometimes possibly subsist together, and
that there may be spe dolentes, as well as spe gaudentes: For I cannot so
discard my own charity, as not to think some very good men have gone sorrowing
to their Graves, and yet have rejoiced too, in the hopes 1 These. 4.14.
that God will bring with him, those that sleep, and they shall meet together.

But for our present pensive thoughts and mourning, it is sure they arise not
only for want of this belief, or from any supposed detriment happened, or like
to happen to our Relation or Friend, (whom we once enjoyed, and now are
deprived of) but to our selves from our present loss. For it is most certain
with every man, that whenever any object has stolen into, and possessed his
heart, and taken root there, if the same be eradicated and snatched away,
(though he suppose it planted in a more pleasant Soil) there will immediately
spring up in the room thereof; grief and sorrow; and the Quem res plus nimio
delectavere secundae, Mutatae quatient --
greater and deeper root the one had taken, the more stubborn and fixed will be
the other. And therefore I think the Poets advice, by way of caution and
prevention, (if we could but warily observe it) more of weight, than these
thoughts have at present by way of cure, viz. Quicquid amas, cupias, non
placuisse nimis.
That we take great and diligent care, that these worldly objects of joy and
delight, do not creep in, and too strongly possess our hearts, lest if they
should be cast out against our wills, there enter in and spring up that bitter
root of sorrow, which will make our last thoughts more heavy, than our first
were lightsom.

Sorrow is a wound that is made, by the separation of the thing beloved, from
the lover; and though it be but temporary, and that we believe with some, that
we shall again at the last be united together, with the knowledge of each
other, where we shall sing Hallelujahs together, and all tears shall be wiped
from our eyes; yet in the mean while, our hearts may be troubled, and sorrowful
even unto death. And since we have lost our present comfort, the wound will not
be healed, but by sending another and better comforter. We may still mourn for
want of the enjoyment; our affections never be absolutely reclaimed, by
believing the former subject of their Love is happy; nor like mourning Widows,
forget the old, but by finding a new subject of delight and complacency.
Therefore let us, as well as hope in future, presently recall them, and
endeavor, as I said, to fix them on some more stable object, than they placed
themselves on before. Tell them, there is nothing truly amiable but God, and
him we may enjoy here in measure.

And for the last of them, the thoughts thereof, as I have said, it has no such
operation. If another man loses his only Child, as well as I; I have thereby
wherewith to stop my mouth from complaining of injustice, but in no case to
rejoice my heart, because I ought rather to rejoice at another good, than his
evil. And sure the true method of the cure of the mind, does in many things
resemble the cure of the body. How far will it assuage my pain, to see another
more grievously tormented with the Gout? very little, I think; unless as 'twill
enforce me to acknowledge God's mercy and goodness to me, that I suffer in a
less degree. Nay if the beholding of another man's miseries, should be of effect
to mitigate mine; by the same consequence, the beholding another felicity
(which is as obvious to every man) must increase mine, which naturally few men
have found true.

Many other prescriptions there are against sorrow, but since I look on the
continual presentment to our thoughts of the thing we take delight in, and the
rouling and chewing thereof in our mind, to be the chief Pillar or Basis which
supports and upholds our sorrows, or the chief Spring which keeps them fresh
and verdant; I could not but think it worthy consideration, how far it may be
good for any man to endeavor to recall his thoughts from his present subject
of grief, by fixing them on, and pleasing them with, any other terrestrial
object; wherein my shallow Judgment has inclined me to think this:

That no such diverted thoughts whatever, being properly efficient of a cure,
but Anodynes and Stupefiers for a time, (for then only can a man be said to be
cured of his grief, when he can think on the cause with comfort, or at least
without reluctance of Spirit) it is not good for any man in this case, to hunt
after a divertisement, but rather suffer that to call on him, and find him out.
I would advise any man in this case to embrace an old lawful vocation or
employment, but not seek out a new one for that end and purpose, nor by any
means endeavor to charm his grief with the most innocent (much less sinful)
recreation. For whatever it may be for cares in general, it is a foolish thing
to think, forthwith to drown sorrow in the River Lethe; for though it be an
heavy passion, yet none of the mind will get above it. We shall often find it
rise, to verify the Wise man's saying, that Prove. 14.13.
even in laughter, the heart is sorrowful; and it will cause us to conclude
with him, that Prove. 25.20.
Songs sung to an heavy heart, are like Vinegar poured upon Nitre, do rather
sharpen and exasperate, than cure the disease. This way of laying sorrow to
rest, is but to give it strength, to combat with us with greater force when it
awaketh, as doubtless it may.

But besides the incertainty and danger this way, we do not thereby at all
answer God's designment in sending it: Did he ever yet punish any man, for no
other end, than that he should forget his strokes and rejoice; and not rather
that he should think on it, so far as to amend his faults or errors? Can any
man think there is an handwriting on his walls, to the end that after his
beholding it, he should forthwith avert his Eyes therefrom, and leave his
House, and betake himself to the Fields or the Tavern? If it be God that wounds
us (as we generally believe, permissively at least, as in Job's case) by his
fiery Serpents, it must be he that must heal us; which will not be, by flying
from the sight of the Serpent, but Numb. 21. verse. 6, to 10.
beholding it. If it be he that casts us down, it must be he that shall build
us up. And whatever Job's Friends might otherwise fail in, they gave him
excellent sound counsel in this, Job 22.23.
That if he returned to the Almighty, he should be built up; but forgetfulness
of his calls is not the means to return; and the Prophet David has told us,
that disregard is the ready way for us to lie buried in our ruins, and has
showed it as the very cause, Psalm. 28.5.
Because they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands,
he shall destroy them, and not build them up.

If we think wilful forgetfulness be the way of cure, it is but just God should
forget us, and leave us unbuilt, or at least tortering and ready to fall again
upon the least blast. For I dare say, by that way, and without him, there is
danger that our hearts from melting, may become frozen, but never reduced to
any calm or serene temper. For besides and above what the World affords
sometimes, to wit, a transmutation of passions, (that is, her objects may cause
the mind to lay aside its sorrow for a time, and be wholly possessed with
another passion, which may be almost as troublesome, or is at best a light
flashing joy) we are capable of obtaining a conversion of passions, of having
our sorrow (as it is expressed in John 16.20.
St. John) turned into joy: we may rejoice in that very thing we sorrowed for,
and our waters of Marah may become sweet and pleasant, by our drinking.

Afflictions are sent to exercise Our Faith, by believing most assuredly God's
promises of his deliverance from them; Our Hope, by assuring our selves of the
reward promised to them that suffer patiently; and Our Charity, in suffering
willingly for his sake, who loved us, and suffered for us. And shall this be
performed by our endeavors to find out means to forget our sufferings? But
besides Theological virtues, there are Moral too, to be exercised thereby; and
even one of them is sufficient to awaken us, and rouse us up from this dull
passion of sorrow. Let us consider a little, the worldly esteem of a noble
undaunted Spirit, beyond a degenerous and poor one. Fortitude is that Heroic
Moral virtue, which can never show it self so illustrious as in Adversity.
There are none of us, but would willingly be thought to have it inherent in us,
and then is the proper time to show it; for it must be a tempestuous, not a
calm Sea, which shows the excellency of a Pilot. Fortitude has already been
owned to show more of its reality in a passive, than an active dress, and
oftener appears with the Shield, the Buckler, and the Helmet, than the Spear and
the Sword. Let us think with Theophrastus, that the World is a great Theater,
and that each of us is often called forth upon the Stage, to fight with
poverty, sorrow, sickness, death, and a number of other miseries, (rather then
with one another) and besides our Brethren Spectators, God himself from above
beholds every one, how he performs his part; and that (besides an hiss, or a
plaudite here) we must expect a Crown, or Prison hereafter: And then let us
fight valiantly, and think, through him that will assist us, to master and
subdue all adverse Fortune; that is in two words, to contemn the World, and
that is truly the definition of Fortitudo, est animo magno, elatoque humanas
res despicere.
Fortitude, or a great mind.

We have great known Enemies to contend with here, the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil; and we have once vowed to fight against them all, and to continue
Christ's faithful Servants and Soldiers to our lives end. Indeed when we
wrestle not only against Flesh and Blood, but Principalities and Powers, we had
need take unto us Ephesians. 6.13.
the whole Armor of God, that we may be able to stand; viz. 1 These 5.8.
the Breast Plate of Love, and for an Helmet the hope of Salvation, etc. But
shall one of these Enemies, the World, when there were more danger from her
smiles, overcome us with her frowns? If ever we think to obtain a Crown of
Righteousness after the finishing of our course, we must like St. Paul, (who
often uses Military terms to encourage us) 2 Timothy 4 7.
Fight a good fight, and let us by our very Fortitude master a puny sorrow.

But if neither Honor nor Glory, nor the sight of God or man, will herein move
us, but that we are ready to yield, and let our affections carry us away like
Captives and Slaves, there is yet this reserve left us; to become at last
resolute from fear, and tell our selves, what Ioab told David, that if we do
not 2 Samuel 19.7.
Arise from our sorrow, and speak comfortably again, it will be worse unto us
then all the evil that befell us, even from our youth until now. And that worst
evil, is death, if Satan be not deceived in our sense of humane evils, who
says, Job 2.4.
All that a man has, will he give for his life.

Immoderate sorrow will macerate these beloved Carcasses of ours; and although,
before pain makes us sensible of our follies, (and it be generally too late) we
are apt to take some kind of pleasure in nourishing and feeding our diseases;
yet methinks, in this, where we have none of our senses to please, (which is
chiefly looked on in the World) we might take the words of wise and experienced
persons. David tells us, Psalm. 31.9.
his eyes were consumed with grief, yea his soul and his belly; and he tells us
of those, who are Psalm. 107.39.
brought low through oppression, affliction and sorrow. St. Paul tells us, 2
Cor. 7.10.
Worldly sorrow works death. Solomon has told us, that Prove. 15.13.
by sorrow of the heart, the Spirit is broken; and that a Prove. 17.22.
broken Spirit dries the bones; and the wise Son of Syrach in plain terms,
that Ecclus 30.23.
sorrow has killed many, and that Ecclus 38.18.
of heaviness comes death. For let every man assure himself, that if he cannot
in some sort overcome and master this Tyrant by his own struggling, and God's
gracious assistance, he is become such a Slave to his passion, that he is not
to expect an enfranchisement from Time, but Death.

I do agree with him who said, Nisi sanatus sit animus, quod sine Philosophia
non potest, finem miseriarum nullum fore, quamobrem tradamus nos ei curandos,
if Deo were placed in the room of Philosophia. For now at length I must
conclude, that although Moral Philosophy may be sometimes admitted as an
Handmaid and Attendant on Divinity, and 'twas not for naught that St. Paul
termed Religion Romans 12.1.
Our reasonable service; yet we must take care we look upon the one in no other
respect, than under the precepts and dictates of the other. I for my part am
apt to think, and do indeed rest convinced, that no man ever yet cured these
wounds of the Soul, by the bare strength of natural Reason and Argument,
(though even that be the immediate gift of a Divine power) without some more
special Light, or influence from above. For although many of the ancient
Philosophers and Sages, who perhaps knew not God aright, have seemed from their
profound knowledge and reason, to reduce their minds unto a most constant calm
serene temper; I rather think that tranquillity of mind in them, was the gift of
that God they rightly knew not, as a reward of their Moral virtues
industriously acquired, than the native offspring of their knowledge. I my
self am a man like other men, and I have been ever sensible by intervals in my
serious thoughts, of the vanity of this World; and I may truly say, there is
nothing in these Papers, but what at some time or other occurred to my thoughts
before; and in those thoughts I have, Goliah-like, contemned a pigmy sorrow:
but find, as contemptible a thing as it may seem to the best humane reason,
being sent from the Lord of Hosts, who alone is he that Job 5.18. Una eademque
manus, vulnus opemque --
wounds and heals, there can be no Armor of defense, proof against his Darts,
but what is taken out of his own Arsenal. For if (contrary to man's experience,
which has found, that 2 Cor. 3.5.
we are not sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves) our
wills were present with us, and those wills could command our cogitations, and
our reason to attend them too; we might however think what we would or could,
and dig about, and water all our days this crabbed root of Nature, and never
cause it to produce more, than an harsh, unpleasant, and not lasting fruit.
Gal. 5.22.
The fruits of the Spirit, of which Love and Joy are by the Apostle reckoned as
the principal, come to us by gift and addition, not by culture or alteration
Nay if we have learned that Lesson of content (and by consequence have sometime
joy and peace) with St. Paul, it is so much the infusive document of a gracious
Master, and so far from being acquired by our native understanding, that we
daily want his reiterated Grace, to call on us to learn, and when we are heavy
laden to come unto him for ease. If we have learned to tred the waters, and to
walk upon a tempestuous Sea for some steps, we shall notwithstanding find cause
with St. Peter to cry out, Lord, save me, or I perish; which cry, is yet my
cry. For I do declare unto the World, that I have not at any time found the
recovery from a disease, to be a sufficient charm against its return. It will
come again sometimes, and if it come, there will lie a necessity upon us, and
we shall be forced for the cure to use over again the same sanative
ingredients; and the most approved Recipe in sorrow is, and ever will be that
of St. James, James 5.13.
If any man be afflicted, let him pray, call on him, who works in us to think,
to will, and to do, according to his good will and pleasure, and has said, he
is near to all them that call upon him, yea that call upon him faithfully. It Is
he, from whom comfort springs, as light out of darkness, and it is he from whom
we must expect, as it were, a new creation, and beg he may say, Let there be
light in us, and there will be light. And in his light, as the Psalmist says,
there is life; that is, a vigorous active state, able to dispell all the black
clouds raised by Sin and Satan. He is the comforter, who must put true joy and
gladness into our hearts by the merits of his Son, and the secret inspiration
of his. Holy Spirit; and they are Psalm. 94.19.
his comforts alone, which must refresh our Souls in the multitude of the
sorrows we have in our hearts. St. Paul is pleased to style him, 2 Cor. 1.3, 4.
the God of all comfort, who comfort us in all our tribulations, that we may
be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we
our selves are comforted of God. And in one place he calls him, Rom 15.5.
the God of patience and consolation, with a kind of inference, that God ever
crowns his Grace of patience, with his Blessing of consolation And he does
declare God to be the sole proper and peculiar Fountain of comfort, in an
instance of his gracious working upon himself; 2 Cor. 7.6.
Nevertheless, says he, God that comfort those that are cast down, comforted
us by the coming of Titus. For, the coming of Titus out of Achaia into
Macedonia at that time, cannot seem to have in it any natural energy to work so
much upon St. Paul, for that coming appears to us a matter of no great
consequence; only St. Paul seems to show us, that God so disposed his heart at
that time, that that should work as a Cordial to him, which of it self barely
had no such natural operation: Nay in one place God does, as it were,
appropriate the issues of comfort to himself, by a reiteration, Isa. 51 12.
I, even I am he that comfort you. From the diversity of humors in our
natural temper, has arose that Adage of, fortuitum est placere; and from the
same diversity we may infer, (and change the word) a Domino est, placere:
Because we daily see men affected and delighted not from any inherent quality
in the subject, because to effect that, the thing per se must have somewhat of
good in it, but properly and peculiarly nothing is good save God only; and
therefore to make a thing seem good and delightful to us, it must first have
his stamp and impress upon it visible to us. And if the Psalmist*s demand
should be applied to outward goods, and one in that very notion should cry out,
Psalm. 4.6, 7.
who will show us any good? he will find no perfect solution, without the
effect in the sequent verse, Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance;
and then will Rod, and Staff, and Fire and Faggot, comfort us

The light of whose countenance that we may all have in some measure, let us
more especially pray to him, and give praise with the best member we have, (
David's own words) and imitate somewhat that Divine Psalmist. I must
acknowledge I ever found some comfort in my sorrows, by reading those Divine
spiritual Soloquies of his, and do not think but that every other man may; and
that however they may upon the reading in prosperity, glide over his heart, in
adversity they will fix and settle there. There is no pattern in them for
stupidity, nor no sullen expression of, My punishment is greater then I am able
to bear; but this or the like, Then cried I unto the Lord, and he delivered me
out of my distress.

And to cry unto him in the very words of that compendious excellent Prayer,
being the Collect appointed in our Church-Liturgy for the fourth Sunday after
Easter, (for I cannot find a better) may be no unfit conclusion: Almighty God,
who alone can order the unruly wills and affections of sinful men; grant unto
us thy people, that we may love the thing which thou command, and desire
that which thou do promise, that so amongst the sundry and manifold changes
of the World, our hearts may surely there be fixed, where true joys are to be
found, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

To which may not improperly be added, that for the sixth Sunday after Trinity:
O God! who have prepared for them that love thee, such good things as pass man's
understanding; pour into our hearts such love toward thee, that we loving thee
above all things, may obtain thy promises, which exceed all that we can desire,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Amen.

These following Ejaculations were used, in the state of the disease.
O Lord, thy hands have made me, and fashioned me; thou art he that broughtest
me out of my mothers womb, and have showed thy strength in my weakness.

Many and grievous have been my infirmities since my youth up, and yet walk I
in the Land of the living: I have been more infirm than my Brethren, which are
gone before me, yet have thou granted me length of days.

I have provoked thee more than they, yet have thou spared me out of the
abundance of thy mercy.

Thou have, to the wonder of others, spared me; whose thoughts have been, when
shall he die, and his name perish?

Thou have taken away more righteous than my self, and placed me in their
rooms, to take my pastime like Leviathan in this World.

But I have not rightly considered thy doings, nor to what end thou have done
these things.

For thou have enlightened me with knowledge, and have left me no covering for
my faults; wherefore I am ashamed, and confounded at my own follies.

Notwithstanding this thy gift and loving kindness toward me, I have gone
astray, and provoked thee more than my Fathers have done; wherefore I am become
sore oppressed, and grieved from thy heavy displeasure.

I have placed my affections on transitory things, which though lighter than
vanity, have weighed thee down in the balance of my Soul.

And notwithstanding my follies and transgressions, I have said in my heart,
What evil happens unto me? Not remembering that though thou art a God of
patience and long-suffering, yet thou will not leave sin unpunished.

Wherefore thou sentest out thine arrows of warning, and destroyedst my
firstborn; yet I considered not, it was thy doing.

Thrice did thou repeat thy summoning Judgments after, in the same manner;
and though I was sore troubled, yet returned I not with my whole heart to thee.

But was ready and willing to impute the cause to my own natural infirmities,
rather than my acquired sins, still forgetting that death came by sin.

Notwithstanding thou of thy goodness, and tender compassion toward me in this
World, did leave me two Infants, as a comfort, and as a pledge not to abuse
thy grace.

But I sinned yet more, and rejoiced in the gift, more than in thee the giver.

I set my affections on things below, and not on things above; and rather
sought and endeavored the planting of my Name here, than in the Book of Life.

Therefore have thou destroyed my vain hopes by a sudden blast, when I least
expected it.

She was flourishing like a Flower of the Field, and thy sudden blast went over
her, so as the place thereof knew her no more.

In the morning was she fresh and flourishing, and in the evening cut down and
withered.

O Lord! it was thy immediate hand that did it, enforced to strike from my
daily continued provocations.

Neither can any that knows that thou art both just and merciful to all the
works of thy Creation, impute it to any ordinary natural cause.

O that my sins should be as the murderers of my production, whilst thou
sparest the offender himself!

But here again have thou showed thy mercy and loving kindness, in taking them
to bliss, rather than casting me into utter darkness.

Thou have showed thy mercy to the most loathsome and vilest of thy Creatures,
who is not only stench and rottenness, but an infectious sore.

I am become a gazing-stock, and the talk of all them that know me, and live
round about me.

They may say, or at least be ready to think within themselves, These things
are fallen on him for his transgressions, and thou punishest him in justice,
whilst they do not remember that thou art merciful.

But, O Lord, let not the evil wishes of the envious, who behold my prosperity
in other things, prevail against me, but pardon their offenses, and show them
that I, and mine are under thy protection.

And out of the multitude of my sins and ttansgressions, show me which of them
have more especially provoked thee to make me fruitless, that I may more
especially abhor them, turning from every evil way.

Had I taken so much delight, and joy and comfort in thy Word, as in a frail
Babe of flesh, surely thou had not bereaved me thereof.

Had I honored my Father in the flesh, I might have had joy in my own
Children, but now it is far from me.

Have I endeavored to heap up Riches, and knew not who should enjoy them? Have
I considered the vanity thereof, and yet neglected to do good, and distribute?
wherewith thou would have been well pleased, and art thou therefore angry
with me, and leavest me desolate?

Many, O Lord, have been the devices of my heart, although I well knew thy
counsel only would stand.

I have seen and read the destruction of other Families, how their name has
perished; how thou pullest down one, and raisest up another, and yet my heart
has rather inclined to the World, than to thee, my God and advancer.

But grant, O Lord, that neither the cares of this World, nor the deceitfulness
of Riches, may choke any good Seed of well-doing, either sowed or sprung up in
my heart.

Thou have commanded us not to set our hearts upon them; O show me thy ways,
and incline my heart unto thee, and not unto covetousness! And if I must part
with all to follow thee, give me an heart to do it.

I trust thou have not increased my outward accessions, to suffer me to be
deceived therewithal; or given me Riches, because thou saw I should not
have been innocently poor.

I confess, O Lord, they are Briars and Thorns yet growing, and ready to choke
every good Plant, but do thou raise in me from thence a plentiful Harvest of
good works.

Make me a faithful Steward of what thou have committed to my charge, or else
leave me naked as I came into the World.

For thou know I have ever acknowledged what I enjoy to be from thy gift,
and never sacrificed to my own Nets.

Thou have given me what I never asked, and bereaved me of what I most desired;
but who is able to comprehend the methods of thy Judgments?

Surely there is something to which our affections ought to tend, in which the
desire of man can have no excess.

Is there nothing to be found amiable, but what is corruptible? shall charity
abide when all things cease, and for the present know not where to fix it self?

Shall we at best behold the chequered and bright Clouds raised from the Earth,
and forget the Sun which gives them brightness, and cause him at present to
withdraw his beams, and leave us in obscure darkness?

Shall he that gives us all things withdraw himself, for want of our beholding
him in that notion? when we cannot do that, but by his immediate gift too.

When thou, O Lord, dartest forth the light of thy countenance, those little
Rays we are capable to behold through the Vail of this flesh, make all things
amiable; and particulars only seem so from a false light of our own imaginary
creation.

He who endeavors to behold thee as thou art, or further than thou have been
pleased to show thy self, deservedly becomes blind, and perishes by his too
near approaches.

We cannot behold thy light but by reflection, only let us see so much as that
we may admire and love thee.

The invisible things of thee, are understood only by the things that are made;
and thou art seen only by the beauty and greatness of thy Creatures, or thy
immediate free gift.

O show me the light of thy countenance in some measure, stablish me again by
thy free Spirit, and send some Balm into that Soul, which thou have wounded!

I know the Creator of all things cannot altogether shut up his mercy and
loving kindness from his Creatures in displeasure: I am as much the work of thy
hands, as the greatest Monarch.

Thy ways and methods, and thy decrees, O Lord, are hidden, but will thou
refuse a present desire of return?

Shall I think of being forgot, when I can say, Lord remember me and all my
troubles? O let me not be forgot in the Land of the living!

If I have loved too much, divert the current of that affection, and let it
return like a River to the Ocean of Love, thy self.

Turn, O Lord, my affections as the Rivers in the South, then shall I have
hopes, though I sow in tears, to reap in joy!

Let me only desire thee, rejoice in thee, fear thee, and sorrow only for thy
absence, if but a moment.

Thou who assumedst flesh, know how frail and weak our nature is; thou have
said, the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.

Thy Servant Paul by thee has said, There is a Law of the flesh warring
against the Law of the mind; and that in him that is in his flesh, there dwelt
no good thing.

Thou art the only Physician of the Soul and Body; thou can enliven my Spirit
toward thee; thou can mortify my lust; thou can allay all the unruly
passions of the mind, inflamed from the humors of the body, and actuated by
Satan.

O make me a clean heart, and renew a right Spirit within me! a Spirit of
meekness, working by true love and charity, and in all things a contented
Spirit.

Let all my inherent passions move only toward the good of community, and thy
glory.

Thou have made all things chiefly for thy glory and praise; and cannot I look
upon the praising and magnifying thee, a sufficient and satisfactory end of my
peculiar being, without either Children, Riches or Honor?

Thou have given me understanding, which is the greater gift, shall that be for
naught? or that my condemnation should be the greater? can he that goes down to
the pit praise thee?

But I will praise thy name; O let me live, and declare thy merciful loving
kindness to my Brethren! Let me after death praise thee with thy glorious
Saints and Angels! for to that end did thou make man of naught.

Though thou slay me, yet will I trust in thee: Let me lay so fast hold on thy
mercy, that no terrors whatsoever loose me therefrom.

Rather in this World wound and afflict me, but be thou merciful unto me, and
deliver me at the hour of death, and in the day of Judgment.

Prepare me, O Lord, for greater Judgments; and if thou have decreed to bereave
me of all Worldly comforts, yet be thou my comforter.

And if thou see it good to punish me, let me only be as it were a Sacrifice
for my Family, and let them praise thee in the Land of the living.

But if herein I know not what I ask, grant only what thou know good for me;
whose care and love never forsook them, who did not first forsake thee.

Thy will, O Lord, be done; thy will be done, yet thou can draw me to thee by
the cords of Love, and spare the remnant which is left.

Out of the remnant which is left raise up a branch unto thy self, that may be
an example of piety and virtue unto others.

One who may fear thy Name, and think it a Kingdom to govern himself, and rule
his passions: One that may look on all Graces and Moral Virtues, as the
greatest Riches and Treasure, so as he may flourish likewise here on Earth.

O accept of the perfect obedience of thine own Son, who suffered for me and
mine, in the room of my disobedience!

It was not for my Childrens sins, I know, O Lord, thou so soon reassumedst
those Spirits of thy giving, to leave the filth and rottenness of the flesh
proceeding from me.

They were indeed conceived and born in sin, but received a new generation by
thy gracious washing in Baptism.

Thou will raise them up again at the last, glorious Bodies; and shall that
Body from which thou causedst them to proceed, go into the bottomless pit?

I have declared thy wisdom, and mercy, and providence to my Brethren; O grant*
that while I preach to others, I my self may not become a castaway!

Grant me true wisdom, being a pure influence from thee, and a brightness of
thy everlasting Light.

The fear of thee is the beginning of wisdom, and that fear is, to depart from
evil: O grant that I may depart from every evil way!

It is wisdom to know what is pleasing to thee, it is wisdom to depend on thee,
and in Christ are hidden all the treasures of wisdom.

Grant, O Lord, that I may be wise unto salvation; then shall I see the vanity
of being troubled at all other things.

Plant, O Lord, and water this root, and I will not fear, but that all other
necessary goods will spring forth as the natural branches.

Grant me such sincere repentance, and perfect hatred of all Vice, that thou
may be at peace with me; then shall I not fear, what man or Devil can do unto
me.

Let my ways so please thee, that mine Enemies may be at peace with me: let me
so live henceforth, as that if any speak evil of me, they may not be believed,
but at last be ashamed.

Let me provoke thee no more, so that I and mine may be safe under the shadow
of thy wings.

Thou art my shield and my buckler, and the lifter up of my head: Thou art that
chiefest good, which the wisest have so much puzzled themselves to find; and
the beams thereof here, are rest and trust in thee.

The light of thy countenance here, will bring more true joy and gladness to
the heart, than a multitude of Children, or the abundant flowing of Riches and
Honor.

Thou art the center of felicity, and the nearer any one draws to thee, he
shall find the gleams of happiness.

I will flee unto thee with praises: Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that
is within me, praise his holy Name: while I have a being, will I praise the
Lord. Praise thou the Lord, O my Soul, praise the Lord. Amen.

A Treatise De ANIMA: Containing several DISCOURSES OF THE Nature, the Powers
and Operations of the SOUL of MAN.
The Preface.
HAving received my Being, Creation, and Form like other men, a lump of
corruptible putrid Clay, yet curiously and wonderfully framed, and more
wonderfully actuated by a reasonable Soul, from whence I become enabled in some
measure to consider and behold my self; from that intuition there has often
arose within me some limited desire, (that is, so far as it should please my
God and Creator to illuminate me therein) in listening after the direction of
the ancient Oracle, to learn that Lesson of his, and above all things else to
'Twas the common saying of Chilo, and Plato mentions it to be written in
Letters of Gold upon the Portal of Apollo's Temple; and Iuvenal says it came
from Heaven. Graeculus a coelo descendit, (...).
Know my self.

The knowledge of the Soul (if it might be known) and its strange manner of
operation, has been that kind of worldly knowledge, which by fits (as it were)
I have most of all aspired after; and my Soul seemed to will now and then to
behold it self: but being in conjunction with a Body, it has in me (as in
others) run wandering abroad to fulfill the lusts thereof; spent the greatest
part of its time of residence here, in the supporting, adorning and beautifying
that its case and habitation; willing too, from its ashes and cyndars, there
should arise another Bird of the same kind, and in the mean time neglected to
consider, how well it was prepared for its own flight.

This outward prospect, as I say, had drawn aside and employed my cogitations
upon the pleasures of the World, and the deceitful Riches, Pomps and other
Vanities thereof; toward the obtaining and enjoying of which, I could not but
adjudge the too narrow search into ones self, and beholding ones own composure,
rather obstructive than conducing. But now again of late (and when indeed it
may seem too late) in my elder years, having had some more disquietness of mind
than ordinary from the loss of my Children, for whom it may be my thoughts had
too far straggled before; I began again to reassume my pristine desire, with
somewhat more earnestness than formerly; and my mind, somewhat again re-settled
and calmed, became more industriously inquisitive into her own defects, and
more willing to search out the causes of her perturbations, and to apply the
best remedies she could toward the allaying and quieting the same.

Thus once again moved with this desire, in my procedure to its execution, this
consideration offered it self to my thoughts; whether now at the last I should
spend some time in finding out, and perusing Authors who before had wrote any
learned Tractates de Anima, or the like, to instruct and guide me, (which
hitherto I was altogether ignorant of, and had ever neglected, by reason of my
pecuniary study, though little profitable to me) or spin, or weave out like a
Spider, the materials of my own weak Brain, and take some view of my Soul by
the strength of its own intellect, without the help of any Perspective: And
after some little demurr, and some doubt of splitting my own Barque against
other men's, or rather fear of being lost in a Labyrinth or Maze of other men's
framing, I neglected the first, and resolved on the latter; and to try how far
my Soul could show her self unto her self, as from her own Idea, and find the
ready way to amend and rectify her self.

In this undertaking I cannot but foresee and except very various and different
censures, from the variety of men's inclinations and opinions in their Souls;
but I am not now so unacquainted with my own, as to foresee them with any
trouble of mind, or without charity; no, not if the Thou art beside thy self.
censure given on St. Paul (without the Much learning has made thee mad. Act.
26.24.
cause added) were one. If any man deceive his own expectation, in looking for
somewhat that is new, it is he that goes about to confute Solomon's Aphorism,
and not I. Inded I began it not, nor intended it, to employ or please the
curiosity of wise men, but to satisfy a Fool, (I mean my self) who could not
rest well contented, till he saw some cause of his vagrancies and infirmities
set down together in writing, which his memory and intellect could not so well
retain, but catch at a little by turns and fits. I have done it, I say, to
gratify my self, make me legible to my self at any time, and that in the
plainest and easiest dress I could, for such a subject; for he who thinks to
put himself into an artificial Garb, may be sooner admired than known, and with
the same device at once deceive himself and others.

I am enforced to use some Metaphors, and to resemble the Soul to various
things, because I well know not to say what it is; for if any man shall ask me
yet what I think of the Soul, I can give him no other answer than what
Symonides did Hiero upon his question, What he thought of God, and that was,
The more he thought on it, the more difficult he found it to be known.

What this wandering Soul of man is, or whereto it may be likned, cannot be
expressed otherwise than from it self, and then it is very apt to express it
self in such terms, as it is most familiarly acquainted with; so as if Tully's
Musician thought the Soul to be an Harmony, or a Mathematician think it to be
made up of Numbers; why may not I think the Soul to be a Law, and its faculties
Bandyings in several Courts, and Reason to be the Chancellor, which holds a
Court of Equity and Conscience, whereto all others ought to submit: and herein
I should not altogether vary from St. Paul, who terms the contracombatant
faculties of his Soul, Kom 7.23.
A Law in his members, warring against the Law of his mind. Indeed the Soul of
man is from its several faculties in perpetual warfare, and therefore I hope I
shall not be blamed in my ensuing discourse, to compare it to an Army with
Banners, which may be no less proper than any of the other. In the mean while,
and for the present, I hope I may here take the liberty to compare it to, and
think it a fruitful piece of Enclosure, while it remains here on Earth, best
dressed and manured by it self, and most fructiferous from it self, where
Native Seeds thrive and flourish better than Foreign: And therefore I think it
becomes every man to be a good Husband at home, not be like some Travelers,
who know most Countries better than their own, but first search into the nature
of his own Soil, as the most ready way and means to discover others.

There is something like a Tree of Knowledge in every man, and therefore it
were best, according to my thoughts, to let it have some good rooting first,
and that the strings thereof may extend and spread themselves to every Angle,
before a man think of transplanting any part thereof to another Soil; for we
are too willingly apt and prone, either to have that Tree of so large a
dimension and circumference in its Branches, that it should drop its Fruits,
and influence rather upon any Foreign Soil, than it self; or else we would have
it raised to that excessive height, that it is in great danger of blasting. We
usually think to improve our intellect very preposterously, we grasp at Heaven,
and think to comprehend our Maker, and all his secret and unfathomable decrees,
by our Reason, (whose goodness and mercy it is at last, if we can apprehend any
thing of him by Faith) and so while we would know him, forget our selves, and
while we forget our selves, become quite incapable of knowing him. Therefore
first let us muster up all our intellectual powers, seriously view their
abilities, find how little power we have over them, see how weak they are,
consider they are precarious and lent us; and then perhaps we shall at last
perceive and know, He is, what we are not, nor capable to comprehend, nor
conceive his ways, and begin to pray for a second Emitte Spiritum, of
Sanctification, to follow that of his Creation. Let us first, I say, take care
of the root, look within, see that that canker not or consume, dig about and
dress it: For though it be requisite our knowledge extend further than our
selves, yet there I think it ought to begin; there we should first plant and
water, and expect the increase.

I am somewhat convinced, that had we no other light than that of Reason (the
Lieutenant, if not the Captain and Conduct of our first created Souls) first
imprinted in our Nature, to guide us in this Vale of misery, we could not
justly complain of a total insufficiency: And I am convinced further, that we
have in some sort and degree, ability to blow up this covered spark to some
light and flame, and by its help to make a fair progress on our way; and
therefore that it is expedient, if not necessary, that every man try how far
this light will direct him; or if he make not use of it as a light, make use of
it as a Staff, to feel out his way, put some stress upon it, and when he feels
it weak and bend, then cry out for other help and assistance; but by no means
lay his whole weight on it, lest it break under him, and wound him with its
Splinters.

I am afraid it is too common an error amongst us, wholly to reject the Lawyers
maxim, which suffers or allows no man to disable himself; and when we are bid
to work out our Salvation with fear and trembling, expect it should be done
with a bare contemplative Faith of ours, without any other cooperation at all;
that we abolish and smother all Law written in our hearts, and expect Grace
should be sent us as a hoodwink to Reason; as if that must necessarily obstruct
Reason from seeing any thing her self, which in truth is only to enlighten her
anew, and in that part only wherein she remains defective. For though for want
of such Grace, the old Philosophers might be said not to see aright, or so
clearly as they might, and so fail in the main; yet if, like some of us, they
had trusted only to a supernatural Light, they might have failed in the mean,
as well as the end: whereas the best of us might wish to tread in the same
steps with them in Moral Virtues, whatever they met with at their Journeys end.

I think we are apt and in danger to destroy our Souls by an extreme hot, or an
extreme cold Poison, absolute power, or absolute impotence; whereas if we
beheld our power and our impotence at one view, and joined the exercise of our
past gift, with the invocation of new, we might make of them both together a
Sovereign -- faciet discreta venenum, Antidotum sumet qui sociata bibit.
Cordial. Indeed though I do look upon it as impossible, that we should be
perfectly restored again to the first image of the Father, but by him only, who
is the Eternal image of the Father; yet I think it very necessary to observe
the character of his forerunner and Harbinger St. John, to Luke 3.4, 5.
prepare the way of the Lord, make his paths straight; to see every valley be
filled, and every mountain be brought low, etc. that we descend down into our
Souls, be somewhat acquainted with them, and observe what rubs and lets there
are, what blemishes and bruises by our first Fall, that he who is the Physician
of Souls, may be prayed to come in and heal them.

The nature and original of the Soul, its faculties and operations, its power
and strength, or weakness, is the sight I have desired to behold; it is the
Jewel which I have held fit to be solely trusted with none but my self, and its
proper Physician; (as fot the Caskonet or Carcass, I am very willing to leave
it to the common Physician, without great care or thoughts of knowing its
composure or disposition;) I am willing to see its defects, and have it healed,
and yet while I am a going about that, I do not think my self capable of
dissecting it, so as to lay every part of it open to my own or others view, or
to find out every winding, turn, or motion of it. I believe it to have
originally so much of the image of its Maker, that we shall confess upon
search, it is inscrutable; and now since its defection, is become such an
obliterate and blurred Copy of that image, that it is scarce in part legible:
But yet withal, it has such marks of a Divine work still remaining in it, as
it is able in some measure to behold its own defects. And I bless God mine is
not so far in love with the first transgression, as to repeat it over again, or
desire to know any thing further than may tend to God's glory, and its own and
others good and well-being; and therefore what I aim at, or desire to see or
know, is with all humility and submission, and acknowledgment of my wants and
needs of supply.

Yet if in the disquisition and search, after my plain way and manner, I shall
prove any whit profitable, or helpful to any other hereafter to know, and
thereby somewhat better to govern himself, that God may be glorified thereby, I
shall not think I have herein exercised my little Talent altogether vainly and
amiss.

I have in my search into this curious and admirable work of the Divine power,
(the Soul of man) endeavored to move by the light of Truth; a thing of which
the Soul by and from the Divine goodness, now and then receives some glimmering
light, or lively glance only, even in the very inferior works of Nature, and
things of a lower Orb than it self: How much more Divine is that light, which
arises upon the search into her self! If I have failed of this light, or
strayed from the truth, I most humbly beseech that God of truth, and Fountain
of light, which lightneth every one who comes into the world, to shine more
graciously upon some other, who may hereafter correct and amend my
simple-meaning errors. It is certainly the chiefest honor, and highest dignity
(if not the greatest happiness) Humane Nature is capable of here in this Vale
below, to have the Soul so far enlightened, as to become the Mirror, or
Conduit, or Conveyer of God's truth to others. And if men were able to discern
her aright, Truth would be readily embraced by all, in any dress whatsoever,
nay plain and naked, as she most often appears and presents her self. But there
are so many false lights, and such a strange and various impression on, or
representation of things, that neither he that gives, nor he that receives, can
rest fully assured the Coin is pure, however it may pass, or become current.

I dare not in any case recommend my thoughts or opinion, as void of falsehood
and absurdity, or seeming contradiction; yet this I presume to say, I have
scraped together some such Materials, as rightly placed and taken, or a little
better marshalled or beautified, by some wise, sober and judicious person,
might open a way in some measure to let in the light of God's truth into the
Soul of men. And to such a person I recommend and dedicate these my Papers,
(without borrowing for a Patronage any Great man's name, or daring to affix my
own) as a groundwork for him to build on; and I should rejoice to rest assured
any one would undertake or undergo that labor.

I have but this (I think reasonable) request, to any man about to quarrel with
these Papers, That he take some consideration, and bethink himself, whether he
may not wrong or prejudice his own Soul: Because I will affirm nothing in them,
as a matter of truth, with so much confidence and assurance, as this one thing
here, that is, if he desire tranquillity and peace of mind, (the greatest
worldly blessing imaginable, and the thing I seek after) he shall never so
readily attain it, by any narrow search into the errors and extravagancies of
my Soul for disputation sake, as by passiug them with pity and commiseration
for God's sake, who best knows whereof we are both made* remembers our frame,
and how subject we are to mistakes. And I hope that no man will beforehand,
from the Spirit of pride and contradiction, raise up a Tower or Fortress for
his own intellect, from thence to summon all others to vail and come in; but
let mine (or other such like) pass as a poor Merchant, that chiefly intends to
see Countries, bring back somewhat it may be for its own support, and possibly
too for the support of some others, of a like or little inferior capacity;
though its Wares have no such flourish or signature on them, as may make them
vendible, or prized by the Merchants of this Age.

PART I.
SECT. I. How far the Soul of man is similar with that of Brutes.
I Think it may appear somewhat plain and obvious to the meanest capacity, that
the Soul of man is endowed with three distinct prime or principal faculties,
whereby it appears to work; and those are, 1 st* the Affections, 2 ly. the
Will, and 3 ly. the Intellect or Understanding: which last is more commonly
reduced to, and made to terminate in these three faculties, 1. Imagination, 2.
Memory, 3. Reason. For to say more, or make any further enumeration at present,
were to fall upon my second limited subject, which I intend to handle more
particularly in its proper place, and might perhaps confound my self and others
with strange notions in the beginning, which I intend not.

All these distinct faculties or operations, we cannot well deny to be inherent
and discernible in the wiser (if I may so say) sort of Brutes: The two first,
viz. Affections and Will, I suppose every man will grant to be apparent in the
less seeming intelligent Animals, and therefore I Will not trouble my self to
demonstrate after what manner they love, and fear, or the like, nor dispute
about their voluntary motions, nor whence that voluntary motion may proceed,
whether from sense or passion, or sometimes intellect. For though I believe
there is not a Sparrow that lights upon the Housetop, without a Divine
providence, yet I think it had a will to light on the Housetop, as well as I
to write, and could not be said to have an involuntary motion, like an Arrow
shot thither out of a Bow, for in all involuntary motion, there is requisite a
second discernible working cause, as well as a first cause. But my enquiry
concerning them, shall be only in those three faculties referred to the
intellect viz. Imagination, Memory, and Reason; none of which, I know well how
to deny to be in several kinds of creatures, in some sort, beside man.

And first for Imagination, which is the representation of some image, or
appearance in the Soul, not at present introduced by sight, etc. and therefore
may as well be sleeping as waking: Though otherwise there appear no ground to
us of their imagination, (which is internal) yet such an effect there is often
seen in them, as cannot proceed from any other cause, but some internal image
of an outward object: And this is discernible in sleeping Hounds and Spaniels,
whose bodies from thence are moved and agitated, with such kind of motion and
accompanied noise, as if they were in pursuit and quest of their imagined prey
or game.

For Memory, he who denies its being in the Soul of Beast, either believes not,
or has forgot the story of Darius his Horse; or has not seen or observed the
common course of Dogs, and other creatures, in hiding and covering their
acquired food, and upon occasion going as readily or dexterously, as I may say,
to the place, as any man could; or has not been himself a common Master or
Rider of Horses, some of which in a maze of ways and turnings, shall with the
liberty of his Rein, bring his Master to his accustomed home; and indeed it is
strange to see diverse creatures brought from their usual and accustomed place
of residence, after some time of stay by reason of some let and hindrance, to
return again many miles to their old abode; which they could never so readily
do, nor could be effected, as I suppose, without the aid and help of what we
call Memory.

Our chief enquiry will be, whether we shall in any case allow them Reason,
which we have already so appropriated to our selves, that we have differenced
our Nature and Being from theirs in that only notion. Toward the resolution of
which, we must enquire and define what Reason is; now if Reason be only a
conception by speech, whereby we are able to explicate our minds and thoughts,
as some would have it, we may well deny it to all creatures but our selves: but
if it be a discerning faculty of the Soul, by which we judge with any election
or choice, what is or may be good or hurtful to it, or to the body; what is
good, and what is evil; what to embrace, or avoid, we cannot deny it, in some
measure, to be in mere Animals. Whatever distinction is made between Instinct
and Intellect, when the word Reason is taken away from them, and the word Fancy
allowed to supply the place, I do not think it amiss to admire God in them; and
though the best of their faculties quite differ in the extract from ours, yet
they are the work of the same God in a different manner; and wonderful it is,
to see such faculties, as we must needs allow them by some title or other, to
proceed from a corporeal substance, only attenuated and rarefied (as I shall
say anon) and so similar to ours.

They were created with us, for our use and service, and all for God's glory;
and if we made a right use of our own rational faculty, we should neither
sometimes vilify them as we do, nor at other times extol and enlarge their
faculties beyond their due limits and bounds, seeming rather desirous of having
our own understanding admired among our selves, by amplification of theirs,
than making any true state of our different cases, thereby showing our
invention rather than our knowledge.

This we cannot but truly acknowledge, that they (having had no such lapse or
fall as we) work more wisely, regularly and orderly, in reference to the end
they were created, than we; and whoever shall duly look into their manner of
working, and more narrowly observe what kind of cunning, or stratagem some of
them use either in acquiring their food, or else preserving or saving
themselves from dangers, must needs afford them the attribute of Reason, or
somewhat tantamount to it. What subtle ways do some of them use toward the
obtaining their desired prey? what intrigues and fetches (to let pass ordinary
stories) may a man see in a poor imprisoned Fox, how he will sometimes
counterfeit himself dormant, till a prey be within his reach? what ways have
many Fowls to uncase a poor Shellfish? I my self have seen a Crow, not able to
swallow a large Acorn, nor break it with her Bill, leave the Pasture Fields
where she first found it, and mounting with it a considerable height, let it
fall in a Stony ground, as if the very place were chosen out of Reason, and
repeat that action near twenty times, and till I have disturbed her in it. I
have credibly heard, (and once saw it at a Chalk-pit) that a Hare in a course,
has taken directly to a precipice, and upon a sudden stopping at the edge
thereof, has cast down headlong her pursuing Dogs, and that this poor creature
has repeated this action again at other times: And what origin of this cunning
or sagacity can I give, but something like Reason; it being a distinct act, and
not deducible from the common natural instinct of that creature, whose every
days and nights work for the preservation of her self (visible in a Snow) seems
so prudent, that it would puzzle the wisest of us to find out or contrive so
safe ways of artifice.

Well, if we cannot afford them Reason, let us not take from them those
attributes the Scripture has allowed them, of subtilty and wisdom, which in our
selves we esteem but as the effects and fruits of Reason. The Serpent in the
beginning was said to be more subtle than any Beast of the Field; and our
Savior has admonished us, to assume the Serpent's wisdom, with the Dove's
innocence. The Ant is an exceeding wise creature, says Prove. 30.24.
Agur, and to her Solomon sends his Prove. 6.6.
sluggard to School; and some Philosophers have termed that creature (amongst
others) Political. And we are told in other places of Scripture of the Ox, and
the Ass, and the Crane, and the Turtle, and the Swallow, by way of exprobation,
as if those creatures did often exceed us in the foresight and knowledge of
those things which tended toward their own preservation. And surely there is
such a kind of forecast and wisdom in most, if not in all other creatures
besides Man, that I cannot well tell how to appropriate the word Reason to Man
alone; unless we distinguish our selves in the very work of our creation, and
allow our whole Soul to be a celestial durable flame, and Reason to be a
connative inherent light therein, given to guide and direct all the other
faculties, toward the attainment of some ultimate end, or enjoyment of some
future permanent bliss and happiness; and not barely for the preservation of
the visible Body, nor arising or springing merely from any passion of mind, by
the bare inlet of sense. Such a Reason (I may call it Right Reason) as beholds
things at a distance, and weighs future events, and distinguishes us from all
other creatures, as Aesop has distinguished one of his Frogs from the other.
That is, by our Reason we are capable to foresee a possibility of failure of
all things here, and thereby prevent our falling into those gulfs (for the
satisfaction of our present lusts) from whence we cannot after get out, which
no other creature is. Indeed many other creatures besides our selves, from that
natural instinct of self-preservation, (common with us) and fear of
destruction, have had some short flashing light of ratiocination, (if I may so
call it) and by that sudden flash (quickly extinct) elected or chosen the most
likely place, for a present continuing preservation, and upon failure of water
in the Brook, have got down into a Well; but no creature, save Man, ever yet
beheld events at a distance, and so weighed time and place, as beforehand to
take care, upon failure of water in the Well, how to get out again, as Aesop
makes his later Frog to do; which thing indeed, is properly and peculiarly an
act of Right Reason.

SECT. II. Wherein the Soul of man exceeds that of Brutes, and its Immortality
considered and maintained from Scripture.
NOw at present to leave all other creatures acting according to their
abilities, more regularly than our selves; it would not be amiss here humbly to
search into, and behold our own, and see how we act by a distinct and separate
gift, with abilities beyond and exceeding the natural capacities of any other
visible creature. In search of which, it will be needful that we have recourse
to our original frame; and because that is already set down to us (according to
my capacity) beyond the invention, or just exception or correction of the most
subtle opponent, I will search no furthet than the Books of Moses, and behold
the Creation as he has described and delineated it; wherein it is observable,
that after the Creation of Heaven and Earth, and the separation of light from
darkness, and the gathering together of the Waters, and the appearance of dry
Land, when he speaks of the formation of living creatures, it is not expressed
as before, Let there be Light, and Let there be a Firmament, etc. but Genesis 1.24.
Let the Earth bring forth the living creature after his kind, etc. plainly
intimating, that in their composition there was no addition of new Matter or
Spirit added, but only together with their Earthly visible Bodies, a product
Soul of a corporeate substance, attenuated and rarefied, and so not capable of
acting beyond its native original. But when he comes to the formation of Man,
it is said, Verse. 27.
God created him in his own image, and Genesis 2.7.
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and says the Text, Man became a
living Soul. So as there seems to be from thence, not only a gradual, but a
specific difference, between the Soul of man, and that of all other creatures;
for that of other creatures, being immediately made out of the same Matter with
the Body, is no other than a fluid bodily substance, the more lively, subtle
and refined part of the Blood, (called Spirit) quick in motion, and from the
Arteries by the branches of the Carotides carried to the Brain, and from thence
conveyed to the Nerves and Muscles, moves the whole frame and mass of the Body;
and receiving only certain weak impresses from the senses, and of short
continuance, hindered and obstructed of its work and motion, vanishes into the
soft air. But the Soul of man being breathed into him by God, and the main
principle of his life being derived from that infusion, must be consequently of
the like nature with that breath it proceeded from, and so be immaterial and
immortal. And we shall find this difference further confirmed by the same
Authority: For whereas Moses gives no other Life or Spirit different from the
blood to other creatures, but says, Genesis 9.4. Levit. 17.11. Deuteronomy. 12.23.
the blood is their life, (or Soul) and their Soul in the blood; when he speaks
of that of man, he calls it Genesis 9.5.
the blood of their lives, signifying by this variety of phrase, the difference
of the thing, and that in man the blood has rather its motion from the Soul,
than the Soul its origin from the blood. And in the ensuing verse, where he
forbids the shedding man's blood, by a retaliative Law, he adds again the
words used in the Creation, Verse. 6.
For in the image of God made he man: So that the Souls of Brutes only appear,
as the Tongues mentioned in the Acts, as it were of fire; but that of Man, as a
spark of that Eternal Light, real and durable, and as Solomon says, after
Eccles. 12.7*
the dust returns to Earth as it was, the Spirit shall return to God that gave
it.

SECT. III. The Immortality of the Soul of man maintained and illustrated from
its obstruction in its operation.
NOw though this Earthly rarefied Spirit of Brutes, may to sense often outshine
the other, and several other creatures may outstrip some such particular men,
as we call Naturals, in knowledge; that diminishes nothing from, nor renders
the Soul of man to be of a less noble extract than in truth it is, but that the
one still remains Divine, and the other Natural: For although real Fire may by
hid, and by reason of some obstruction, impediment or interposition, dart forth
little or no light to the senses, and an ignis fatuus may show it self, and
appear more lucid and bright to them; yet Fire is no less Fire when covered,
and the nature and quality of them still remains different. The outward
appearance does never infallibly demonstrate the inward excellency of things,
and there may be a change of our common Proverb, and Gold found that glisters
not.

It seems to me rather some Argument of the immortality of man's Soul, that it
sometimes remains so darkly, as it were, enclosed in some one particular trunk
or carcass, without any the least symptom of its being there, more than outward
heat and motion; as well as that in some others, it shows forth its wonderful
capacity, and faculties beyond that of all other creatures: For if it did arise
naturally, or had its production from the flesh, or the more fluid substance of
that flesh, the Blood, as that of Beasts, there never could happen or be such a
disparity, such a distance and disproportion in its effects, as now and then
there appears. The faculties of the Souls of Beasts, wherein they are similar
to those of Man, do not much exceed or outshine one another of the same
species: For although one Horse may be more docible than another, more lively,
quick, or better spirited (as we term it) than another; yet there never was
that, or any other kind of Brute, so brutish (as I may say) but had some
knowledge of his Feeder, and like the Ox and the Ass (none of the wisest
Animals) could know its Owner, and its Master's Crib; none that would not show
some endeavor to nourish and preserve it self, be sensible of what was noxious
and destructive to it self, careful to avoid Fire and Water, or the like, know
its Young (if Female) and love and nourish them, and be somewhat useful in its
kind to man, and other creatures; as if the Souls of Beasts only dwelt in their
native and proper Country, and were at liberty; and ours were here Prisoners in
Chains and Fetters, and sometimes in a Dungeon, waiting for their deliverance.

I knew a man born in a Village near me, living to the age of twenty years,
very heathful, of a good stature, of perfect outward lineaments and features,
endowed with the senses of Hearing and Seeing, of a sage countenance, (if at
any time without motion) and yet never, as I or others could discern, knowing
any one person about him more than another, never making any signs for meat or
drink, though greedily swallowing them when put to his mouth; never could he be
made sensible of the passage of his own ordure, or of Fire or Water, and yet
might be kept at any time from the danger of those Elements, by the
interposition of Stools, or a Line or Cord, and within that circumscribed
Sphere would move all day ridiculously. Certainly if this enclosed Soul had its
being from the Blood, and not the Blood its motion from it, (whatever
Physicians may allege, and however they may guess at some obstructions or
defect in some part of the Brain, and they can but guess at the one, more then
I do at the other, for they can show me nothing in a dissection) it must in
some degree equal that of Brutes, in outward appearance. But seeing there is
such a disproportion in degree of knowledge, as well by comparing the most
stupid Man with the most stupid Animal, as the wisest Man with the wisest
Animal, and Man is found to exceed both ways; that very excess on our parts,
does more demonstrate the immediate work of God in our creation, and somewhat
different from Natures ordinary course, (which though his working too, usually
produces the same effects in all individuals of the same species) and might
prove a Medicine to allay our fears on the one hand, and our spiritual pride on
the other; and show what the Soul of man is capable of, and yet how obscure it
may be here on Earth, till it shall please that Inspirer to receive it into
Glory.

I do not look on knowledge in the Soul of man as a bare remembrance, or that
the mind of man is at present, and while in the Body, merely thereby let and
hindered from the knowledge of all things; yet some such notion may not seem to
arise and be fixed now and then in our conceptions, altogether without the
allowance of Reason: since as often as we attain to any intellectual knowledge
of things, that is from causes whereof we were, or seemed before ignorant, (and
that either from the bare labor and search of our intellective faculty, or
from others information through sense, with its attention) it will seem to us
rather a recovery from some disease, than any new being, or existence in the
Soul; rather a dissipation of some Cloud, than any new Light, and that we knew
as much before, if we had but minded it, as we are wont to say. And besides the
usual native weakness, or blindness in the Soul of man, (which is a thing
almost perpetually laboring and working in some men as it were for a cure) if
it recovers in some sort and measure, yet it is afterward very incident to a
relapse, and subject to an adventitious weakness or blindness, does contract
infirmities, and often lives long in the Body, blinded with a delirium, dotage
or frenzy: whereas in all other creatures, their life terminates quickly after
the beginning of any visible delirium in them, or decay of their native or
natural homebred intellect, as I may call it.

SECT. IV. The Immortality of the Soul of man illustrated from the manner of
its acting in the inferior faculties similar with Brutes.
THe Soul of man does in many things show its different Original and Extract
from that of other creatures; not only by its extent and contraction, but by
its manner of working in those very faculties, wherein they are similar, and
which are proper and necessary both for Man and Beast. For though Beasts see as
we do, hear as we do, taste as we do, etc. and have the like passions of desire
and joy, fear and sorrow, with their concomitants, yet their senses may be
satisfied, and their passions circumscribed, within the same Elements from
whence they have their Original. Ours alone seem to be Prisoners here; and of
us only it is, that Solomon has truly said, Eccles. 1.8.
The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing; and then I
cannot reasonably imagine, the Creator of the Universe so unkind in his special
work of Man, as to make him with a desire inherent in him, so capacious, as
never to be filled or satisfied; and thereby allow a vacuum in the Soul of man,
which we admit not to be in Nature; but must acknowledge and conclude, that
there is a possibility these very inferior faculties of our Souls, may be
allayed and comforted with hopes at present, and satiate hereafter with some
fruition; or else in their working, we were of all creatures most miserable.

For I find no sufficient ground to think or believe, that Man is endowed with
two Souls; the one consisting of motion, sense, passions or affections, and
natural; the other rational, supernatural, and Divine: For though while annexed
to a Body here, it shows its diverse faculties, whereof in another World it may
not make the same use, and some of the senses will need no employment about
such objects as they receive into them here; yet so far forth as they can add
any thing to our happiness hereafter, we may employ them, and they are an
essential part of this Divine, and never-dying Soul; and that in some sense and
manner we may taste and see how good and gracious our Lord and Maker is. We
often term the inferior faculties of the Soul brutish, sensual, and filthy,
not that they merely arise from the flesh, but for the like reason as St. Paul
calls Envy, and Pride, etc. ^al. 5 19
works of the flesh, (which yet are inherent in wicked Spirits, as well as men)
as they are amongst men excited by carnal and sensible objects, and are also
perverted and turned aside by them from others of a more noble kind, which they
are capable of being affected with. But they are still faculties of the Soul,
and, as such, are neither extinguished in the regeneration of it here, nor (as
far as is consistent with the perfection of it, and its state of separation) in
glory hereafter. I think the Soul of man to be an Host or Army, always in its
march for the recovery of its proper Country; in which march, though some of
the Rascal multitude will be laggering behind, and be busy to make provision
for the flesh; yet they are accounted as part of the Army, and triumph with the
rest after Victory, and acquiring their native Soil, or else suffer with the
rest upon an expulsion. Undoubtedly we may love and joy (and I know not why one
kind of Mat. 28.8.
fear may not consist with great joy) if we attain our end, and the mark that
is set before us; and we shall have fear and sorrow, shame and confusion of
face, weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth, which are effects of passions,
if we miss that end. Now because the very restlessness and inconstancy of the
senses and affections here, shows them part of a Soul, that will have being and
continuance after death; I will therefore a little behold man in comparison
with other creatures, and try first how far our very senses and affections
differ from those of Beasts; and after see what more noble kind of faculties
there are in us, which they want.

SECT. V. The Immortality of the Soul of man illustrated from its different
operation in different persons.
WE differ in respect of our senses and passions, not only from all other
creatures, but even from one another, so much, as might make a quaere, whether
they were not hunting after somewhat, that no man could ever yet find out in
this World. There never was yet any one object grateful to any one sense of all
men, nor equally and alike to any two. There are to be found those men, who
would not move out of their Cottage, or be any whit pleased with the sight of
the most glorious Pageantry the World affords. One color seems more beautiful
and pleasing to one man's eye, and another to another; no one prospect is
pleasing to all men; some men will swoun at the sight of particular things.
That which we call Music, is harsh and grating to the ears of some men;
several men are taken most with peculiar Musicks, some had rather hear the
noise of the Cannons, than the voice of the Nightingale; and so e contra. So
that if that which is fabled of Orpheus his Art, had been real, and amongst the
Beasts and Trees, he had had several Men auditors; the first might all have
followed him, but some of the latter would have staid behind. Some men
abominate Sweets as we call them, and are ready to faint at the very smell of
them, and delight in what is generally termed stinking and noisome: The taste in
men is so different, that it has raised a Quot homines, tot palata.
proverb, and that varies in the same man several times in an Age.

Our affections are various, and wandering; that which delights us to day, may
happen to vex us to morrow; what we desire sometimes earnestly, we presently
spurn at like Sub nutrice puella velut cum luderet infans,
Quod cupide petiit mature plena reliquit.

little Children. What pleases at one time, pleases not at another, so as there
is become a To^tuitum est placere.
proverb of pleasing too. Nay this pleasing and delight, were it settled and
fixed in men where it once takes hold, and were there a calculation in this
present Age (besides that Ages differ) of every Worldly thing some particular
men did chiefly affect, or principally delight in; the things would not be
concluded in a short Ode, as I have touched, but a Poet might run himself out
of breath, and be weary before he came to, Me doctarum hederae, etc. Me gelidum
nemus, etc. We have our Pannick fears and terrors, or, as the Text says, Psalm.
53.5.
are afraid where no fear is, and we have flashing joys upon as small visible
grounds; and in short, we are the only ridiculous creature here on Earth.

On the other side, take the Beasts of the Earth, the Fowls of the Air, and the
Fishes of the Sea too, and so far as we can discern, we find them agree in
their desires and delights, with one another of the same species. They have
each their Torva leaena lupum sequitur, lupus ipse capellam,
Florentem liticum sequitur lasciva capella.

particular Food, and rest contented satisfied and pleased therewith, during
their whole course of nature. It Is not with them as with us, what one loves
another loathes. 'Twould be a difficult matter to find an hungry Ox, that would
refuse Hay, either when he is young or old. A man may well ask Job's question,
Job 6.5.
Does the wild Ass bray when he has grass? or loweth the Ox over his fodder?
it is man does only that, or the like, when he has what his fleshly heart can
desire. The Beasts are more constant and content, and their Soul seems settled,
and the inhabitant of its proper Region; they neither fear nor joy in excess;
their choices and elections are still alike; and every Cock, like Aesop's Cock,
will yet to this day prefer the Barley-corn before a Jewel, though amongst men
some prefer the one, and some the other. I speak thus much for this cause only;
that viewing the Soul of man in its very inferior faculties, and finding it so
various and disagreeing, so little at a stay or at rest, so fighting and
combating, so snatching and catching at it knows not what, things neither
useful nor profitable for the body, or the mind; it somewhat convinces me, it is
a thing very capacious, and that there is a place of fullness of joy, or fullness
of sorrow for it hereafter.

SECT. VI. The Immortality of the Soul of man illustrated from the difference
thereof between Parents and Children.
BEsides this, some enquiry might be made into the different qualities of the
Souls of men, beyond those of Beasts, in their ordinary workings; though they
inhabit or actuate Bodies, which have their being from one and the same
production: For if the Soul of man were the ordinary work of Nature only, a
fine rarefied vigorous quality in the Blood, Man receiving his body from his
Parents, by the ordinary course of Nature, as other creatures do, his Soul
would always somewhat resemble that of his Parents too; and Brethren (twins
especially) would resemble one another, in the faculties of their Souls, as
well as it is often seen they do many ways in the Body. But there is generally
found (as between Jacob and Esau) such dissimilitude in the Spirits of
Brethren, and those of Father and Son, Mother and Daughter, as greater is not
to be found between mere strangers in blood; which thing daily experience will
not only demonstrate upon search, but may be readily found in the Histories of
Princes in all Ages. Now the Soul of Beast being the bare product of flesh
only, and necessarily taking its rise and essence from the substance of its
Parents, (if I may so call them, for the word may be proper enough, pario being
only to bring forth, or produce) never varies much, or altogether at any time,
from that of the Parent. We shall never find an absolute Jadish Spirit in a Est
in juvencis, est in equis patrum
Virtus, nec imbellem feroces
Progenerant aquilae columbam.
Hor.
Horse begot from free and well-bred ones, nor a mere Curr from right good
Hounds, no not in one of his senses, the Nose, or smell. But if in any case
they excel, or degenerate from their Stock, it is by degrees, and not per
saltum; which thing per saltum may be found and observed in the Race of men.
And besides this variation of the Souls of men from Birth, there sometimes
happens on the sudden a strange kind of total Metamorphosis of the Soul of man,
so as one would scarce adjudge it the same, but according to Scripture phrase,
that one becomes a new man; and this without any alteration at all of the
Bodies constitution. Now if the Soul of man were not a substance of it self,
capable to be wrought on ab extra, by somewhat, without any introduction by the
senses, then no such alteration (without the Bodies alteration) could be made
but through the senses; and if such alteration were made from sense, through
the Organs of the Body, then upon the shortest obstruction, or letting in of
prior forms again, the Soul would consequently return to its pristine state,
according to that simile of the dog to his vomit, etc. which change, or
alteration in the Soul of man, we see sometimes settled and remaining,
notwithstanding all interposition during a long following life. Thus we find
that men have utterly contemned and hated (without any offense raised from the
thing it self) even with a Psalm. 139.22.
perfect hatred, that which was formerly their delight; which kind of hatred,
never yet happened, or was discernible in Beast.

Now if any man shall ask me, At what time the Soul of man, being a substance
of it self distinct from the Body, enters and possesses the Body? I can make
him a reply with as difficult a question; At what instant does this other
arising product Soul from the Blood, begin its circulation and move? If we know
neither, why should it seem more wonderful and strange to us for the God of
Nature, upon man's conception in the womb, to create and have ordained a
Spirit, to actuate that conception, (which Spirit should continue for ever,
notwithstanding that conception should decay and perish for a time) as well as
that there should arise a Spirit from the Blood, to actuate, move and govern
the Body, for a certain period of time? which time we could never define
certainly, from any course of Nature. And further, that the wise Creator and
Governor of all things, should ordain, that if the first created Spirit to
inhabit a Body (both together being Man) should wander in disobedience from its
Creator; all others, sent and entering into Bodies, product from the Loins of
the first Body, should be infected with the same wandering disease, and have no
cure, but by Grace from the first Creator? But I would not wander too much my
self, nor desire to pry into any of God's secrets, further than he has thought
fit to reveal by his Holy Word; and so shall lay aside my thoughts of the
manner of Man's creation, every way wonderful, (as the Psalm. 139.14.
Psalmist expresses it) as also the consideration of the inferior faculties
for the present, and try and see if there be not some sparks in the Soul of
man, which give such a light, as can by no means naturally arise, from any
thing barely and simply terrestrial.

SECT. VII. The Immortality of the Soul of man illustrated from its
unweariedness in searching, etc. and its reflex acts and operations.
WHy has the Soul of man in all Ages, when it has been at any time withdrawn
from that quick intromission of worldly objects by the senses, and has not been
hindered or obstructed by some mists, fogs, or lets of the flesh, wherein at
present it is confined to work, hunted after, wearied and tired it self, to find
out and comprehend, what it is not able to comprehend? The first sin of man
showed at once, the Soul's error, and its extract and being: For the very
innate desire of some distinguishing knowledge of good from evil, could not
have its motion from sense, nor ever was introduced by sense. There is a kind
of knowledge springs it self from sense, as the Ox knows his owner, etc. but
knowledge by causes, such as it is, is peculiar to Humane nature, and has no
relation to sense: Know indeed, so as to comprehend, we cannot, knowledge in
the abstract being the peculiar of the Divine nature. If we had been capable to
have known good and evil absolutely, the Devil had used no Hyperbole in telling
us, Genesis 3.^.
Ye shall be as Gods. But the very desire of knowledge, even such a knowledge
as the Soul is in some measure capable of, that is by causes, shows a Divine
spark in us, tending toward the cause of all causes; which exercised about
God's revealed will here, might be more clear, but mounting in desire, is apt
to lose its light, and vanish.

Nay not only our desire, but our fear or doubt of somewhat we know not, nor
can perfectly attain to by our search, nor is reasonable fully to demonstrate,
must necessarily have its origin from somewhat more than sense. If we (at
least) fear a future being, and continuance for ever, and future punishment,
that very fear is either native, and natural in our Souls, or else arises in us
from the Tradition of some others; if from Tradition, then sense being the Port
and Inlet, I allow to be Parent too; but yet while we allow it to spring from
Tradition in our selves, we do by consequence allow it to be native in some one
particular person; and he who allows it native in any one, must allow the Soul
to be a substance of it self, and not a resultance from the Body; for thoughts
of infinity could never first spring from a bare temporary finite existence. I
said I would lay aside the inferior faculties of the Soul from my thoughts:
Desire and fear are affections, I agree, common to Brutes; I know they desire
and fear, but I dare say never any one of them, yet, desired knowledge, or
feared any thing to happen after this life; and therefore these (as they are in
us) being, in respect of the object, no such affections as are led by sense, or
work by sense barely, and so not having their essence from the Body; are not to
be accounted amongst the other inferior faculties, common with Brutes. But to
proceed and go a little higher.

Whence arise those accusing or excusing thoughts (mentioned by Romans 2.15.
St. Paul) in the Soul of man, though wholly ignorant of Scripture, and having
no accession of new Light, so much as by Tradition? Certainly it must be some
glimmering of that celestial native spark of Justice implanted in every Humane
Soul. I dare leave it without further pressure, to any quiet, sedate,
reasonable Soul to determine, whether if there had never been any Divine or
Humane Law, written or divulged by Tradition, against Murder, but that that
same fact by the Laws of his native Country were allowed, and approved, if done
against mere Strangers; whether, I say, in case of that man's private imbruing
his hands in his Brother's blood, with no other colorable pretense or
provocation, than some slight worldly gain; he should not, upon the
consideration that we men made not our selves, but that every one was a
fellow-member with other of the visible Universe, and of equal native extract,
expect to find some inward regret, disgust, trouble, or vexation of mind? If he
determine that he thinks he should; the question will be, about that
consideration, how it could arise? For we find that or the like consideration
has risen, without the help of any outward Engine, or sense; nay when all the
Spells imaginable, have been used and applied to allay it. Now no disgust or
trouble, or sorrow was yet perceived in any other The Crocodiles weeping is a
Poetic fiction.
Creature beside Man, upon the destruction of his fellow creature, or Man, the
Sovereign of creatures. And whence is this, but because their Soul is not
extensive beyond its original, nor has any motion but from sense, that is, it
is not capable of any consideration: For consideration, weighing or pondering
of a thing, whether it be good or evil, is a proper act of a reasonable Soul,
distinct from a Body, and is somewhat more than desire of knowledge by causes.
It Is the very exercise of Reason; it is the Soul's waving of its senses for a
time, and summoning its noble powers to trial, which have some little native
ability. This trying, considering, or weighing good from evil, by Reason, the
balance of the Soul, is, I say, the Soul's peculiar act, from which act there
may be very properly (the Hebr. 12.3.
Author to the Hebrews uses the like words) a weariness of the mind; and so
it is distinguished and is different from such acts of the Soul, which Solomon
says are Eccles. 12.12.
a weariness of the flesh. For that kind of study which he respects, viz.
composing, reading, or hearing, are no peculiar acts of the Soul, as withdrawn
from the flesh; but are a bare introduction of somewhat to the Soul, through
the Organs of the flesh, and so are a weariness to it. Whereas the Soul after
reception, and some light of a thing by sense, in considering the good or evil
of it, quite lays aside the senses for a time, and so the mind is peculiarly
affected.

SECT. VIII. The Immortality of man's Soul considered, from things peculiar to
Man, as weeping, laughter, speech; with some conclusion against Atheism.
THe Soul of man does not only show it self, and its original, by the aforesaid
manner of withdrawing it self, or as it were by separation from the Body, to be
above the capacity of a Soul extracted or springing from the flesh; but even by
peculiar actions and motions, through bodily Organs, which a bare earthly, or
fleshly Soul does not. There are three things generally held and esteemed
proper and peculiar to Humane Nature, and no ways incident to any other living
creature whatsoever, and those are, Tears or weeping, Laughter, and Speech; in
each of which, or from each of which, may seem to appear somewhat more in Man,
than a product Soul part of the Body, or extracted or raised from the Body,
though never so curiously or admirably framed. I do not allege each of them
apart, as any infallible demonstration of a Spirit, distinct and separable from
the Body; yet coupled and joined together, they become of some seeming weight
and strength to me, to confirm my opinion.

It does not seem much wonderful at any time, to behold a distillation from the
Eyes; that thing is to be found in Beast, as well as Man, not only from a
disease, or some distemper in the Blood, but upon every offensive touch of the
Eye; yet when neither of these are present, or can be alleged for a cause, to
have the Body as it were melted on the sudden, and send forth its streams
through that unusual channel, makes it seem to me no less than the quick and
violent agitation of some Divine flame, thawing all the vital parts, and
drawing the moisture through the chief and clearest Organ of the body, the Eye;
and not to be caused by any thing, which is part of it self.

I do agree that every living Soul, whether arising from the Body, or by a
greater Divine gift infused into, or sent to actuate a Body, has equally in
either, some influence upon the visible Body, and according as the affections
with the imagination are moved, works visible effects therein; and that Man
and Beast, such as have their parts similar, may and do equally tremble for
fear, and the like. But yet as to this kind of motion, or ecstasy mentioned,
that is, weeping, (for I know not how to term that, or laughter either, a
passion, but both strange attendants or consequents of some kind of passions) I
cannot adjudge it to arise from the acceptance of a bare representation of an
offensive object through sense, but by some inward distinct conception of a
Soul, as of it self; though at the same time agitated or rouzed by passion. For
if it were from the first barely, then the same effect could never proceed from
any pleasing object; the contrary whereof we find, and men to weep as well upon
the predominancy of joy in the Soul, as sorrow; nay weeping is a concomitant
often of a weak anger, which not able otherwise to satiate or satisfy it self,
has this help to vanish and resolve into tears, as may be observed in Women and
Children.

Now tears being the attendant (the effect, as may seem to some) of clean
contrary passions, such as joy and sorrow are, they cannot really be the
proper, and bare effect of any passion; nor the sole work of any such Spirit,
as is no other than the refined and most curious part of the Blood: For that
were able to cause only different effects, upon different occasions or
representations, and still the same effect upon the same occasion, so far forth
as we are able to look into the ordinary works of Nature. Indeed salt,
brackish, and crystal tears, flowing in that abundance, as at some time is to
be seen, would puzzle the most learned Physician, as well as a Poet, to allege
a right fountain, as well as a cause, and Mirandum est unde ille oculis
suffecerit humor.
wonder in searching after the original Springhead of them in the Body.

If I should allege or affirm Laughter to be some denotation, or demonstration
of a pure intellectual Spirit, separable from a Body, and no ways arising from
any other single or primary cause then such; I hope I should not incur the
censure, or become the subject of laughter to all men, though I might to some.
By Laughter I do not mean a bare dilatation or contraction of the mouth or
lips, and other parts of the face; such a kind of grinning as is incident to
Apes, and no less to Dogs, and such as in the latter we term fawning; a kind of
habit, or faculty, some men take up for peculiar purposes, as seeming pleased
with others actions, and sensible of some such involuntary motion, voluntarily
counterfeit one; nor yet any Perpetuo risu, pulmonem agitare solebat Democritus.
agitation of the lungs, with expulsion of breath, and other odd motions of the
Body in others, whereby perhaps they would seem to please themselves: But I
mean an absolute, involuntary motion, upon some sudden slight pleasing touch of
the Spirits, by some bare conception in the intellect, different in notion from
what is represented by the senses.

It is a thing that differs much from true joy, and is often extorted from men
in their greatest griefs, and sometimes tortures of Body; as is storied of that
Villain, who murdered the Prince of Orange, that in the midst of his pains,
and while he was tormented with burning Pincers for a confession, laughed at
the fall of a number of Spectators from a Scaffold. It is one of the first
unnecessary (as I may say) motions in Infants; it is incident to wise men, as
well as foolish, and old, as well as young, though not in the same measure or
degree; and is, and happens sometimes, as well sleeping as waking.

Now I do take it to arise properly and peculiarly from the intellect's judging
on the sudden (though that Judgment is not always aright) of somewhat of folly,
lapse, or oversight, in a rational creature; or some ill, or shrewd turn
happening thereupon, which from prudence might have been prevented, and have
been done or acted otherwise; and I do not judge it to arise (unless we will
allow something of voluntariness in it, after the manner I spoke before) upon
any sight, or action proceeding from an irrational or brute creature. Therefore
I do think, that I my self should not with Crassus the Grandfather of Marcus,
that wealthy Roman, (as is so storied of him, and that he never laughed but
that once) have laughed at the beholding an Ass eating of Thistles; (I think
the Beast does it with a great deal of Art, to save the pricking of his mouth)
but had I seen a man smelling on a Thistle, to gratify that sense, and thereby
in pricking his Nose, much more offended another, I do think I should have
laughed.

Now though laughter be a thing more incident to the Fool, than the Wise, whose
clearer Judgment is best able to correct its rise; yet it proceeds from
apprehension of the intellect, ready to judge at all turns, and quickest often,
in that notion, when weakest; and may denote at once, some kind of inherent
wisdom, together with folly or frenzy in man; that we, being created to act
most regularly and prudently, from a disturbed intellect, become often the most
giddily erring, and foolishest of creatures; so as if Solomon said of mirth,
Eccles 2 2.
what does it? he might well say of laughter, It is mad.

As for Speech, which is a power or ability the Soul has, so to move the Tongue
and other Organs of the Body, that from thence shall result such a modulation
of the Air, that each rational Soul from an articulate voice, might apprehend
others meaning and intent. This formation of words, made to be the Idea of the
mind, appears not, nor could ever break out, from the earthly extracted Soul of
other creatures: not that there is any absolute defect in their Organs, (for
then no other Spirit could frame an articulate voice by them, and we must deny
the Devil's speaking in the Serpent, and some other Spirit for a time in St.
Peter (2 Pet 2.16.) calls it man's voice, ( the dumb Ass, speaking with man's
voice, forbad the madness of the Prophet) as if an articulate voice were man's
peculiar here on Earth.
Balaam's Beast) for they have curious and admirable Notes, and some of them
have framed as plain a (...), (with many other words) as man can utter; which
has been a resultance from the ear, when they were taught, but no Index of the
mind. This gift and power of Speech, I say, is the chief outward livery, badge
or cognizance of the Soul, by which Mankind is distinguished from, and has the
advantage of all other creatures. Brutes do indeed fellow together, and
apprehend, and (if I may so say) understand one another by signs and
inarticulate voices. And so we find Trade and Commerce maintained betwixt us
and the Indians, and that Mutes do act and understand by signs to admiration.
But whatever faculty is in the Beasts, or whatever necessity may have taught
and brought Men to, (that could not converse by words) yet all the dumb signs
in the World, though managed to the best advantage, can never equal the benefit
we enjoy by Speech, when we can thereby communicate our thoughts, and maintain
converse with freedom, ease, and pleasure. This indeed is the Soul and life of
Society, and by the means of which we do as much exceed the other creatures in
the happiness of it, as in the principle that guides it, which is our Reason.

We often abuse this Heavenly gift, (as other noble faculties of our Soul) and
not only say in our hearts, (that is, silently by our actions) but some of us
in our tongues, and by our Pens, That there is no such thing as an Immortal
Soul in man, but it is a Chimaera first forged in some melancholic brain, and
by consequence that there is no God. For I must agree that if it can be made
out, that the World is a fortuitous juggling of Atoms, and our Souls are only a
natural fine product from thence, and to vanish again with our Bodies; Nature,
as we call it, and term it, is no such revengeful Deity, that we need fear the
disobeying of her private dictates, but may safely challenge our tongues for
our own, and say, Who is Lord over them? But surely we must want sense, to let
in so many various works of Nature into our Souls view, or any thing of reason
to consider or judge of them after they are let in, or else we should be
convinced from the wise disposition thereof, that there is somewhat more than
chance, and that Nature it self (which is but a Law made by God to work by) has
dependence upon some infinite eternal wise Being, (call it some men what they
please) which we call God. And for our Souls immortality, the seeds thereof
sown in our hearts, and arising now and then in every one, into doubts and
fears, if not more, must be strangely trampled on by some evil one, who is
willing to let self-valuation in man grow as rank as may be in any case, but
this of the Souls immortality, when all besides it is vanity. Otherwise man of
himself would never so undervalue his own Original, and instead of revering
himself (an excellent old precept of the Philosopher) as if there were some
petty Deity within him, unman himself, become in a wrong sense poor in Spirit,
(for so we may well think that Spirit is, which has its rise and essence from
the flesh only) sully the Word of God with his own, and falsely conclude in
generalities from particulars, that Eccles. 3.19, 20.
what befalls man, befalls beasts; as the one dies, so dies the other;
that they have all one breath, and that man has no pre-eminence above a beast:
All go to one place, all are of the dust, and all turn to dust again. And some
have been so afraid of living hereafter, and so desirous surely of companions
to die with them like Beasts, that in their Writings and Arguments for their
vanishing or vanity, I have seen the words of the following verse misplaccd for
their purpose, and instead of, Verse. 21.
Who knows the Spirit of man that goes upward, and the Spirit of beast that
goes downward to the Earth? by changing that which was an affirmation of the
place whither the Spirit goes, (though an interrogation of the knowledge of
the Spirit what it is, which I say indeed is difficult) into an interrogation,
they have set it down thus, Who knows that the Spirit of man goes upward?
etc. as if (allowing these words for Apocrypha, Wisd. 2.23.
God created man to be immortal, and made him to be an image of his own
Eternity) the wise man in the following chapter, where he expressly says,
Eccles. 12.7.
Then shall the dust return to the earth* as it was, and the Spirit shall
return unto God who gave it, had quite forgot what he said before; whose
meaning there in comparing Man and Beast together, and concluding a like end to
both, no sober man ever thought to extend further than their Bodies: For he
begins, Chap. 3.2.
There is a time to be born, and a time to die; our Bodies are born as theirs,
are nourished as theirs, feel pain like theirs, and die and rot as theirs; and
so shall continue no doubt, till it shall please God at the last day to raise
them again in incorruption: And therefore all provision for the flesh to fulfill
the lusts thereof, whether in reference to a man's self, or to his posterity,
that wise man found and held to be vanity, and acknowledges it, in his Eccles.
2.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
great works and buildings, in his Vineyards, Gardens and Orchards, in his
variety of Trees and Plants, in his Pools of Water, in his Villains and Cattle,
in his Riches and Power, etc. And upon his review, as well as at first sight,
confirming our Saviors question, Mat. 16.26.
What is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole World, etc. he agrees there
was no profit Eccles. 1.3. and 2.11.
under the Sun of his labor; which term or words under the Sun, he often uses
Eccles 2.17, 18, 22. and cap. 3.16. cap. 4.3, 7, and 15
after, and gives his reason; besides the vexation of Spirit to our selves
while we live here, we know not whether we shall leave our labor to Eccles.
2.19.
a wise man, or a fool. But if he had had any thoughts of our utter extinction
after death, he would not immediately in the following verse, after he had
proposed the question, Who knows the Spirit of a man that goes upward? etc.
have said, Chap. 3.22.
Who shall bring man to see, what shall be after him? which supposes an
existence somewhere; nor have concluded his Book with the fear of God and
keeping his Commandments, as the whole duty and proper labor of man, telling
us, God shall bring every work into judgment, whether good or evil, if all were
to be finished under the Sun. But these men only, at present are about to
ratify and make good, the only thing that Solomon found, (which indeed he
affirms with an Ecce, as nothing else so sure) Chap. 7.29.
That God had made man upright, but they had sought out many inventions.

Were there not a possibility of that which seems a contradiction, viz. that a
man may sometimes (as we say) cum ratione insanire, none would believe that a
man should strive to argue, and reason himself into nothing; and yet this we
find to proceed from (otherwise) very rational men, and who would be angry at
peculiar seasons, if we should compare them to the Beast that perish; and
therefore let us beg of them, and humbly entreat them to become fools with us,
and to consider and think, whether so much as Desire of the remembrance and
good opinion of others, can be fixed and inherent in a material earthly
substance, necessarily and certainly to vanish again into its natural extract;
or that such a substance can covet something future, and as it were contrary to
its own annihilation, and yet become certainly annihilate. This Desire I
suppose all men will agree to be no ways incident to Beasts; and therefore I
beseech men for God's sake, that if at any time there arise a desire in them,
or they wish, or would that others should speak well of them rather than evil,
after their death; then, at that time, they would seriously consider, whether
those motions are not from some Spirit, to continue a Spirit, after it leaves
its earthly habitation, rather than from an earthly Spirit, a Vapor, which
cannot act or imagine, or desire, or fear things beyond its continuance: For if
the desire or fear of Posthume Glory, or Posthume shame or punishment, be
congenial and connatural to all noble minds; it is a pregnant, and, I think,
undeniable hint of their (possible at least) sempiternal existence after death.

Now a probability of our Souls being and existence, and a possibility of its
Eternal being after death, being as much as native reason can suggest, or
inform any man, (for I do not think that any man from reason ever thought
himself to be a God, and of Eternal existence a part ante, as men say, but had
a beginning, and by consequence if he had a beginning, his duration, support
and conservation, must necessarily depend on the same Eternal power that gave
it beginning, and that from the withdrawing that conserving power, all things
created have an end;) this probability and possibility from reason, methinks
should create some prudence and watchfulness in man, and cause him (whenever
he feels some inbred light glowing in him, and yet after it has stirred, burns
so dimly in him, that he knows not well which way to move) to implore the aid
of the Author of our own and all other beings; and feeling something native, to
seek after somewhat of Tradition too, to help it. And that if there may be
collected from reason, some such thing in man, as a capacity of Eternal life,
to make a quaere like him in the Gospel, what shall I do to know it, and
inherit it, that is, enjoy it, or live it with joy; for fear at least otherwise
we may so live, as that we would desire to die, and be extinct; and find cause,
when nothing will help us, to call on inanimate creatures, even the Hills to
cover us from his presence, with whom there might have been fullness of joy.

All men living agree the Creator of the Universe to be good and gracious, and
loving to his creatures; therefore let us search into that, which the whole
Christian World have always acknowledged to have been his Word; and if we find
not from thence assurance of Eternal life, and by his Grace comfort from it,
conclude it is not to be found, but not conclude before we have sought.

PART II.
SECT. I. Of the several faculties or operations of the Soul, and therein first
of Involuntary and Voluntary motion.
I Am now about to take the best view I can, or my Soul is capable to do, of
its several faculties or operations, distinct and apart one from the other, and
which together working in the Body, we call the Soul of man. What I have
elsewhere said, is an intricate maze, full of little windings and turnings, not
to be traced out, or fully discovered to it self. I may here further say, it is
a brightness issued or darted from that glorious light; so shining, as somewhat
to be seen and admired, not at present wholly comprehended. I never thought nor
hoped to set down all that it is, but only somewhat that it is; we are not able
to dissect the very case of it, so as to find out the hundredth entry or
passage for this Soul into the Body, whereby that -- Totusque infusa per artus
Men's agitat molem, and toto se corpore miscet.

Lump is moved: Some little kind of knowledge or notice we have got of its
larger Rooms, but for its smaller Inlets, they have puzzled the most curious
and quickest sight in the search; and if my information be not false, the most
learned have acknowledged and confessed, that upon the narrowest scrutiny they
could possibly make in a dissection, they could never yet find out, by which
ways or means Milk was made, or conveyed from other parts of the Body to the
Paps or Dugs. The Soul must needs be of a more subtle nature than the Blood,
from which some would have it to arise in Man as well as Beast; and if that
were granted, we could scarce discover all the motions of the one, without a
perfect knowledge of the other; which it seems is yet wanting, and I am not
desirous to lose my self in finding. All that I desire to find, is the cause
and occasion of the Souls billows, rage, and tempestuousness, and what helps
there may be toward the allaying them; to see whether our madness and folly,
does not with the raging of the Sea, necessarily require one and the same
stiller and quieter.

But from my search into the Soul, I am not altogether ignorant, that first,
from it, there is a motion which we term for distinction sake, Involuntary
motion, Involuntary motion.
continuing without interruption during the whole time of the Souls residence
with the Body; as is the course or circulation of the Blood, the pulse,
breathing, concoction, nutrition, excretion, etc. And also another kind of
motion, not always, but admitting intermission, and this arising from an
introduction by some sense, viz. the pressure of an external object, upon each
peculiar Organ of the Body proper; and by the mediation of Nerves or Fibers,
conveyed inward to the chief domicils of the Soul, (from whence in its primary
motion, we are said to see, hear, feel, taste, or smell) and so receives some
counterpressure or resistance, by stirring some Limb, and making some noise:
which because seeming to depend upon some precedent fancy in our mind, and
capable of intermission, we call Voluntary motion. Voluntary motion.


These and the like motions of the Soul, are not the things I hunt after, nor
trouble my self to decipher, since they may be quicker or slower, without any
apparent disease, or combustion in the Soul of man. But in short, the
Affections, the Understanding, and the Will, (together with the result from
some of them, the thing we call Conscience) are those actions of the Soul, I
would at present in order enumerate, be acquainted with, and make legible to my
self.

SECT. II. Of the Affections of the Soul.
AFfections we commonly call them, some Affects, some Passions; they are many
and various in the Soul of man, and there is little need of enumerating them;
they are too obvious upon several occasions in the Souls march here, and they
are a Troop, without a wise conduct, readier for mutiny, than for service: And
though what we term sometimes Affections, seem not properly so, but are rather
propensions or habits, budding forth from Affections, and taken for Affections;
we will at present muster some of them together, under the notion of
Affections, Affections enumerated.
and call them by name, Desire, Joy, Fear, Grief, Sorrow, Love, Anger, Hatred,
Malice, Enmity, Strife, Debate, Frowardness, Peevishness, Curiosity,
Indignation, Revenge, Cruelty, Lust, Luxury, Jealousy, Pride, Boasting,
Vainglory, Ambition, Envy, Emulation, Detraction, Contempt, Impudence,
Admiration, Covetousness, Miserableness, Parsimony, Care, Doubt, Desperation,
Lamentation, Amazement, Pensiveness, Sadness, Distrust, Anxiety, Shame, and
many others. Now herein we often give several names, to one and the same
Affection, according to its degree in working, or the subject matter upon
which, or from which it works. We have Pusillanimity, Timorousness,
Dastardliness, Cowardliness, Fear, Amazement, Dread, and Terror, as well as
the Latins have metus, formido, timor, pavor, tremor, terror, horror,
exanimatio; and we have Love, Fondness, and Lust, as well as they have amor,
dilectio, libido; and we have Anger, Wrath, Fury, as well as they have ira,
excandescentia, furor; and we have Sorrow, Grief, Pensiveness, Mourning, as
well as they have dolor, moeror, aerumna, luctus; Tull. Tusc. Quaest.
the first of which last, to wit, dolor, when they come to define, they call it
aegritudo crucians, the second aegritudo flebilis, the third aegritudo
laboriosa, and the fourth aegritudo ex ejus, qui carus fuerit, interitu acerbo;
and all is but Sorrow. Now besides that some of the aforementioned words
denominating our passions, may be taken in a good sense, as Love, Fear, Sorrow,
Joy, Indignation, Care, etc. so may we reckon up and adorn the Affections on
the contrary part, with as many commendable and well-sounding words, which are
as proper and peculiar for them as the other; as Charity, Peace, Gentleness,
Calmness, Meekness, Purity, Benevolence, Alacrity, Cheerfulness, Constancy,
Courage, Valor, Pity, Compassion, Tenderness, Humility, Caution, Frugality,
Liberality, Mercy, Modesty, Sobriety, Content, Comfort, etc. And I think our so
accounted Divine and Moral Virtues, are no more than well tuned Affections (or
germins springing from them) by native Reason, and the superaddition of Grace:
And where either the one or the other is wanting, the result from them is very
harsh and grating, and of an evil sound. I will for instance pick one out of
the former sort, of a sound most abominated and detested* the term we fix upon
the Devil, as a thing inherent, most proper and peculiar in him, and that is
Envy. The word it self is of no original evil signification; the Latin
expresses it best, (from whence we derive ours) invidia is from in videre, to
pry or look into the estate, being, or condition of another creature: Now if
from this looking into, we conclude him happy, and are pleased with it, that is
Joy, and I think a good Joy of the mind; if from our insight we conclude him
unhappy and miserable, and we are any whit displeased or troubled at it, that
is Pity or Compassion; and I think that good too, and a true fruit of Love and
Charity, which Tree of Love flourishes the better, by that dropping or
excrescence from it. But if we either sorrow at the apprehension of another's
happiness, (which effect has with us appropriated the word Envy to it self) or
rejoice at the apprehension of his unhappiness, which we may call malum mentis
gaudium, then is our affection wrong-tuned and evil; yet all terminates in joy
or sorrow; and sorrow is indeed but a privation of joy, and those other many
words are Coins made by us, to express our selves in. For Hatred, Malice, or
the like, I cannot apprehend there is any such thing as either in Nature, that
is, subsisting by it self, separate and diverse from other passions; that which
we call Malice or Hatred, is but an evil desire, or wish, tending to the
weakening or depressing, or removing that object, which we imagine obstructs the
joy or comfort we would have, or should arise from the excessive evil Love of
our selves, or others. And for Anger, which always has for his object to work
upon, something or other offensive, it is defined but ulciscendi libido, a
desire of revenge; and according to the height of that act, (unless where it
lights on inanimate things, and so accounted Folly) it may be termed
Hard-heartedness, Oppression, Cruelty, or the like.

SECT. III. Of the rise of the Affections.
COncerning the rise of our passions or affections, my thoughts and
conjectures, at present, are these: That there naturally is, in every thing and
every creature, but especially out of its place, some secret hidden appetite,
desire, endeavor, propension, proclivity, inclination, tendence or motion,
called which you will, to some place of rest, quiet, or good, but often
receives lets or impediments in that its tendence. And the Soul of man being an
emanation from a Divine Essence, and God (as I may say) being the Center to
which naturally it tends, until it come to that beatifick vision, it cannot be
at rest. Now a rational Soul naturally working by Love, and Joy, in its
fruition, for want of that fruition, necessarily and by consequence Desires and
Sorrows; so as I do think Love and Joy, Desire and Sorrow, to be of the Essence
of a Soul, wholly disjoined from a Body, and rational acts of it, not properly
passions; but when the Soul works in that manner through a Body, then are they
called passions.

Now the Soul conjoined to a Body, may have yet notwithstanding some love
purely intellectual and rational, by some reflection, and drawing in some
amiableness as through the imagination, though it cannot fully, by the
imagination, reach the proper object of love to it self; and this may be upon
some consideration (a proper and peculiar act of an Humane Soul, as I have
said) of some infinite power, goodness, and wisdom, in the creation and
preservation of the Universe, of which it is a minute particle. And certainly
the Soul of man may be discerned now and then, to act in the Body, as if it
were out of the Body, summoning its powers, and drawing its forces together,
from some tending affection; as if it were about to take its flight, ravish it
self from the Body, lay aside its senses for a time, and have no manner of
commerce with them, but did see with other eyes, and seem to it self for a
while as disjoined from a Body. Which kind of motion has undoubtedly been selt
(as I may say) and observed by some, in a pleasant healthful state, and more
especially after waking from quiet rest. These gracious kind of prospects of
the Soul, are cause sufficient to make any man cry out with St. Paul, cupio
dissolvi, etc. but these kind of ecstasies are short and rare, and the Soul is
straightways forced to a return, and act again as usually, in and through a
Body.

Now were it granted that no affection can move, but from the imagination, and
that sense is the general Port and entrance into the imagination, (which thing
at present I cannot grant, but believe the imagination may receive some stroke
from that thing which I call a pure intellectual rational love, of which I
shall have fitter occasion to speak, when I shall enquire which of the
faculties of the Soul may seem primary in operation) yet I think even native
reason in some men, is able so to throw a Vail over the senses, and frame the
imagination, that there may be conceived in the imagination some more glorious
and amiable thing, than it can well conceive; and from that conception it shall
have readily attending it a sensitive love, as we call it, that is, a motion of
the heart from some Nerves or Tendons, at least a fixation of the heart, not to
move too extravagantly* but be readily obedient to the dictates of reason; and
I see no ground why we should with reason hope, to quite discard them from its
obedience, or have our passions and affections clean rooted up; lest by
avoiding that, which one kind of Philosopher resembled to the Itch, that is, be
always desiring and joying, loving and fearing, etc. we do light upon a kind of
felicity, which another Philosopher resembled to the felicity of a Stock or
Stone. I would not indeed willingly grieve, but I had rather sorrow, than never
joy, and the one can never be inherent without the other, either rationatively
or sensitively. Reason, I say, has some ability and power yet left since our
fall, not only to correct and reduce the imagination, but to direct and point
it, to seek after somewhat; so that if all men should deny a pure rational
love, they may grant there may be a good sensitive love. It Is true, the
imagination from sense shows us no living creature better than our selves, and
we are apt to see through it, as in a false glass, some amiableness in our
selves, and so we become lovers of our selves more than lovers of God; yet that
little strength of reason, does sometimes hinder and stop the imagination from
presenting that false glass, stays the affections from looking too much into
it, wins the imagination to take part with it self for a while, in conceiving
our vileness, and then by consequence forces it to represent to the affections
some amiableness in that being, from whence all other things have their being,
and without which we cease to be any thing; so as about some amiable good, do
the affections always move, if they move.

From one of these two Mirrors, I say, do I think is the rise of the
affections, quatenus working in a Body; the one of these Mirrors is clear yet
false, and only of the imaginations framing from sense; the other is dark and
cloudy, (unless amended by special grace) but true, and of reasons correcting.
The root of each Tree of affections (whether bad or good) springing from hence,
is Love. Neither can I upon my review, find cause to alter my opinion in my
Treatise of comfort against loss of Children, but do think that some innate
faculty of love, is the primary mover in the affections; and thus I think it
may sprout up, and bring forth Trees of diverse colored branches.

If we look in that false glass mentioned, and by reflection have a good opinion
of our selves, (which is from a love of our selves) there shoots out a branch,
called Pride, or in short that is Pride. If we become mounted in thoughts to
exceed others, that is Ambition; if we see some cause, as we think, that others
should have a good opinion of us, that is Vainglory; if from this sight we are
troubled that any other should seem to exceed us, and withal there be an
endeavor in us to exceed them, that is Emulation; but if it be only to
supplant or hinder them, that is Envy. If we espy any opposition in another,
and behold that person as mean, and not able to hurt us, that is Contempt,
which is a kind of contumacy or immobility of the heart; but if otherwise we
discern an ability to hurt, it is Frowardness, Impatience, Fretting, Anger,
Hatred, Malice, or Revenge, according to the nature of the Soil. And here
certainly Love must be agreed to be the root, and to give being on either side.
There is no man ever opposes, or does wrong for the wrongs sake; it is to
purchase to himself profit, pleasure or repute, and that is from the love of
himself; and therefore says Bacon wittily, If a man do me wrong, why should I
be angry with him for loving himself, better than me? But to go on; If we look
after, or espy ways or means to adorn, beautify, and sustain our beloved
selves, be it by Money, Lands or Goods, that is Covetousness; if we espy a
failure in others of love mutual and reciprocal to our beloved selves, where
it is expected, that is Jealousy; if we apprehend future danger or loss, it is
Fear; if present, Heaviness, Sadness, Sorrow; if we espy any probable way or
means of our acquiring, or adding to our acquisitions, Hope, etc. And after
this manner might I reckon the springing or growth of all evil affections
whatsoever.

On the other side, if that true but dim glass be at any time presented, or set
before us, and we receive any distant sight of an excellency and goodness in
the Creator, and continual preserver of the Universe, our Love a little moves
another way, and raises a Tree of other manner of affections: If we behold in
that, his Power, his Justice, or his Love, there arises Fear; if his Mercy,
then Hope, Joy, Comfort: If we apprehend him a Protector against all injury,
Courage, Trust, and Fortitude; if a Revenger of wrong, Patience: If we espy his
providence and care, there arises Contentedness; if we discern our own
inability, Humility; if our own evil dealings to others, Meekness; if our
failings and errors, Trouble, Grief, and Sorrow; if affliction fallen on our
Brethren, Pity and Compassion; and the like. And were my opinion asked of the
ground and cause of the most Heroic, worthy, or pious particular action ever
done in the World, I for my part should determine it in short, to be the
parties love to God or himself; for if it be not the one that has made a man
die willingly for his Country, (as the phrase goes) I am sure it is the other;
if not Charity, some desire of a perpetual lasting Fame of his memory, which is
a love to, and of himself.

Now whatever men pretend, there neither is, nor was, nor will be any created
Soul within a Body, wholly exempt from any one passion or affection whatsoever.
And though some affections seem very contrary, so as not to subsist together at
least in any height, or excess, (and therefore it was not without some wonder
observed of Nero, if I remember aright, that he who singly beheld his Cruelty,
would believe he had no Lust; and he who beheld his Lust apart, would believe
he had nothing of Cruelty in him) yet they can, and do subsist together: And
though some men may take their denomination from some one faculty or affection,
chiefly and most commonly predominant; as for instance, it may be said Moses
was a meek man, Nebuchadnezzar a proud man, Jonathan a loving man, Nabal a
churlish man, Iehu a furious man, Jonah a pettish angry man, Jeremy a sorrowful
man, Job a patient man, and David a valiant man; yet for Moses the first,
besides what some may collect from his slaying of the Egyptian, we find
sometimes Number. 16.15.
he was very wroth; and for David the last, we find most kind of passions in
him, at the full height and growth. And surely every living man may rightly cry
out upon occasion to another, in the language of Barnabas and Paul, Acts 14.15.
I am a man of like passions with you: For it is but want of prospect from the
imagination, (or otherwise God's grace) that any one affect or passion is
silent and lurking, and shows not forth it self in man. Passions are not only
accidental, but inherent, as David himself seems to hold, when he says, Psalm.
58.3.
The ungodly are froward from their mothers womb: And which our Savior when in
the flesh, was not exempted from; for though passion were in his power, I do
not think those expressed, to be only seeming ones, but real effects; Mark 3.5.
He looked on the Jews, being grieved for the hardness of their hearts; -- 5.19.
He had compassion; -- 14.33, 34.
He began to be sore amazed and very heavy, and his Soul exceeding sorrowful;
-- 8.12
He sighed deeply in Spirit, which is an effect of sorrow; he John 11.35.
wept for Lazarus, and over Luke 19.41.
Jerusalem; and he commends passions, arising from a right spring and head, to
us in his Sermon on the Mount, and pronounces a blessing Mat 5.4.
on them that mourn; and therefore Humane Nature (however it may imprison and
confine them) must not think to expel or banish them.

What part of the Body is the chief seat or receptacle of the affections, has
been agreed by most men; and doubtless they rightly approve the heart to be
their most frequented Cell, and I am of that opinion; but yet there is some
doubt left for enquiry, whether some kind of passions do not principally move
elsewhere, as Frowardness and Peevishness in the Spleen and Stomach, (and we
use the word Stomach often for that motion, though Solomon indeed apply it to
the heart, and says a Prove. 17.20.
froward heart) Anger in the Liver, etc. The Scripture mentions bowels of
compassion, and yerning of the bowels; and whoever has been a Father, has
sometimes I suppose sensibly found a stroke deeper than his heart, and a
heaviness that has immediately gone down to the very bottom of the belly. This
is certain, that many passions are in an instant visible in all parts of the
Body, as Fear in all the outward parts, Anger in the face, etc. and Solomon
mentions a Prove. 6.17.
proud look, as well as a Prove. 21.4.
proud heart.

But to leave all the Affections for a while, let us make some enquiry about
their general supposed Father, from whence they are said to have their being
and original, viz. the Imagination, a faculty of the Intellect more nobly
seated; and define and describe that.

SECT. IV. Of the Imagination.
THe Imagination I do take to be, Imagination defined.
A strange admirable, though roving faculty of the Soul, more peculiarly
situate in the Brain, always working, sometimes, as it were, vainly working of
it self; but more properly, the purveyor or hunter of objects for the
affections, sometimes set on work by them, controuled or recalled by them, and
sometimes by Reason; sometimes obeying one or both, and sometimes neither;
sometimes inciting and enticing the affections, and leading them away captive
without regard of Reason, and sometimes won to take part with Reason against
the affections.

Now according to its manner of working, do I think, there are several names
bestowed on it, or titles appropriated to it. When it is eagerly set on work, or
working to find something, Invention; when it has it, and brings it forth to
the affections or reason, Conception; when it suddenly turns about on things
past, for the introduction thereof into memory, Reflection; when it suddenly
takes in an object, whereabout reason at hand is somewhat consulted,
Apprehension; when it goes on methodically or rovingly without interruption,
Cogitation; when reason and the affections seem most distant from it, or it
from them, Fancy, or Phantasm. It is all and every one of these, and we often
call it the one, or the other; but because there is always framed from it, some
image of things from Soul, I rather treat of it in general, under the notion
and title of Imagination.

Well, I have defined the Imagination to be not only a roving unstable faculty
in its working, but always working; yet surely that may receive some little
exception. Some indeed have defined man to be substantia cogitans, and have
thus argued themselves into manhood, cogito, ergo sum; as if that were the very
essence of a man. It does indeed work, when all other faculties are, or at
least seem, still and quiet; the Affections, the Reason, and the Will too. It
works in sleeping, Lethargick or Apoplectick persons, and for ought I know or
can conjecture to the contrary, it may move in an Infant in its Mothers womb,
though the impress it then makes is so weak, that nothing thereof remains. But
in all these there is a motion of the Blood, and a pulse; and that helps their
sum. Now with submission, I do think, a man may be said to be a living
creature, and be for a time, without any cogitation at all; and that in case of
an absolute Syncope or swoun, when there is a total cessation of the hearts
motion for a while. And men of perfect intellect, who have suffered under that
distemper, or obstruction, have observed presently after, that the most quiet
sleep was not like it, and thought then, that they thought not at all during
that space; which is an equal argument to me, first, that the life or Soul, not
moving the Blood, and yet existent in the Body, is separable from the Body, and
Eternal; next, that the Blood in man, is not the life of man, as it is of other
creatures; for if it were, then upon a total cessation of its motion, would the
Spirit vanish, as it docs in every other creature upon a cessation. For this
kind of distemper (if I may so call it) never happens in any other creature but
man; in man it does, sometimes in an healthful state of body, from a violent
passion, it may be with the assistance of the imagination. And lastly, that if
the imagination do at any time cease to work, and yet life remains; then is not
the imagination amongst the faculties of the Soul primary in operation, but
rather some other latent faculty, to remain when (as Psalm. 146.4.
David says) all our thoughts perish; which I shall have occasion to speak more
of, in my third general enquiry.

Whenever the Imagination moves at any time, without some discernible
concurrence of the Affections, and Reason; we are at that time little otherwise
than in a sleep or dream, and the impresses it leaves in us, not much greater,
sometimes not so great: Nay often when it seems wholly to go alone, unless by
the first guidance of some outward sense, yet in that very case, as there is an
assent of the Will, and Affections too; so its very ramblings, windings and
turnings, may be orderly unravelled, like the hanging together of Links and
Chains, though of various forms, as if some reason for its very wanderings were
to be given. For though in short space it run from the greatest State, or
Monarch in the World, to the smallest Insect; there is still some concatenation
of them together, and it never skips wholly from its subject matter, without
some sudden new introduction from sense, or the Affections or Reasons recall;
as if some of them set it on work, or at least it wrought not for it self.

As for instance, I walk into my Orchard, and there I espy Fruit Trees in their
tender bud spoiled and devoured by Caterpillars, upon which I seek in my mind
somewhat of the cause, how these Insects are bred, as from drought, Easterly
winds, or the like: Now if Fruit were one of my chiefest delights, and a thing
in desire, Reason would somewhat fix my thoughts, and busy them in finding out
with its assistance, some way or means for the prevention or destruction of
this creature; but being not, forthwith from them my thoughts are carried
rambling after all those peculiar Trees, on which these Insects usually feed;
straightways experience informs me the Oak for one, then I think how that Tree
amongst the Heathen was sacred to Jupiter; then it may be I think on the story
of the Royal Oak, and the miraculous preservation of our Sovereign; from thence
my thoughts travel to, and ramble over the greatest Monarchies in the World,
and from thence mount to Heaven, and think on him who is the establisher of all
Monarchies, and by whom Kings reign; anon Reason puts a stop to this career of
the Imagination, and perhaps fixes it for a while in some regular course, and
then perphaps for want of better employment, it unravels it self backward again
to the Caterpiller, finding out all the ways and steps it went before, and all
that to as little purpose as its former journey and travel. And thus do we
often, more literally than those of whom David speaks, Psalm. 2.1.
imagine a vain thing.

This faculty seems only able to behold it self, and its own vanity; and this
is the faculty over which Reason has the least power, and for whose
extravagancies we may readiliest expect pardon, since it casually works for
others, and cannot be at rest. Free Will and power, and a kind of dominion over
every of our faculties, nay our whole selves as well as others, seems to be in
some degree or measure inherent in our (I will not say our nature) desires, and
therefore the very power of reducing to subjection this one faculty, to what we
call our Wills, may now and then seem to please us in imagination, or wish; and
that if it were so, we might govern our selves (alone) as we pleased, and so
become wise and happy; for we would then think of nothing but good. This
perhaps is now and then our desire; but surely hitherto every man's Imagination
has been and is the framer of his Will, rather than that any man's Will ever
was or can be master of his Imagination, or else there would never have been
forged and framed in the Soul, such a Will as now and then there is: And it is
the goodness of a wise and gracious Almighty power, that there is no absolute
power in man over this faculty; or such a Will in him, as were able at all
times to bring it to subjection or obedience. Indeed when the heart seems well
tuned, and to be Psalm. 108.1.
fixed, as David says, and we are praising God with the best member we have, it
is an unhappy thing our thoughts should be rambling (as I remember St. Hierom
said of his) as far as Rome or Carthage. But the natural course of its rambling
(duly considered) is undoubtedly a great mercy to us; for it is to be feared
Romans 7.21.
Evil would be as often present with us, as our Verse 18.
Wills, as St. Paul says, and then a power over the imagination would little
avail. In the main, it is our great advantage, and happiness too, that this one
faculty of the Soul cannot possibly be fixed long on any one thing, without
wavering to and fro, or be made the constant attendant of any predominant
affection; if it could, it might, I fear, often prove to us an Hell upon Earth,
rather than an Heaven; and by gratifying even one of our affections, should it
always hold a glass to sorrow, (and sometimes we seem to will that) or rather
fear; how miserable were we. Even the poor Prisoner going to Execution, has
this happiness, that his imagination is a wanderer, without any absolute
control; and that every moment almost, his thoughts are for some short space
diverted from death, toward other things, by some sense or other, (though they
presently return again) or else it would be truly said, from the steadiness of
the imagination, that the pomp or usher of death (and so of all other evils)
would be far more powerful than the hand of the Executioner. The Psalmist seems
to me to have had some such thoughts, when, beholding death in himself at some
further distance, he suddenly cries out, Psalm. 79.11.
O let the sorrowful sighing of the prisoners come before thee, according to
the greatness of thy power, preserve thou those that are appointed to die.

We cannot well think or imagine how, and after what manner, this faculty works
in Beasts; we may conjecture perhaps, that it is chiefly according to sense, or
is more easily turned about by sense, and therefore makes not so pleasing or
irksom impressions, nor yet so lasting, as upon our selves. This is certain, in
our selves it is not always readily diverted by sense, but is now and then so
intent and fixed upon some peculiar object, as that at that instant we may be
said neither to see, hear, taste, feel or smell, though indeed we do. And how
rambling and volatile soever it may be in it self, yet it makes and sometimes
leaves in the Soul such an Impress or Effigies, as is for continuance, which we
call Memory, and that I shall now consider.

SECT. V. Of the Memory.
MEmory is, Memory defined.
some remaining mark, impress, or footstep in the Brain, or a collective
faculty there, of somewhat before rouled over by the Imagination, or examined
by Reason; whether introduced by sense, sent thither and actuated by the
affections, or native in the Imagination; and becomes a treasury or storehouse,
for the Imagination and Reason to resort unto.

Generally I think that according to the strength of the Imagination, those
marks or strokes it makes do remain; and that he who has a smart conception or
invention, and a good superintendent, (that is, Reason) seldom has a bad or
weak memory: And therefore those men of parts (as we term them) who often
pretent forgetfulness, rather pretend it, than otherwise, and are not to be
trusted too far, in that pretense. And according as the Affections and Reason
have gone along with the Imagination, to make that impress, so it is still more
durable, and less subject to be worn out. He who has ever been terribly
affrighted, will scarce ever forget the object, and circumstances of his fear;
neither shall we easily find out a man, that ever forgot the hiding of his
Treasure, being a work that his affection led him to.

So that as the quick and lively inlet of the senses, strengthens the
Imagination, so the strength of the Imagination, is generally that which makes
and fortifies a Memory: And when it treasures up things springing from the
proper strength of our own imagination, or invention, well ruminated by Reason,
and having the concurrence of well-governed affections, it helps again to
incite and strengthen them, (seeming to be a faculty as well active as passive)
and so is a more proper and fit Nursery for our own offspring, than a
strangers. For when it only or chiefly is a treasury by sense, ( viz. reading
or hearing) let it be never so vast and spacious, it is not of so great use or
profit; it being hard to find a wise or good man so made, from other men's
documents, though from the largeness or capaciousness of his memory, he were
able by once reading to repeat over the whole Works of the most voluminous
Author. And therefore as he that is affected with what he knows, is ordinarily
sure of a good Memory; so that Memory is always best, most useful, and likely
to hold, which is the fruit of our own conception, imagination, and observation.

SECT. VI. Of Reason.
Reason defined.
REason, is the Humane Touchstone of good and evil, right and wrong, truth and
falsehood, etc. the Superintendent, Vicegerent, (under God) Moderator, or
Monitor of all the other faculties of the Soul; though not always of power, yet
at all times ready, to curb the Imagination and Affections, in all their
extravagancies, and reduce them under its dominion and government.

Right Reason, that Divine gift, and Humane enjoyment, is a thing which does,
or may bear or produce many Leaves, and some most excellent both Flowers and
Fruit; as Temperance, Justice, Prudence, and the like; and besides such its
natural Fruits, as I may call them, I hope I may without offense think too, it
is on its proper Boughs and Branches only (though it is impossible they should
naturally spring from thence) that saving Graces are ingrafted. For he who has
his Faith only placed in a light and airy speculation, or imagination, and not
enclosed and held fast bound within the verge of his Reason, or otherwise some
way embraced or allowed by his Reason, will find it upon every occasion apt to
fade of it self, as well as to be loose, and blown away with every wind of
doctrine; but this requires another place.

Here if we seriously behold it in our selves as natural men, and view not what
it is capable to embrace and nourish, but what by good husbandry it is able to
produce of it self, we may and do find, and now and then undoubtedly taste, most
excellent pleasant Fruits from it; but then we must esteem them as gifts, or
else they quickly lose their savor.

Reason in us may be likned to some Plants of the Earth, which in the shade
grow rank enough, and increase to a sufficient magnitude or dimension, yet have
no pleasant taste or relish, nor ever bear good Fruit, though large they may:
and therefore it is good to have it ever in the light of the Sun, tending and
looking that way, and then never fear increase will hurt us.

SECT. VII. Of the Will.
THe Will I take to be, An assent of the whole Soul, to any present moving or
ruling faculty thereof, in intention or act; and therefore can assign it no
peculiar place of the Body, more than other for its regal seat, as we do the
Heart for the affections, and the Brain for all faculties of the intellect, but
that there is a concurrence of all parts of the Soul (which indeed possesses
the whole Body) to this Fiat; or at least the major or stronger part, whereto
the others (though not silent) give place.

I look on my own Will, as I sometimes do on my self in general; whilst I am at
home within doors, and look no further, then do I take my self to be some petty
Prince without control; but whenever I look abroad into the World, then do I
find my self restrained as a common Subject, to act no further than the Laws of
my King permit; cease that Law, and my power ceases. My Will may be free
respecting my self, but it is sure dependent respecting God; or else I must by
exempting my Will, think his power finite, which God forbid! Such a thing there
may be in us, from his Eternal wise disposition, as is sufficient to render our
actions good or evil, and yet that sufficiency is involved in the whole
Creation subject to Divine power. What power we have, let us endeavor to use
well, without questioning the extent or utmost bounds of our Commission. It Is
said to be the perfection of Humane Nature, to know good, and to will it: For
the first we all agree, that we are for the present imperfect in; if we can do
the other, let us always do it, and (which is good) let us ever pray, His will
be done, without enquiring farther or beyond what is plainly revealed to us; of
his Will, or of our own.

Will in us does seem much to exceed that of Brutes, and to be of another
extract than theirs, as all other faculties of our Soul do; for though I cannot
behold them as mere Machines or Engines, yet I cannot rationally perceive or
conjecture, that there is any Will in them, other than such as receives an
immediate impression from sense, or that has its rise barely in and through
sense; such a Will as necessarily springs from, or follows their thoughts, not
such an one as is able at any time to correct or put a stop to their thoughts;
neither do I believe there is so much as a Wish in them at any time, that their
thoughts were other than they are. But such a kind of corrective Will most of
us now and then perceive, and find in our selves; and yet we cannot but
conclude that such as it is, it wants a special Divine assistance to cooperate
with it, even to make it ours. Howsoever when we find or perceive a desire or a
will (be it what it will) in us, that our thoughts were other than for the
present they are; it may assure us our Soul is not part of our Body, or
naturally extracted out of our Body, for then it would not be prone and apt to
resist and control such thoughts, as, while they were, traveled to please the
Body.

SECT. VIII. Of Conscience.
COnscience is a Latin word, from con scire, to know together, and I think the
Greek word (...), is to the same effect, from (...), simul videre: As if there
were now and then some stop, or consultation held amongst the faculties of the
Soul. This consultation, demurr, or dispute in the Soul, is from the glowing of
some spark of a primitive purity, which though raked up and covered, ever since
our Fall, with all manner of infirmities and blurs, that our imagination is
able to invent or bring in, so as it gives not that clear light it should, to
lead us and conduct us aright, yet it often produces a light to warn us or
inform us, when it is that we go right, and when wrong; and blessed be God it is
not quite extinguished in any man.

I have sometimes in my thoughts resembled the faculties in man's Soul to a Law
or Judicature, and Reason to the Chancellor; which though not alike in all men,
but in some stronger and in some weaker, and in some one man sometimes
stronger, sometimes weaker, yet still remains of some Authority at some times,
to put some stop to those inferior Courts of the Affections, etc. whereto the
Will is, as it were the Sheriff or Executioner. And therefore I do take
Conscience to be, (and cannot in short define it better than) A reverberation
of that light of Reason God has given us, Conscience defined.
into the innermost recesses of the Soul: whereby, or from whence, there
becomes a persuasion for some demurr, stay or hesitation for a while, of the
other faculties; though they often forthwith again disobey and proceed. And I
cannot but think the Poet has well enough defined it, and no ways worded it
amiss, in this verse, Stat contra ratio, and secretam gannit in aurem; as if
Reason perswasively and convincingly, did secretly whisper in its injunctions.
I know this our Chancellor here, as I call him, is subject to error, and I
doubt too, generally (in which case he is not able to determine either way)
very weak; yet obedience and disobedience to his whispers, are the two things
wherewith we usually entertain our selves by way of reflection; and the one is
pleasant, and as the Wise man calls it, a Prove. 15.15.
continual feast; the other is bitter, and a continual remorse. For though the
error of this Vicegerent of God, do not at all alter the nature of good and
evil, but that they remain as they are in themselves, and if we do evil from
his error, we are punishable; yet that gives our offense no worse a title than
erroneous, and is properly the Understandings fault, whereas the other is
stigmatized presumptuous, and is the Wills, or the Affections, indeed the whole
Souls fault.

Now by the way, if I have guessed or defined it aright, that Conscience is a
result from Reasons whispers, or the inward reverberation of that best natural
light we have to guide us; why, since we all daily offend, and do wrong, do
some of our high-pretending Rationalists seldomest feel its strokes; and why
are the same most felt, or most pretended unto, by men of weak Intellects or
Reason? Why truly in one case, I think man may become a deaf Adder, charm the
charmer never so wisely; and on the other side, I think that a weak Reason may
be so dazzled by the flame and zeal of the affections, that it knows not how to
discriminate between them and it self; and that the flashing and light of the
affections, is often mistaken for the light of Reason; or at least Reason seems
to enjoin and command as a Captive, whenever the affections would have him; or
else they only colourably set him up, as their Authority, against a Foreign
Authority: For against Authority it is, that Conscience is ever most pretended.

What is the meaning of the word Tender Conscience, properly and strictly
taken, I do not well understand: yet if there be such a thing, I am not about
to rake or harrass it in another man, having enough to do to look after my own.
Weak indeed it may be, Reason is very weak in the best of us, and wants
assistance; but sure methinks, men should not pretend tenderness in it too, and
such a tenderness as no man must come near it, so much as to inform it, or
guide it, but let it go which way the affections please. I hope men only mean
hereby tender affection, or tender heart, (which I pray God grant to every one,
and that it never become hardened, stubborn, or obdurate in any man) and then we
shall not fear but Reason will suffer information without offense. Well, be we
as tender as imaginable in all parts; be Conscience a post-cordial, or a
post-wound, (as truly it is the latter, whenever we act against the tried light
of our Reason) we shall do well to endeavor by all means to avoid this wound,
not only in humility exercising this our best faculty, but harkening to others
reasons, and praying God to assist us: For there is no man but may live to see
the error of his own present Judgment, which if it err for want of diligence
and care, or receiving information, may that way prove a wound in the end too.
However let us all be assured, pretense of Conscience will never want its darts
in the latter end.

There is no man knows his own heart, it is deceitful above all things, much
less can any of us look so far into other men's Souls, as to see whether the
light within them (a thing much talked of nowadays) be the light of their
Reason, or the flashing of their Affections; and therefore we ought to be as
tender in censuring any man, as he would be to be censured. I beseech God to
enlighten me in all my ways from the first, Reason; and beg of others not to be
too tender in trying themselves: search narrowly whence that light they have
proceeds, remembering that speech of our Savior by way of question, Mat. 6.23
If the light that is in thee be darkness, (which I much doubt it is, if it
spring from the affections barely) how great is that darkness?

SECT. IX. Of the faculties of the Soul, working upon each other.
HAving slightly run over the several apparent, and most discernible faculties
of the Soul, distinct and apart; I will endeavor to behold them working
together, fighting and combating, raising or inflaming, helping or assisting,
drawing or enticing, quelling or allaying, ruling or governing one another, in
some plain and familiar instance, which may be this.

A man who has lived, until his Reason has been able to inform him he lives,
and show him some ground how, and whence he lives, for that it is not from
himself that he lives: A man, I say, endowed once with this faculty visible,
(which never much appears till some perfect stature of Body) and having all
other faculties of his Soul quick and ready to work, but by reason of the Souls
conjunction with a Body, necessitated and constrained to work by and through
the Organs of that Body; through them, I say, by one means or other, the Soul
lets it self out into the World, or lets the World into it. Now espying through
the Eye (and perhaps a hearsay would work the like effect) a covering of the
same mould over another, but withal attended with Riches, Honors, Dignities,
Power, Place, Authority, or any outward worldly pomp or vanity whatsoever; from
this sight it may be (with some little present concurrence of the imagination)
is the concupiscible part of the Soul irritated and stimulated, and somewhat
bent and inclined. The imagination from them again (which perhaps otherwise
would be quickly at work in Eutopia, and do little good or harm there) is
stayed from its present pursuit, to attend them; and being over-apt to gratify
the affections to the full, presents them again with a false beautiful glass,
and, it may be, some such like inscriptions as these, Haec omnia vobis dabo,
or, bonum est esse sic, (in the room of hic:) From hence again the
concupiscible part of the Soul becomes so inflamed, that it awakes and rouzes
all the other affections ready for its attendance, though often from its very
Brethren it meets with obstructions: For if this spectacle be introduced to
some Soul, though the desire therein may be as great, and as large and
extensive as in another; yet fear and care of the Body, and a number of anxious
thoughts and doubts, frame a Prove. 22.13.
Lion without, because there is a Hare within: The man would move his hand out
of his bosom, but it chap. 26.15.
grieveth him to do it, and his very chap. 21.25.
desire, as Solomon says, slays him: His desire is for the glory of his Body;
and the rest of its fellow-faculties being for the Body too, they fight for the
ease of it. But if a vigorous active Spirit, become once infected with an itch
from this prospect, (admitting the itch not natural) then besides the
imagination ready at all turns to project, design, and contrive all the ways
and means imaginable, as we say, all the other passions run full cry after this
desire; now Hope and Assurance, now Fear and Distrust, now Heaviness and
Displeasure, ( Ahab's case when he coveted Naboth's Vineyard) now Anger
threatens and strikes, now Dissimulation courts, etc. and together without
notice of Friend or Foe, they endeavor and agree to run down every obstacle in
the way; and the Will is carried along with them as a Captive or Slave, which
indeed is the proper subject of right Reason. And in this career I cannot but
say Reason bears a part, and is one in the company, but yet blinded and as it
were a Captive, under dominion for the present. It moves indeed as Reason,
weighs every circumstance, convenience and inconvenience; but yet is for the
Affections interest, and at their beck, and becomes like the General of an Army
in a great Mutiny, ready to gratify them in whatever they demand. Yet withal,
it is never such an absolute Slave in man, though it goes along with the
Affections, and serves them sometimes, (for as I have already said, and it must
be ever observed, that in every action properly Humane, although there be a
kind of dissension too, yet there is some kind of concurrence of all the
faculties of the Soul, and no one faculty is wholly and fully excluded) as not
to have a Negative voice, and some power left to use its exhortations at
peculiar times. 'Twill be now and then trying to reclaim the disorders in the
Soul, and show it self fitter for Conduct, than Vassallage; point out, and lay
forth the falsity and circumvention of the Imagination in the first rise or
beginning; the false bent and foolish inclination of the Affections; the
captivity and slavishness of the Will; I and it self too, for the time passed:
hold forth to it self, and the whole Soul, prospects at some further distance:
make us see the uncertainty, instability, mutability, and vanity of all Earthly
enjoyments; the certainty of death, and withal that as with the enjoyer there
will be no remembrance or thoughts of them in the Grave; so neither will there
be any remembrance of them, who now enjoy them, by those who come after: That
above the present necessary support of the Body, there is no need or use of any
worldly things; that they add nothing of real worth to any man; that there are
always necessary troubles and vexations attendants on them; that in a mean and
private path, we are least subject to affronts and justling; that the Creator
of the Universe, cannot but be just, and a wise dispenser of all things, and
that we shall never want things necessary for our journey; that there is a
possibility of the Souls existence after separation from the Body, and then by
consequence, there is as much necessity for the employing its faculties in the
well-governing it self, and laying up some treasure or provision for it self,
which can neither be of things here, nor properly laid up here. And besides
this, it will sometimes forthwith get the assistance of the Memory to its aid,
to show us instances and examples of other men: some failing in their attempts
when they were got to the uppermost round of their aspiring Ladder; others
crushed down and ground to pieces with the weight they drew upon themselves:
and on the other side, others weary of their very acquisitions, and casting
them behind them; others joyful, happy and quiet, in a very mean and low estate
and condition.

And happy were it for us, if Reason could in any time, or for any space, win
the Imagination to take part with it too, and so leave the common Rout without
any Officer to side with them; in which desertion, their heat is soon allayed
and cooled: For this cogitative or conceptive quality, is of ability in some
sort, to work even upon Reason's account alone, and can imagine there may be a
happiness beyond all bodily sense, and then forthwith all its former glasses,
become but painted Paradises, and formal nothings. I say, though Reason
sometimes runs, and works from the Eyes of sense, it has Eyes of its own, and
sees far beyond the capacity of the Bodies Eyes, and what can never be
introduced through them only; and so St. Paul not improperly mentions to the
Ephesians, Ephesians. 1.18.
the Eyes of their understanding. Nay such is the strange and admirable frame
of man's Soul, that as the understanding has Eyes to see, and power to direct
in some measure; so have those inferior faculties, the Affections, Ears to
hear, and hearken to its direction and call: what is the meaning else of those
words, Mat. 11.15.
He that has ears to hear let him hear, if the Affections moved not sometimes
upon some inward stroke or noise? No man ever made doubt, but all those to whom
our Savior then spoke, had bodily Ears, and yet he concludes his Parable with
that saying, being about to move the Affections, and keep the heart from being
rocky, stony or thorny, and make it good ground; telling us in the explanation,
that the good ground are they, which in an honest and good heart, having heard
the word, keep it, etc. Even Reason in man is the Word of God, and if our
affections would but hearken to its dictates, our Soul would neither be in so
much danger to go out of the way, nor have such mutinies in her way, as she too
often finds.

Well, I am not about to rob Grace of its effects, or to attribute these sights
or noise, or harkening, chiefly and principally to ought else than Grace, and
the free subsequent gift of God; we shall find occasion enough, I doubt, to
acknowledge where we ought chiefly to pay our tribute, and I shall take
occasion to speak more of it hereafter. But this I dare somewhat boldly say at
present, (to leave us inexcusable) that there is not one man of common reason,
or common sense, in our ordinary phrase, but take him a little out of the noise
of the World, and his affections a little cooled, and he will acknowledge
something of truth in this; at least he will not be able to deny it in his
heart, but there confess to himself, that he has heard and does often hear his
own natural monitor, Reason, though he never did, or were of ability to obey
him long. For besides God's gracious goodness in pointing us out a way by his
written Word, and his special Grace, leading and assisting us; he has set a
native rider, Reason, upon us, to direct us, and in that especially differenced
us from the Beasts, that must necessarily perish. They have somewhat of Reason,
(some men will scarce deny it them) but then it is such a Reason, as is always
subservient to the affections, goes along with the affections, sees with the
affections, and from the eyes of the Body only: Not a Reason that is able to
see of it self at a distance; nor a Reason of any power or ability to put a
stop, check or control to the affections, or resist-or stay them, but help and
further them: Nor have they affections that can hearken, or be moved, otherwise
than from sense. But such have we, and whenever we cast off this Rider, we may
remain somewhat the more sagacious Creature, but in no sort the wiser Animal;
and yet if we do cast him off for a time, we cannot be quite rid of him; he
will up again if it be but to spur and gall us, and wound our affections, that
though they go on still, yet somewhat halting and lame. And this is the thing
which I have defined, and certainly may most properly be called Conscience. But
beside this, such is often the goodness of a gracious God, who created and
endowed us with such a Reason, as a separating and distinguishing gift from all
other creatures, and no ways the ordinary work, or production, from him, called
Nature; That besides it, I say, he often throws in some let, or stop, in the
way of this race of our affections; and disposes things in his providence
toward the assistance, and strengthening our Reason. If Reason see not as it
might, or we hearken not to it as we should and ought, he sends some unexpected
accident, pain, or sickness, or the like; whence we become sensible Soul and
Body, of the approaching certain destruction of this our Tabernacle; and happy
are we, if we are converted and live; nay happy are we if we become truly
penitent for our former blindness, deafness and errors, and die. Then we always
see, to be sure, with some Eye of Reason, and whatever other pleasing prospects
any man may have, whatever deceptio visus there may be in health, I never heard
of any sober man yet, who run this race or course, but whatever he saw before,
when he came to the Goal, Death, he saw the vanity of this, though he believed
not the glory or pain of another life; and was apt to make some such short
reflection upon it, as Solomon had done before to his hands, Vanity of vanities,
all is vanity. Let a man dream here never so sound and quiet, he then usually
finds, it is but as a dream, when one awaketh. How much better then and safer
might it be, to hearken to such a voice in health, Ephesians. 5.14.
Awake thou that sleep, than hear our Trumpet sound it only at our Exit.

PART III.
SECT. I. Concerning the primary faculty of the Soul, and wherein the primacy
may seem to be.
OUr Souls do work, and after the manner aforesaid do they sometimes work; but
it will be a very difficult matter for the Soul, so to trace back or unravel it
self in its manner of operation, as to discern the origin, or first rise of
every work. What is the first moving point, and rudiment of animation, we shall
never know; for though we partition out the Soul into diverse faculties, and
allow those faculties several peculiar rooms in the Body; yet as that structure
and habitation for it, the Body, is so entirely framed and built, as no one
room can be said to be before the other, though those rooms are extended and
enlarged to their full proportion by degrees: so the inhabitant and mover of
it, is one; and none of its faculties in time before other, however some
apparency in actu, may deceive us. I now think, but why I think, I cannot tell,
whether because I have first a desire to think, or a will to think; whether I
have a will to desire, or a desire to will; whether I have reason to imagine or
think, or thoughts to reason and weigh things. I have all, and my Soul is all,
and the gift of one unfathomable Essence, whose ways are past finding out, and
this one of his wonderful works or ways.

My Reason may weary my Imagination in the quest and pursuit of this knowledge;
my Imagination may bring in enough to puzzle my Reason in defining and judging;
my concupiscible faculty may either egg them on, or entice them; my Memory may
be assistant to lay up safe what my Invention has found out, or Reason judged,
or the Affections have desired; and the Will may be ready and attendant; and
all work together, and aid and assist each other in the search, and yet never
find out or define the first motus amongst them. All that I am able to say in
my own Judgment, is, that Psalm. 139.14.
fearfully and wonderfully am I made, and that my Soul knows right well; but
in reference to any certain definitive knowledge thereof, especially how my
Soul works principally and primarily in my Body, I am enforced to cry out,
Verse. 6.
Such knowledge is too wonderful for me, I cannot attain unto it. And I think I
may truly say, without alleging it as an Asylum for ignorance, or a Remora
against search and trial, it is a knowledge which man is no ways capable of,
and such an occult secret, that the desire of it may endanger us. What God has
hidden or locked up, let no man think to find or open. Surely every rational
man will soon find the way of the Soul to be as difficult and wonderful, as any
of the four things mentioned by Prove. 30.19.
Agur; and I may confidently speak in the words of Solomon to any such diver,
Eccles. 11.5.
As thou know not, what is the way of the Spirit, nor how the bones do grow
in the womb, so thou know not the work of God, who makes all. It Is not a
thing I dare undertake to discover, nor a thing I have absolutely desired to
know: But only to quiet and satisfy my self, I have endeavored to make some
little search or enquiry, which of the faculties of the Soul may seem (a visum
est only) primary or most potent in operation, not which in truth are; for that
shall never man certainly define. And therefore let no man, till he be able to
find out himself, the circulation of the Soul, and the origin of that
circulation, and be assured to convince others in reason of that his (...),
blame me of sloth or ignorance, but allow me something of intellect, if it be
but in finding out my own defect therein. And yet because I am willing in some
degree to satisfy my self, and others too, but not wade herein further than
some light from Scripture (which I believe to be the true proper light which
lights every man that comes into the world) may seem to direct and mark out,
I shall set down somewhat of my thoughts, concerning the priority, precedence
or prevalency in the faculties of the Soul, one before or above another.
Whereabout though I may seem to dissent from the received opinion and learning
of the World, and therein be exploded by some; yet I trust and hope, I shall in
no wise wrench or screw that Sacred Word for my purpose, nor much swerve from
the true and genuine meaning of that, which I allege to be the principal, if
not the only, ground of my opinion.

I am not able to find out any great ground of contest to arise between any
faculties of the Soul for priority or precedence, (that is, any dispute or
question thereabout) unless between the Imagination and the Affections barely:
Now that which we call the Imagination, or cogitation in the Soul of man, we
find to be an unconstant fluttering, as well as a restless faculty; which at no
time can be found settled, or made to fix long, nay much or often, upon any one
single object, unless some affection do first seem to draw it, and set it on
work, and in a manner fasten it as its attendant for a time, though then also
it have some momentary flyings out, and extravagancies. And though it be a
thing undeniable, that the imagination may often move or rouse some affection
which was quiet before; yet it is a thing as undeniable, that the imagination
or cogitation never created or made any affection, more than any affection ever
created that; for we must agree they are contemporary in the Soul, and so
neither has the precedence. But yet where one seems to work more often, in
obedience, and to some ends and designs, or safe lodging or pleasing of
another, we may allow that other some kind of excellency, and so priority. And
this I am ready to afford to some affection, lodged in the center of the Body,
or innermost place of recess for the Soul, there secretly fixed by its Creator,
with some reason to direct and guide, as well as imagination to whet it. Indeed
the imagination and the affections, when they are orderly or regularly working,
(if not at all times and seasons) do whet and as it were give edge to each
other; but surely as the Love of God, far exceeds the thoughts of him, so the
Soul being an emanation at first from that Spirit of Love, Love of him may be
said to be a cause of thoughts of him, and that if the Soul were not naturally
capable to love, and tend some whither, we could not so much as think. Sense
must be agreed, while we live in the Body, to be the chief (though not the
only) inlet or Port to the Soul, and that every object, by and through sense,
has some touch in its entrance upon the imagination; or else we shall make a
strange Chimaera of the Soul: But not barely resting upon sense, we may allow
some prior inherent quality, upon which, by sense, the imagination may seem
attendant, and in subjection to. And though at some times the imagination do
appear as the usher of the affections; yet the least affection once kindled,
(and something there must be allowed to be kindled, whether of it self bursting
out into flame, or however inflamed or kindled) will often hale the thoughts to
the object, without any farther help of sense. But many things are presented to
the imagination by sense, upon which no affection seems to stir or move that we
are able to discern; and thereupon we may allow the imagination's work or
motion, to be chiefly from something occult, (whatever use it sometimes makes
of sense) to which it is, or may be in subjection, and not prior, but rather
posterior.

SECT. II. That it seems to be in the Affections rather then any other, from
Scripture.
THere is a common saying, how true I know not, that life is first and last in
that part of man's Body, which we call the Heart; and it is generally agreed
and believed, and I find no reason to dissent much from that opinion, that
there is the principal seat of the affections, and that That is the Cell,
wherein they chiefly move and work. Now nothing is so much called upon in
Scripture, as the Affections, nor any part of man's Body so often named, as the
Heart, the chief and principal seat thereof; as if that part were taken for the
whole, and the content for the contained, and whole man, Soul and Body, were
included in that one word Heart; and no act or thought of man were significant
without affection, or did arise or work but from an affection.

I shall not in this place (going about to show some peculiar prerogative the
affections seem to have over the other faculties of the Soul) scrape up
together and cite the multitude of Texts, wherein God by his Prophets and
Apostles seems to strike only at the root of the affections, the Heart, and
call upon that particularly to be given him, or inclined or bent toward him;
they are obvious enough, and I believe a thousand such are readily to be found.
But I shall only mention some peculiar places, occurring at present to my
thoughts, which seem to allow, not only a native, or dative power in the
affections over the whole intellective faculty, whether Imagination, Memory, or
Reason; but also some primary influence which they have upon them all, or as if
the other faculties had their rise or spring from them. Thus generally
whenever the intellect is mentioned in Scripture, it is coupled with the seat
of the affections, and taken for them; as if from thence it rose, and had its
influence: For if the very imagination had any motion of it self, or by sense
barely, without the agitation or help of an affection, and so were the first
inlet of things to the affections, by and of it self; its own peculiar seat
were then the proper attribute and adjunct for it, and it would or might be
said, the imagination of the Brain, instead of the imagination of the Heart;
for there doubtless we imagine in dreams, and when the affections are most
quiet, and may seem only to move (if they do then move) from the imagination.
But on the contrary we read in Scripture, of the Psalm. 140.2. Luke 1.51.
imaginations, Luke 9.47. Mat. 15.19.
thoughts, and Act. 5.4.
conceptions; the Psalm. 19.14.
meditation, and Prove. 15.28.
study; the Hebr. 4.12.
intents, and Prove. 19.21.
devices; the Psalm. 45.1.
inditings, and Mark 2.6.
reasonings; the 1 Kings 3.9.
understanding, and Psalm. 95.10.
errors of the heart. After this manner speaks St. Paul, that when in a whole
days discourse from morning to evening, he found he could not move the
affections of some of his Countrymen, cites them these words of Esaias the
Prophet, Acts 28.27.
The heart of this people is waxed gross, etc. lest they should see with their
eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and should be
converted: As if the heart must be opened, and the affections first move, to
let in understanding. All which considered, we shall not find it any absurdity
in our Litany, to pray against blindness of heart.

In these places, with many more like, the Holy Spirit of God pitching upon the
affections, or the chief seat of the affections, for the whole Soul; it seems
to me to point out some potent, if not some leading quality in them. And
therefore do I think we have not translated that Mandate of St. Paul to the
Colossians amiss, by these words, Colos. 3.2.
Set your affections on things above, not, set your minds: I know the original
is, (...), superna sapite, or de supernis cogitate, and so primarily respects
the mind: But it is also frequently applied in Scripture to the affections; so
our Savior uses it to St. Peter, (...), Mat. 16.23.
thou savourest not the things that be of God. And although we render it, Phil.
2.5.
Let this mind be in you, which was in Christ Jesus, yet it must needs be there
meant rather of the affections, viz. an humble mind and void of pride, because
of the immediate subsequent declaration of our Saviors humility. And as the
Scripture speaks after this manner of the Imagination, so it does also of the
Memory, which though I have in some sort before defined to be the Treasury or
Storehouse of the Soul, seated in the Brain; yet the affections do seem to
ingross that title too, and that there is not only a savor or sense, but a
laying up, and keeping in the heart, as well as Brain: So it is expressed of the
Luke 2.51.
Virgin Mary; and our Savior seems to infer it, by telling us, Mat. 12.35.
A good man, out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good things;
and an evil man out of the evil treasure, brings forth evil things. As if all
our good or evil acts, had their stamp or coinage from the Affections.

SECT. III. That it may seem to be in some affection from Humane conjecture and
allowance.
HUmane thoughts and cogitations seem unto me like Clouds in the Air; some vain
and empty, and like unto Smoke; some full and weighty; some bright and
pleasant; some black and dismal; succeeding each other in time and place;
always in motion, and sometimes quick and violently agitated, upon diverse
occasions, from diverse quarters; which, though they may be said sometimes to
refresh the Earth, and make her good and fruitful, and that without the fall of
them upon her, she were an insignificant, dry, heavy lump, without activity or
cause of vegetation; yet certainly those Clouds were first insensibly created,
raised and sent up, from her, whom they again sometimes refresh, and sometimes
drown. Indeed to me the affections do no otherwise appear than that Earthy part
of the Soul, (and so we sometimes term it, and that not improperly, while it is
employed on Earthly things) which though it have not that splendour, nor is
beheld in any wise so admirable, or excellent, as those glorious Lights above,
from which it receives influence; yet does rather seem to precede them in time:
And it may be no false assertion to say of them, as the Scripture does of the
other, they were ordained Genesis 1.15.
to give light upon the Earth, which was before them. The intellect must be
owned by all, as the affections light, and Reason as our present Sun, able in
some measure to correct their barren, churlish nature and quality, and now and
then dispell those unwholesom and unpleasant mists and fogs, springing, or
arising from them. But yet this Earth of ours (as all things) was created good,
and in no wise to be wholly rejected, contemned or despised; and for ought I am
able to perceive, might be the chief cause why the others were at all.

Whoever shall tell me, it is some more noble faculty in my Soul than an
affection, that gives being to this very enquiry, I must acknowledge somewhat
of truth in the allegation, and probably my suggestant may do no less in first
acknowledging some kind of appetite, or desire in my Soul to enquire and
search. Genesis 3.6.
Desire as it preceded our first unlucky knowledge, so it continues surely a
fermentation in all our learning; at least some affection does, and works that,
which our natural light would not attain to, of it self. We have a saying, Si
natura negat, facit indignatio versum, Indignation is an affection in the Soul,
and often, at least, helps, aids, and assists the more noble faculties to work,
and so do other affections too, as well as Indignation. The great pretended
Rationalist of the World (the Atheist) has ready at hand another such like
verse, and if we talk of God, will forthwith bring it out, and tell us, Primus
in orb Deos fecit timor, -- That it was not our Reason was able to find them,
or our Imagination to conceive them, of it self. It may be true in some sort;
and it might be happy for these Rationalists too, if fear could set their
intellectuals on work as well as ours, since love does not, or will not.
However, from them, who deny the Author or Inspirer of the Soul, it is agreed,
that the passions if any part of the Soul must first find him; and surely I
might no less properly before have resembled Affection to a Whetstone, than I
did Reason to a Touchstone: For though it be Reason which tries, whether they
be pure or impure, false or current, yet it is an Affection that always give an
edge, and vigor, even to Reason, as many of our quickest Wits have owned; and
that without the rubbing or motion of some Affection, there would be little of
sharpness, or so much as brightness, in any other faculty of the Soul.

SECT. IV Of the potency of the Affections.
THough we should not, or do not allow the affections precedence by way of
operation, or any primacy or superintendency in them, over the other faculties
of the Soul, but admit it to be in some other more noble faculty, as the
Imagination; yet something of force, power and strength, must be granted and
allowed to these common Soldiers of the Soul. It is a wise and prudent conduct
that keeps them at any time from mutiny, and disorder; but if it once happen
they do mutiny, it is not any General we have, or carry about us, that can
reclaim them, or rule and master them; much less at any time disband or cashier
any one of them. I know a man may talk Philosophically, and when his
imagination is high-flown, and his Brains a little busy in asserting their
Prerogative above the Affections, he may think of mastering, subduing and
eradicating, or at least of wholly mortifying them; when all the while, it is a
vainglorious affection to be esteemed wise, and master of ones passions, that
sets the Brain on work and raises such a mist therein, that the Brain for the
present cannot espy it, but thinks it works for, and of it self. Let no man
think I speak this, as if experience were my only Tutor, (though with us all it
often appears a baffler of Reason) or because I have too much been, or continue
a slave to my affections; until he can plainly show me he has mastered his own.
I do own their potency, and am in quest of another power. In the mean time,
while I behold the Soul as it is, as I find no ground for contest or dispute
about precedence, between any faculties of the Soul, unless between the
Affections and the Imagination; so is there none, as I conceive, for
predominancy, power and strength, or mastery one above another, unless between
the Affections and Reason. The Imagination though a faculty headstrong (as we
say) enough, at particular seasons, is various and mutable, and never holds out
long, or keeps its station against opponents; but is apt to yield and comply
with every sense upon all occasions. The Will, as I have said, is the certain
assenting subject of the present ruling faculty: For if I am sad, and would be
otherwise, it is the Wills obedience to a present desire; which desire, it may
be, springs from some sensible uneasiness of my present condition, or some
special dictate, or demonstration of Reason.

Reason, that excellent special Divine gift, is never much visible, till man be
of some age or maturity; and till then, how apparently do the affections reign!
and sometimes one of them over the other, and the imagination is ever their
assistant, till Reason become of ability to reclaim it, and win it by fits, or
turns, unto it self. And during this infancy of the Soul in the Body, there is
certainly some special preventing ruling Grace, I know not what else to call
it, that keeps us from running into all manner of extravagancies, as well as
there is a providence, that keeps the World from resolving again into its first
Chaos.

Now that which forces me to impute such potency to the affections, above all
other faculties of the Soul, is this; that the greatest and strongest combats
in the Soul of man, are still after God has actually given us some Reason, as
his Vicegerent, to govern us, and seems as it were to leave us to our selves;
at least if he did leave us to our selves, we might justly condemn our selves,
for our disobedience to that only guide of the Soul under him. Which guide, (
Reason) though appointed in some sort to be the Soul's governor too, never yet
fully and wholly subdued (let men talk what they please) any man's evil and
erring affections. Yet on the other side, unruly and violent affections, have
many times totally and absolutely extinguished and destroyed Reason, as strong
and clear, as man has ordinarily been endowed withal; and this I take to be
demonstrable in every distracted person, or mad man: For the word amens, or
demens, in Latin, that is, without mind, or without Soul, I think them
improper words in the case, for that there is nothing wanting in mad men, but
Reason; and the more proper word for that distemper, or loss in the Soul, might
be that by which we distinguish a Beast from a man, that is, irrationalis. And
this is to be noted or observed, that it is nothing else at any time, but some
violent, impetuous, and unlimited passion, that is the cause of this distemper;
and at such time always, as man is of maturity, and Reason of some ability to
govern the other faculties of the Soul, and to put some check to the career of
the affections, if it were but consulted or suffered. We have Infants idiots,
(as we call them) but never have Infants mad, or distracted: He who always
wanted Reason to govern himself, can never be said to have lost it, or quite
discarded it; as is the case of mad men, who have all other their faculties
quick and working, but become totally deprived of their once Moderator and
Governor, and doubtless can have no check of Conscience, imagining all they do
is right, and thereupon the Law exempts them from punishment. I have not been
much conversant in the Hospital of Bethlem, but if it were narrowly enquired, I
believe it scarce has a constant residentiary in it, but some violent native
passion first gave him his mittimus thither. I am ready to acknowledge that
every passion in excess, is a short madness; Reason is clouded, shut up, or hid
for a time, but not quite extinct, cut off, or shut out of doors: But when that
once comes to pass, through the violence of any unruly masterful passion, and
from vehement becomes habitual, I doubt it wholly and irrecoverably lost, and
question much whether Physicians do not vainly pretend to a perfect and
absolute cure. But herein I distinguish between passions, how violent soever,
raised from some fermentation in the Blood, (though they seem habitual) as may
be from Wine, and several corporal diseases; and such, where there being no
distemper of the Body, Reason is once disbanded, or cast off, by the violent
career only of some native passion, assisted with the spur of the imagination.
For the imagination of it self, is not of force and ability to destroy Reason;
it may be more vain and idle, more extravagant, and less subject to be governed
by Reason, than the affections, but if it had any such power of it self to
destroy Reason, then might a man lose his Reason from a dream; for then does
the imagination work most strongly, and without opposition, and often carries
with it terrible presentiments to the other faculties of the Soul: But from
thence we never find men distracted, or beside themselves; it must be some
violent waking affection, that does it, when Reason is at hand to oppose,
(which is not in a dream) and sets the imagination, like a rouling Engine, on
such a career, as to leave Reason quite behind, and destroyed, and it self
never reclaimable from a vain wandering course. They are these passions which
metamorphose a man into a furious Beast: It Is they which are able to destroy
that best faculty, or light of the Soul, Reason; and therefore Solomon's maxim
is to be observed above any, Custodi cor.

But Reason was never yet found of ability, to destroy or wholly mortify any
one passion. It may somewhat from Divine assistance, regulate or calm, lead or
direct, but if it should wholly destroy the affections, as some have pretended
to do by it, it would prove in the condition of a Prince without Subjects, that
is, indeed, no Prince or Governor at all; but we find the Subjects able
sometimes, for want of his vigilance, to destroy their Sovereign, and set up a
strange confused Anarchy amongst themselves.

Whatever faculty of the Soul we may give precedence to, we sometimes too
sensibly find the strength and power of our passions: For besides that they are
able to destroy one another, and that love or hatred can drive away fear, and
fear is able sometimes to suppress love or hatred; so as it seems more
difficult to determine which of the passions are strongest, then it would be of
those things Darius his Guard 1 Esdras 3.
disputed about, while he was asleep. They are all strong, and either of them
is of power enough oft-times, to make us destroy our selves; or at least
neglect our selves, and work more hurt to our Bodies, than any other faculties
of the Soul whatsoever.

Reason never destroyed any man, the imagination might help to do it, but never
did it of it self; but Ecclus 7.23.
sorrow has done it, if we believe the wise Son of Syrach. And this common
experience will tell every man, who lives, and is not yet destroyed, that the
slightest of the passions, is able to keep us waking by its proper strength,
when the imagination, were it not for some affection, would let us sleep. By
the strength of that only (I mean the imagination) we seldom so much as awake
from our sleep, unless by some terrible presentment it do irritate the
affections, and then they are the cause, and not the imagination; and if we do
awake thereupon, Reason forthwith shows us the folly of our imagination, and
our affections become quiet. But when they have their rise from sense, more
peculiarly than from the imagination, then is the combat dubious; they then go
on in their rebellion, and there is no mastery to be obtained over them by
power, but by fraud as it were: The Will they outlaw, which was ordained the
subject of Reason, and that necessarily carries with it the Organs of the Body
as its ministers. The aim of the Will may be good in general, but that is not
of power to distinguish between reality and apparency of good; neither good the
end, nor virtues the way to that end, have any corporal shape, and therefore
cannot be showed, as so, to the senses, whereby the affections might be
reclaimed, and made to fix upon any real good. Besides Sense is only judge of
present things; Reason of future, as well as present; the imagination is
somewhat capable of both: And therefore if ever the affections become fixed on
a real good, it is not that they are mastered, but that (next and immediately
under God's special Grace often leading and directing them) they are deceived
into good, hoodwinked a little from sense, and caught as it were by a wile, or
stratagem: The imagination is slily drawn away from taking part with them, and
somewhat of real good is first from Reason, as it were, darted into the
imagination, and by the imagination conveyed unto them.

Affections being native, visibly working in us, as soon as we are born,
without control for a long while, (unless ab extra, as we say) and no Reason
to govern, till they have encamped and fortified themselves; the wise man might
well say, Prove. 16.32.
He that rules them, is better than he that rules a City. The City where they
inhabit, is a deceitful place, many Caves and Vaults in it, for them to lurk
in; we find it but too true, when we enter into it, and search it, and think we
have wholly won it. We may well wish that Jeremy were a false Prophet, and
somewhat deceived himself, in telling us, Jer. 17.9.
it is deceitful above all things; and therefore we have a hard task to make
those Citizens there, good Subjects, and fit for another City, Heb. 11.10.
whose maker and builder is God. If ever they prove so, they must be dealt
withal, like as with men wedded to their affections, (as we term them
proverbially) and as they are usually dealt withal; that is, allured and led,
not thrust and driven, they are too stubborn to move that way.

SECT. V. That some Affection, is the substantial part of the Soul.
I Have thought, and do think, and believe (which is somewhat more then a
thought, it is a thought with the concurrence, approbation and allowance of
ones Reason) that the Soul of man is immortal; and that the very Essence or
substantial part of an Humane Soul, disrobed of a Body, or subsisting of it
self, is some restless working (however at some times invisible) affection; and
that if those more noble faculties of our Soul (next and immediately under that
bright heavenly Star) are the Pilots to conduct us unto rest, some affection
(as it seems to me) is the chief Passenger in this frail and weak Vessel of the
flesh. St. Paul in that admirable Encomium of his, of Charity, tells us, that
it abides, when many other gifts fail. And if 1 Cor. 13.12.
we shall know, as we are known, as he tells us in another place, there will be
then little use of the Invention, Memory, Reason, or the like, which are but
the Handmaids to knowledge. Neither can I rationally imagine, after return of
the Soul to its place of rest, or for default thereof in its banishment to
everlasting wandering, any use of other faculties than the affections, unless
toward the exalting or heightning them in their several degrees, whether love
and joy on the one side, or sorrow, fear, etc. on the other.

The Soul of man being an emanation from that Divine love, must necessarily
partake of it, love; and not able at present by any natural light it has, to
reach unto it self its proper object, lays hold on any thing, rather than seem
to vanish or be extinct; and withal that it happens to have such several
inclinations in man, while it is here, is surely by reason of some false
imaginary light, or the want of a true one, and that we want both power and
skill, in the setting or tuning some strings of the affections, as I may call
them. And it is want of a clear inspect into our nature and frame, that we
become, as David speaks, Psalm. 78.8.
a stubborn generation, a generation that set not their hearts aright, and
whose Spirit cleaves not steadfastly to God. And I do further believe, that all
the faculties, strength and power of the Soul, which we have, are given us
toward the performance of that first and great Commandment, Mat. 22.37.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy Soul,
and with all thy mind: The whole Soul beside, seems naturally subservient, if
not subsequent to the affections motion, and the motion of the Soul would be
strange without them, and not imaginable; they being as necessary as they are
useful. And therefore I think we may as well cease to be, by our own power, as
cease to affect; and they who have gone furthest or most covertly herein, have
in going about to hide some particular affections, showed others more visibly;
and for the covering of their joy or sorrow, fear or anger, or the like, have
set up for predominant in their Soul, a seeming contempt of all things; which
is an affection it self, and for ought I know, as subject to be faulty as any.
For surely the Soul may seem no less glorious in its march, with all its parts
and retinue, than some of them; provided it marches the right way, and each
faculty help and assist, and not go about to destroy each other.

SECT. VI. How the Affections move from the Imagination, or otherwise.
IT does seem to me, as I have said, that the affections, or some or one of
them, we properly so call, are, or is the chief inhabitant in this our Body;
from which, or from whence, there is, or proceeds motion and operation
voluntary. Now if the Imagination be granted to be that glass in the Soul, from
whose reflection they only move, which for the present let us grant; then do I
conceive, that glass may receive its light which it casts on them, three manner
of ways: 1. By Sense, 2. By Reason, 3. By Divine Revelation, immediately by
God, or mediately by his Word.

From the two first, the imagination shows unto the affections, this present
visible World only, but yet after diverse manners. From the third it shows them
another World; which sight from this last, as it is more glorious, so it is
here more rare, and men that once obtain it, have their affections so fixed by
it, that they seldom quite turn away, or utterly lose it. It Is that which I
humbly conceive the Author to the Hebrews speaks of, with a kind of
impossibility of retrieving or renewing it, if once men wilfully turn away from
it. Heb. 6.4, 5.
Being (says he) once enlightened, and having tasted of the heavenly gift, and
made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the
powers of the World to come; if these fall away, etc. Then immediately after he
uses this expression, Verse. 9, 10.
But beloved, we are persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany
salvation, though we thus speak, for God is not unrighteous, to forget your
work and labor of love, which you have showed toward his name, in that you
have ministered to the Saints, and do minister. As if whatsoever light we had,
or whencesoever it came, Love were the worker and labourer in our Harvest: but
of this I intended not to speak, it is a subject very unfit for me to handle;
God is gracious and merciful, and as I am not able to depaint that light, so it
behooves me not to limit his power, no not in my thoughts. But how our
affections move from that first or second light, is my intended enquiry at
present.

From this second kind of light, viz. that of Reason, by reflex from the
imagination, the present World is showed to the affections, with all its
vanities whatsoever; the certain period of man, and all things else in it; the
falsity and mutability of it; the futility of the love of it, or care for it.
And from the reflex of this light, though the affections are sometimes cooled
toward the World, and bent and inclined somewhat toward some greater and more
perfect good; yet finding it not, they often suddenly fall away again, and know
not where to fix.

By reflex from the first light, that of sense only, the World is seen, as
Beasts see it, for fleshly delights, and for support and maintenance of the
Body, but with this difference between us and them; that their Souls being of a
bodily extract, and terrestrial, their affections move no further than in
reference to some present utility of the things of the World for the Body: Ours
are celestial, and of continuance for ever, yet necessitated in respect of the
Body, and for its sustentation, to make use of this light from sense. The
concupiscible part of the Soul, being first (and most often) moved from this
light, before Reason appears and shows her self; and yet never fully satisfied
with any present thing it enjoys, (although it often receives its checks from
reflex of that second light) if it be not graciously restrained by the third,
and led to take some hold on that good, wherewith it may be somewhat satiate in
hope; it grasps at innumerable things, neither useful to Soul or Body; shows
only. it is not terrestrial, and yet withal that it is capable to lose in
future, its title and signature of celestial.

SECT. VII. What light the Imagination receives from Reason, and the weakness
of Reason.
THe second way by which light is communicated to the Imagination, and from
thence reflected on the Affections, is (as I have said) Reason, which is the
proper light and guide of an Humane Soul, and by which it does discover the
vanity of this World. But it is not the least wonder in Nature, that after this
light begins with any brightness to shine forth in Man, never so little
withdrawn from the noise and business of the World, and, in conjunction with
sense for its assistance, does give him such a clear prospect of its vanity,
that a contempt of all its superfluous unnecessaries is raised in the heart,
and his affections are so far diverted for the present from it, that a full and
somewhat settled resolution is begot there, not to let them possess that place
any more: That that man, shall yet forthwith from a little pageantry here,
presented by the Eye or Ear, have his imagination wheel about again, and by
consequence his affections as fast rivetted to the World as ever. Surely there
needs must be some Spirit or powerful Prince of the Air, that does bewitch
every rational man; how else were it possible almost that such an one
discerning his folly and madness, by a far clearer and more excellent light,
than that which caused them, shall again often return in despite of it, to act
over his folly and madness, which he himself had condemned, and his affections
rejected? If there were not, the very light of Reason would prove sufficient,
so far to extinguish and dazzle any weaker light, that the affections might be
held, and kept within some ordinary bounds and limits. But then withal, we
have ground to believe, and as sure it is, that when we find our sight from
Reason thus strangely baffled, and made as it were subject to a weaker light;
there yet remains and must be, some greater infinite power, above that Prince
of the Air, who gave us our light of Reason, and from whom we may expect
support; one, who is able to strengthen his first heavenly gift, by a second,
and if Reason it self be not Armor sufficient proof against the World, or the
Prince of this World, where we now live, there is somewhat to be asked and
given, that may be so; which I shall speak of hereafter in due place.

I am at present in quest of Reason only, that inherent Eye, or light of the
Soul, of what use that may be toward our happiness or bliss. Why truly unless
it smooth out some way for the current of our affections, and a little turn the
stream of them; it may prove in the latter end to have the quality Solomon
attributes to knowledge, increase our sorrow. Be it never so great, or shine
never so bright, Satan will allow it us, and matters not though it be always
employed on Heaven, so our affections be employed on the World, or at best,
only kept in, that they move or search no whither beside it. He knows well,
that for men to chain up, or to condemn them to imprisonment within the Body,
is impossible. When once from the light of Reason, and its influence on man's
Soul, the affections shall become like a Water at full Tide, seeming to move
neither way; if they return not to the Ocean, they will be sure from so many
Springs feeding them from Land, to break in again upon that. If Reason be but
able so much as to give some stroke to the affections, (as I have touched in
the definition of Conscience) and doubtless every man has in some measure felt
it, then certainly it is an earnest of some greater light, which that Prince of
the Air endeavors by all means to have hid from us. And that the one may never
lead us or direct us to the other, (whereby our affections might work another
way, and he be deceived of his hold) he is willing we should believe, that this
our best native light Reason, is but a pure emanation from the Body, which if
so, how can we ever expect any other. And it is no slight artifice of his, that
he has brought us nowadays to impute every sober serious thought, arising in
the Soul, every check upon the affections, every Jer. 8.6.
quid feci? (as Jeremy expresses it) toward a return, to some temperature of
the Body, and call it Melancholy; and herein he has got the assistance of some
of our bodily Physicians, to attribute a little too much to that Mine, wherein
they dig their Oar. I would fain know, what affinity there is between the
thoughts of Judgment, Justice, Mercy, or another World; and the Body? If I
could find it, I should then think the wiser sorts of Animals had such
thoughts, and could be melancholic too. How the Body first espied any such
thing with its Eyes, is strange to me. It is not the Body, but Reason the
offspring from above, and usher of some greater light, that is of ability to
behold some things future; and when from the light of Reason, the Soul shall
stand for a while at amaze, to behold what a thorny labyrinth she is got into,
(whatever Flowers may grow in it) knows not, for the present, which way best to
move, but desires direction from above in all her motions; to attribute this to
the Bodies temperature, what ground have we? Never let us seek for the
Hellebore now in fashion for a cure. If Reason be the Beam, that which men call
Melancholy, will prove as steady a Hand to weigh things present and future in
the Scales, as any Airy temper in the Soul, they call Sanguine. And while
Reason is in the Enquest, it will neither hurt the Soul or Body; but in some
measure take an equal care of the one, and of the other.

We might as well, and upon as firm grounds, impute every disease in the Body
whatsoever, to some impression of the Soul upon it, as every motion or mutation
of the Soul, to some temperature or change in the Body. There is, no doubt,
some reciprocal operation between them; and as they confess some diseases to
have their origin from some passion in the Soul, and yet not all, or most
diseases; so shall I readily acknowledge, that the Soul works many times
diversely, and in different form and manner in the Body, according to diverse
lets and rubs it meets with there; is brighter, or dimmer, according to the
subject matter it works in; and this without derogation from its Sovereignty or
Immortality, more then we do detract from the nature or quality of Fire, when
we say it gives a clearer light from Pitch than Brimstone. I shall agree, it is
now and then dull, and as it were lumpish and heavy from obstructions; and
whenever it is stopped in its passage, and its operation, in its more noble and
chief rooms, and receptacles of the Body, it makes its Exit. I shall agree
likewise, that it is tied by the Law of Nature, to take thoughts and care (not
immoderate) as well of the Body, as it self; and has Reasons allowance and
accordance for it. I am not endeavoring to bereave any man of his senses, or
hinder the Soul to look abroad that way, or to make man expect to be fed, and
clothed, or healed of diseases, from Heaven barely; yet withal, I think every
defect or extravagance of the Soul, every flight or turn of it, is not rightly
imputed to the Bodies temperature; since we are able to discern its strange
mutations and changes on the sudden, even in a moment, without any alteration
of the Body, or any seeming help of Sense; and if it were possible to keep the
Body always in one state, condition and frame, and deprive the Soul from all
intromission of sense for a time, Reason might consider its present and future
being. Yet it is very requisite the Soul should move here as well by Sense, as
by Reason, or any other light. He who thinks he has it ravished from the Body
here, has it converted from a Pilgrim and Traveller, to a Vagrant and a
Wanderer: And such there are too many, who by the help of Satan, would imagine
themselves out of the Body, while they are in it; Extinguish their light of
Reason, and Sense too together, sometimes, by a new Light the World shall never
be able to define, nor say whence it arises, unless from that Lake of Fire,
which has the title too of utter darkness. It Is not a little withdrawing of the
Soul, or consideration how it should or ought to act in the Body, with the
Body; but this strange imaginary roving flight of it, is that which may
properly assume the attribute or title of Melancholy. This is it, surely, in a
literal derivation, that is, the suggestion or inspiration of some Black Fury.

SECT. VIII. The excellency and advantage of Reason, and yet its inability and
dependence.
REason in man, may justly challenge the dignity and pre-eminence above all
other faculties of the Soul: It is God's Deputy, or Viceroy, given, ordained,
and sent to govern in it upon Earth; to reduce it to obedience, and keep it
from Rebellion, and yet in things of importance, ever to consult its Prince. If
the Affections reject Reason, and it be recalled, or its power diminished for
want of our obedience, and we are left only to our own imagination, our
Affections become in a miserable and distracted condition; they shall by that
have strange impositions laid on them, they shall be led a thousand ways, jaded
and tired, but never satisfied. If the Affections set up Reason for King, and
trust to that alone, they are not in a much better state: For though it be
generally a safe, yet it is a weak guide, and not to be relied on alone. For it
being only some clearer sight than ordinary of an intellectual faculty of
things here below, though it somewhat quiet the affections for a time, it can
never absolutely reclaim them, or reduce them to fasten on any thing, beyond
its own prospect, or out of its own reach.

Though the intellect do become at any time enabled, any ways to reach to the
affections things in such excellent order and manner, as that they may be with
some pleasure embraced for the present, without any cause of disgust, and so
accounted as good; yet all those things within its reach, being of a transitory
and fading nature, the best of the affections, or the possessory affections,
(as I may call them) as Love, and Joy, can never be so replete therewith, as
that there will not be room for distrust, and fear of a privation of those very
things they enjoy.

I have only this reserve left, in reference to this desirable good, and
excellent gift, That an inherent Prudence in man (the Flower of Reason, and in
some degree the Dowry of every rational Soul) may with some secret Divine
assistance, conduce much to the present ease and rest, and also future
happiness of his Soul: For that Prudence, or Humane wisdom, as we may call it,
putting no false gloss upon things, nor therein so deceiving the affections in
their enjoyment, but showing all things to them as vanity, and withal, that
from Reason she is not able to show them any thing beyond that inscription; she
does as it were prepare the affections, to stand quiet, ready, and attendant
for some other thing to be presented to them, and to catch hold thereon upon
any occasion or offer; without any great turbulency, or admitting fear or
distrust to accompany them overmuch, in reference to the enjoyment or loss of
any of those things, which Reason has, as it were, once convinced them to be
vain, or forced them at some time to reject as such.

The affections will move of themselves in despite of us; it is a good guide
they want, to find out good, which is always their aim. Reason is a good guide,
but we often want a better; Psalm. 4.6.
There be many that say, (says the Psalmist) who will show us any good? but not
expecting with patience, the light in the following verse, which only puts true
gladness into the heart, think they can find it of themselves, and though all
pretend to that good, run as various courses as imaginable. For not looking
foreright upon the Goal, nor considering whatever thing unnecessary we reach
at, and take up here in the way, becomes a burden to us, and how at that Goal
of death we must part with all; the affections stoop in the course, and catch
at the Golden Apple in the way, and sometimes a more trivial thing, a Feather,
a puff, every man at somewhat, though never so mean and sordid.

I do yet think the Soul of man, however it moves, or from what power soever it
moves, to be in its proper genuine equipage of march here; when Reason shines
in her most bright, and so, as the affections principally and chiefly move
according to her light, when every faculty is as it were up and ready for
motion, each one attends the other, and yet moves not far, or any great
distance, but expects her directions. When at any time the Soul looks through
the windows of the Body, Sense, she makes use of that light, no farther than
for the present support of that building, and 1 Cor. 7.31.
uses the world (as St. Paul expresses it) as not using it. But when we once
become so unhappy, as that one kind of affection takes up his quarters or
repose here, another there, and quarrel about their Lodging, and mutiny about
their Guides too; when they sometimes quite desert, and reject the one, to
follow the other; when, though Reason will admit Sense in her company, yet the
Affections once up in Arms for Sense, will not admit Reason; then from each
faculty of the Soul, thus out of order, and not performing its Office aright,
it happens that no one of them moves with ease or quiet; neither shall we find
any rest, until we find some more than ordinary way or means of pacifying, and
right marshalling this disorderly multitude of unruly appetites and affections.

I am very much assured, there never was sober rational man, but at some time
or other has had in his Soul, some combat between his Affections and his
Reason; and withal, has found his Reason baffled by them. And therefore
methinks that very Reason that cannot rule in the case, and finds it so, might
however admonish and point to the Affections, and set us on work, if it be but
to will or desire earnestly to find out some remedy, or have it shown us; which
Reason it self cannot extract from all the imagination is able to bring in, nor
is in the strength and power of the Soul. Which brings me to my last part of
enquiry, what may be the best way and method, to reclaim the disorders of the
Soul, and reduce it to some quiet estate, and composure for the present.

PART IV.
SECT. I. Means to reclaim the Soul.
ABsolute power and ability in man, from the greatest strength of Reason, there
is none; and I dare say, whoever takes it for granted in the premises of his
trial, will deny it in the conclusion. What? can that wholly allay the tumors
in the Soul, which is in some manner the very cause or occasion of those
tumors? It is the very appearance of Reason, as I have said, and showing her
self in the Soul, that often begets these Agonies in it. The passions are like
some rude and unreasonable Rout, that the more endeavor is used to reclaim
them, the more violent and outrageous they become, and the more fierce and
heady in their excursions; when it may be let alone, and not opposed, they
would forthwith cool, and vanish of themselves. When we were Children, and had
none, or very little Reason to govern our affections, perhaps there might be
some scuffle amongst our passions, but nothing from thence that ever caused a
wounded Spirit; only some little scars, or scratches, which a short space of
time without Medicine would heal. Knowledge such as we have, (which some would
to be the offspring of Reason, though I think it has no such issue, of which I
mean to say somewhat elsewhere) may sometimes perhaps work contrary effects,
and decrease sorrow, as well as (the wise man says) increase it; but it will do
neither of both, from any absolute inherent quality in it. We often
experimentally find, knowledge and a troublesome weary life, as well as
sometimes a sinful, are not things incompatible, but may subsist together.
Reason, the Mother of most, if not all, excellent Humane gifts, (as Prudence,
etc.) is of some ability to judge of her own weak product, that it cannot
suppress what is bred of other faculties of the Soul: When she has weighed all
that the Imagination is capable to introduce, though she apply, yet she can
judge and determine it not to be of full solid weight or efficacy to master
that, which for ought she can find or judge, has the instigation and aid of a
Foreign and stronger Prince; she finds she has no absolute power at any time
over the Imagination, and if the Imagination forsake her but a moment, and side
with any other party, she is at a loss. What then? must we cast away our
Reason, to be at peace and quiet, and have her let go the Reins she is used to
hold over the affections, though she cannot stay them or rule them? No! she
teaches us of course and consequence, from her disability found out and
acknowledged, to pray in aid of some stronger power, and finding she has no
power, she may incline the subject by her motions, and facilitate it for the
admission of some new gift, of greater strength and force. She may, and does
sometimes, draw in Moral Virtues, for the superstructure of Spiritual Graces.
Nay if that cannot be said to be her work properly, quatenus she is native in
us, but that they require the title of God's preventing restraining Grace in
us; they are then good symptoms, that God will perfect and crown that work he
has begun in us. It is enough, I say, for Reason to show us our errors, (if
that ability may be allowed her) though she cannot reclaim us; to judge we are
restless, and uneasy, though she cannot ease us. There is no man that has her,
but at some time or other, from her, has taken up the Prophets wish and
exclamation, Psalm. 55.6.
O that I had wings like a Dove, for then would I fly away, and be at rest: But
then it is silently owned and agreed, there is something else, if it were to be
found, that must give us ease, and give us patience, to wait the leisure till
that thread of life be cut, which pinions our Souls to our Bodies, so as at
present they cannot fly away to any certain continuing rest; and there is
somewhat else, beside Reason, that must imp the feathers of our passions too,
that we flutter not too much here. There is a rest in Hope, which not Reason
but Faith does give us the prospect of; and by the firm belief of which, and in
our Savior who came to bring that life to light, and has gone before to
prepare it for us, we can only hope to bring our passions, those restless
inmates of our Souls, into any order. This our Savior gives as the ground of
assured comfort, John 16.33.
be of good cheer, I have overcome the World; and the Author to the Hebrews
spends a Chap. 11.
whole Chapter on the several wonders Faith has wrought, in the direction,
supportation, and quieting of Souls in this Earthly Pilgrimage, as a
preparation for us against future troubles, and as an argument for our
agreeable behavior under them: Faith being the ground or substance of things
hoped for, and without which Hope had no sure Basis of Foundation. Those
excellent incomparable Heathens, who saw so far, and went so far, by the light
of their Reason, as we say, (if that may be termed theirs) what do we know but
that they might have in company with it, some glimmering light of some Savior
of the World, as well as they had of a God, and a World to come? And though
they are not recorded in Sacred History, amongst the Acts of that peculiar
people the Jews; there might be other Heathen men as well as Job, that wished
Job 19.23, 24, 25.
their words (or thoughts) were written (or printed) in a Book, and were
assured that their Redeemer lived, and that they should see him with their
Eyes. It must be some such Antidote as this, of Faith, that of it self has
power at all times to quiet the Soul, and allay its surges; and this may very
naturally (if I may be allowed so to speak) accompany or follow Reason,
provided Reason can see her own inability, not trust to her self; and after she
finds or doubts, takes not upon her to be the sole Empress, Ruler, or Guide in
the Soul. We have the word of the chiefest of the Apostles, what be found and
perceived at last, in the case of Cornelius, Acts 10.35.
That in every Nation, he that fears God, and works righteousness, is
accepted with him; and yet, Hebr. 11.6,
without Faith, it is said, it is impossible to please God: And therefore Faith
must be the Anchor of the Soul, to keep it steady, and from being tossed about,
and ready to perish from the waves raised by it self.

My Soul has somewhat wandered now indeed from its intended purpose, my thoughts
at first being only to depaint, or set forth a Soul, as well as I could, in its
ordinary Ethnic apparel; and to consider what ways and means there are, which
we might possibly in Humane reason or probability find out, for the quieting,
well-ordering and governing of our Souls, and to that I shall return.

If we find, or think our selves got into a straight or error, Reason would
that we make a stay, and consider, call a Council of our faculties, and have
them all attendant. Now first, if our Soul be capable to err, necessarily its
error must be defined; which is a wandering, or going from its Creator, that
first gave it Being, and from his appointed ways and methods; and therefore of
consequence, the foundation of a more pleasant structure, must be thus laid. We
must with all the inherent faculties of our Soul, acknowledge the errors of all
those faculties; and therefore according to my shallow reason, our Liturgy is
well begun, and I cannot see in reason what cavil can be made to that part,
unless we are thought by some, to do ill in resembling our selves to those more
innocent creatures, Sheep; and might have more truly said, as the World now
goes, We have erred and strayed from thy ways like Swine or Goats: This is the
natural probable way for remission and restitution. We have something like a
Deity in our selves, and whenever we receive an acknowledgment from any person,
who has dependence on us, of his neglect of us, and perceive any thing of
trouble or sorrow in the party, we forthwith pardon, and receive again into
favor. And it is our only rational way in the like case, to acknowledge our
errors, and get our affections somewhat hot, and then melting in us, that any
dross contracted in our Souls, any cankering rust cleaving to them, may drop
off, that they may be somewhat bright, and shine again. The Heathens, who had
no other light but this to lead them, had their purgations, (of which Socrates,
I think, was the beginner) which, though after a vain manner, may seem no ways
to hurt them: And certainly this manner of purgation, that is, melting into
sorrow, may do us good, and prevent many sharp pains the Soul might otherwise
feel, even here in the Body. I am not about to enquire and determine, whether
after thus doing, we shall be at rest here, or how far, more or less, from
hence, the Soul may become obnoxious to afflictions, or crosses; but certainly
in all reason, she will bear them better when she has done all she can toward
a return, and can find in her self no ground to think, but that her boils
proceed rather from some outward, than any inward cause, and that her disease
is rather Epidemical, than singular.

Having our Souls somewhat restored and cleansed, somewhat at ease and calm; we
may, I trust, without offense, and without rejection of more Sovereign
Antidotes, make use of our Reason, toward the preventing of a Tempest in her
for the future, by finding out and judging, if we can, first, the most probable
and chief cause of her billows, and why she is often thus tossed, and almost
shipwrack'd in the World; and next, espy out some ways or means, for the future
prevention of these storms.

But first by the way, let us acknowledge, that Reason in man, such as it is,
and whereby we exceed all other visible creatures, as it is the special gift of
God, and the thing we have least cause to term our own, or too much think of
the nativeness, or inherency of it in us; so it wants a more than ordinary
daily support and supply, (for it is that faculty or ability in the Soul, which,
I have said, man is most subject wholly to lose, and be deprived and bereft of)
and without beholding through it, Cum ratione insanire.
that light which gave it being, we may, as I may say, run mad with our Reason.
And such Rationalists there are in the World; for why some men, who have had a
greater outward visibility and appearance of Reason than others, have yet acted
in the conclusion, as if they had less; if this presumption in them be not the
cause, or that they looked on their strength of Reason too much as an Habit,
and too little as a Grace, I can find none.

If the Donor of the Talent be but owned, it may surely as well be Traded with,
as laid up in a Napkin; and not unlikely, even from it may be found out too
some other inherent gift in the Soul, which if rightly disposed and ordered, (I
will not say disposed or ordered by Reason) may somewhat abate all
excrescencies in the Soul, and become the chief and only Foundation-stone, for
any Spiritual building spoken of before, even that Tower of defense, Faith.
Reason, I say, may point at, or find out, the proper cornerstone for building,
though she cannot move it of her self, or erect any thing on it.

SECT. II. Of Love.
SUrely he who created us, neither gave us Invention to find out, nor Reason to
judge in vain. I must acknowledge, I am not able so much as to think a good
thought, nor well able to judge when my thoughts are as they should, or might
or ought to be; yet that roving faculty of mine (call it men what they best
like) laboring to introduce into my Soul diverse and sundry causes of the
disquietness, tumults and disorders happening in her, as well as others; my
weak Reason (after rejection of some) has seemed to rest satisfied, and pitched
upon this, as the chief, if not the only proper cause thereof: That that
essential part of the Soul, Love, from whence at some times we feel greatest
delight, suffers often too narrow an enclosure, is pent up, and imprisoned by
some means or other, and has neither that free scope and range, or full and
clear prospect abroad into the World, which Reason is able to allow it and
afford it, whereby it loses that common acceptable title of Charity; in a word,
Love is not rational, but sensual.

Love may seem, with the allowance of our Reason, I think, to be placed in
every of our Souls, like the Sun in the Firmament, which though it may have
peculiar Flowers, that require more than its ordinary influence, at least its
visible rays, (and we are allowed some such things as we may more particularly
call here, Flowers of our Sun) yet its circuit should be to the ends of the
Earth, and Psalm. 19.6.
nothing hid from the heat thereof: And then whatever becomes of those Flowers,
though they are cropped, dead, or withered, it finds innumerable objects to
exercise its rays upon, and still shines bright and pleasant: but if it become
once eclipsed by the interposition of any peculiar objects, there happens such
an Egyptian darkness in the Soul, as most properly may be said to be felt.

Whenever we look into the Soul, and find such a thing as Love there; Reason,
though it be not able to quicken, nor blow it up to any bright extensive flame,
(for that is ever from Divine influence) yet can demonstrate to us, to what end
and purpose that spark of Love is inherent in us; that is, to love the Author
of our Being. Now as we cannot see God, but by his works, so neither can we be
properly said to love him, but through his works: Amongst which, as there is
nothing more deserves our love, than such as bear his Image in common with our
selves; so there is no more certain way to judge of the sincerity of our love
to him, than by our love to them. Thus the Apostle, 1 John 4.12.
If we love one another, God dwells in us; and again, Verse. 20.
He that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he
has not seen? This is so much the dictate of Reason, that I should have thus
thought upon consideration, had I never seen Scripture; and it is to a certain
Law antecedent to all that is written, that the Scripture it self does refer
it: Thus the Apostle speaks, 1 John 2.7.
I write no new Commandment unto you, but an old Commandment which ye had from
the beginning; and calls it, Chap. 3.11, 12.
the message from the beginning; of the breach of which he gives an instance in
Cain's unnatural murder of his Brother, before there was any written Law; so
that the Apostle might in this sense say, 1 These. 4.9
As touching brotherly love, ye need not that I write unto you; for ye your
selves are taught of God, by the light of Nature, and the Law written in the
heart, to love one another.

Now if the obligation to this Charity arises from a general Reason, as we are
born alike, are of the same mould, have our Being from, and equally bear the
Image of the same Father, should not our Love be universal? And may we style
our selves of Paul, or of Apollos, and then in assuming the Title, cast away
our Charity and our Reason too? Must we in bandying for our Teraphim so far arm
our passions, and blind our Charity, as to reject and contemn others persons
for the sake of their Opinions, which they differ from us in? Whatsoever our
Opinions are, Truth is God's peculiar; we may seek for it, and pray for it, but
I question much whether we ought to run over, and trample down one another, in
the finding of it. We are all very apt to err in the pursuit, and as I have
once said, our Liturgy is well begun, in the acknowledgment of our errors; so I
now think it ends as well, in our request, That it would please God to grant us
in this World some knowledge of his Truth, and in the World to come life
everlasting: His it is, and so locked up, that I doubt no man yet ever had the
certain infallible Keys, to open it to others. Though Pilate believed not our
Savior to be God, yet if he had not known, that he was taken and believed on
for such, I do not think he would ever have put that ironical question to him,
What is Truth? He well knew, man was not able to define it, nor attain to any
certain knowledge of it, much less appropriate it to himself. St. Paul never
told us, he himself was the Light, or the Truth; he rather assures us
otherwise, and that he was not crucified us; and we are not very apt to believe
St. Peter was. But a sober Heathen, that should see our heats, would be prone
to judge, we almost thought some other men were, (who they are, I will not go
about to determine) and that though Truth may be the color, and pretended, yet
it is Mammon or Dominion are the Gods they fight for; when for the sake of
Truth, they lose all Charity; and in contending for, and exalting of Faith, the
solid fruits of both, Good Works, are despised.

I would not be thought in the least to undervalue or reject that gift, or
tenure in Frankalmoign, or Free-Alms, (a Lawyers term not improper for this
place) Faith; since without it, from all the labor and search I am able to
make, I cannot find sufficiency in man, to attain to any possession of a
present, or reversion of a future happiness. I do own it to be the most
excellent gift which comes down from Heaven, but I fear we are subject
sometimes to rely too much on it, or (if it be not improper so to say) put too
much confidence in it, place it always uppermost in the Soul; to the starving
of that otherwise vigorous and active quality of the Soul, Charity.

I stand convinced, that if the most righteous man on Earth, did take a full
and entire view of all his best actions, (whether proceeding from himself, or
of Grace, such as we call gratis data, we will not here dispute) together with
his wilful errors and deformities, and make his Reason judge of the weight and
merit of each, he would distrust and deny himself, and all he were able to do,
and expect his Justification (if he expected any) of God's mere favor and
grace; and therefore I am content it should stand for a received truth, that
the best works of an Infidel, are not only unacceptable with God, but sinful.
Yet as I believe the Scriptures, excluding many men from the Kingdom of Heaven,
or future happiness, under the diverse titles of sinners, and all under the
notion of Infidels; so, since there is a salvo for penitents, I know not who
those sinners are, much less do I know the faithful, from any outward badge or
cognizance they wear, and therefore am unfit to judge any but my self. For I
could never yet, nor shall I believe, unless I become able first to reject and
abandon that Reason I have, or that Reason leaves and forsakes me, find just
cause to condemn in my thoughts, any one Nation or People, any one Sect or
Party, or any one single person in the World besides, for the bare want of a
public profession, (I exclude here wilful denial) or owning of Faith, just
according to that model, as any one Nation, or Council, or selected number of
men have framed it, so long as I behold in him, or them, those works which are
the usual concomitants and attendants, of what I think, and is generally held
to be, the true Faith.

I do not think it safe to wish my Soul with the Philosophers, but had all my
actions, after some knowledge of good and evil, been always conformable and
agreeable to their Writings, and such as the actions of some of them seem to
have been, I think I should never despair of future happiness, or rest, were my
Faith weaker than some men perhaps will imagine it, from my thus writing. What
was the cause of their good works? was it Faith? If it were not, I am sure it
was the Grace of God, and to them who owned it so, or the work of a Divine
power, that Grace was not likely to be in vain. If any of them was withheld at
any time from sinning against God, 'twas the same God withheld them, as
withheld Abimelech an Heathen as they; and Abimelech and some of them, might
for ought I know at the last, obtain from a bountiful and gracious God, mercy
and forgiveness, as well as a restraint. The sound of a Savior of the World,
from the beginning, and long before his bodily presence on Earth, had Romans
10.18.
gone into all the Earth; for St. Paul borrows those words, Their sound went,
etc. out of the Psalm entitled, Psalm. 19.
Coeli enarrant, the Heavens declare, etc. These men might look for some
strange deliverer, and God might please to show them more than we can judge of.

We read of a good and charitable man, a Gentile, who so loved the Nation of
the Jews, that he built them a Synagogue; concerning whose Faith at that time,
there is nothing more to be collected from the story of him, than that having
heard of the fame of Jesus, he did believe he was able to heal his Servant; and
yet the Author and finisher of our Faith gives this testimony of him, Luke 7.9.
That he had not found so great Faith, no not in Israel; though there are
others mentioned before, who Chap. 5-11.
forsook all, and followed him, and owned him for Mat. 16.16. John 6.69.
that Christ the Son of the living God too. Truly a Centurion's Faith may best
become us, an humble, not an arrogant Faith, and it may in some sort be safest
for us to think, that if he vouchsafe to come under our roof, we are unworthy
he should, and unfit any manner of ways to entertain him.

We are apt not only to extol our Faith, but to impose and force it upon
others, and condemn all men who receive it not as 'twere from us, and from our
hands. Indeed he who feels any blessed effect of his own Faith, will not only
wish all men believed as he did, but endeavor, without breach or rent of
Charity, they should: But surely methinks he should not with ease, or without
feeling some smart, undergo a rupture in his own Charity, for the transplanting
the same Faith into others, since he will certainly find, neither himself, nor
any man barely was the planter of it in himself; nor think there should be any
diminution of the one, for the propagating (as we call it) of the other, in
other men. Without some rent of this thing called Charity, I doubt whether
there can be an approbation of, or assent to Cleonard's proposition to the
Princes of Christendom; that is, (without other just cause) an endeavor to
show the Turk our Faith, with Temporal Armor over it, if we were able so to
do; and put part of his Nation to the Sword, to draw or hale the remnant of
them to the Faith, and to heal some Souls through the wounds of others Bodies.
They are men as well as we, of the same mould, and their Souls of the same
extraction, and we might consider first, how we could approve of the like
conviction amongst our selves. The Sword doubtless has often made a way for
Faith, and I believe it to be, or happens sometimes, through God's Eternal wise
decree; but I do much question the truth of those men's Faith, who are upon such
a reason at any time the immediate visible instruments of this preparative.
When a man shall once own the New Testament, as the Word of Truth, and stand
convinced, that all the Precepts laid down therein are righteous, and grounded
on Moral equity; if he make his recourse to the New for his belief only, and to
the Old only for some of his actions, I would ask a Stranger in that case,
whether he thinks that man's Reason, or his Affections, bear the greatest sway,
or be most predominant in his Soul.

It may seem strange, how some men can step from Mount Gerizim, to Mount Ebal,
as it were at will and pleasure; settle a Tower of peace, or defense for
themselves on the one, and raise a Tower of offense against others on the
other; let the one be the seat for their Reason, and the other for their
Affections, and place Faith (as they call it) the attendant on both, and that
Reason all this while should not espy that the Affections lead it thither.
There is one, esteemed a great planter, or reformer of our Faith in these
parts, who to maintain the lawfulness of Malediction in some case, (I am sure
against Mat. 5.44. Romans 12.14.
Christ's precept, and his example, who Luke 23.34.
prayed for his persecutors, and against Acts 7.60.
St. Stephen's too, who did the like) would make a distinction between a
persecution of man, (though for the Gospel) and a persecution of the Gospel. If
it be against the persecutors of the Gospel, (according to his definition) he
then calls it Faiths malediction, or cursing; which, says he, rather than God's
Word should be suppressed, or Heresy maintained, wishes that all creatures
went to rack. If this be the work or effect of some men's Faith, I hope I may
say without offense, I pray God deliver me from such a Faith. Surely it may be
questioned, how, and in what manner the Gospel of it self may suffer
persecution; and no less whether the believers therein, would suffer so much
from their common Enemies, or one another, were it not for their too positive
condemnation sometimes of all, who do not believe just as they do, or profess
themselves to do. Theano a Heathen Nun, had, in my opinion, more Divine
thoughts in her, than some of our late Reformers; and 'twas a better and far
more charitable saying of hers, when by public Decree she was commanded,
amongst others, to ban and curse Alcibiades, for profaning their reputed Holy
mysteries, That her profession was to pray, and to bless, not to curse.

I am so far from adhering to any party, more than other, and so far prone to
blame all parties in this case, that I am not like to receive the favor, or
good opinion of any: But whatsoever I receive from man, I trust and believe I
shall never incur God's displeasure, for declaring my sense of things only,
according to the best light of Reason he has endowed me with. Some such thing I
do believe there is on Earth, as St. Augustine has entitled his Book, A City of
God, that is, a peculiar select number of people, who so pass their lives here,
as that they shall be Eternally happy hereafter. But for several men, to frame
and imagine such a peculiar City in any Nation, or corner of the World,
different in some fashion, form, or mode, from all others, and then think that
to be the Model, or Platform upon which future happiness must necessarily be
built, or depend, seems very strange to me, and may do so perhaps to some
others. I cannot think those Citizens, whoever they are, require such a
different habit, or dress from all others; but rather, all of them generally
use one special attire, or ornament for the Soul, whereof somewhat is to be
found in all Nations and places, and which men free of that City, may be best
known and distinguished by: And that is, that becoming ornament St. Paul seems
to mention upon another account, 1 Timothy 2.10.
Good works; that ornament which naturally arises from a meek and quiet Spirit,
which St. Peter seems to intimate, 1 Pet. 3.4.
the hidden man of the heart; not outwardly worn in pomp, but that, whosoever
privately wears, or carries about him, will not too narrowly dissect, rend and
tear, much less suddenly condemn the Spirit of another man. True Charity, says
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.7.
bears all things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all
things; and if we put on that which is Col. 3.13.
the bond of perfectness, it will reconcile us to all mankind, and be as useful
to others, as it is ornamental to us. It will be like the Dove in the Ark, as
swift of wing, and as fit to be sent abroad upon any employment, as the Raven
or Vulture; and with that will bring a branch of Olive, solid contentment and
satisfaction to our selves: we shall then have all 1 Cor. 5.7.
the old leaven purged out, and become a new lump; and shall render unto God,
by such a restoration of his Image, that which is Gods.

SECT. III. How Love may be regent?
I May seem before to have undertaken a rational discourse of the Soul, and to
show by what steps and degrees even that way, it may be fitted to resist
assaults from without; and therefore in reason it may be expected, that I
should set down some rule, some probable demonstrable way or means, how this
thing I call Charity, which is ever the main principle of Action, may be set up
regent in the Soul; which I have said, and do think there is some stamp of in
Nature, no less than there is of Justice, which all or most men agree to,
however* each of them is become much obliterate. But now since Charity is so
much the chief spring and principle of Action, it is fit it should be so
directed and assisted, that it may either be preferred to its Regency where it
is any ways obstructed, or be preserved in it. And the means hereunto will be
the better discovered, if it be considered, that there is a certain connection
betwixt the Graces and Virtues of the Soul, and a mutual light and assistance
which they lend one to the other in their operation; and therefore though Love
does appear to be the principal, yet it is not alone, in its motion, but what
does depend upon, and owe much of its vigor to the concurrence of the rest. As
for instance, Humility does not a little administer thereunto, as it arises
from a prospect into our own weakness and insufficiency; and as there is
somewhat greater and more perfect than our selves in the World, so that shows
our Love should be accordingly directed; and that God, who is the Author of our
Being and preservation, and is infinitely perfect in himself, should therefore
be loved by us with all the heart, and all the Soul. But because man may be
lowly and humble, and think meanly of himself, and yet not presently find a
ready rule, for drawing his Lines to the circumference; let us see if we can
extract Love, by the rule of Justice. This is most certain, that we would be
loved of all that know us; we would be aided and assisted in all our dangers
and troubles; we would be relieved and comforted in all our wants and needs;
why then, let this be the rule, To do so to all persons, as we would in right
reason they should do to us, if their state and condition were ours, and ours
theirs. This is a common rule, but such as certainly deserves precedence of all
the sage maxims the World has at any time afforded, and might well without hurt
to us, like Aaron's Rod, devour all those of the best Magicians and Enchanters,
that we might only make use of that upon all occasion. He who has it once well
engraven in the Tables of his heart, will need little other precept or rule to
walk by. It is a rule, that with variation of a word or two, is applicable to
the direction and government of our actions and passions too, not only in
relation to our fellow members, but in reference to all irrational creatures
under us; and, I hope without offense I may say, in reference to our actions
toward our Creator. For certainly had we power to create of nothing, we should
expect of our creatures love and reverence, duty and obedience; and therefore
we ought by all ways we are able, to pay them to our Creator. What occurrence
is there in man's life, that this rule may not be laid to? A man would think at
first view and conjecture, it were as far from being applicable to, or having
any thing in it Sovereign for my distemper of Sorrow, as might be. Facias quod
fieri vis, etc. seems at first sight to have little probability of any sanative
ingredient for that passion; yet, narrowly searched into, it has. If I
interrogate my self, whether having near Relation, Friend, or child, whom I
dearly loved, I would they should for loss of me, drown themselves in a flood
of tears and sorrow? I can readily make answer in the negative, I would not. I
might be willing and content, that in all their thoughts and words of me, they
carried some civil respect and esteem for me, but proceeded no further. And why
then should I exceed that measure, which I would have only meted out for my
self? All excess and excrescence springs from self-love, Charity has none; and
this rule may as well help to frame it, as any I can imagine.

When I have been alone, and my thoughts have been at any time in travail to
bring forth and frame, or to find out already framed some short general rule,
by which the Soul might always move with least grief and offense, and with
greatest ease and pleasure, I have ever pitched upon this, quod tibi fieri non
vis, etc. as the most exact and universally comprehensive, and far beyond
Epictetus his sustine, and abstine, or any other; as being the most effectual
relief against all incursion and invasion from without, and a firm Basis for
Charity to be founded upon* and it is indeed for the introduction of universal
love and charity into our hearts, that our Savior lays down this rule, Luke
6.31, 32.
As ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to them likewise: For (the
following words) if ye love them which love you, what thanks have ye? for
sinners also do even the same. And St. Matthew setting down that precept in
these words, Mat. 7.12*
All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to
them, adds by way of argument, For this is the Law and the Prophets. What the
Law and the Prophets are, and what they hang upon, or mean, our Mat. 22.35* etc.
Savior tells a Lawyer elsewhere, that is, Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and thy
neighbor as thy self. He who came not to destroy, but to fulfill the Law, puts
us in mind of that first and great Commandment, that Law of Nature, I may say,
which till we fulfill in some measure, our question will be vain, as his was
there, who asked, Luke 10.25, 26.
What shall I do to inherit eternal life? and we can have no fitter reply that
How read thou?

But though in this progress of Love toward its perfection and Regency,
Humility and Justice (which bear upon them the stamp of Nature) do greatly
contribute; yet there is somewhat more necessary to purify and refine it, and
to make it more powerful, effectual, and durable, and that is Faith. Faith, I
say, that Divine Grace, which does present such objects to us, as Reason either
could not at all, or but imperfectly discover; but yet when discovered and
approved by our Reason, are of that nature and consequence, that they forthwith
excite, attract, and engage our Love, and make it to be predominant. And
therefore it is necessary to consult Revelation, by which alone these objects
are thus made known, and to strengthen our Faith in it; that so our love of
them for their excellency, and our hope of enjoying them, with respect to our
happiness, may become an effectual means of life and action, and give new
strength to all the powers of our Soul in the prosecution of them. Then will
our Love grow great indeed, and that which is here thus Regent in us, will
hereafter be Triumphant; for Charity never fails. Charity then is the end of
the rest, and to which they do tend as Lines to their Center; and as they do
lend help unto that, so that again does give perfection to them, and without
which they are, in St. Paul's phrase, but as sounding Brass, or a tinckling
Cymbal, that whatever noise they may make, are of no benefit to us. Thus the
Apostle speaking of the abiding here of Faith, Hope, and Charity, tells us, 1
Cor. 13.13.
the greatest of these is Charity; of which (reversing his method and order in
placing of them) I shall say thus much in short; it is Charity must guide and
direct us, it is Hope must relieve and support us, and it is Faith by which we
must enter into rest; that must be the Key that must open to us, and let us in,
after all our travails; and if Faith do ever become a Crown, and Hope an
Helmet, we must have before Charity for our Breast Plate, badge or cognizance;
which we must always wear, and never put off, lest we be left open to diverse
and various assaults here; and notwithstanding any Armor we think we have got
on, notwithstanding any allegation of prophesying in Christ's name, or casting
out Devils, or doing other wonderful works, if we be found to be without this
Livery, we shall be disowned, and receive that sentence, Mat. 7.23.
I never knew you, depart from me ye, etc. from which Good Lord deliver us.

The Conclusion.
IN my entrance upon this subject, I said, how I had a desire to take some view
of my Soul, and see its operations; and now, this here is become its weak
product, perhaps more unfit for the World, than that of my Body; yet this I can
say, it is not spurious, and if my Brain has been the Father of it, and gave it
Being, my Heart has been the Mother, and lodged it, and brought it forth;
without any other aim or design, desire or affection whatsoever, than the
easing, quieting, or calming of her self, unless that she desires or hopes, it
may through God's Grace have some mollifying, or sanative quality toward some
others.

I have not upon my own view of it, so far transgressed, as to fall in love
with it; I am conscious of its mis-shapes and deformities, and doubtful, nay
very fearful, of its defects and errors in many particulars; and so have little
reason to desire, it should live long to my shame and disgrace. But if man will
not wink at those errors, nor pass them over with charity, I trust and hope
that he who made me subject to errors, and knows them best, and their causes,
will pardon them; which hope is to any man a sufficient Cordial against the
fear or trouble of others censure.

I pretend to no supernatural Revelation in any of my thoughts, and he who is
free from error in them, must necessarily have somewhat more than a pretense to
it. Let the World judge of me what they please; I have been beforehand with
them, and I am sure no man can have meaner, or more contemptible thoughts of
me, than I have sometimes had of my self; and if there be any thing of true and
unfeigned humility in man, he can be as well content others should think meanly
of him, as he of himself; but they are not always so proper Judges, and I think
that question, 1 Cor. 2.11*
What man knows the things of a man, but the Spirit of man, which is in him?
may not be altogether improperly applicable to the present purpose, and for
prevention of rash judging of other men's Spirits, since we have been told by
one who well knew, We know not our own, or of what Spirit we are.

I have lived to see often the vanity of my first thoughts, from my second, and
may live to see the errors of these; if I do, I will acknowledge and amend
them. I have groaped in the dark to find out the easiest plain way, toward
content and quietness, and rest, even while I am a Traveller; but I desire not
to become an Ignis fatuus, to lead other men out of their way; and if this Hand
point not right, I beseech God any man who sees it, may hear that gracious Isa.
30.21.
word behind him, This is the way, walk ye in it* John 5.39*
Search the Scriptures; they are they which testify of the God of power, the
God of peace, and the God of consolation.

That Sacred Word has already received so clear an Humane rational vindication
of its truth and excellency, so plain a demonstration of its virtue and
efficacy, toward the health of Souls; and such excellent methods have been
lately prescribed, toward the application and use thereof, as there wants no
additional assistance of so weak a Soul as mine. I must confess and acknowledge
I do believe, it may and does often cause strange inflammations in many Souls,
and renders them not only painful and dangerous, but malignant and infectious,
for want of a good digestion; and all that I am able to advise any one further,
in the reading thereof, is, that he first observe the temper of that man
according to God's own heart in the Old Testament, (who found that very Ps.
119.105.
Word ( Moses Law) a lamp unto his feet, and a light unto his path, became
wiser than his Enemies by it; took comfort and delight in it; and gives so
large an Encomium of it in that most excellent Psalm, as is not to be
paralleled; wherein it has been observed, there is mention made of it almost
every line or verse) that he do not exercise himself in things which Psa.
131.1, 2.
are too high for him, but refrain his Soul and keep it low, like as a child
that is weaned from his mother. If he can but obtain that, (which certainly a
man might do, from the reflection of the very light of Reason in beholding his
own weakness) I presume to say after he has read and seriously considered our
Savior's Precepts in the New Testament, he will be at peace, and in charity
with all men, and so by consequence within himself. More I cannot say, but that
I beseech Almighty God, the Lord and giver of Life, in whom we live, and move,
and have our Being, the provident Ruler and Governor of all things, one
Eternal infinite wise power, that Ens or Essence of it self, that first cause,
that which we are in no wise able to comprehend, that he would enlighten and
purify our understandings; direct all our thoughts; regulate the vain
wanderings of our imaginations; strengthen our memories, so far, as they may be
retentive of all good; make our Wills obedient and tractable; allure and draw
away all our affections, from the vanities and false appearances of the World;
actuate and enliven them toward the pursuit of all good, and the detestation
of all evil; that we may possess our Souls in patience, and with one mind and
one Soul glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; and out of the
abundance of his mercy, forgive us all the errors of our ways; that he would
not be extreme to mark what we have done amiss; that as our sins and follies
have abounded, and do abound, his Grace may superabound, more especially to me,
the greatest, vilest, miserablest, and most deformed of sinners, and the most
defaced Image of his goodness, that he would again restore that Image here in
some measure; give me a Fountain of tears to wash away all its blots and wilful
sullies; direct me by his Grace here, toward his Glory: increase my weak
Faith, that it become an assurance; convert my fearful hopes into a full
persuasion, and certain expectation of that glorious Vision; be with me,
comfort me, and strengthen me, at the hour of death: And when this wearied,
tossed and turmoil'd Soul, that can find no settled rest here, shall leave its
polluted and sinful habitation, purified by Repentance and Faith, receive it
into Glory. And this for the merits and mediation of his Son Jesus Christ, our
ever blessed Savior and Redeemer, to whom be glory, and honor, and praise,
now and for ever. Amen.

SEVERAL EPISTLES To the Reverend Dr. TILLOTSON DEAN of CANTERBURY. WHEREIN The
Nature, the Immortality, the Operations, and the Happiness of the SOUL of MAN,
Are further Considered and Illustrated: And the Divine Providence over it in a
particular manner Asserted

By the aforesaid Author.

LONDON: Printed for George Downs.

The Author's Apology for his Writing. To the Reverend John Tillotson D. D.
DEAN of CANTERBURY.
EPIST. I. Wherein the Author, after some Apology for the not making public
his said Treatises, De Dolor and De Anima, makes some reflection on Atheism,
and blames the unnecessary and extravagant disputes, and writings, against such
as seem tainted or infected* with that opinion.
SIR,
HAVING reduced my (sometimes) sad, solitary, or serious considerations (at all
times, and upon all occasions, very inept, weak and imperfect ones, God knows)
into some kind of Method; and made them legible in paper, I took upon me the
boldness (altogether unknown to you, and without so much as discovering my
name) to approach you before all others, and beg the favor of your perusal.
And this I did not only from a hearsay of your clear judgment, and courteous
disposition to all men, as well strangers, as familiars; but from a singular
opinion I had of you my self; That you were a person of a frank and open
discourse, and one who would plainly, and roundly tell me of my faults and my
follies, discover your real opinion of what lay before you, and not permit and
suffer me (a mere stranger) for want of admonition, to cherish an imperfect or
deformed Embryo, and such, as might casually hereafter be born into the world
to my disgrace; but rather while I lived, and had the power over it to smother
and consume it in the flames.

The most favorable censure I expected from you, was a reprieve of it for some
season, not a present enfranchisement of it (or making it free of the world in
my life time) and by consequence a kind of confinement of my future thoughts,
if they should vary from, or disagree with these. And yet the latter I met
withal from you, and find that you are pleased to move me, not only to allow
it present life, and future birth, but to afford it instant liberty and freedom
to walk abroad.

I might seem ill natured not presently to grant his request, who so readily
condescended unto mine, had I no just cause to allege, for a demurr at least,
if not for a denial, and such as may work upon you to desist from any such
motion, as much as on me for a denial: For I must tell you, If I hereafter
suffer therein, I shall readily transfer the blame on you; and some perhaps
will give you the precedence therein, when they come to know the person who
perused these papers, and blame your oversight beyond my weak and feeble
inspect.

Your universal Charity may so far abound, as to overlook many deformities, if
not errors, occasioned perhaps from my immoderate affection; Which kind of
Charity, is a thing not to be expected from other men, at least from all.
Indeed if any man receive good from these Papers, he will find greater cause to
thank you (next under God) than me; who never at first intended them as a
Legacy to the world; nor durst, nor dare yet own them under any name. I trust
they would hurt or prejudice no man (if public) further than the spending of
his time in vain, in reading them; and surely that is a sufficient damage, or
loss to any ingenuous spirit. There is enough good seed already sown, more than
any man can reap in his life time; 'twere well if the tares of this nature,
were gathered together in bundles to be burnt, from which fate I I know not how
to exempt mine. I have given you my opinion already in discourse, from which I
know not well how to recede; That if some Judicious person were of power to do
it, and should banish out of the world, and cause to be buried in utter
oblivion many thousand volumes now extant; he would merit more of the world,
and perform a far more acceptable service to the wise and learned thereof, than
he who added one though of never so great use, or excellency.

There is enough said about the soul of man already, more perhaps than is, or
ever will be understood, and too much I fear of a higher-subject. Every age in
each single Nation has afforded, or rather introduced some subject matter or
other, whereabout the Souls of men have more peculiarly busied themselves by
way of disputation, and made the canvasing of particular opinions, a thing in
mode and fashion for a certain time and season: That which at this instant
seems to employ, and busy the tongue, the pen or the Press (except seditious
Pamphlets and the like from the spirit of contradiction, or an overweening
conceit of ones self never out of fashion) most or above all other, is the
different opinion of men about the original of all things, under the notion,
names, or titles* of Theism and Atheism; wherefore we had some little discourse
together, occasioned by some short passages of mine, in my aforesaid Treatise.
And for as much as all those Atheistical Tenets, now more than ordinarily
vented, do seem to strike at the very root of religious worship, and are wholly
derogatory of the glorious Attributes of that God, we serve and adore, I
perceive you are not only (to your praise) a strong oppugner thereof your self,
but take pleasure in them also who do the same.

Now truly I must here tell you, That which has fell from me in relation to
that subject, was rather accidental, upon my weak search into the nature,
operation and faculties of the Soul, than of any designed purpose to convince
any man of the falsehood of those Atheistical opinions: Because I am not yet
fully convinced in my thoughts of the necessity of any such endeavor; but do
rather believe, all those men we term or hold for professed Atheists, would yet
gladly receive and embrace a full persuasion and conviction from others, of
what they themselves maintain in words; and not seldom (some of them at least)
question a Deity and divine retribution, from the like passion, they say,
others believe one, viz. Fear: And if they are sensible of something invisible
to be feared, under some notion of justice; and like Of whom he say 's Nec
quenquam vidi, qui magis ea timeret, quae timenda esse negaret.
Metrodorus (I think the name is) in Cicero, fear what they deny, there needs
no conviction of opinion, but rather extortion of confession, which is the
peculiar work of a Deity, by distress, affliction, or the like.

If I could once prevail with any man, to ransack as I may say, his own Soul;
seriously to consider, and observe the strange motions, tendencies, operations,
and sudden alterations therein, I should have greater hopes of some clear
manifestation to that man, of an eternal wise working spirit in and through the
same, than from any outward prospect, and beholding its work (under what notion
soever Atoms, etc.) in and through the whole Universe beside. Certainly God
would show himself to any one, who did but seriously and humbly behold, view,
and consider himself, which we can never show a man by any outward
demonstration; That sight, must arise from within. How some endowed with so
great perfection of Intellect, beyond the ordinary sort of men, and able to
discern a vast disproportion, or difference of spirit, and yet none of body,
between themselves and others, should not fall into some admiration, at some
time or other, with a kind of thankfulness to somewhat or other; is to be
wondered at. Every man's Soul is not only an image of God, but looked into of
its self, is the clearest glass to represent the most perfect shadow that can
be of that Original. There is some spark of fire in man, beyond the reach or
finger of chance, which if he might be prevailed with to uncover, and view
himself, would afford some light which all the raking, or blowing from another,
cannot do; God himself can and will show himself, so far as he sees good, and
none else can show him to that person, who will not vouchsafe humbly to look
into himself.

If there be any such thing, as a beast in the likeness of a man, and one
should fight with it, I may ask St. Paul's question, What advantageth it? I beg
your pardon and others, etc. for such an expression besides the meaning of the
Text, I am not prone to impose such a title or attribute upon the meanest human
creature; but surely, if we once come to that pass, as to reject an infinite
wise, just, eternal Being; a Reward and punishment hereafter, and disclaim our
own immortality; our prerogative above beasts is very small; and I am sure we
may not improperly take up the subsequent words 1 Cor. 15.32.
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we dye, for which ends and purposes, it is
to be feared, some men have owned (though they have not been fully convinced
of) that opinion.

The world did, and does, and will abound with Atheists, that is, persons
living as without a God in the world, or duly weighing divine retribution: But
whether those on whom we most commonly fix, and impose that title, best merit
the same, is some question. There is no great distinction to be made between
men denying God in constant daily works, yet owning him in words; and denying
him in words, yet owning him in some measure by works: unless we should term
the first sort real Atheists, and the other professed ones only, and conclude
the latter are of more evil consequence; because the first sort or kind require
the intellect to discern or espy them, and the latter only sense; forasmuch as
the tongue, which is such an unruly member, infects even through sense; but
actions do it not so readily, but require the intellect to judge and discern,
whether the party be an Atheist or no. Had I not in beholding the Soul in an
human body happened to consider that admirable power it has to frame an
articulate noise, given chiefly to magnify its Maker, and withal how it is
otherwise employed, I had not first so much as mentioned such a thing, or
called one, Atheist: and David's dixit insipiens in cord, I cannot intend much
further. For however it be spoken from the heart, that is voluntarily and with
some kind of affection going along with it; yet I do verily think there never
was man so confident, or that ever so assuredly believed there was no God, as I
and thousands others do that there is one; and that seeming negative opinion
were at an end, if every man would permit his tongue to declare his belief, or
at least his doubt, and not use it to obey some appetite of being singular, and
thwart the general received opinion of the world, from some desire to be
esteemed wise or learned. Methinks this question were enough to convince any
man, that he is not an Atheist in belief. Why is he, or how comes he to be at
any time just, and faithful? Why a lover of truth? Why does he regard his
promise, and sometimes perform it to his disadvantage? If he will not own this
belief of a God by word, others may espy it in him, for I dare say never any
man was yet able, so to obliterate the image of God in himself, but some mark,
or impress thereof, might at some time be observed by another; and therefore
let us condemn nothing in man, but that unruly member, set on fire of Hell;
over which too there is now and then a kind of fatal necessity of contradicting
it self in these reputed Atheists; none sooner or more readily unworthily
invocating that name they deny, than they. I have yet that good opinion of many
professing, or rather saying there is no God, That they are actually in some
measure just, merciful, liberal and charitable, which is some owning him in
their work, however it happens they deny him with their lips, and they must
necessarily secretly own and confess the belief of a Deity from themselves, and
some of their own actions, unless they are able to demonstrate to me or others,
how these excellent extracorporeal qualities, as I may term them, as justice
mercy, etc. or a goodness of mind, universally inclined or inclinable to all,
beyond and quite out of its individual self, or progeny; can possibly arise
from a bare concretion of Atoms.

We have lived in (I hope passed) an age, when generally the tongues of men
owned a God publicly enough, and might seem to have been a little too familiar
with him, given him high and excellent Attributes enough, called on his divine
providence, and summoned it down for the justification of every wicked action:
When Reason, God's vicegerent in the Soul, seemed quite abandoned, and
Conscience was defined a new light from above, to gratify the affections of
some, and the fancies of others. And it is no great wonder, if upon a sudden
change and alteration, some men run into the contrary extreme: That when reason
begins to take place again, there start up a philosophical generation of men
upon the stage (some say the world is at this time much inclined to it) as bold
in words, as the other were in deeds, and feeding too greedily on causes, for
want of a good digestion, resolve into Atoms. But it is to be hoped, there is
less danger of Satan, when he appears in his own colors, than when in the form
of an Angel of light, and that he will not continue in that shape, for any long
time or season.

Now we have greater cause to judge or censure the greatest number of men thus
liberal of their tongues, and challenging them for their own, or who is Lord
over them, as men full of new wine, than those Mockers in the Acts, did the
inspired Galileans, men of a quite contrary temper, discourse, or opinion. The
spirits of these kind of men in our days, are quick, and aerie from their
accustomed liquors, and thereby forgetting all cares and sorrow, they make a
shift to forget their Maker too; or at least remember him and his word, no
further, than as they serve for subjects of their wit. If Bacchus were banished
the nation (as he is at this day in Turkey) and drollery out of countenance and
fashion; these men's Oracles would soon be silent, without any endeavor of a
conviction of their falsehood: Which till one, or both happen, is not to be
expected; and I cannot not think there is any such absolute great necessity of
studying, and maintaining arguments against th^se men, as there is of taking up
David's form of prayer for them, Psalm. 9.19, 20.
Up Lord, let not man have the upper hand; Put them in fear (O Lord) that they
may know themselves to be but men, ignorant weak silly worms, as well as we,
who can not own the least knowledge of him, or any thing else but from him.
This thing, fear has sometimes wrought a conviction, when nothing else could
seem to effect it. That incomprehensible nothing (as they call it) which they
say Fear has made our God, is of that power and goodness, now and then by this
kind of means to be found of them who seek him not, but even contemn him, and
dare him with their tongues.

Besides these men, who do not always think as they speak nor speak as they
sometimes think; and some others no earnest nor eager Disputants in the case,
little exceeding beasts in knowledge, yet much in making provision for the
flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, who would be content to dye the death of
beasts, and may seem therefore a little to favor that opinion; Besides these
there are a sort of engineers against God, who out of the rusty artillery of
some old Philosophers, by a little new scowring, filing, or the like, do frame
and fit up weapons at all points, and expose them to public view and sale; and
stir up active spirits wanting other employment, to take them up and challenge
all Combatants. But whether self interest, or self conceit, has caused more men
to take upon them this kind of trade, art, or mystery; or which has bred up
most pupils, or best proficients; is a point very disputable, and
controvertible. However, be it the one, or the other, or one rather than
another at any time; I am somewhat confident, there would not be so great vent
of this kind of stuff, nor so many Chapmen for it, if some men, who cannot well
endure the sight of this commodity, did not take upon them, and use so great
labor and pains, to cry it down, but would rather in some manner, slight and
contemn it.

What ever singular opinion any man may raise within himself, about the system
of the Universe, or Original frame of the now visible World different from the
general received opinion of mankind; I cannot think, he does at any time vent
it, and that varnished with the best colored reason, or flourished Rhetoric
he can procure, out of any good will he bears to mankind in general, to
disburthen them of causeless and needless fears; or that he thinks it will
prove any advantage to the world, to have a mind, all-knowing, just, merciful,
etc. cashiered out of men's thoughts, or exchanged for a fortuitous operation of
Atoms. There is no man in his right wits, would desire a cure of the fear of
these attributes, mixed or united in one eternal mind, nor need they who talk
against it, fear it, if they would return and humbly seek to approach it.

Now if any men make all this ado (as we say) and stir, to have their quick or
deep inspect into nature, their strength of judgment, or profoundness of
learning had in admiration; as it may be reasonably collected some do: Those
men are then usually as well pleased to find Antagonists, as pupils, and
converts, and think they have not showed their parts, and endowments,
sufficiently and thoroughly enough to the world, unless they have some ground
to demonstrate them a little further by a reply. And therefore all occasions of
offering the gauntlet to these men, would be carefully avoided.

If any man suspecting he has heretofore served God for naught, has set on
broach new opinions, or old ones new trimmed up, dressed, and varnished, framed
and modelled too, for the allowance or approbation, or rather justification of
the doings of some great ones in power (whose constant actions all along, have
seemed to defy a righteous and just God, though perhaps the parties sometimes
feared one) judging it a ready way to advance his own fortune, by telling men
in authority, they are masters of their own, and that right of dominion is
nothing but what men give, or take for their present security; after this
manner striving to demonstrate there is no God, to those who would be well
content and pleased there were none; If there be any such I say, and doubtless
some such one or other there may have been, a thing best known to a man's own
conscience, even such a man would sooner relent, and acknowledge his errors, if
men would seem silently to pity him only, and not send him bravado's and
challenges to defend them. We do not know after what strange manner indigence
or want may (upon Gods a little forsaking for a time) set the soul on work: How
from thence all manner of affections do rise up in arms together, as it were at
one time, and so beget such disquietness, or disease in the soul, that reason
shall swallow down any thing which the imagination shall bring in, for wholesome
food, without struggling against it; which the whole soul would willingly
reject, and cast up after as nauseous, if it could do it privately: But it is
seldom seen, that this ever happens, if the affections become outwardly
irritated or provoked, to defend that, of which they might seem to be the
original cause.

I thank God I never actually knew, what strange kind of Diana's that master of
arts, the belly; or that grand weapon, necessity were able to forge in my
brains; but I do think or rather fear, that if I had once framed some strange
monster there, and brought it forth to light, seeing I could not disown it; If
men struck at it, and accused or challenged me for the monstrosity or ugliness
thereof, I should have endeavored to defend it, and maintained it to be
somewhat perfect in its lineaments and features; when otherwise, I might in
some short space, have been as desirous to have it smothered, as any man, and
would have been content to be the Executioner of it my self, if people would
forbear to look too much on me.

Perhaps we think we are bound in duty to vindicate Gods honor; It Is true we
are: But our true and proper vindication of God consists rather of a few good
works, than a multitude of words. And it is to be feared that for want of the
manifestation of the first, Our father which is in heaven is so little and
seldom glorified, and so much and so often vilified, as he is: Certainly this
were the ready way to convince others of a God, to show we heartily believe
there is one our selves, which is not demonstrable any way so well as by good
works: And if the number of those, who allege there is none, do daily
increase, it may be assigned for none of the meanest, least, or slightest
causes; that our works do not so clearly manifest to the world, that we verily,
and assuredly believe there is a God, as some of theirs do, that they believe,
as well as say, there is none.

There is no man who believes there is a God, but believes withal, God is able,
and will in due time vindicate his own honor, and let the world know there is
an Almighty one in Israel. And I for my part could never yet find or perceive,
that men's minds became changed in their course, for having their opinions
severely oppugned, or canvased in writing, but that usually they become more
stiff, and refractory, in their course thereby; and that such an outcry and
clamor is the readier way to whet the spleen, and with it, the fancy; than
mollify the heart, and with it clarify the reason.

If any commission be granted us, or allowed us to fight for God, after this
manner, it had need be executed with abundance of caution, and in most perfect
charity, remembering there is no one we term Atheist, but is the very image of
God, as well as any other. And 'twill be difficult for us who believe that, to
think any of his image wholly devoid of all manner of sense of him, whatever he
say. As to the generality of men talking after this manner (not of design) they
usually seem quick, and discerning enough, and are doubtless men of brave
spirits; Men, which bear a kind of indignation in their breasts, against being
gulled, or sliely drawn into an opinion by any seducing false spirit. And it is
some wonder they do not espy (which I pray God one day they may) that those
things I mentioned before, self-interest, and self-conceit are no less busy
inmates, in unmaking God; than, as they themselves sometimes talk, they are in
making one, and that he who starts up with old arguments new vamp'd, in these
our days, after the dispute seemed for many ages to be laid asleep, is shrewdly
to be suspected, that he labors of the one, or the other.

The moderate inquiry into the original of all things, might not ill become the
first ages of the world, and I cannot much blame men in former days for this
kind of search. But when God has once delivered himself (so far as man is able
to comprehend him) graciously or miraculously to a nation, or people, and
seemed to be engrafted into the thoughts of all mankind; I think some peculiar
men may be as much to blame, in thinking to maintain and defend his existence,
by the proper strength and force of their reason, as some others have been to
question it of late. If men once allow themselves the liberty (or think it is
allowed them) to let the fancy have its full scope and range in any matter,
without correction; they may easily shake the strongest foundation that has
been laid in the world by unanswerable Nicodemus's questions: And therefore
surely a Nicodemus his reply, may at sometimes be as proper for them, as a
grave or sage one; such an one, as to him, who inquiring if God were eternal,
or from eternity, and the whole visible universe created out of nothing, at a
certain space of time, or that time had its being or beginning from thence;
What God did, or how he was employed before the creation? received this answer;
that God was preparing hell or a place of torment for all such futile idle
inquisitors as himself. I do think I were able my self, by objections,
questions, and cavils, to nonplus or puzzle the wisest and learned of the
world; and seem to render them incapable to satisfy other men's minds
demonstratively, and plainly, of the truth of those things, whereof my own mind
rested moderately and sufficiently already satisfied; but if I committed such a
folly, and any man went about to answer me, I should not esteem him wise (how
learned soever he might be) but think according to our Proverb he might shake
hands with me.

I wish, men who go about to defend a God by their reason, be not guilty
sometime of the same fault with those who deny one, and do it as much, or more,
to be esteemed deep-sighted and wise, and to show their learning or reading, as
for the pure love of God or the truth. It is a subject (if I may be allowed so
to call it) which would make a good man, nay a sober wise man, even tremble
while he goes about to handle, or think seriously on; And he who is truly wise
will not adventure, or think he is able to know or define his Maker, before he
know himself; which never man yet did, from all the reason he was endowed
withal. I know it were no difficult matter for a man of an ordinary capacity,
once master of the languages, to muster up, and run over the opinions of almost
all the ancient and modern Philosophers, about this point of Theism; finely to
marshal them, set them in opposition one against the other, and at length with
some little new invention of his own, appoint or determine which should
overcome in the case. But perhaps at this day he might be generally thought, in
such case as this, the wiser of the three Grecian Sages, that knew when and how
far to hold his peace. A man may be mistaken in his aims (whether it be of
leading and conducting others into the paths of wisdom and truth, or being
reputed wise himself) by saying too much, as well as too little; and I pray God
none of us become so far deceived, as to lay the way more open for profaneness,
and daring of the Almighty, while we go about (as we say or pretend) to close
and hedge it up. I am much afraid our abilities will never extend to salve the
Phenomenon we so much talk of, or make any thing apparent in Heaven, if I
understand the word, nor that reason can demonstrate what God is, though it may
tell us what God is not; And therefore I think reason may be as well too blame,
for marching too far, or soaring too high, for its learning, or knowledge, as
sitting quite still, or grovelling on the earth, and permitting the imagination
to introduce what forms of a Deity, will, or best may, gratify any the most
predominant present affection, an habit which has been too much in fashion of
late; and now a little withdrawing, makes way for the other excess.

I may have said too much my self in this little, it has exceeded my original
intent and purpose, yet this further I must say, and beg your pardon, and
others who shall chance to see it, if I say amiss, that my wishes are, we may
all in this great concern carefully avoid extremes: and that as we do not set
up such a God by faith, as reason is able daily to confront; so, we set not up
such a God by reason, as there needs no faith to lay hold on. For my weak
opinion is, nay my present resolution is; As never wholly to desert my reason
for the adoration of any God: So never to adore any thing for God, my reason is
able fully to comprehend.

EPIST. II. Wherein he treats of the cause of Action, or Motion, under the
notion of Spirit; and endeavors to show our often mistakes in applying our
thoughts and actions to the operation of that Spirit of truth in us, which
though good in themselves, may proceed from other cause; and advises to
solitude at particular seasons, as the most ready and likely way to behold, in
some degree, the light of truth.
BEcause Soul or Spirit has been heretofore, at special seasons, the subject
of my thoughts; and because there are many amongst us, who would seem to have
great knowledge of a Deity, and may be thought too familiar with God, under a
color or pretense of being daily enlightened with his Holy Spirit, affirming
its constant working in them; And others quite Aliens and strangers to God, not
barely by their life and conversation, but by their outward profession too, and
who deny in words, as much or more than in the deeds, that there is any such
thing as a Spirit (which Joh. 4.24.
in St. John our Savior tells us, God is) and that what we term Spirit, is a
mere Chimaera fansied in our brains. Both which kind of persons, being equally
to modest Society and civil conversation, and I may say, enemies to true
Religion; I have adventured with all submission to your more weighty thoughts
and solid judgment, to present you with my sometimes opinion, in reference to
what we most properly and peculiarly term Spirit; and wherein I say ought, in
relation to that Spirit of truth, I humbly implore its aid, that nothing escape
my Pen, which may in any wise (if seen) lead others into error, or in the least
diminish the goodness, power, glory, might, Majesty, etc. dominion of the
Almighty.

First, I have thought and do think, That we can not rationally attribute or
impute the cause of any action or motion whatsoever to ought else, than
somewhat which we, (in no wise able to comprehend by our sense) term or call a
Spirit; and that without some such thing, the world were an insignificant Lump;
That from such thing, all things live, and move, and have their being, is not
to be doubted, whether we call it Nature, or ought else. This Spirit gone forth
or sent into the visible world, which now has visible effects; as I take it to
be some emission of that Eternal spirit at the Creation from the Word, so I
think it generally works (unknown to its self) the will of that Eternal
Spirit, neither can it cease of it self to work, but if reassumed or Job 34.14.
gathered again, as is expressed in Job, all flesh would perish together, etc.
And that all flesh, and all other things, Sun, Moon, etc. do not perish, is the
work of Gods ordinary (I trust I may so call it) Providence, the confirmation,
Seal of his Creation.

Such vivifying Spirit as this (which men may call nature if they please) is
gone out into the world, and shall continue working every where (no doubt)
until the appointed end of the world: yet not apprehensive of its being, nor
capable of understanding in the least to what end it works, may probably cease
to work, after the manner it now works. And this kind of Spirit receives no
new influence, nor seems capable of any new influence from above, yet is
ordered by what we call Providence.

But where there is any Spirit conscious of its own working, and in some
measure capable to conceive from whence it is; or at least desirous to enquire
after, or know the original of its being; that Spirit seems to me to be some
special emission more than ordinary, at the beginning, or Creation of the
visible world; to be of duration, and continuance; A thing now as it were
subsisting of it self, and which vanishes not, nor can vanish, or will be
reassumed again: But being, as I may say, the very Spirit or breath of the
Almighty, and able to look back toward its original and fountain, is capable
of some new influence, and as I may say, regeneration; and such is the Spirit
of man. And therefore we in no wise deny, but that the Spirit of man, may
receive some new light for its motion, otherwise than barely and simply by
sense, the Organ of the body: And that no other, though intellectual, Spirit,
inferior thereto, can so do, or is capable so to do.

Now of created Spirits superior to our selves, or of greater capacity in
point of intellect than our selves; as I read or hear of none save Angels,
created all good as well as we: so I cannot conceive, that any created or
circumscribed Spirit, from any power of it self, to intermix it self with our
Spirit, or so move in us, as that it may be properly said, we are possessed
with any other Spirit than our own; and therefore it is most properly said, Jam.
1.14.
When we are tempted, we are drawn away of our own lusts. Though I confess I
think, objects may be brought by the assistance of some such spirit, and laid
down before our senses, or presented to our fancy, whereby our lust may seem to
begin to move, though indeed our lusts be the original of our error.

But forasmuch as our own spirit is some image of, and has its being from the
Almighty; that is one eternal all powerful spirit, it being capable by its
reason (for no otherwise it is so) to distinguish between good and evil in some
measure, and to know the will of that almighty One; It doubtless may be, and is
capable also, not only to have its reason enlightened from thence, but to
receive some such new accession of light, as that it may not only have a
clearer sight of that bountiful Creator, than reason is able to afford it; but
be led into the paths of truth and righteousness and become acquainted with his
will: And this we look upon, as effected, by his Holy Spirit, through his Word,
one God blessed for ever.

Such new accession of light, and such a blessed gift as this, were the Writers
of Holy Scripture (no doubt) endowed withal, whose words and actions were in
demonstration of the spirit, and with power, the effects whereof, we have
heard, and beheld, and felt in a great part of this visible world.

Now for that we have a promise, this admirable strange effect in man, shall
not wholly cease, but that God will be with us to the end of the world; and we
talk much now a days of the light of the Holy Spirit; It may not be amiss,
since we have a caveat, 1 John 4.1.
Not to believe every spirit, and withal authority given us to try the spirits
whether they are of God, for every man to try his own spirit at least, and see
whether that of it self, already sent, be not the spirit only, which he often
mistakes, and vouches for the immediate dictates of the Almighty, and calls it
a new light, the spirit of God within him, and so becomes a little too bold
with the Almighty.

I am afraid it has in some men; and that many a man has so little understood
himself, and less his Maker, that he has mistaken the sudden and strange
flashes of some kind of lightning from his own inherent affections for another
spirit; which feeding with conceit he has brought to such a flame in himself,
that at last his reason has given place, and approved it to be something more,
than what is under its regiment or correction; even the light of that spirit of
truth, whereas did a man by his reason keep a narrow watch over his affections,
it might observe every the most ordinary affection able to raise its peculiar
spirit; that is, such a flame in the soul, as with the assistance of the
imagination shall hurry it with the body in obedience to it, and force reason
into a belief for the present, that its motion is from the light of truth; of
which in time it may stand convinced to have been mislead and misguided. We do
not improperly call the product of that predominant affection in man, Pride,
the spirit of pride, and the consequent thereof the spirit of contradiction,
and these may be the spirits which for the present enthral our reason, and make
us believe better of our selves, than others do of us, and think God works in
us immediately, and of his gracious dispensation, that which is effected by our
own spirit, through his most just and wise providence.

To exclude God, that is, One eternal omnipotent wise working spirit, out of
any action (especially that which is good) might prove of evil and dangerous
consequence; Yet since Psalm. 77.19.
his way is in the sea, his paths in the great waters, and his footsteps are
not known, as is expressed; We may be too presumptuous in being too confident
of the knowledge of his present manner of working in our selves. I do own, it
is he, that has endowed us all with an intellectual mind or Soul, and given
some of us that strength of reason, which is in some measure capable to search
after him, and behold some of his ways (and doubtless many of the heathen were
not excluded from such a sight) and he has enlightened others by his holy
spirit, to declare unto us his good will and pleasure, which we call his Word:
And to others of us, has he by that Holy spirit (with which those holy Writers
were inspired) given grace to lay hold on that word, and all the promises
therein. Notwithstanding which, and a saving faith at the last, we may not for
the present safely challenge that good spirit of God, to be the sole or chief
guide of all our thoughts and actions; for if it were so, then were it
impossible for us to err (as I conceive) which daily we do, and Ephesians. 4.30.
grieve that Holy spirit (as is expressed) by which we are sealed to the day of
redemption.

There are, as I of my weakness am best able to conceive for I never saw or
searched Writers on such subject either toward the enlightening or confirming
me therein) four more especial ways, by which God works over us, and in us.
1. By his common and ordinary Providence. 2. By his merciful Providence. 3. By
his liberal and bountiful Providence. 4. By his Spirit.

His ordinary providence, I call that, which extends over Psalm. 147.9.
and feeds the young ravens that call upon him: And within this care or eye
of his, are we comprised too, and no way excluded.

By his merciful providence, I mean his withholding us Genesis 20.6.
Abimelech, and his withholding him from touching of Sarah.

By his liberal and bountiful providence I mean this; That Common renewing
grace to. In which sense or notion, if any shall allege his capacity of coming
to the knowledge of the present work of the spirit of God in him, I mean not to
contradict him; because I behold every man's reason, his rational soul to be in
some sense the spirit of God, which being enlightened from him anew, for the
inclining the affections to embrace that which is morally good, we may more
properly say then; It Is the spirit of God that works in us. But many Heathens
as well as Christians, have doubtless in great measure participated of this
grace (for so I call it now, it being from the mere good will and pleasure of
God without any motive or inducement from man) and owned the same to be his
good work in them, and yet never otherwise enlightened, missed of the truth, and
could not be said to have any light from his Holy spirit, but to err even to
perdition, notwithstanding the aforementioned grace, I, and justly to perish
too. For such is the wise just disposition of our minds, and consequently our
actions, by that Eternal Majesty (from whose spirit Psalm. 139.7.
David seems to infer we cannot well go) that every man, if there were not some
default or neglect in him, might receive the Seal of that other Spirit, the
Holy Ghost, as we call it, one God blessed for ever. However in the end, we
shall all set forth his glory, and if we miss of Eternal happiness, we shall
behold it so much our own fault, as that we shall take upon our selves shame
and confusion of face.

viz. That Spirit which he has promised by his word, to such as lay hold on
that word by Faith, and yet without which, we cannot truly believe; That
Comforter coequal and coeternal with himself, and with the word one God
blessed for ever. Which work in man by and from that good Spirit, you
ordinarily call, as I suppose, God's special renewing grace, or his grace of
Sanctification. And truly, if even words could be so laid open and plain to our
capacity by you, as that we might rightly distinguish things thereby, 'twere
well and happy for us: For certainly those three words, Spirit, Grace and
Faith, for want of distinguishing the true signification of each in the several
places where they are found, have caused many errors, and begat no little
disputes amongst us.

Now according to these several workings beforementioned, do I think, we may
safely invocate the Divine Majesty: For instance, were I about to take a journey
through some desert place, frequented with Savage beasts, or infested with
Robbers, or to pass some dangerous current; I do believe I should invocate God
in his Almighty power, and providence over all his works, to preserve me from
bodily danger.

Were I about to resort to some place or company, in which I suspected any
allurement or enticement toward the committing of those facts, I found my self
most inclinable to by nature, and which my reason had already judged of to be
crimes, or sins; I do think I should beg of him, in and through his goodness
and mercy, to lay some reine upon and over my Passion, and withhold me from
running into those snares, to which I found my self most prone, and more
especially to keep me from presumptuous sins, lest they should get the dominion
over me.

Were I about to enter upon, and execute some office or place, wherein the good
of others as well as my self, might depend, and which necessarily required a
more than ordinary circumspection, wisdom, and prudence, or foresight in the
management; Or were I about to deal with men in any action, that might in my
present opinion require the like: I do then think I should implore him in and
through his infinite wisdom to enlighten my understanding and reason, that it
might be profitable to others, and that it become not clouded through any
desire of gain, or other passion, whereby I should be hurried away to commit
any unjust or unseemly action, but that I might approve my self in the sight of
all men, discreet and righteous.

Were I about any present act, whereupon I conceived my Eternal estate and
well-being necessarily and consequently depended; as whether I should go to
Mass or suffer imprisonment, and my reason had weighed both, and could not well
or readily determine: I should earnestly beseech him, through his infinite
goodness and mercy to all mankind that believe in him, to send the light of his
Holy Spirit into my heart to direct and guide me therein.

Now in the first case, were I preserved from imminent and apparent bodily
danger, I should readily without hesitation asscribe it to his mighty power,
who stilleth the rageing of the Sea, and sets bounds to the same, saying
hitherto shall thou pass and no further. In the second case, should I, upon
some consideration after, find my self to have been as it were manacled, or the
course of my passion diverted by some unexpected accident, so as I did not at
that time perhaps what I would; I should impute it to restrictive mercy, which
is always ready to withhold men from sinning against him. In the third case,
should I, not only receive applause from men, but from some present comfort in
my own heart, be satisfied of my prudent and just managery of my affair, I
should readily impute it to his wisdom, that gives light and understanding to
the simple. But in the fourth and last case, what ever Election I made,
although I owned my Election to be guided by God's good providence, I durst not
presume to say; it was from his Holy Spirit (though that might be) for that it
was, or ought to be my reason, which determined my Election, in all appearance,
to my self.

It seems to me a matter of dangerous consequence to play with that fire, and
call for it down from Heaven upon any ordinary occasion, or yet for a man to
avouch its moving in himself, almost upon any occasion. But we have those of
late days, who in the decision of meaner points than those of Virginity and
Marriage, seem to exceed St. Paul, and not only 1 Cor. s. 40.
think, but would seem to know in their determination thereof, They have the
Spirit of God. These men I would undeceive if I were able, or indeed any one
whom I conceive to be in an error. But first by the way, give me leave to tell
you, without the least personal reflection on your self) whom I never observed
to go about to amuse men with strange notions, but to inform their intellect in
the plainest rational way you could for the introduction of truth) This bold
assertion of an habitual converse with God by his Holy Spirit, has received, I
think, if not its first rise and conception, yet its strength and vigor, from
our Pulpits or little Pamphlets (such I may call some) of Godliness: Where some
men for want of force of argument, and dint of reason to convince their
Auditors or Readers of the falsity of the opinions of that Church, they would
they should desert and forsake; have first endeavored through strange mazes to
elect and saint them in opinion, and to quiet their reason often put them in
mind of the promise of that Spirit to all Gods Elect, and its light to lead
them in the truth; and by this means ( viz.) other men's (in estimation) blowing
strange notions into their heads, has opinion in some men usurped the Chair of
reason. For I do not think, that plain* simple meaning men could ever of
themselves, or from barely reading of the Scriptures, which condemns pride and
every high thought, have raised so good an opinon of themselves, as to think
they were led, almost in all things, by the very Spirit of God: if they had not
seen their teachers (who we are ready to agree, receive their commission from
thence) too familiar with it. Now whether this too often talking of the Spirit
in Pulpits, has been a feeding with milk, or the same be not a thing of
difficult digestion, and may be of evil consequence if not well digested; and
whether they had not done much better, only to have smoothed the way for the
coming of that Spirit, by instilling into men the principles of obedience,
justice and honesty, and integrity of life and conversation, than talk of its
being and effects (which are only known to God himself) I leave to their
Conscience (that is their reason) who have preached, and do usually preach of
it.

Such a salve there is, as that of the Spirit to comfort us, but if it be too
often and ill applied, it may cause a Lethargy in the soul, rather than ought
else. And such a Sword there is as that of the Spirit to beat down our
adversaries withal, and indeed it may be said of it, as that of Goliath 1 Samuel
21.9.
There is none like it. But if men be told of the force of that spiritual
Sword, and have not judgment to discern it, They will be prone to catch up an
imaginary one, such a strange Weapon, as they will be able to puzzle, if not
foil their very Masters with. So, as if God in his infinite and wonderful
mercy prevent it not, instead of a spiritual one, every man's temporal Sword
will be drawn against his brother at the last.

We have justly deserted, without doubt that infallible Church, with the head
thereof, for its strange arrogance of engrossing the Holy Spirit, and
presumption that it cannot err: But methinks it might be no imprudent caution,
or wariness in each of us particularly, that we carry not about us every man a
Pope, as is said, in our belly, which will in time after some maturity, if we
take not good heed, break forth, and usurp the Chair, with as great confidence
as that, whom at present we condemn and reject; and at last for want of
strength to defend it self, yield the prerogative to, and set up the old one
again in his full power and strength.

Certainly did we believe some men enlightened, or possessed after the manner
they talk of, averring as much a real presence of the Deity in themselves as
the Papists do in the Sacrament, we should adore them rather than the Host (the
adoration whereof we equally condemn) and think gods were come down to us in
the likeness of men. Acts 14.14.
And therein perhaps these kind of men would not blame us, nor seem so angry as
Paul and Barnabas with the men of Lycaonia. Yet surely all men are men, and of
like passion with us; And truly 'twere to be wished, 'twere not the spirit of
pride rather than ought else, which makes some of us seem to our selves, Luke
18.11.
not like other men, though we seem to thank God for it, as well as that
Pharisee.

The Scripture seems plain, and I think there is no true Christian that ever
questioned, but, that the very spirit of God, that ever blessed third person in
the Trinity, may and does Romans 8.9.
dwell in some men. How else could a man constantly and cordially, and
pleasingly retain a belief of that thing which his reason is not able to
comprehend, nay that which it combats with, and is sometimes ready to condemn
(since no belief can be without the consent of reason, as I shall make plainly
appear in another place) and therefore my enquiry only is, in relation to its
effects; Whether thereabout we do not often allege, that for its effect, which
is not its effect.

It is a dangerous thing we are told to sin against it, and from that sin,
whatsoever it be, good Lord preserve us! Now this light of the Holy spirit, and
its special work in man, further than that true faith with its necessary
concomitants is certainly effected thereby; No man in my opinion, can have such
an assurance of at this day, as that he can safely and without danger avouch
it, in any particular cases of action or opinion, to be his immediate present
guide, much less with ostentation challenge it for his peculiar, and reject and
condemn others as void of that true light. For as without it, I do believe,
there can be no true faith; so too great a confidence in any man, of its
present infallible operation in him, as to other matters which necessarily
depend not thereon, in some sign, in my opinion, that his faith is not true,
and such as it should be. For surely he whose faith is such, will daily and
hourly pray for that enlightening grace, and fear he has it not, which he who
seems assured of it, neglects by consequence to do.

Saint Paul concerning spiritual gifts, willing not to have us altogether
ignorant, and about to show us, that there are diversities of operations, but
it is the same God, which works all in all, Gives us to understand, that 1
Cor. 10.3.
No man can say Jesus is the Lord; but by the Holy Ghost: which thing I do
believe, but yet I take his meaning there, to be, not a bare outward profession
and confession by the tongue; for surely there are many, who have professed so
much, and uttered as much with a clear audible voice, at that very instant they
have intended to deceive, and with a very intent to deceive; which could never
be the work of that good spirit of truth in them: And therefore we cannot take
his meaning there to be, other than an intus dicens; A cordial, and total (from
the whole soul) embracing, and laying hold on that word by faith, as the alone
Savior, and so Lord of the whole world; And this thing, we cannot, as of it
self, behold in any man.

He has given us to understand likewise in another place, that there are Gal.
5.22, 23.
fruits proceeding from the work of that spirit, and enumerated some of them;
yet since no man now a days can, or will, I think, pretend to any inmediate
gift, of 1 Cor. 12.10.
discerning the spirits (more than he can or will pretend to working of
miracles, prophecy, diverse kind of tongues (without study and labor) or the
interpretation of tongues, which Saint Paul has linked together in one verse,
and placed that gift of discerning the spirit in the very midst.) How shall we
judge of the reality of those fruits, otherwise than by our reason? And
therefore why do men talk to us so much of that blessed spirit, and seem to
take it unkindly we do not believe their works proceed from thence, if at any
time our reason, as sometimes it does, inform and satisfy us, they may be, and
often are without it. Some of those fruits there mentioned by Saint Paul, as
temperance, patience, goodness, etc. have appeared much more real in many
Heathen than some of us, and yet our reason is not convinced, that they
proceeded from any thing more, than that bountiful goodness of God in his
providence over them; nor until we have that special gift of discerning the
spirits, can we acknowledge a belief of a better fountain (if so good) in some
of our present spiritualists, without a breach upon our reason, whateever our
charity may incline us to.

I am so far from denying the often immediate blessed effects of that spirit of
truth in the soul of a true believer; that I would not be thought to make use
of my reason in the least, so as to interpose it as a cloud or mist between
that and any man's Soul to obscure it, if I could, from the light thereof. I
would sooner wish, or be content, not barely to lose my reason, but he changed
into a brute as to visible shape, than do it; Yet since I challenge and own my
very reason, from one and the same Godhead however miraculously and diversely
working as several persons; I hope I may even from that, without offense or
grieving that Holy Spirit, tell men they may possibly err in the opinion of its
effects, and through some inherent lurking pride, have their conceit raised to
that height as to believe (and therefore would have us believe) they bare the
fruit of that spirit, when Gal. 5.20.
Sedition a work of the flesh is more manifest to our reason. Indeed Saint Paul
has told us the works of the one are manifest, but not the fruit of the other,
though it has its fruits; and therefore why men should cry up their fruit, to
be the undoubted product of that ever blessed spirit, until they can manifest
the same so to be, and be able to convince our reason by some infallible
demonstration, that it could not proceed from ought else, I find no just or
sufficient ground.

That true faith (an invisible thing and best seen by works, though by any
outward work it cannot infallibly be known) is the very effect of that blessed
spirit, we may safely affirm; but further than so, I cannot see how we can
without danger affirm its immediate operation in us; or retain a positive
belief, that any particular effect wrought by us, or in us, did proceed merely
from the motion of that blessed spirit dwelling in us. If any; it may to my
weak judgment, be in some such particular case as this: when the soul
sometimes on the sudden beholds as it were at one intuition, all earthly
things as vanity, and rejects them with a kind of longing desire, to behold
somewhat that is not such, and to have some present fruition thereof. And this,
at such time as the soul may seem at ease and quiet; and is surrounded, and as
it were courted, with all wordly affluence and prosperity, and seems to have
wordly honors laid down before it, in its path; not when it rejects, and seems
to contemn those things out of a sullen temper, because it either cannot attain
them, or is crossed in the fruition of them. When this happens, I cannot think
it to be the mere work of the Soul it self, nor of the deity either in any
ordinary providence and care over it; but some special grace moving it, and
darted as it were into it, from that blessed spirit toward beholding an
everlasting true joy by faith.

Besides this, there may be other cases happen, which may induce us to think,
that there is something more than ordinary, moves in us from above; as this,
When a man shall by his reason (with the invocation perhaps of divine
assistance) have weighed the good and evil of some particular action, and all
circumstances in relation thereto as near as he can, and concluding of the
lawfulness thereof, perhaps through the fallacy of some covert and latent
affection in him, shall pursue the same; If afterward he chance to be stopped
in his full cariere (not by any audible voice or visible light, as Saint Paul;
that is not to be expected now a days, and whenever it is averred, I will
determine it the effect of Melancholy, or which is worse, averred upon
contrivance with an intent to deceive, but) by some secret whisper as it were,
or sudden conviction of his error, and the light of the truth breaking out as
at once upon his soul on the sudden, which doubtless has happened to some men;
I should be ready to acknowledge it, as the work of some extraordinary spirit
from without, and not his own. For this cannot be said to be the effect or
stroke of his own conscience, that is, the dictates of his reason contrary to
what he acted before: For in this case he no ways erred against that, but, as
we put the case, consulted it, made the best use of it he could, with an
invocation of the divine power to enlighten the same. Yet in neither of these
cases, do I think it safe or convenient, the party in whom such effect is
wrought, should presently determine it in his own thoughts, to be the undoubted
immediate work of that good spirit within him, lest if he should err, those
thoughts embolden him to continue therein against the plainest demonstration of
truth in future, much less to discourse and proclaim it to be the very light of
that spirit of truth in him, lest he induce others to be led away by every
fantastic light their brain is able to forge within themselves.

They on whom God himself John 20.22.
breathed, they on whom Acts 2.3.
tongues as of fire visibly sat, they who 1 Corinthians. 15, 56.
saw Christ after his resurrection and had power to Acts 3.16.
work wonders in his name, might safely make use of their own tongues, to
declare their immediate knowledge of the will of that Almighty spirit, and not
be thought too familiar with the Deity, in declaring its manner of working. But
for us to take the same liberty, and casting aside all thoughts of moral
goodness, fall to talking and describing of that strange admirable effect (that
being born again of the spirit) sometimes wrought in the soul of man, which we
cannot possibly comprehend how, or when, or where it is wrought, may be of
dangerous consequence I think; and further to glory, as if we were the only men
in these latter days on whom this spirit is poured, is such an arrogance in my
apprehension, that a sober Heathen might well think us distracted. If we would
needs glory, let us make use of Saint Paul's own subject ready at hand, our
infirmities; We shall find little else if we examine our selves, that we have
any tenure of, or may call our own, or that we can have such knowledge of.

True faith, as I said, which I take to be the peculiar work of that spirit in
man, is a trembling, though a fast hold on the Deity, and proclaims not the
body to be the temple of the Holy Ghost, otherwise than by the good works done
therein; the beholding of which (and we can behold them as good, though we
cannot be infallibly assured they always proceed from that spirit) is the
readiest way to draw others to glorify that God whom we adore; not to dissect
it, as I may say, in ordinary discourse, no not in the Pulpit, and tell men
exactly after what manner the spirit of God works, or should work in us; As
if we were as familiarly acquainted with that spirit, as our own (which few of
us little regard, much less understand) that eternal, that omnipotent, that
incomprehensible, that dreadful spirit, I may say, (for certainly no man can
seriously exercise his thoughts thereabout without fear and trembling) by whose
breath we are as easily consumed as made, therefore let us fear to be too bold
with it.

Well! can it be any offense against that good spirit, for a man to behold his
own unworthiness? to doubt or fear its absence? or to question whether we
mistake not some pleasing motion of our own spirit, for it? It Is not the
present comfort we receive from our cogitations, nor yet our actions, that is
any infallible sign that we have thought or acted from that good spirit merely;
It Is an infallible sign rather, that we have not wilfully acted against the
present superintendent of our own spirit, our reason, and that is the utmost we
can be assured from thence.

I may mean well, and please my self with the sincerity of my present
cogitations in relation to this very subject of the spirit; think I have spoken
the words of truth and soberness; yet it would be a strange presumption in me
(though I acknowledge the favorable assistance of a divine power in every good
thought) to affirm that good spirit more especially working in me, unless I
could be able to convince the world, and rest assured too my self, of the
indubitable truth of that which I have said: But that I do not, I rather fear I
have in many particulars thought amiss; and surely he who has not that fear
always moving in him, is very arrogant, and who has it, must necessarily
discard such high thoughts in himself, at least he must keep them from reigning
in him.

Have not many men thought, they have done God good service in some action, and
yet repented them of the action? Have not every of us now and then pleased our
selves with beholding as we thought the light of some divine truth, which upon
second cogitations, and second weighing, we have rejected as our own false
conceit: and seemed to be angry and vexed with our selves (which is the chief
ingredient of repentance) for receiving or allowing such an opinion? Now as it
is impossible to err from the immediate light of that good spirit, so I am
confident God was never so unkind to any, as to suffer any inward vexation of
mind, in relation to the embracing of that he immediately inclined the mind to,
by his Holy spirit. And therefore let not some honest well-meaning men (as
doubtless there are many) from the present comfort they receive of the
integrity or innocence of their own heart, be induced (through that song of
requiem, as I have mentioned, chanted to them from others) to think that all
that which they for the present verily believe, is the demonstration of that
spirit of truth, dwelling in them. There is a vast and wide difference, between
God's working in and through our spirit by his providence, as I have mentioned,
and by his Holy spirit; We may err by the first (and those errors foreseen by
him are ordered to his glory) but never by the second; nay, give me leave to
say as well as think, we may wilfully sin by God's providence; Not that he is
the author of sin, but by leaving us sometimes unto our selves, he so, after a
manner as it were leads us into temptation, which we are taught to pray against
by one that well knew our infirmities in the flesh, though he sinned not. And
therefore 'twere well we mistake not the one for the other.

There is no man that I know, so uncharitable to think any good meaning
Christian man wholly devoid of that good spirit; But wishes that from thence,
he may in due time, have a clear sight of the truth. A thing at present very
remote from the prospect of the best, or wisest of us: Let him be but so
charitable to himself, as to wish the same; We have our desire; He lays aside
his present confidence and boasting.

There are many well-meaning men, and of a seeming humble spirit to themselves,
who are ready perhaps, therefore, to impute all their good thoughts to the work
of that good spirit in them, but I wish their own spirit deceive them not; For
I take this delusion to arise, not always, or so commonly, from humility, and
the love of truth, as it does from secret pride, and the love of liberty. Saint
Paul has told us, 2 Corinthians. 3.17.
Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, and if we are Galat. 5.18.
led thereby we are not under the law. This pleases us so in a literal sense,
that we are ready to let go our reason, to believe we have the spirit to guide
us in all things. But we might rationally suspect, that those who harp to us so
much upon that string, would rather enslave us to themselves. As for liberty,
we have enough already in any sense, and it is well if we use it not, either
Galat. 5.13.
for an occasion to the flesh or 1 Peter 2.16.
for a cloak of maliciousness. And for the Law, we need not fear, or desire to
be exempt from it, it is fulfilled in one word the same Apostle tells us, Galat.
5.14.
and that one word, is Charity; a thing chiefly to be recommended to all, which
I have insisted upon elsewhere, and which I pray God send us through that
spirit: and then we shall not bite and devour one another under color of I
know not what spirit; perhaps through the very spirit of delusion.

In all sins or offenses, we say the understanding, the will, and the
affections, are all, more or less faulty; but where the will is most too blame,
there is the offense ever the greater. Now if it be an offense to vouch the
Holy spirit upon every small occasion, and to play with it, as we may say, in
too familiar a discourse of it; Men had need take great care and heed, that
their will be not most to blame in that case. I think you will not, and I dare
not, go about to define, what that sin is, which totally excludes us from
mercy; But if any man upon examination of that deceitful thing, his heart,
shall chance to find, he has at any time, upon any wordly design whatsoever,
pretended some light from that Holy spirit; Or so much as endeavored to
obscure the light of reason in others (which is able to show unto subjects
their duty of obedience, that Romans 13.1.
there is no power but of God, and the powers that be, are ordained of God) by
amuzing them therewith, and this for the advancement of himself, in place,
power, or dignity, whether that we call temporal, or that we call spiritual; I
will be bold to tell him, he has been very presumptuous, and has committed a
great offense.

Well these two sorts of persons I first mentioned, the mere Spiritualist, and
the mere Naturalist, are those, whom we shall scarce meet with in company, but
we shall receive a challenge from; As to the first I have said somewhat, but
properly to hold a dispute against him we cannot; either we must deny his
premises, which we are unwilling wholly to do, or else we must necessarily
grant him his conclusion. For the other, so much a Sadducee, as not to believe
Angel or Spirit, other than his own, if that; and resolving to believe nothing
without a plain demonstration; We must) not provoking that spirit of his, of
which he thinks himself the only master, and we think he is therein deceived)
answer him at his own weapon, reason, (and indeed we have none other as of our
selves) and argue with him in calm manner, if at all; not philosophically, not
Aristotelically, but as rationally, and as plainly, and as perswasively, as we
can, or are able, leaving the success to the guidance of that good spirit, in
which we our selves already believe.

It Is a strange thing, a man should admit of any ordinary inference, or any
indifferent argument a probabili, as we say, to satisfy his reason, and raise a
belief in any case, but that which is of greatest concern to him, the belief
whereof would only do him good, and which could not, if upon a false ground,
possibly prejudice him, or do him hurt. If I should begin to talk of the nature
of the elements, how each several one, as we divide them, has in it some
latent quality, or virtue, of the other; And that some particular species of
one, participates so much with, or is of such cognation, as we may say, with
the other, that from some little reflection or light from that other, it shall
in a manner change its quality, and seem to be quite another thing than what it
was: And then tell one of these kind of men some such strange story of Naptha
as Plutarch does, A kind of a sulphurous fattish soil to be found, which taken
out of the body of the earth, and brought to light, shall forthwith at a great
distance from any fire, take flame from thence, and become of the nature of
fire it self, consuming every thing about it; there is little doubt, but I
might, without demonstration to sense, obtain credit therein. Now since we
cannot make out, that our soul (conscious of its being, and capable to enquire
after the nature or original of its own and other beings) is the bare product
of flesh and blood; or that it can be actuated from thence, toward these kind
of enquiries; Why should not these men as readily believe that there is some
spirit or intellectual mind, far above our own, from whence our own receives
some influence, or agitation, and by which, it is disposed, ordered or governed?

I dare appeal to the secrets of any one of these men's hearts, their
conscience, if they please to allow of that term; Whether or no, if I should
have done him some great or grievous injury, such as, after all ineffectual
endeavor of revenge, should lie heavy upon his spirit, or leave a sting there,
he should not by a kind of secret wish, seem to invocate (for we will not
imagine he has so much of the Christian Tenet in him yet, as wholly to forgive
all offenses, and return good for evil) some Nemesis, or resort to some secret
revenger of evil, to punish my injustice toward him? On the other side, should
I bestow so many gifts, heap so much kindness, and do so many good turns to
that man, as after all endeavors of requital in point of gratitude, he should
find he were in no wise able to make me sufficient recompense or amends, he
should not by a like secret wish invocate some good power above his own, for a
reward upon me? If in either of these cases, he thinks he should so do, or upon
examination of himself, finds he has at any time so done, in like cases; then
surely he naturally, as I may say, believes that, which in word he denies, viz.
That there is some spirit above our own; for if he verily believed from his
heart, there were no such thing, as some all-knowing, all-powerful, and
all-sufficient spirit, a just rewarder of good and evil, superintendent over
us; it were the most ridiculous thing imaginable for him barely to wish (nay he
could not wish) me good or evil. But if he has unawares by his own spirit
recourse to some invisible power, why should he not confess (which he often
swears by unawares too) that there is a God?

Now though it may seem here from the present purpose, give me leave to say in
this place, that it is some confirmation of my opinion in relation to the soul
of brutes proceeding barely from their blood, and vanishing therewith (which
thing I mean to insist upon more at large in some other discourse) that it
makes no foreign appeal in any case, nor uses any weapon but bodily. I do here
think, that God may punish us for the abuse of brute creatures, and that their
blood may seem to cry for vengeance; but it cries only silently, not
intentionally from them: For although we do really perceive, a kind of
gratitude as well as revenge, in many creatures besides man; yet we cannot
observe, no, nor suspect upon just ground, any recourse they have in
prosecution of their love or anger to any superior power above themselves, I do
not think my Spaniel ever wished me good or evil; if I could conjecture there
were imprecatory thoughts in any creature save man (and the weakest of men has
them) I should forthwith renounce and recant my present opinion of the
annihilation of their spirit after death. For if that spirit of theirs, can
wander out of the body, any other ways than directly by sense; it certainly
neither vanishes with the body, nor can be said to be mortal.

There are many such like cases as aforementioned of some strange foreign work
in the soul of man, which have occurred to my mind, sufficient as I thought to
convince any Atheist of the falsity of his assertions in point of the original
of all things, and the government or guidance of all visible creatures, more
especially our selves; But lest I seem guilty of what I condemned in my former
Epistle, I shall forbear to insist thereupon, and leave all to that attribute,
that superabundant stream flowing from the Deity, and which is over all its
works, its mercy and loving kindness toward man. And however any of us think
or believe, either of our selves, or ought else in relation to our selves for
the present; it can be no uncharitable wish or desire, no nor foolish one I
hope; that before we cease to be as we are, that is, have finished the race of
all flesh, we may so think and act, as that at the end of that race, we miss
not of eternal rest, body and spirit.

But if these two kinds of men amongst us, I have often thought, could be
brought to some moderation (shall I say to a reconcilation, for they are
opposites) it might prove an happy thing for this Island. And truly I cannot
imagine a readier way to reconcile them than to persuade every of the Leaders
in each opinion, if we could prevail therein, now and then to withdraw himself
from all company, and seriously consider himself, (our spiritualists with the
invocation of divine assistance, though the other not) have some rational
discourse, or intercourse with himself alone in relation to his past actions or
opinions, after what strange manner his soul has worked? Not only why his will
and affections have pursued and embraced that, which his intellect has
rejected; but why his intellect without apparent cause from without, should
sometimes reject that, which at other times it receives, and receive that which
at other times it rejects? Whether that be not guided by affection sometimes,
as well as affection by that? Or whether they with the imagination have not
wrought together of themselves, for want of a better guide, rather than of any
spirit from above? And what is that we seem to drive at all our lives and why?
With many such like enquiries. This I call a busy solitude, and recommend it
(if that may move ought) as the readiest way for some little light of truth
which we pretend to, but too much, to break in upon the soul.

And O that some men would with their reason, and the spirit in conjunction
together, if that might be, thoroughly and impartially view and consider their
imperfections; the daily errors and lapses of their own soul, whether through
the precipitance of passion, or otherwise howsoever. Then surely,
notwithstanding they might trust to the merits of a Savior through that
blessed Spirit; I dare say they would not boast of its daily effects in
themselves, nor go about to persuade others of its daily motion in them, clean
contrary to reason, and so much difference and distinguish themselves from all
others by the spirit only.

I know no hurt this rational solitude could do our Anti-Atheists, and such as
almost deify themselves. I do not observe those great spiritualists much given
to melancholy (a thing which sets the imagination on work without any reason at
all, and from which I confess there may be much danger in solitude) they are
generally busy and meddling enough, and over and above their inspiration, assume
and challenge to themselves a great deal of rationality beyond other men. They
have their reason ready at hand, and surely we must needs allow them strength
of reason, if the greatest policy or subtilty be always the product of the
strongest reason (which I cannot think but the looking beyond and beholding all
policy as vain, to be it) and then that reason of theirs, if they would first
lay aside all prejudice and passion, might in an humble solitude work that
effect, which in the end might bring them truer comfort, than what they at
present feel, or pretend to, from the spirit.

But they are not the men, to whom I would chiefly recommend solitude, lest
from thence they feed their passions through their reason, rather than subdue
them thereby, as it often happens: It is the plain downright Atheist, resolved
in company to believe nothing without a plain demonstration, and who perhaps
alone with himself, might from himself receive a kind of demonstration.

Men may pronounce a vae soli but so long as a man's reason is able upon
occasion, to put a stop to the career of his imagination and not only suffer it
to ramble beyond sense, but even contrary to sense (in which case only it is we
are subject to destroy our own bodies) We do think notwithstanding God's wise
and provident care of a companion for man in the creation, and the advantage
and comfort we receive from company above all other creatures, It may be good
for man to be, sometimes alone.

It matters not much, who was the first Author of that saying, Nunquam minus
solus, quam cum solus, whether Scipio the African, or any other, if so be upon
consideration it be found to have no less of weight in it, than any of those of
the Sages. Surely we must needs think upon weighing, it proceeded from a more
than ordinary divine soul, and one who from solitude found somewhat of
enjoyment more than ordinary. Scipio, if we believe history, received as great
and public applause, from public action, as any man whatsoever, and might
have pleased and enjoyed himself (we may well think) in company as much as any
man; And therefore if it were he, we might the rather give credit to the
saying, and hope to find that company, and complacency in solitude, we never
yet found. This let me tell any man, that he who considers his past actions by
himself; searches rationally into himself, if he once come to behold his own
imperfections (and that sight he will not miss of, if his intellect be not
strangly bewitched by his affections) he will from thence fly in desire, to
find out and behold somewhat that is perfect, which if he should not at present
do (as I am almost assured he will do in fine) that little acquaintance he gets
with himself, will otherwise find him employment sufficient, to verify that
saying of Scipio; And this is the thing I would always have specially
recommended to an Atheist.

We have an English expression, in relation to a delirium, or dotage, of being
Acts 26.24.
besides our selves (we so translate (...), or insanis Paul) and truly he who
travels all the world over in quest of an original cause of all things, and
looks not into himself, is, in my opinion, as well really and truly, as
literally so: It Is a strange thing one would think, men in their search after
God should go furthest from him; run to the least, and I think, most
inconsiderable particle of his creation, and fancy atoms to be the cause of
mind, without a mind. No, it must be a greater mind, that is the cause of a
lesser mind, and a perfect mind of an imperfect mind: we our selves seem
nearest to a Deity, and what should we go further to search for it? A man's own
soul is, in my opinion, that glass, which narrowly looked into, shows not only
it self unto its self, but something beyond it and above it. Did ever any man
observe the motion of his soul, and not at that time see his ignorance, and
impute folly to some of his actions? And can he behold ignorance and folly, and
not believe there is some such thing as knowledge, or perfect wisdom? Can he
observe his own weakness, without acknowledging some absolute power? Can he
find such a thing as falsehood in himself, and not believe there is truth? Can
he observe himself sometimes harsh and cruel, and not acknowledge that there is
such a thing as mercy? Did he never injure man? and if that escape not his
sight, how will he be able to deny, but that there is such a thing as justice?
and so for the like. Why, give me leave to tell him, Knowledge, Wisdom, Power,
Truth, Mercy, Justice, Love, Goodness, and the like (for I hope we may safely
affirm, as well as some Philosophers, that there is morality in the nature of
God, and that his happiness consists as well in goodness, as in power and
knowledge) united in one eternal mind, is that God, which we adore; not through
amazement, and out of a confounded astonishment, bestowing these attributes on
him, but rationally believing, they are essentially complete and perfect in
such mind, of which ours is some image or shadow, but now dark and imperfect.

Moses brings in God himself speaking after this strange manner, Genesis 6.3.
My spirit shall not always strive with man, and this came to pass at such
time, as men began to multiply on the face of the earth, and this happy
solitude, God and a man's self, seemed to be rejected for visible company: The
citing any books of Moses to an Atheist, will it is likely, prove to little
purpose, perhaps he may say Moses was an Impostor, if not worse; and to talk of
God's spirit under any notion, whether grace of illumination, or
sanctification, etc. will be to as little purpose, until a man has some
knowledge of his own spirit. I will only say this more; That if any man please
to follow my advice and withdraw himself a little from the world, and all
company in an humble manner in relation to enquiry on that subject Himself; How
himself so intellectual? from whence and whom himself? or the like, he may
perchance find a striving or struggling within himself, in relation to that
other subject matter, God: Whether it be his own spirit, or somewhat else that
so strives or struggles in him, I will leave to his own determination. This I
am sure of, that upon such withdrawing and search, he will be afraid there is
some such thing as a God, and I believe for that present instant would venture
a considerable sum, for the return of an infallible assurance, there were no
such thing (and he is a most insensible man that would venture a farthing to be
secured from that which his reason plainly tells him is impossible, says that
most excellent The government of the tongue. page 18.
Author, whom I had rather cite than seem to rob, though such notion came into
my head as of it self before reading him) and why then should he not confess
his fears and jealousies? Those fears and jealousies are an heavy nauseous
burden to the soul, retained and kept in; but cast up, and discharged in that
manner, will cause very much present ease, and may fit and prepare the soul, to
let into it a more pleasing and cordial belief in relation to a Deity, than
such an one as that of Felix which only makes it tremble.

I doubt not but you have sometimes, as well as I, thought on the madness of
the people, and more especially, these two seeming kind of opposite madmen I
have mentioned, both equally bold with God, the one avouching him, as the sole
and immediate spring of all his good (and such he is ready to term any or most
of his own, whatever they seem to others) thoughts, and motions, and that in an
high and admirable sense and notion, not in his providence but by his very
spirit. The other denying that he is at all, or that there is any such thing as
either. What either of these believe I know not, or whether any of them really
and cordially believes what he says, I know not. But whatsoever either of them
believes, 'twere to be wished, for peace sake amongst us, they sometimes would
be more sparing of their speech, especially the latter; And I think he might in
prudence soonest be silent, because I cannot judge of any great design he
should have to gain proselytes, whatever the other may. But the best way to
quiet them both, is, I have thought and do think, not to provoke them over
much, but leave them a little to themselves, that so by degrees, they may
through Gods providence over us, seem to be at quiet of themselves. And I
beseech almighty God that none of us, ever provoke other in the way of dispute,
out of some secret lurking passion, the love of somewhat else, rather than the
love of truth, the sight whereof if we are once so happy as to behold, and can
but retain any glimmering light thereof, the same will reduce us to unity of
mind, and not set us at discord and variance.

Shall I in the conclusion of this Epistle, plainly tell you the result of some
of my solitary thoughts in relation to the fluttering motion of our spirit here?

That though it be governed, and enlightened in some case, by that good spirit
of God, the very eternal spirit of truth, yet it is unsafe and dangerous for us
to conclude when and how far we are thereby actuated, further than the bare
embracing that eternal word by faith, as the alone Savior of the world.

That the providence of God may be safely averred and affirmed in all things,
and that it is, or may be visible to all men, and he who beholds it not in some
degree, is not rational.

That were there not some foreign, or, operative power ruleing in, and over our
spirit, besides what is natural, or what we call nature, (that is any absolute
power it has of it self) it could not, notwithstanding any present lust of the
flesh or eyes, be drawn any wise to promote any act, the inevitable consequents
whereof ( viz the disquiet of it self, and disease of the body) it naturally
loathes and abhors upon consideration. And that consequent certainly every soul
more or less foresees in all intestine division and civil War.

That he, who considers our late past troubles, and the madness of the people
then, may safely conclude, our punishment therein, was from God's just
vengeance for our sins, in his providence; And that if he thinks there was any
thing of his spirit therein, as was then much pretended, or contributing or
assisting thereto, he is besides himself.

That if the like madness now beginning to possess us again, perhaps through
the general neglect of our ordinary duty to God, or the like, break not out
into open rage and hostility, I will without hesitation affirm it is the
merciful providence of God alone, and what we can scarce rationally expect,
beholding our selves to sin so much against the light of reason. And thus much
may any man see.

That the soul of the wisest man, at best receives but a dim and short sight of
the truth of things and causes; that if such sight at any time happen through
the goodness and bounty of the Deity, it is apt to vanish again on the sudden,
by reason of the interposition of some clouds arrising from the flesh; so as
the soul cannot long behold it, nor know where to fix, but in faith of some
future clearer vision.

That Eccles. 8.17.
Man cannot find out the work that is done under the Sun: because though a man
labor to seek it out; yea further, though a wise man think to know it, yet
shall he not be able to find it. But to believe there is wisdom, and truth, and
justice, and mercy, in some one eternal mind, and that the judge of all the
earth must needs do right, is almost a necessary consequence raised in the soul
of man, upon any humble search into himself, and that Eccles. 12.13.
the whole duty of man is no difficult thing to know.

That even Solomon whom we agree to be endowed with the spirit of truth as well
as naturally wise, appears to me in that excellent book entitled the Preacher,
to have had his soul at a stand, and in a maze, not knowing where to fix in the
demonstration of any certain wordly course that ours might follow; But that he
seems to allow its guidance by the providence of God, rather than his spirit:
For if it were guided by the latter, it could not so often err, neither then
would he call all its works vanity.

That the spirits of men are then most keen, and most sharp set toward the
world, and most likely to resemble the hawk, or the birds of prey, when there
is most talk of the dove; and that we are willing to hide our selves under that
shadow, though we have little of the light, of truth.

That some men's outward profaneness and public contempt of God, seems ground
sufficient in justice for our punishment by the hands of those, who, driving at
wordly designs, only pretend to honor him. And that if those in authority took
vigilant care, to see the very form of godliness better observed; those
pretenders to it, in humane probability could not have obtained those
advantages of alluring and drawing the vulgar to their side, as now they have.

That in the misery of civil dissension, we shall be all more or less involved;
the Atheist, the spiritualist, etc. and every of us, more or less shall feel
the smart of it in the end, whatever any of us aim at present; that though
there seem a necessity of offenses, yet there is a consequent woe particularly
attending every offender; and therefore we should all endeavor to be void of
offenses toward God and toward man; and prevent, if we can, that storm which
seems to hang over us. But if it be otherwise decreed; then we who seem
spectators only (but spectators only, we are not, since we are sinners) and
neither deny God in word to provoke him to show himself in our punishment, nor
boldly vouch him in his spirit to cover the lust of our flesh; have this ready
and open passage to fly unto God, until our calamities are over-past, His just,
and wise, and merciful providence. And this certainly must necessarily be the
door or Psalm. 118.20.
gate of the Lord, as is expressed for every man (if ever he enters) to enter
in, and truly behold that Verse 22.
stone which the builders of this world refuse. For in the instant of personal
affliction, chastisement or correction, I dare confidently aver the Atheist
will neither boldly deny God, nor the spiritualist boldly ingross him; but both
own him as he is, just, and wise, and wonderful in all his doings, and to be
feared, To whom be Glory, etc.

EPIST. III. Wherein the Author sets down some further grounds and reasons of
his opinion of the mortality, or utter annihilation of the Souls of brutes upon
their death: And therein endeavors to clear himself of all seeds and
principles of Atheism, wherewith that opinion seems taxed, in a certain Book
presented him by the said Dean.
THat Soul which pries into things even below, and inferior to its self, do
they seem at first never so ordinary, mean, and obvious, and be it
clear-sighted as may be, (and perhaps from the clearest sight the soonest) will
at length, if it dwell long on any subject, begin to stagger, and suspect it
self of dimness and weakness, and that there is something more in every
Creature, than it is able to discern or comprehend: and if it resolve not into
a blind kind of chance, or fall asleep in occult qualities, it will own one
Almighty wise, and only all-knowing Being, or existence; and therein resting it
self, will dare to assume no knowledge but conjectural, and seeming probable;
that is no more than belief. This is my present thought, and confession. But
because in my Treatise De Anima, I might seem to you a little too positively to
assert the soul of Beast to be no other than part of a body, rarefied to a
proportion, and with the body perishing, and upon the dissolution thereof
becoming annihilate, and totally extinct. I am now desirous to declare unto you
a little more fully the grounds of my opinion thereabout; And the rather,
because in that little discourse we had together, I received this only Querie
from you; How an intellectual spirit, could naturally arise out of a material
or bodily substance? And if the same were an infused spirit, and not part of
the body, how the same with the body should cease to be or move? A Querie
perhaps only made, to hear what answer a plain rational man without learning
would make to it; and though a curious one, and such, as I acknowledge my self
altogether unfit to resolve, or so much as to handle, yet I have made this
further adventure in reference thereto.

Truly Sir, I am not, or ever was, so positive in any assertion of my own, or
so enamored therewith, as not to suspect my self of fallibility, and whenever
I consider the soul of beast, with those excellent faculties it is endowed, I
cannot but wonder at, and admire, and extol the God of Nature, who was pleased
to ordain, That from such individual corporate substances, there should spring
so much of intellect, especially to be seen in many of them, as might seem to
be, rather a special gift, and emanation from that Spirit (always and every
where moving, and which was once said more locally to move upon the face of the
waters) than any peculiar essence of so rare framed bodies. But yet I am not
satisfied, nor methinks could easily be convinced in reason, That therefore
there is any duration of such Spirit, after the body is again converted to
earth.

That Spiritus Mundi, (if I may so term our God and Creator blessed for ever)
is every where, and moves every where, by his Original fiat: Psalm. 104.24.
His works are manifold, in wisdom has he made them all; But yet without
offense I hope, or any breach in that reason he has given us above other
creatures, we may conjecture, his emanations are not all alike. If in relation
to brutes (for of such David there speaks) ver. 30.
When he lets his breath go forth, they are created, and so the face of the
earth is renewed; Yet there may be a reassumption, and ver. 29.
taking away again of that breath; and then things die, and are turned again to
their dust, and no local continuance of that breath remaining, so as to be a
spirit circumscribed. There is no manifestation as I may term it, of any
durable Spirit in any visible creature, but us, his Image; because although
those other Spirits are of him, and from him, yet they are not capable to
conceive, they are of him and from him; nay from any thing else: and though
some of them seem to work with intellect and will; yet they really work to his
glory, as mere machines or engines, without any design and desire to fulfill, or
will to transgress his eternal purpose, that we can discern.

Now let us a little behold God in his Creation; That is, in his several
visible creatures, which is indeed the proper mirror for our reason to look
into (for that cannot ascend higher of it self) and we may presently behold
somewhat more than is obvious to common ordinary sense, and see his spirit
working every where (though not alike) in wisdom. I know we distinguish between
animate and inanimate bodies, vegetation and sense, and the like; yet in all
bodies, there are Spirits insensibly included in the tangible parts, as in an
integumen; which are never (almost) at rest, but from them and their motion
proceed Concoction, Maturation, Putrefaction and the like; and even in those
inanimate bodies (to which we allow not vegetation or sense) there is a
perception far more subtle than sense; That is, a kind of election to embrace
what is agreeable, and to exclude or expel what is ingrate, or nauseous, as we
find between bodies electrick and some other bodies; And especially between
Magnetic bodies and others, as the Loadstone and Iron; in which, or between
which, there is a very disposition conforming unto contiguity, or coition, or
union with one another. For we cannot impute any coition of these two bodies to
a bare attractive quality in the Loadstone; since those who have made their
several Experiments thereof do deliver unto us, that if a piece of Iron be
fastened in a bowl of Water, and a small Loadstone enclosed in a kind of Boat of
Cork, be put into the Water, it will presently move and make way to the Iron.
Nay a Needle touched will move toward a great body of Steel untouched; And the
atoms or dust of a Loadstone finely filed, will adhere unto Iron that was never
touched. And as there is a kind of desire of union in some bodies, so there is
an antipathy in or between others; as may be observed by Iron put into Aqua
fortis, upon which there will forthwith be an ebulition, with noise and
emication; such an antipathy is there, and such a combat and contest between
Sulphur and Iron when they meet.

As for Plants, and all Vegetables (not to speak any thing of the sensible
Plant, or the reason of its contraction upon touching) though we allow them not
sense or passion; We cannot deny somewhat of appetite and aversion to be
inherent in them (which in all creatures of motion is the product and mother of
all passions) they do surely attract what is proper for their nourishment, and
reject or secern what is improper and nauseous. There are multitudes of Plants,
which of themselves, as weak and feeble, shall seem to tend directly to some
other next adjacent bodies, which may support them; and even as it were espy
and feel them out, as has been observed of the Vine, the Ivy, the Hop, our
ordinary Ginny or Kidney Beans in Gardens, and many more. And although that
observation of perception in Plants may sometimes be taken upon false grounds,
and that it is often in reality rather some attraction by the warm Sunbeams of
the body supported to the body supporting, than any perception in the body
supported: I my self have seen that Herb or Weed we commonly call Cliver,
rooted some little distance on each side of an Hedge, from each side North and
South, bent and inclined to the same Hedge, as to its prop and support.

What there is of affection in Plants is not altogether a fruitless inquiry; We
commonly say, and it may be not improperly; That Laurel loves the shade, or
delights in the shade; And other Plants love and affect such and such a kind
of soil. Now to say nothing of the Palm Tree, strangers to our Climate, of
which it is reported, That if two of them of some difference in kind, (for
there is some distinction made between them of Male and Female, as we do of
some other Plants) grow near together, they will most apparently incline to
each other, with the embraces as it were of Lovers: There is most certainly a
kind of agreement, and disagreement between diverse and sundry particular
Plants; So as some of several kinds shall thrive separate, and asunder upon a
like soil; and yet not contiguous and together: And on the other side, there
are diverse peculiar Plants, which will not thrive, or be at all, unless
adjacent, contiguous, or intermixed with some other of another kind; As from
peculiar Weeds, growing amongst Corn only, we observe. Some of which kinds of
Weeds are never or rarely to be found elsewhere than amongst Corn: Nor will the
soil ready manured for Corn (if the same be neglected to be sown with Corn from
ill husbandry or otherwise) ever produce them.

There is a kind of Envy and Emulation between Plants, and as it were a
striving for the mastery, as is observable in Trees contiguous and adjacent,
which ever mount higher than when they are apart, and distant some space one
from each other; and although some other reason may be given for their mounting
in height in case of proximity, (viz.) a more vigorous inclination and
erection, ascendently toward the Sun, whose beams are laterally obstructed by
the neighboring Trees: Yet that reason holds not in smaller bodies as Grass
and Corn; where thickness, or near adjacency rather dwarfs than otherwise. And
yet between Corn and Weeds there is observable a kind of struggling for the
mastery, in the beginning of Summer; and sometimes the one, and sometimes the
other robbing its rival of nourishment, does very much enfeeble it, and cause
it to lose its strength, verdure, and freshness, if not totally destroy it;
which the Poet methinks prettily expresses in these (if I forget not) words Et
steriles dominantur avenae, as if after a superiority, they lorded it, as we
say, over one another.

Now as we observe God has, by the universal frame of Nature, implanted some
kind of spirit in every of his Works, and some kind of abhorrence of a
dissolution; together with a secret endeavor, in every particular of his
Works, tending not only toward the preservation of its peculiar being barely,
but its exaltation, and well-being too, as far as may be: So it is no ways
dissonant to our reason, to conjecture, or imagine, that that wise Creator of
all things should from those bodies which he was pleased to have separate from
the earth, and to have local motion, Ordain a Spirit to arise, rarefied in them
to some greater proportion than the other; which should be, not only pervious
as in Plants, but have some peculiar seats and cells, fit for its proper work
and operation, toward the conservation of that body, whereof it is a more
refined part, as necessary and requisite thereto; and without which, we cannot
so much as imagine it were capable to have duration and continuance in that
form it is; But yet withal, no ways comprehending or desiring any matter or
thing, further than in relation to the sustentation, or preservation of the
same body. And therefore for such a Soul or Spirit, to perish with the body,
and to resolve again into its first elements, is not altogether incongruous to
our reason.

And we may I think further conjecture in reason, that, though Rev. 4.11.
for his pleasure all things are, and were created; Yet he being worthy to
receive glory and honor (voluntary) from some terrestrial creature, (For whose
2 Esdras 6.55.
sake next and immediately after his own Glory and Honor, it may seem to us,
all others were made) He might endow the most excellent of his terrestrial
creatures, us, men, with such a spirit, as might not only have some glimmering
light of him here, but might have continuance, to magnify him for ever, when
the Earth and Heavens should be no more. Yet herein again I must acknowledge,
that the thoughts of the immortality of our soul are more apt and ready to
encounter and stagger our reason, than the mortality, or vanishing of that of
Brutes. Since we are not able with reason to imagine, but that (as I have
already said in my Treatise de Anima) whatsoever thing had a beginning, may or
will have an end; and that there is nothing Eternal, but God alone, the Maker
and Creator of all things out of nothing. And therefore there is no perfect
Medicine to cure those reeling cogitations of ours, about our immortality, but
Gods promise in his Holy Word, with his special grace to believe it to be his
Word; Nor any thing else to strengthen us therein, more than some specific,
and not barely gradual difference to be found out and espied between our Spirit
and that of Beasts; That is, some acts or thoughts of man, even
extra-corporeal, or peculiar to a soul, or Spirit, wholly separate and
disjoined from a body, and which indeed are no ways discernable in the wisest
Animal; whereof I have made some mention, in my Treatise de Anima, and which
seriously and duly weighed and considered, I leave to the World to judge of,
and shall repeat nothing of it here, in relation to our present subject, only
or chiefly now inquiring about their Mortality or Immortality, without
questioning our own.

There are indeed many, and various different kinds of operation, between the
soul of Beast, and that of us, in many things; as not only sufficiently
distinguish us, without appropriating to our selves and wholly engrossing the
word rational, but seem plainly to demonstrate, their Soul rather essential
with the Body, and a peculiar substance of the body, than ours; and therefore
more probably terminating in and with the body; some whereof, having now and
then occurred to my thoughts, and drawn my reason to accept and allow thereof,
I here present you; and submit the weight and consequent thereof to your more
serious, or solid judgment; though they have already somewhat prevailed over
mine, to conclude the Spirit of Beast (though an admirable work in nature) to
be a thing only temporary, and fading or mortal.

There is in all living Creatures whatever, not humane, either immediately upon
their first being, and motion, or so soon as there is any vigorous bodily
strength for motion, a perfect clear and evident apparency of that intellect,
they at any time have or enjoy, as a special present attendant of their being,
and subsistence. And whatever Adages we have of a cunning old Fox, or
proverbial interdiction of catching old Birds with chaff, I could never yet
discern, but that the young Fox, or the young Hawk, had the same complete
stratagems to preserve themselves as the old, and that if they sooner fall as a
prey to the Dog, it is want of strength, rather then subtilty.

The Kitling sure needs no instruction to catch a Mouse, with a kind of cunning
watchfulness, as soon as it has strength, and the young Bird makes her nest
with as much curious art, as the old one. And, what is somewhat wonderful, most
creatures at their first production into the world are able to distinguish
sounds, and capable to understand the very language of their kind. I have
observed a very young Lamb to distinguish the bleating of its Dam, from twenty
other doing the like almost at the same instant; and to move at her bleat only,
and not otherwise. It Is observable in Fowls, and I have taken more special
notice of it in the Turkey; that whereas they use three or four several notes,
or tones, to their young ones; one of allurement for food; another of
attraction for covering with their wings; a third for progression, or motion
along with them when they move; a fourth of admiration and wonder, or warning
to preserve themselves upon apprehension of danger, and approach of Birds of
prey; they have within an hour or two after they have been brought forth
apprehended the differences of these several tones, and readily observed the
old one's dictates; Especially it would almost amaze one to behold these little
things of an hour or two old, upon that alarm of danger, how instantly they
will couch down, and approach the next covert to hide themselves. Nay many of
these Creatures need little of document from their Parents, or Dams, or yet
(our Mistress) experience, there being in them a Native intellectual perception
(as I may say) of every special, and more peculiar destructive nature, or
quality, toward them; in as much as we may observe Birds taken out of the Nest
never so young, and bred up in a Cage, shall upon the first sight of an Hawk,
or other Bird of Prey, brought into the room, presently by their fluttering and
otherwise discover a kind of knowledge of some approaching danger, or adstant
peril, which upon the sight of any other Fowl, or Beast they will not. Whereas
most probably, or undoubtedly rather, to a man brought up in a Have, or
otherwise never beholding before any creature, save humane, A Lion and a Calf
would prove equally terrible, upon their first approach. And whereas there are
many Herbs, Plants, and Insects too, of a poisonous nature, and of an absolute
destructive quality to Man and Beast, if received into the body for food, What
creature is there to be found young or old, except man, not able by sense or
otherwise, to distinguish between what is agreeable, and what destructive to
his nature, and will at all times most certainly avoid and reject the latter,
unless by man inserted, or intermixed with some food agreeable to its nature?

We see many of these brute creatures even Physicians to themselves, and all of
them naturally avoiding such of the Elements as are destructive to them. Let a
Duck hatch Chickens (trial whereof has been made) and no allurement or
invitation she can make shall draw them into the water: An Element equally
destructive to our nature, and yet from which we are often enforced to use some
care and industry to preserve our own young ones.

I speak all this to show, and to make it somewhat apparent and plain, that
that kind of Intellect which is in Animals, how great soever it may seem to be,
is nothing else, but a more curious kind of perception, with sense and motion,
than that of Vegetables, or inanimate bodies, and arising in the blood (or
other such like thin fluid substance in Insects) because, as soon soever as it
has its full current and motion, the intellect of those creatures is at the
highest, unless some actions of theirs from our documents seem to make an
improvement of it; which in reality is no addition of intellect, but the
exercising a prior inherent Intellect some other way, toward their acquiring
food or the like. But the Soul of man though chiefly seated in the blood (and
upon a total effusion or shedding thereof necessarily leaving the body) does
not in the most florid and vigorous condition thereof, and in youth so much
show it self, nor is so quick in discerning things obnoxious to the body, as
theirs; and therefore may seem rather, some wonderful way inspired, than to be
connative, and of the substance of the body; for certainly a separate created
Spirit, though of a wonderful knowledge and apprehension, as subsisting of it
self, yet sent into the gloomy dark vault, or tabernacle of a body, wants not
only the introduction of species by sense, as some inlet to work upon, but also
some considerable space of time to show its intellectual power, and vigor,
rather than a spirit raised in a body, for the substance and government only of
the same body; without which speedy work in Nature, to some perfection, the
body would not long submit in that state. And therefore in the case of a first
created, and after infused spirit only, it sometimes happens, from the darkness
or closeness of its mansion, it has little other visible operation, than the
very carrying its Tabernacle about with it (as I instanced in the case of an
Idiot in my Treatise de Anima) and yet as to its excellence and sublimity, in
point of its original being, and intellective power, were it freed and
discharged of those obstructions ithas, far exceeds that of the wisest Animal.
So as immaterial and (from thence probably) immortal spirits, want but room to
display themselves; or having room, want some space of time to recover and
expel some mists of their present obstruction, and then by gifts only, break
out in any luster.

To will a Spirit, endowed with some kind of preservative intellect to arise
from a body, is equally the wonderful work of an Omnipotent Power, with the
creation of a body, and endowing the same with a spirit ab extra, as I may say:
and no less than either, to endow an inanimate body with peculiar operative
Qualities or Virtues. But if it be once admitted and granted, that in Animals
the blood is the life, or that the spirit is essential with the body; whereof
there is some sufficient ground from the course of Nature to believe (its
motion and tendence regarding nothing else) It will necessarily and
consequently follow, That the whole, spirit and body, how ever we divide it by
particular names, is subject to one and the same Fate, Destiny or Period.

As to these spirits of ours; If they were a part of, and coessential with our
bodies; I cannot see how it were either natural, or possible, that there could
at any time arise in the soul, a desire of disunion, or dissolution from that
body, of which it self was a part; Which desire in certain humane spirits has
most certainly at sometimes appeared, nay often worked its desired effect: Nor
is it reasonable to conjecture, that any thing can possibly will or endeavor
its own destruction or annihilation; and therefore if our Souls were of the
very essence of our Bodies, we must grant, A man could never voluntarily or
intentionally make away himself, the contrary whereof is manifest.

As to those spirits of theirs, if they were distinct or any way separable from
the body, and no part thereof (since they labor and groan under the Creation
as much, or more than we, and are no less subject to passions of fear, and the
like) then at sometime or other, upon some displeasure or other, there would be
espied a voluntary endeavor of its separation, by its own act, to ease it self
of those flames it felt for the present: But this could never be observed in
any of them, by any of us; but always such a voluntary resistance of
Separation, as there is usually in us, unless at such times as this separable
Soul of ours is ravished with Hopes and Joys, or tortured with Despairs and
Fears. At least if the Soul of beast were a distinct thing from the body, and
separable therefrom, it might now and then as well as ours, be observed
naturally to act after such a manner, as in no wise, barely and simply tended
toward the preservation of the same body; but seeming to neglect the body,
were somewhat fixed for a while upon a subject matter, altogether unnecessary
to the bodies ease, quiet, or well being. Now if any man could be able to
satisfy me of so much as a voluntary abstinence in any creature save Man, at
any time, from any thing, which might seem to afford delectation or nourishment
to the body, or satiate or please the same, at such instant, as there was a
present appetite, or desire, and when there was no impendent fear, or other
passion to obstruct, so as, the body might seem to be, at the same instant,
voluntarily neglected, for the pleasing or satisfaction of the mind: Much more
if I were able to discern any kind of motion of the spirit of beast (the most
subtle or wise) tending, out of its proper element, the Flesh, and the
preservation thereof; and exercising its passions, about qualities or
accidents; as to love Justice or Mercy; to fear ignominy, or contempt; to
desire to know, or the like; whereby it might seem to be capable of, or merit a
future reward or punishment, and be a just subject thereof (for nothing
incapable to act voluntarily beyond the preservation of it self can so be) I
should then be inclinable to think, that there is rather a continuation, and
some transmigration of that Soul, than any evaporation thereof, and vanishing
into the soft air, or a reduction thereof into Earth with the body.

But besides what has been alleged, and some places of holy Scripture which
might be alleged, seeming to give a period to the soul or spirit of beast,
together with the body. It will be difficult for our imagination (so long as we
have any reason left to go along with it, aid or assist it, or else but correct
it) to assign a place for the residence, or future habitation of these Souls,
when the body leaves them, or they leave the body. We shall scarce allow them
any heavenly vision; and though they are the work of God's hand, as well as we,
and work to his glory, and set forth his glory here on Earth, we shall hardly
admit them to do it locally in Heaven.

To what place shall we convey them? or for what work or use shall we assign
them in our thoughts? If we leave them as thin aerie bodies, wandering up and
down in the Air, or, we know not where, or whither; neither animating or moving
other bodies, nor doing good or harm to man, or ought else, I think we derogate
from the wisdom of that first cause, which can no more be thought to continue a
thing altogether useless, and unnecessary, than to create a thing useless from
the beginning; which reason will not allow us to think. If upon the separation
of these Souls from the body, we can imagine, they forthwith enter into
animate, and reside in other bodies; we must forthwith make enquiry, whether
such bodies only, as are of the same Nature, Quality and Species, with those
they inhabited before, or else promiscuously of any kind, or degree whatever:
Either of which will prove absurd to imagine with reason. But before we come to
view that absurdity in its particulars; All living and moving Creatures would
be a little considered together, in their several Faculties or Intellects; from
which notion, Intellect, we raise our doubts of their Mortality or perishing.

Though the wisdom of the Almighty be apparent, and embraced by the reason he
has given us, in his willing the production of a more fine and subtle spirit
for moving bodies, than those fixed to the Earth (touched before) we cannot
reasonably conjecture any vast disproportion of Intellect (though some we find)
between living, moving Creatures themselves, whose voluntary operation seems to
be, and tend only toward acquiring Food and Sustenance, to each particular
individual, and perpetuating it self by generation. For our more immediate
acquaintance, or conversation with some of them, more proper and fit for our
use, make the difference in their Intellect seem greater to us than in reality
it is. And we are apt to place the excellency generally in those creatures,
which necessarily depending on us (next under God the Preserver and Feeder of
all) for preservation and sustenance; do by that their dependence, and
familiarity with us, show their Intellect more apparently to us, than other
Brute Creatures. But why we should hereupon imagine, that there is not as much
of Intellect in some Fishes of the Sea, as either in Fowls of the Air, or
four-footed Beasts which we better know, I find no reason; since by their
Intellect, they both acquire their food, and preserve themselves from danger,
equally with the others; Nay I see no ground to deprive Insects from as large a
share of Intellect, in some cases as either. By Insects I mean not only those
reptilia, and volatilia, without parts and blood, to us discernible; but all
creaturs whatsoever, bred of heat and putrefaction, as it may be, Mice, some
kinds of Serpents, Frogs and the like, whereof some years seem to produce more,
and far greater numbers than can be thought to proceed from generation, though
I believe most Creatures bred of putrefaction at first, do after generate.

These together, do undoubtedly far exceed in number all quadrupedes and flying
Fowls upon the face of the Earth; Now some of these have already obtained from
us the repute of very wise and provident Animals, and we are apt to extol their
Intellect sometimes, beyond that of other Creatures of far greater bulk and
dimension. Truly it may be adequate in many cases; Intellect we know no more
how absolutely to deny them, than other Creatures. Certainly we cannot deny any
sense to most of them, for instance the Be, undoubtedly they see and hear too,
as may be observed and collected from their being stayed or allured with
whistling, or the ringing of a Basin. And since we observe, how they will find
and know their way to a Field of Thyme, or the like, some Miles distant from
their Hives, and return directly to them again, we cannot deny them voluntary
motion, and by consequence Imagination: and further I am somewhat assured, upon
Experiment, they will in few days certainly know, and distinguish a person
conversant about them, and not at any time molesting him, (though he somewhat
molest and disturb them) and forthwith strike at any Stranger, upon his or her
approach. And truly were Wasps and Hornets equally beneficial to man with them,
I doubt not, but some, who have wrote the Commonwealth of the one, would soon
have espied a Kingdom in the other (more than Prove. 30.27.
Agur could discern in the Locusts) and found as much of sense and Intellect in
the one, as in the other. Since they are no less political creatures, and work
in select numbers, and with no less order, and it may be government, than the
other; the like may be said of many other kinds of Insects.

The numerous excess of Insects, beyond that of other creatures granted; and
likewise that there is in many of them (which I know not well how it can be
denied) as great a measure of knowledge, as in some other creatures (which
thing Knowledge or Intellect in any or all, is our ground to think, why such
their Spirit resolves not into Earth or Air, but rather continues in some airy
thin body, or transmigrates into some other body, for the animation thereof) It
will follow, that the spirits of these insects cannot transmigrate into
specific quadrupede bodies, or Fowls; because it may be made (almost)
apparent, that there often are in one, or two days space more of them in number
destroyed and mortified, than there are, probably, four-footed Beasts, and
Fowls upon the face of the whole earth: But we must of necessity find out in
our imagination, some place for the spirits of these insects to rest in, for a
time; or where they work, or wander up and down for a certain space; Or else
conclude, they do forthwith animate (or transmigrate into) bodies of the same,
or the like species with themselves, to wit insects only. Which to hold and
maintain, would be equally absurd to our reason; unless we can rest convinced
withal, of some World in the Moon, or at least a most accurate Antipodes to
our selves, and a Continent of land so placed, where the Sun shall have a most
lively vivifying influence too, at that very time or instant we shall first
feel our sharp Autumm frosts. For besides the innumerable millions of diverse
kinds of our ordinary Flies, whose spirits from thence cease to work any more
in the same bodies (between which and those Insects we attribute so much of
prudence to, it would be difficult to define any certain bounds, in point of
prudence or Intellect.) How many thousand millions of that sage provident
creature, the Ant, does one winter destroy? Since we often afford an helping
hand to their destruction, by laying their heaps and banks open to the power of
Northern blasts and cold, as being (how ere so wise for themselves) noxious to
our grounds and fruit. How many Spirits or Souls of that other wise creature
the Be, do good Housewifes at a peculiar time toward the approach of the fall
send together in transmigration by Brimstome to some other place? Truly the Ant
in great numbers, may be thought, as well to make a voluntary transmigration,
as that there is any transmutation of species in them (as some hold) since this
is most certain; that every kind of them, at such an age, or period of time,
become winged, and leaving their heaps or banks to the younger Brood or Frye,
flee away, and are seen no more: But that they convert to a life of another
species, I believe no more, than that there is a conversion of species, of
those little black Clobheads which we call Tadpoles, bred in Ponds of the spawn
of Frogs, by the accession of legs, and quite different features, from what
they had before. As to that other most subtle and wise creature, so termed in
Scripture, the Serpents (if our Adders and Snakes may come under that notion)
How many of them do some Winters cast into a profound, and lasting sleep? as
may be observed from the paucity of them, seen, in a Summer suceeding a sharp
and tedious Winter: So as those which have but shallow caverns, or holes to
sleep in, are scarce thought ever to awake again. These are but a species or
two of many thousands for ought I could ever perceive, as wise in their kind as
they, whose bodies Winter leaves altogether inanimate. We make our predictions
of a plentiful Summer from the sharpness of the Winter preceding, and we give
our reasons sometimes, from some native or inherent warmth in Snow, the
contraction of the pores, and keeping in the spirits in the earth, by cold; the
retardation of all plants, attraction of their sap and moisture too soon
thereby, and then their more vigorous operation, and exhaleing of the same upon
the more near approach of the Sun beams, with the like; which though they may
be good reasons of our plenty too; Yet I am apt to think, the exanimation of
innumerable Insects, hurtful to plants and fruits, from the sharpness of the
winter, or it is imbecilitating their Eggs, or Seed, for production; is a reason
of more weight, than all others usually given. For he who will at the Spring
time but walk into his Gardens or Fields, with a light, in the night season,
may espy a various multitude of little creatures, who (as the Psalmist
expresses it) all wait on God for their meat in due season; Which as ordinary
Earthworms (and of them there are diverse kinds too) are not to be seen in the
day time, nay some of them so small, and of color earthy, as they are not
easily discernible, but upon a green plant. This every provident Gardener is
sensible of, and does not impute the nipping off (or little holes in) his
tender Plants, like common Country people, to Easterly Winds, which may indeed
wither, or discolor, but neither bite nor perforate. To find out or imagine
bodies ready prepared for all these spirits, at an instant frosty time, would
puzzle the best Intellect, or strongest imagination.

Should we pass by these spirits, inherent in all these little creatures, as
insignificant; and because we are not able with our eyes to see, behold, or
distinguish any parts, or blood in them; laugh at those trite sayings, Formicae
sua bilis inest; Habet and musca splenem, and find out some pretty distinction
between their Spirits, and the Spirits of Beasts, of visible parts, and greater
bulk. Certainly, since their Shambles are fuller of their bodies in Winter,
than in Summer, and most of them (especially wild creatures) bring forth young
only, in some peculiar Summer months; We shall need the like help, as in our
case of Insects, to salve the errors of a transmigrating imagination.

In case of oviparous creatures, as all Fowl, I would willingly know, Whether
after the Egg conceived, and formed, from treading or copulation, there be not
a spirit therein contained, and included; And yet they who can imagine an
immortal spirit in the Chicken, will hardly allow it, I believe in the Egg, or
that upon corruption of the Egg, or conversion of it to draught, there is any
transmigration, and yet no doubt the spirit in the egg, and the spirit in the
chicken, are one and the same, only in the one case, by gentle and proper heat
continued for some space, rarefied to a greater degree, and proportion, than in
the other; and by consequence is subject to receive its termination and period
with the body of one as well as of the other. If we think the life and motion
in the Chicken, be a new peculiar spirit introduced by heat, then do we allow
our selves a power, not only of sending spirits in transmigration to other
bodies, by our destruction and devouring of the present, but (creating I will
not say) alluring, and drawing spirits, from one body to another, at our will
and pleasure; and so kill bodies at a distance; which thing, would have made a
Lady I knew, who hatched a Hawk in her bosom, a little more proud of the act,
than she was; and thought herself equal, if not superior to Livia, of whom
Pliny relates a like story and I think it was but of a Chicken.

I am unwilling to move out of my own element, and to endeavor any discovery,
about the spirit, or souls of Fishes, what becomes of them. Those aquarious
Spirits in our standing Lakes, and Pools, do usually in a very hard winter
undergo the same fate of many Insects, and want at that time a numerous company
of bodies, ready prepared, to receive them, and no less at other times (that is
in peculiar Summer months) when they lay their spawn do they want innumerable
spirits, to animate the same, more than that instant season can well afford,
either from the destruction of insects, or any kind of moving body. But I think
we need not trace after these Spirits, by Sea or Land, or trouble our heads
with any narrow search upon such a subject; since whatever becomes of the souls
of other living creatures, is rather a curious and unnecessary enquiry, than in
any wise advantageous to our own, any ways useful or profitable to our
subsistence, or any ways tending toward the well ordering, or governing our
Passions, or Affections; unless, it may be, in this only, that from the
assurance of the duration of the soul of Beasts, as something more excellent
than bare Earth, or other Element, we become more careful how we abuse or
unnecessarily vex them: Which (without knowledge thereof) we have sufficient
ground to forbear, and since beholding our selves, and them together,
undoubtedly the workmanship of one and the same God of Nature, we cannot but be
(if we be barely righteous) merciful to our Beasts. Thus much more, I have
adventured to speak in reference to the Soul of Beasts, that curious and
admirable effect of Nature, that Chimistry in nature, by which we conceive
there is extracted a kind of Intellect, out of matter; yet such, as necessarily
ceases to be, or work, out of its house of clay, but falls and perishes with
it, as we conjecture, and is not so immediately from the breath, or spirit of
the Almighty as our own; because we cannot observe in or from its motion, or
operation, any thing which might seem to tend, or reach after eternity, or
perpetuity; or any employment of any thoughts about that more remote author of
its being, the first original indepent cause of all, God.

In my search into my self, or in my Treatise de Anima, and comparing the soul
of man and beast together, I did endeavor to find out the native Strength and
Power, and set down the just Extent, Limits, and Bounds of each, without
diminishing ought from the one, or adding to the other; that thereby I might
behold their several original extract. This I did by the best and clearest
light my Reason was able to afford, and from thence I could never espy any just
ground to conclude any future duration of the Spirit of Beast (as that of ours)
but rather the contrary.

Now the chief ground, as I conceive, which has begot an opinion in some men,
of their Duration and Immortality, is some false opinion or admiration of an
Intellect in them, beyond its compass and ability; or what they are naturally
endowed withal. Men have been very apt and prone sometimes, in their search
into the works of Nature, to bestow their own reason on other Creatures; and
amplified theirs, to have their own magnified; and would be esteemed
quick-sighted in curiously finding out what they never had or enjoyed. We have
often attributed to Brutes greater gifts, than God, through Nature, ever
bestowed on them. Their Intellect has been strangely gilt by some of us, and
made to pass for current amongst others, when in reality it is but ordinary
Earth, and from thence extracted: and if we can but once find and espy, as we
think, some remote prospect of theirs; it is no marvel if we ascribe duration
and perpetuity to them, as well as to our selves. An instance whereof I will
first here lay down before you, and then fully convince you (as I think) or any
other of the falsity of that common Tenet.

Amongst others, the wisdom of the Ant is much extolled and magnified, and it
is a received opinion from some learned, and eminent Men; V. Ionstoni Hist. de
Insecttis, lib. 2.
that that Creature, for the preservation of the Corn she carries to her Nest,
or Heap, for her support in Winter, bites of the ends, to prevent the shooting
out of the Nutriment thereof, into Blade and Stalk. Now to show the apparent
falsity hereof, and that there is no such provident wisdom in this Creature,
nor any such foresight of it, into the Works of Nature; We must first find out,
if we can, what kind of Ant it is (for there are diverse kinds) to which this
provident wisdom is attributed.

Of Ants so called, there are many of various kinds, and different colors;
some greater, and some smaller, some conversant only in Pasture grounds, or
Orchards, raising multitudes of little Hillocks out of the Earth, and scarce
discernible to move much further than those Banks, most of a red color.
Others, of a black color, and usually about some hollow Tree. Others more
conversant about houses, and very troublesome to the Owners. Others more
conversant about woody places, and raising a great heap of Sticks, Straws, and
other light adjacent matter; and this is the great brown Ant, the Hic nos
frugilegas aspeximus agmine longo Grande O^^s, exiguo formicas ore geren^es,
Rugosoque suam servan^es co^tice callem.
Poet so finely and elegantly describes, which I conceive to be the provident
wise Ant, intended; For of other kind, I could never discern that carried any
thing to their Heap, Food or otherwise.

Now I must first take leave to deny from sight, this constant seeming wise
course of theirs. For I have seen Corn spring, and shoot from their Heaps; and
opening their Heap, have taken it into my hands, and viewed its Sprouts into
Blade and Root. Not that I think it usual or common with them, to bring any
Corn at all thither; unless the same casually scattered, next their Heap and
Path, was, with other things as a light portable matter for them, brought to
their Heap. For I could never yet discern them to feed on any Corn, but only on
tender Buds of Fruit Trees, and other Trees, Grass, Flowers, and sometimes
Fruit; neither indeed shall a man find their Path, by which they go and return,
tend toward any Corn-Field at any time; but to some particular Trees, where
one shall see their quick and numerous passage up and down. Now, besides that
there are innumerable kinds of Seeds, which may come under the notion of Grain
or Corn, so round, as that no end is discernible; I would the Discerner and
finder out, or at least the Assertor of this Wisdom in the Ant, would show me
the two ends of a piece, which if he should, I can show him if he please to
stay the Experiment, both Blade and Root proceed from one end, in some
particular Grain, and Kernels, and that if it be cut into parts, and one end
cast away, the other will notwithstanding sprout, grow up, thrive and flourish.

But to confute this Error, as I said, He who has ever observed their Heaps,
and moved them after a great rain, shall find such a pretty contexture, or way
of laying those little sticks and straws, that the place where they lay their
Eggs (unless sometimes they bring them up nearer to the Sun) and whither they
chiefly resort, shall be very dry after the greatest Showers. Now if they have
such a way of Architecture, that they can lay up their Corn dry, and that it
will so continue; then there is no need of biting off the ends, for without
moisture it will never sprout, though the ends continue on; but if that be
denied, and that they lay up their Corn so, as it it may be moistened from
Rain, then though it be bit, and incapable of sprouting; that moisture in the
Heap, will soon convert it to Putrefaction and Earth, and take from it all
nutritive quality before the approach of Winter, the time they may seem to need
it. But besides this, whosoever observes all kinds of Insects which move upon
the face of the Earth, shall find none of them, unless such as are kept
vigorous, from the heat of other greater living Bodies ( viz. Worms, Lice, or
the like) to want nourishment, the greater and sharper part of Winter; but lie
as it were dead, and stupefied, till again revived and re-inspirited, by the
more near approach and warmth of the Sunbeams: And except it be for such time,
they have always Herb, their common food, so as we do vainly impute to them, a
false Wisdom of our own imagination. Yet there is a pretty and not improper
simile made between us and that poor Creature, by one who compares us together,
and says we may be looked upon to be very like them, if one shall behold us,
as well as them, and see and observe one passing hastily one way, another
another way, one going, another turning, one opposing and justling another, one
carrying this, and another that, and all to add somewhat to an heap of Earth.
Indeed it is a very busy Creature in Summer, and a fit and proper Tutor and
Monitor, for Solomon to send his Sluggard unto Prove. 6.6.
; but if there be any of the kind, that gathers up her Food in the Harvest,
as he there says; and that against Winter, as some other Naturalists affirm,
it is some particular species of them, which they had seen, and I have not.

We may not unfitly resemble our selves, in many things, to several brute
Creatures, and I have often my self done it in my thoughts, but could never
find any for a comparison more proper than the Be. A Creature whereof it may
be said only with man, (that is from any bare voluntary act or operation) Sic
ves non vobis, etc.

I could never yet discern any other Creature, unless Man, to lay, and store up
together far more than were sufficient to maintain it self, or were necessary
for its well-being; and certainly that is the cause, that of all Creatures, they
only destroy such a number of one another of the same species, with that fury
and madness. It may be truly observed of them, and us alike, how we live in
select Parties, and Governments; how industrious some of us are to build and
gather together, and others are lazy idle Drones; How we labor justly, while
we are equally poor, and find enough in the World, by our industry, to make us
all rich, and in some measure happy. But no sooner are some full, and abound,
than we fall at variance, and often destroy one another, when each one in an
industrious way might find sufficient to supply his present need, without the
robbing of his Neighbors Hive. We are pettish and angry at we know not what,
or at utmost because our Neighbor is richer than our self. But yet surely
there remains this difference between us; That we are able to espy the Madness
and Folly of such actions, having the Principles of Justice, and Equity
engraven in us. Indeed we are in many things comparable to the Beasts that
perish, but the Beasts that perish are in no wise comparable unto us; until
that light of Reason we have, for want of use thereof or looking further than
Sense, becomes as it were extinct: which they utterly wanting, in a strict
Notion; there is no ground for us to think their Souls should continue to work
longer than the Ports of Sense are open, but that, they closed, we affirm, the
Soul is extinct.

It may not be improper for me in this place (though I never found inclination
in my self to incredulity of a Deity) to vindicate and clear, at least to
excuse this my Opinion, of the Mortality or annihilation of the Soul of Beast,
from all Seeds and Principles of Atheism, wherewith it may seem to be charged,
and taxed in a certain Book presented me by your self, as an excellent piece on
this Subject; after I had set down these second thoughts as they are. In which
Book I find these words; And however some that are no Atheists, be over prone
to conceive Life, Sense, Cogitation, and consciousness in Brutes, to be
generated out of dead, senseless, and unthinking matter (they being disposed
thereunto by certain mistaken principles, and ill methods of Philosophy)
nevertheless, is this unquestionably in it self, a seed of Atheism; because if
any Life, Cogitation, and Consciousness, may be produced out of dead and
senseless matter, then can no Philosophy hinder, but all might have been so.

Now though I grant the assertion to be true, That no Philosophy can hinder,
etc. Yet I hope you and others, question the unquestionables, that such an
opinion is the seed of Atheism. For I think it will be difficult in reason to
set down any Bounds and Limits to an All-Creating, or producing power (which
seems rather some seed of Atheism): and while we do not, and hold, we ought
not; Let Philosophy tell us similies, or that all might be so, nay must be so;
We may safely, and not unwisely reject her, as vain contending with, and
appearing in opposition to Omnipotence. I confess the Author to be endowed with
a capacity far exceeding mine, and able to make a more narrow scrutiny into the
Soul, than my self; but I had rather be esteemed by you and all men a sober
rational man, and withal an humble Christian, than either Learned, or able to
contend with him in Philosophy. And therefore having said before on this
Subject what I thought convenient, I shall trouble you no further therewith,
but bid you, Farewell.

EPIST. IV. Wherein he treats of Man's Ignorance, in his search into the most
ordinary Work of Nature, and concludes how much more dim-sighted we are, when
we look into the frame and structure of Man's Soul; The most admirable effect of
the Divine Power, working here below.
IF my thoughts of the Soul of Man or Beast, have any ways erred from God's
truth, in the manner of the Creation, or extraction of them (for in the
exercise of that blessed gift of charity I think in no wise they have): It will
not seem very strange to any sober rational man of another or contrary opinion;
if together with human frailty, he behold the intricate and amusing course of
Nature, in the meanest, and seeming plainest work, of the whole Creation.

From my weak search now and then therein, I stand convinced, and rest
satisfied, there is something more in every the least individual created
substance, than ever man was, is, or will be able, or capable wholly to find
out. Otherwise I should rather believe them all the Work of chance indeed, than
any incomprehensible wise Power: and my weak (and simple it may be) opinion is;
that he who traces Nature in her windings and turnings, and does at any time
think he has surely found her, and took her Captive, as it were, does set up
fancy, rather than reason, for Guide and Judge both.

Solomon himself seems to acknowledge, an incapacity of man's nature, to
comprehend, or define the Soul of Beast, as well as his own; or to say
properly, what it is; but leaves, us a Eccles. 3.21.
quis scit, as to that, though not as to the place where it goes, as some
would, for he plainly concludes that to be downwards. As to ought else that he
treats of, I do not observe many (...) in his Books, but he rather seems to
confine himself to one, and that with an Ecce, Lo, this only have I found that
Eccles. 7.29.
God has made man upright, but they have sought out many inventions. He is
indeed extolled for Wisdom in Holy writ, which delivers to us, that 1 King.
4.33.
He spoke of Trees, from the Cedar that is in Lebanon, even to the Hyssop that
springs out of the wall: and of Beasts: And we may grant him to be the
greatest Philosopher, and best Naturalist, the World ever yet afforded, and yet
think, there were many things in Nature beyond or out of his sight. Some men
indeed have fansied to themselves that he had a kind of Universal Knowledge, and
was thoroughly acquainted with the nature of all manner of Plants, annd of
their own too; and seem much to lament the loss of his Writings and observation
in that kind by the reason of the Universality, as well as excellency of the
subject: yet I hope I may without offense think, that there are infinite kind
of Trees, which Solomon never saw, read, or heard of; when besides the many
other Countries far remote from his; the West Indies, which have many Plants
not found elsewhere, were not known (as we may fairly suppose, notwithstanding
what some conjecture about the situation of Ophir that way) to that Eastern
part of the World in his time. And when any one Nation, nay one single Acre of
ground in it may find a man work all his days, we may conceive even those
things which Solomon saw, read, or spoke of, had so much of Mystery, beyond any
man's comprehension, locked up in their Nature, that there was more in them that
he did not know than that he did. And herein I had rather confine Solomon's
knowledge, and so understand his speaking of Trees from the Cedar to the
hyssop, with its due limitation (as it ought to be) so as not to comprize all
mediums and particulars whatsoever, than bring any particular part of Gods
Creation within the bounds and compass of his or any man's understanding. But
besides, had it been, as some imagine, that he had thus spoke of all these and
their several Natures by a wonderful kind of sagacity, if not Divine
Inspiration, yet that discourse of his upon those arguments was never reduced
to writing. For if he had wrote of all Trees, Herbs, Beasts, Fowl, Fishes and
Creeping things, (as the Text reckons them up) we may conclude without any
Hyperbole that no subject matter of Paper, etc. would be able to contain all
that should be written. Since the number of the last of these, and the least
considered, is unaccountable; every body (I will not except Snow or Salt)
producing at some time its peculiar Insect, and some bodies several.

The search into Nature has afforded many pretty inventions, various and
wonderful helps to man, in this Pilgrimage, physically, and otherwise (thanks
be to the God of Nature) and may do more; yet seldom, or never, by any nice
abstract Philosophical inquiry; but rather casually, and unexpectedly, upon
some first humble discreet universal observation of the things of the World,
and then of some particulars: And the event and success hereabout, has usually
moralized the Fable of Pan, who though a rural God, sooner found Ceres lost, by
accident, than all the more select Gods, by their curious speculation and
search. This I observe not to dehort any man from it, but advise it rather, so
it be performed with due moderation, and circumspection. That great Book of
Nature, which is before us all, and somewhat laid open for us to read, is daily
mistaken, and we are apt to forget the first and last letter of it, the Alpha,
and the Omega: and adventure upon causes, not only lamely (for that we do at
best) but blindly too; and then, it is no marvel, if at last we find we embrace
a Cloud, in the room of a Goddess.

I am not about here to set down any Catalogue of the Errors, or misconceited
sights some men have made into the works of Nature (though it might prove no
unprofitable work to have them marked out) but only declare to you my opinion,
of the fallibility of this kind of search: And that unless we therefrom by the
goodness of a gracious, as well as incomprehensible wise God, see our own
ignorance, and thereby somewhat of him, our search is usually vain; and that he
who terminates there only, hits the proper mark set before him, whatever he
seem to aim or design at, or light on profitably besides.

It Is true in the search of Nature, we often for the present light on causes,
agreeable and acceptable to our Reason; and it is the peculiar property of human
Reason only, to search and find out causes (the words are often confounded, and
showing a Reason, put for showing a Cause) but no man yet was ever able to
extract by his invention, with the present allowance of his Reason, such a
certain cause of any Work in Nature, as to be embraced by himself, or others,
as altogether indubitable. Fancy indeed, having oft-times somewhat of
similitude and likeness with Reason, though not of cognation with her, is so
much quicker sighted, though not clearer sighted, than reason her self; that if
it keep the Watchtower in the Soul, there shall not be such a thing, as an
occult quality in nature; nor any thing so hid, as it cannot easily discern. No
man who has it regent in his Soul, will ever dye the death of Aristotle;
although a death most likely of fancies first framing, or inventing. It is able
to espy not only a Transexion, or Transmutation of Sex, but a Transmutation, or
Transition of one reputed species into another, a Transformation,
Metamorphosis, or what it pleases; and not content to stand still, as a
Spectator in Natures conception, or production, will do the office of a
Midwife, and frame an Embryo to its own model; nay raise more monstrosities,
than ever Nature produced from confusion of Principles. But I think reason will
as soon espy the defects, and imperfections of that Soul it inhabits; as any
other man's, and find that even nature is above its absolute reach.

After due trial and search into the works of Nature, and perhaps invention or
experiment of some settled or constant effect therein, not to rest assured
therewith, may be accounted, and perhaps is, the usual disease of an
inconstant, wavering, fickle, if not very weak judgment; yet such is the
variety of secret occult Qualities, and some secret property (words quite
cashiered by our hot-spur searchers, as the Asylum of Fools or Sluggards)
wrapped up in every individual; as is sufficient to beget a Skepticism in any
modest sober Soul. I am not ashamed to acknowledge my weakness, and
dim-sightedness into the meanest and smallest Plant, or Insect; and to confess
that after diligent search into some, and when I thought I had espied the very
utmost extent of their Nature, and Qualities; I found my self deceived, even by
something casually, or accidentally appearing from them, not ordinary in others
of the same visible species, so far as I was able to distinguish; from whence I
could afford you perhaps some incredible stories.

It may seem a bold adventure of so weak a soul as mine, yet I dare challenge
the quickest, clearest, and Learned Intellect in the Universal World, to show
me how Nature in her Work, often changes (even as to visible mutation of
colors) and to set down any (rationally) undeniable, or incontroulable cause
(for instance) of black, or blackness; nay such as I am not able in Reason, to
convince him of the uncertainty, and dubiousness thereof.

That she follows any certain especial course therein, no man will maintain in
things of the same species. That not only in Sheep (a thing most common) white
of both Sexes for many descents, produce black, we find; but even Crows, and
Daws sometimes do the like, or contrary, and produce white, as I have sometimes
seen, and I suppose at this day may be seen at Saint James's: And though it
might be rare, it would not appear a miracle to me, but the Work of Nature, to
behold a black Swan. The like I could demonstrate in Fruit both Plums and
Cherries, from Stones of another colored Fruit set together, in the same bed
of Earth, black from white, or red, and white from black. Men may talk of some
portion of Mercury, Salt, or Sulphur in every Body, adust, torrified, sindged,
or the like: but how this adustion works sometime in peculiar forms, and
figures, only; let any man tell me. That alteration of color is at any time an
effect of the Imagination, is a thing utterly exploded, and never was other,
than the whimsy of some men's imagination, or fancy: surely never any man
obtained fair or black Children from the greatest strength of his Imagination.
If it were able to work such an Effect, we should be all very fair from hope,
or black from fear; since Passions very much strengthen, if not create or
engender an Imagination. However, if any such thing were thus wrought in living
Creatures, it cannot hold in Plants, which have no Imagination. I know men from
their imagination have adventured to set down Causes of Colors, and thought
verily they hit on the right; and yet have been corrected by another man's
imagination, rather than any solid Reason. Aristotle tells us, the cause why
there are to be found more delicate and lively colors in the Feathers of
Birds, than in Hairs of Beasts, is this: For that Birds are more within the
Rays or Beams of the Sun, that Beasts are. Another comes and corrects him, and
says he gives a vain and frivolous Cause for it: and tells us, the true and
real Cause of it is; for that the excrementitious moisture of living Creatures,
which makes as well the Feathers in Birds as Hair in Beasts, passes in Birds,
through a finer and more delicate streiner, for Feathers pass through Quills,
and Hair through Skin. And surely his true and real Cause, is as little exempt
of vanity, unless he had been pleased, or could have showed us a Cause too, why
there should be, so adjacent, such variety of delicate Colors, about the neck
of a Cock-Pheasant, produced from such neighbourly, and similar Streiners; nay
three of four delicate Colors, in one and the same Feather, through one and
the same streiner: Or why in a Peacocks train, at such an exact and equal
distance from the Body, Nature should produce that curious and delectable
Color, in a peculiar form and shape; and the excrementitious moisture in its
streining should fail of its Beauty, not only in its first, and next, but in
its furthest, and most remote motion, and produce but a dull Color, at either
end of the Quill. Of the two opinions, or causes, I will give that of Aristotle
the precedence; because I find not only in Feathers, but all Flowers, that I
have seen and observed; that side of the Feather, Leaf, or Flower, which is
most directly within the Suns rays, to be ever most beautiful; and that Eye of
Argus in the Peacocks train to have but a shadow of its Beauty, or form, on the
lower reversed side; And yet doubtless there are most curious Colors to be
found, in the very bowels of the Earth; And I for my own part, am neither able
to give, nor do I expect further or other substantial cause to be given, of the
beauty and splendour in any part of a Creature, than the will of the Almighty in
his Creation, either for our pleasure in beholding, or admiration (to draw us
toward him) in considering the variety, ornament, and excellency of his Works.
Neither do I think there is any undeniable cause to be rendered, why Stones
(ground to powder) should not nourish as well as bread, if God's fiat had been
upon them, as Satan seemed to tempt him.

I do not from hence, go about to persuade you, or any man, to transplant and
remove back again, all final causes, particular effects, and fix them only and
barely, upon the first original cause of all things. I know there are exterior
Causes to be given, for the blackness of this very Ink, I write with, and such,
as may not only satisfy an ordinary Reason to accept thereof as indubitable;
but such, as may frame an ingenious Spirit toward the finding out, some like
useful invention. But this I say, there is such an intricacy in the veriest
ordinary Works of Nature, to him who looks any thing deeply, and not
superficially therein; as is sufficient to show us, both our own weakness and
folly, and a transcendent Wisdom far above our reach. Upon which, there should
be always one Eye fixed, and ready upon all occasions to recall the other, and
also all our other senses and faculties, permitted sometimes lawfully to ramble
after second Causes. And surely unless we set up fancy (as I have said) rather
than Reason, for Umpire, it would so be; and we should be forced at last (as to
the main) to terminate in some hidden Cause. A Cause indeed not altogether hid
from us, but set aside as unregarded; that is, there necessarily is, One only
Eternal, immutable, unchangeable Essence; abundant in Power and Wisdom, through
its abundance, showing it self in variety, in the least of whose Works (being
infinite) there is more than humanity can comprehend; which by a Law of Nature,
binding all things but it self, continually works all in all.

What defense or Apology shall I then make, first, for permitting my thoughts
to ramble in quest of the Nature or extract of the Soul of Beasts, as well as
my own; and next for setting down my opinion thereof, and exposing the same to
public view; thereby seeming to endeavor to impose the same belief on others,
which I hold and maintain my self. Why truly, for the first, it might be
occasioned, or at least augmented from a late private rural life, and a
conversation, as I may say, with Beasts as well as men. I cannot say with the
Preacher Eccles. 1.13.
I gave my heart to seek, and search out by Wisdom, concerning all things that
are done under Heaven, but the later part of the verse may not unfitly be
applied to me, or others, This sore travel, has God given to the Sons of Man,
to be exercised therewith, or to aflict them, or, as some Translations, to
humble them thereby: and that is a good effect, if it happen, of such a search,
as well as a ground for search. I neither foresaw, or conjectured any advantage
likely to happen, or any ease or quiet to be framed and raised, in my own, or
any other Soul from an inquiry or search into that of Beast, unless to keep us
from mounting too high with our rationality. We find little difference upon the
first view, between our selves and them, in our frame, unless that our Building
is weaker than theirs, and from a number of Causes, more subject to corruption
than theirs; and our very Intellect as to the upholding or preservation of that
Building, exceeds not the Intellect of many Creatures, nay comes far short of
that of some: And as to the Ports and entrances to it (sense) they generally
far exceed us. But after we have made some search, perhaps we shall wonder at
both, and yet cannot but think and conclude, our own to be of a more noble, and
celestial extract, and therefore permanent, and that in this thing only; That
we find it capable to search into the Nature and Original of others, which
certainly no other Creature, ever did, or can do into ours.

Out of mere curious speculation, or to be accounted Wise, or Learned, I can
safely (or with a good Conscience) declare unto you, I never searched into, or
about the Soul of Beast; but have ever held the opinion of the wise Son of
Syrack (without wholly borrowing it from him) good counsel; and here set it
down to you in his own words, because I cannot deliver it so well in any of my
own, Ecclus. 3.23, 24.25.
What God has commanded thee, think upon with reverence, and be not curious in
any of his Works, for it is not needful for thee to see with thine eyes the
things that are secret. Be not curious in superfluous things, for many things
are showed unto thee, above the capacity of men, the meddling with such, has
beguiled many, and an evil opinion has deceived their judgment. Which I wish
all men did esteem, as good and sound Counsel, as I do my self.

As to any endeavor to impose my belief on others, in so dubious a matter, it
does not appear, by what I have set down, that I have so done; I was not over
earnest or eager in it, I delivered nothing before as altogether indubitable,
neither do I now, further than it receives the confirmation of God's word, by
me truly cited: Nay I cannot rationally expect many Converts, because to have
such an effect wrought from human writing, there is requisite an infallible
demonstration, such as may work upon men's Senses and Reason together at the
same time, which would prove a difficult matter, in a discourse of a Soul's
Original, whether of praeexistent matter or not. I think we do well in such
discourses as these or of this Nature, if we deliver our selves, or thoughts,
in such probable arguments; as that when others first behold them by their
proper Intellect, there appear so much of seeming bulk, at least in them, that
it causes those others to vouchsafe to weigh them by their own Reason, and what
I take to be our care and duty further is, that we desire the God of truth, so
far as there is truth in them, it may appear and be accepted of others, and so
received into their Belief, which Rule, I hope, I have not transgressed.

EPIST. V. Wherein he further illustrates the inherent or native Power, and
predominancy of the affections, above other faculties of the Soul; but more
particularly treats of the Imagination, its deception, its supplying the place
of Reason in us, our miseries thereby, and the remedies against its Delusion.
THE Imagination or invention is reckoned by some as part of the Intellect, and
so a more noble faculty of the Soul: And being placed in so high an Orb, it is
then apt to contemn the affections, ranking them with those of Brutes, because
perhaps it has rendered them a like disposed and inclined as they. Wherein it
may be resembled to some Steward, that having helped to debauch his Lord and
Master, presently thinks the whole power as well as superintendency to rest
solely in himself. But how high soever the Imagination may mount in conceit,
yet Reason does often correct it, and discovers that some Affection (how
covertly, latently, or disguisedly soever) does set it on work, and when it is
roving and soaring throws out some lure that draws it down again.

Man indeed is not generally prone and ready to espy the predominancy of his
own Affections above his Intellect, but it is evident in the observation we
make upon others; In dealing with whom, the first and chief enquiry is usually,
not what he is capable to apprehend or judge of the case, but how he is or
probably may stand affected; whence it comes to pass that it is almost the
constant evil fate of Princes and great men to have so much of food or Physic
administered to that part of the Soul beyond any other, as if it were granted on
all hands, that the Affections were the powerful part of the Soul, and the
Intellect but an ignis fatuus drove along before them, a weak light at best,
and such as might be easily obscured. So true is it that how noble faculties
soever Reason and Invention, etc. are, and how truly soever they move and
point, yet they are mostly set on work and as it were directed in their course
by things of an inferior Nature; being herein like a curious Clock, whose
motion is carried on by the force of Leaden weights: And it is to be feared,
that without some such kind of metal, first drawing the lines of our
affections, there would remain a very faint kind of motion in the intellectual
faculties, and we should have amongst us very few Famous Divines, Physicians,
or Lawyers, but had need be all, naturally pious, heathful, and peaceable. I
would fain have any one show me, how he so much as happens (unless through some
special Motion from above) to think on good or discern, or judge of it, without
some kind of affection as it were moving or struggling within; or what his other
faculties would work for, if his Affections were laid aside or discarded? what
would they gratify and please, since themselves they cannot unless in
conjunction with other? for they are in the Soul, like the nobler parts in the
Body, void of sense, yet feeding the craving appetite of more sensible parts,
by which we apparently move.

Plato, I think not improperly, calls desire or concupiscence in us, The Horse
of the mind; Whatsoever Rider may be set upon it, or whatsoever reins are laid
over it, or whatsoever power there is, that holds those reins, and sometimes
restrains, or guides, and directs that Beasts (which term we sometimes put upon
the Affections) we may not improperly say; The original of such joint, or
complicated Motion, is from that Horse.

I have read of some, who having had their Children taken from them, very
young, upon their approach to their presence many years after unknown, have had
a secret joy within themselves, without the least seeming precedent imagination
of their being such; I cannot say, how much of truth there may be in the
affirmation, but if there be, then that blind faculty of the Soul (as we
sometimes term Affection) may move without the precedent assistance of its
fellow faculties; And, it would seem no wonder to me, if, the imagination set
on work thereupon, after some search, should at length pitch upon some such
cause, but certainly the imagination more or less, must necessarily be set on
work therein.

The two who journied to Emaus, mention the burning of their hearts within
them, upon our Saviors talking to them, without the least precedent
imagination, that I can collect, that it was he who talked with them; Nay the
Text says their eyes were holden (and sense is the ordinary inlet upon which
the Imagination presents to the Affections) That they should not know him; And
he calls them Fools, and Luke 24.25.
slow of heart to believe, thereupon; As if belief might arise from the motion
of the heart, without the precedent work of the Imagination from sense. And
truly Sir, since I am verily (I hope) persuaded; That every faculty in man's
Soul, is Divine, and different from that of Beast, which work only from sense;
I do not, or can rationally think that the Affections motion depends solely
upon the Imagination's presentation, but that the Imagination is often
irritated upon the Affections first Motion or struggling; or otherwise, through
the good will and pleasure of some insensible power, immediately working in us,
the one, or the other is strangely set on work.

I must confess of Beasts, I do think, that Sense being the only port, and
inlet of the Soul, and a thing through which every object makes its stroke, the
first Spiritual Motion is necessarily upon the Imagination; Nay, that
Imagination is no other in them, than some more refined curious part, or
quintessence of the Blood, lodged immediately over those doors and cells of the
Body, which raises and creates some such kind of thing, as will, and affections
in them, rather than inclines any will or affection in them before created, or
inspired; Because we never find such kind of Motion in them, as either to
affect, or will, above the reach of sense, or contrary to sense; But that
through sense only from the Imagination, there is raised in them an appetite to
or aversion from such and such object; And thereupon it is, that they are
neither misled, or misguided by their Imagination, neither is there any great
or lasting Disease of the mind, but what raised through sense only may be soon
allayed, and quieted therefrom.

First their Imagination misleads or misguides them not, for having its
dependence only thereon, and working thereafter, and not capable to work upon
the impulse of any thing, but what, as of it self, penetrates through Sense; It
receives every object in its more proper exact Nature, Figure and Form, than
ours; And it being most certain, that their sense is generally more open and
clear to receive, than ours; they mistake not, or misapprehend not, as we do.
Hence it is, that they are seldom mistaken in the face of the Heavens, in which
we are so often of our selves deceived; and that our Prognostic from their
sense, and their motion, and contrivance thereupon, is generally truer, than
what we can make from our own. The hastening home of that little Creature, the
Be, by multitudes into their Hives, is a more infallible sign of an ensuing
storm, than we are able to espy by the best help of our intellectual faculties
(sometimes otherwise employed than from sense) through a weak and disturbed
sense, and which the strange work thereof does not seldom disturb.

Indeed hence it is, that a Beast (if not stopped by force, or by some more
pleasing Imagination raised from present sense) is able of it self, which man
cannot do, to return to its ancient place of abode at a great distance, how
strangely soever, or through what mazes soever, conveyed from thence. And we
may observe in its ordinary motion, it will return more directly, I may say
more knowingly, by the paths it went and came, than the wisest of men; nay, a
Fool will do this, much better than a Wise man, because, though his Imagination
be subject to be recalled from attendance on Objects offering themselves
through present sense, and employed on others by some sordid affection, yet it
is generally obedient to present sense, and is not so much in subjection to
reason, as to assist that faculty, or taken up by that, in help of revolving,
or weighing of things past or future, and the causes thereof.

I could never yet collect from the narrowest observation I could make, any
power or ability in Beast to revolve a thing in the mind, without the help or
introduction of present sense; no nor any affection raised in them to work, or
recall the Imagination from its present work, without its help. I must confess,
lust, or itching of the flesh, or rather appetite, a thing below an affection,
and inherent in Plants, may, and does seem to recall their Imagination in them
sometimes; and with a neglect of present sense, set it on work, so as to
contrive for their prey or food, or the like: But for any Affection, of it self
an affection, to do it, I cannot observe. Sense shows the female only, the
product of her body, and thereupon the Imagination is stirred to raise and
create a kind of affection to it, which we call love; so as in defense thereof,
anger may be kindled, and in deprivation thereof, sorrow may arise; but the
Imagination works for neither of these of themselves, nor do they continue to
be, as I conceive, longer than some Object makes the impulse through sense: And
therefore we shall observe, there is no bleating or lowing, but from bleating
and lowing, or the approach and beholding again the place where they usually
fed or nourished their young, or the like; stop or divert that, and their love,
or sorrow, is at an end. Darius his Horse, as I have mentioned, could neigh
when he beheld the place where his lust was first raised; but I question much,
when the impress the Imagination has made in such Creature, is once wiped away
for the present, through some new introduction of sense; whether it can be
raised again, without the fresh stroke of some Object relating thereto, through
sense; Or, whether the Horse were capable to revolve that act in his mind at
any time, without such means to introduce or raise a thought.

Now if the Imagination in Beast, work only immediately upon Senses
introduction, (as we have reason to conceive it does) and that thereupon their
affections are raised only; their Affection necessarily attending their
Imagination, changes according to the change of Objects through Sense. For what
is created or raised, by and through that merely, may be fully satisfied
through that only; neither can there be ease or disease, pleasure or
displeasure in the Soul, longer than Sense affords being to such Affection; and
this I think to be the case of Beasts, because we never see them disquieted
long, or above measure, nor refusing any grateful Object, if some disease of
the body resist it not, we observe not their Imagination heightened by their
lust, nor their lust inflamed or raised from their Imagination, but at such
time only as Objects offer themselves through Sense; and the one abstracted,
the other seem to vanish. And surely were our degenerate lust and affections of
the same extract, it were impossible for us to be hurried away to that excess
of any vile or base passion, as to employ our thoughts nights and days about a
meaner, or more sordid Object, than Sense it self usually affords every moment.

But Affection in us is of another extract, able to desire and embrace what
Sense cannot afford; our Imagination of another capacity and reach, penetrable,
and malleable, as I may say, otherwise than by sensible Objects; Our Will, and
all other our animal Faculties, subject to supernatural influences; and that is
the reason there is such daily combat between them, and sometimes such lasting
agony. For the Imagination rowsed and called upon, as it were, from diverse and
sundry quarters, and not able through Sense, to work so as to satisfy one
single affection; It sometimes opposes Sense, and raises a thousand Chimaera's,
to the astonishment and amazement of it self, to the conclusion and distraction
of the Affections, and to the disquiet of the whole Soul; so as, whatsoever
original cause we impute elsewhere, the present apparent cause of our disease,
we may rightly impute to the Imagination; and the rectifying thereof must needs
be the readiest way toward a cure, which I shall endeavor to speak of in the
end of my following Discourse.

Do we not find our Imagination allured or enticed to work from the restless
struggling of some affection? Do we not again find it recalled by Reason,
arrested by our Will, wrested at length by some foreign power from subjection
to either; and forced to work, as we observe by consequence, in obedience to
some eternal decree, leading all the others as captives? And all this while
Sense (one and the same in all men) might seem to offer it other subject matter
for its present work. Do we not, or may we not observe in our selves, at
special seasons, some mounting in desire to embrace, or lay hold on somewhat
above the reach of Sense? And would we not our Imagination could invent, or
find out some such thing? Is it not thereupon set on work? And, though it
cannot fully comprehend mere insensible things by any investigation, yet is
able to imagine or conceive, there is something more glorious, more pure, more
perfect, etc. that it can conceive, whereby the Affections are a little quieted
for the present, and rest in a kind of hope; and to this, Reason freely
consenting, there is begat a kind of faith.

I would fain know, how it were possible our own thoughts should be set on
work, in relation to what others thought of us, or in what state we were in the
eye of any righteous all-knowing Judge, or argue and weigh, or will in relation
thereto, or be concerned or troubled thereabout, with fear, or dread, or joy;
if sense were the only inlet to the Soul? I am sure it cannot hurt us at
present, but from our desire to know, and our imagination's presentation
thereupon; so as, what our Imagination frames, must be chiefly the cause of our
disquiet, or disease of mind, if any happen. Indeed, as it is sometimes the
window by which Heavenly light is admitted, so it often proves the
Postern-door, by which some evil spirit sliely enters, and the Key thereof is
certainly some corrupt affection. It is most subject to be turned about by
every wind from within, and from without, most subject to be deluded, and
delude; and since our Happiness here seems to depend very much upon its work,
we will endeavor to treat of it here, a little more particularly than we have
done, either of it self, or in conjunction with some other faculty of the Soul.

Indeed the several faculties of the Soul seem not many in number, yet the Soul
like some instrument of very few strings, is capable to render such innumerable
various sounds, as are able to confound us in going about to distinguish them.
This we own upon trial, to be the admirable work of our Provident Creator and
Governor, and judge it impossible to set any certain rules or bounds in its
manner of work, or so much as to fathom or know our own. Yet this I think, the
sweet harmony, or jarring discordance in this wonderful Instrument, in relation
to our selves, and whether it renders a sound sweet and pleasant, or harsh and
grating, consists very much, as I conceive, from the high, or low, or even
straining that one string thereof in it, the Imagination.

The Imagination is a most strange faculty, and able to confound us, and put us
to a stand, or a maze, while we reflect on it. It Is that various, and sometimes
false light, which puts the colors of good upon evil, and evil upon good: It Is
that strange resounding echo to the affections, that renders their cry double
and louder. It Is that, which called upon by one affection to its help and
assistance, often raises, and leads with it a thousand furies to disquiet us.
And if we may affirm, as I think we truly may, that the heat of the affections
sometimes causes its work so also; It is that bellows which increases their
natural heat double and treble, and (driving them from their proper Object)
inflames them beyond all degree and measure, to their utter destruction, and
confusion in the end.

I deny not, but that Imagination in man continually and necessarily working,
is capable to work from diverse causes; it is diverted, or called upon, and
employed by various Objects minutely through Sense, as we observe; How else
could we remember (which is but an impress left in the Imagination) for any
time, what we daily hear and see? And when those windows of the Body seem shut
up, it is often employed upon such Objects as it formerly received thereby. But
I cannot but think, that its work generally tends to the satisfying or feeding
some affection, not affection of its own creating from Sense, as in Beast, but
some affection of equal extraction with it self; originally pure and undefiled,
but now corrupt and depraved by its work through the sly insinuation or
delusion of some evil Spirit; and that from Sense alone, the one nor the other,
nor both together, could create in our soul those diseases we find, and I may
say, often see and feel above the Beasts which perish.

This affection in us, how pure soever, or howsoever debauched, is the thing
ever chiefly aimed at in all addresses to the Soul, as I have touched already,
and therefore is Oratory defined to be nothing else, but a dextrous
application, to the affections and passions of men; which received Tenet, is
sufficient to demonstrate, what faculty we generally give the precedence to,
and esteem for most powerful in the Soul; I am not about to correct the
definition, though methinks, since there are faculties in the Soul, capable of
instruction (which the Affections properly are not) as well as agitation, or
rowsing up, every application should principally tend, and aim thither, and he
be esteemed the best Optimus est enim Orator, qui dicendo, animosaudientium,
and docet, and delectat, and permovet, docere debitum est, delectare
honorarium, permovere necessarium.
Orator, who rather endeavors to inform truly, than delight and please; yet
since most certain it is and indubitable, that there is no approach or entrance
of one human Soul or Spirit unto another, but through the Organs of sense, by
the Imagination into the Affections (So as to hit, and wound or heal them, men
necessarily glance upon the Imagination by the way, and it is that which
certainly gives them an edge or dulls them) Men should be careful, that faculty
be not first deluded to the deception of the other, nor that we suffer men to
delude our affections through our Imagination barely, Reason not at all, or not
well consulted.

That the Imagination is a deceitful faculty, we need not Scripture to declare
to us, as it does of the heart; daily experience sufficiently informs us as
much. But above all, its leiger demain in supplying the place of Reason to the
Affections, is the greatest and most considerable fallacy thereof, and most
carefully to be avoided. We commonly affirm, it supplies the place of reason in
Beasts; but if we look narrowly into our selves and them, As we find them void
of Reason, and incapable to argue within themselves; so we should find that
faculty in them, most exactly and curiously, exquisitely, and admirably framing
and contriving in obedience to the strokes it receives through sense, and in us
only to supply the place of Reason.

And how happens it or comes it to pass, that it supplies the place of Reason,
that more than ordinary divine gift in us? Why thus; Reason, which is the
ground Work of Faith, although it accept of things invisible as true to create
a belief (and indeed a belief properly is not without it) yet never directly
opposes sense, whereby there is a more apparent contradiction in the Soul, for
then it were not Reason (a thing of it self not deceivable) nor the Spiritual
gift of that God, who gives us leave to make use of our Senses thereby: the
Devil, or man, cannot hurt us through that faculty alone, or chiefly. But the
Imagination in man, though of divine extraction, and given as subservient to
Reason, is capable of a kind of exaltation, in direct opposition to sense, and
that, through the inflammation of human affection, equally divine, and not
satisfiable through sense. So as, if once the Affections become grievously
wounded through sense, or otherwise, they do as it were enforce the Imagination
to satisfy them for the present with a bare imaginary belief, and therefore are
the affections always chiefly aimed at, and this is that which the World
applauds as a dextrous application; when they are thus hit, to the exaltation
of the Imagination, and depression or clouding of Reason; or if you please in
short, when an imaginary or fictitious belief is created in the Soul.

This has been found out, as the surest, and most ready way by all pretenders
to Religion, in all ages, to set up fancy for predominant, by blowing through
it upon some affection, which of it self is apt to recoil and inflame the
Imagination, to the dazzling of Reason in conjunction with it. Passions of all
kinds shall be assaulted, Pride, and vainglory, as well as love; and if a
belief can be effected no otherwise, fear must be raised, and that that fear
may stand its ground, and inflame the Imagination to some height, God, whom we
ought to serve in fear, must be brought in as a party, either constantly ruling
in his (so called) infallible Church; or else new inspiring some amongst us by
his gracious Spirit, which we ought to hearken to, and obey. The fallibility of
either which position, or assertion, is plain enough, and common Reason would
soon espy the delusion, if she were free and at liberty, not confounded through
fear of, I know not what, that it is absolutely necessary for men to believe as
the Church does, or as new gifted or inspired men shall teach them, and thereby
the Imagination is hurried to supply the place thereof.

I dare appeal to the soberest, and greatest rational Doctors of the Romish
Church (Passion already raised against us somewhat cooled, the Imagination a
little quieted, and Reason a little free) whether, the general, universal
belief (yet I do not think they all believe what they affirm, maintain or
Preach) of their Transubstantiation, Miracles, Fables, and Legends, were not
first raised, and be not yet supported by the strength of Imagination only, or
chiefly; And whether they do not think, their Religion, or rather their Romish
Church would soon fall to the ground, if men's Affections were left quiet to
themselves, that working faculty, the Imagination, a little rectified, and
freedom allowed men to exercise their Reason without imaginary danger.

I would neither offend God, or them, or any one else, willingly and advisedly
by questions and doubts; But in that grand point of Transubstantiation, or the
real Presence, wherein, or whereabout we so much differ; I beseech them to
declare, not only how it comes to pass, but how any real belief thereof can at
any time be effected in the Soul; since Reason it self, more prone to accept
and allow of things as they are represented through our own sense that
otherwise, at first rejects it, and cannot be easily convinced of the contrary,
till it be convinced of the very fallacy of that glass of sense in us.

As to the thing it self, I know they will readily allege, that there is a
miraculous, and wonderful sudden change, through Gods omnipotent power, of the
Bread into Flesh, upon the words of the Priest; And this I readily grant, if
there be any such change at all, and so far I agree with in belief: But, belief
it self, or to believe it so, or so done, seems to me to be an human act, a
voluntary consent of the mind: And surely they will never affirm, their own
belief thereof miraculously effected, nor that ours must so be, by the free
grace, or necessary impulse of the same eternal Power; If they do, I will
answer them, it is then vain and idle for them, once to think to convince any
man of the truth and reality thereof, by human argument, and that it is
cruelty, as well as folly to endeavor or imagine to do it by fire and Faggot;
their Prayers then to that Power, were the better, surer, and safer way.

If they say, it may be effected, through the assent of Reason, ever
submitting, and bound to submit to Gods express word, whatever sense introduce
in the Soul to the contrary: Then let them show that express word of conversion
of the Bread into Flesh; But if they would persuade our Reason, in opposition
to sense, to accept it as true, and real; Let us see how they can make out this
fallacy of sense, without setting up our Imagination, as regent in the Soul, to
the suppression of Reason.

I confess a man's Reason may naturally submit, to accept of those truths sense
cannot penetrate, or it self comprehend, but it can never submit from any human
impulse to accept or allow of any thing, clear contrary to the demonstration of
sense, and what from thence might be comprehended of the Soul, without a great
depravation of the Imagination to blind it, and lead it captive. And therefore
while we retain our Reason, free and at liberty, we may wonder, with a kind of
laughter, why these men should endeavor to prove to us a real Presence, by
clean contrary ways to our Savior himself: And bid us distrust our sense, and
elevate our Imagination, and believe contrary to that inlet, by which, He, who
best knew the safest way, would, that belief should be raised or let in to the
Soul, and was the greatest confirmation of the absent Apostles Faith.

Every outward apparition to the Soul, if there be no disease, or defect in the
Organ by which it is let in (though it pleases or displeases not alike by
Reason of our lapse and affections disorder) is ever one and the same to all
men, or else we must accuse our great God and Creator of fallacy, which God
forbid! And thereupon I think it impossible in Nature, for Reason, which is his
immediate gift, and his Vicegerent in our Soul, and able to judge a defect or
no defect in the Organ, to move of it self in a direct opposition to that
apparency. But that it must be some other faculty in our new diseased and
distempered Soul from our first lapse, that, as it were, forces its consent; Or
rather falsely represents through some disturbance and inflammation of affection,
and so raising and allowing of it self an Idea, which is not, so that we might
well discard the opinion of deceptio visus in most cases, and impute our
fallacy to our own opinions, that is our imagination.

Now how comes this faculty, which is employed and works for the enlightening of
the whole Soul, to delude and deceive us so often? Why truly, not of it self
barely and simply, as I said (it is if well employed even about sensible
things, an admirable and wonderful searcher and Diver after truth, from the
very work whereof, how weakly soever we are able to judge of it, we are apt to
become proud as well as self-conceited) but from the restless importunity and
craving of the Affections, and the fumes proceeding from thence, toward the
present allaying whereof, it is now and then as it were almost forced on the
sudden to supply the place of Reason (since the Affections have no immediate
recourse to Reason) and sense too, and palliate Reason to contradict present
sense, and raise a seeming sense of what is not, to delude Reason, become Judge
as well as Juror, pass final sentence, as well as indict, which is indeed the
sole office of a more noble, though a more quiet, that we say not a more lazy,
faculty in us.

I am somewhat assured, the most Ingenious of that party, will not be able to
deny, but that strength of Imagination (rather than strength of Reason)
inflated through passion, has brought them in many, if not the greatest number
of proselytes in that belief. Perhaps they will say, Credulity, that is a
belief without due examination, is an Epidemical disease in every Soul, and
that the strength of Imagination backed with passion, has in some of us,
created a belief of things altogether as (rationally) incredible. I must
confess I think it has, and, owning as much, wish we were all so far
undeceived, and those mists engendered between our Affections and Imagination,
so far dispelled, as that we might in these our days, behold the things which
belong to our present, as well as future peace; and that we might so far behold
each other in charity, as not so fight and quarrel about our different beliefs,
and colourably set up Reason in the case, when in truth they are Affections,
one or two, and perhaps none of the best, Pride and Covetousness in us, which
with the assistance of the Imagination contend on each side, which of us shall
reign or domineer over the other.

I intended not when I first reflected on the Imagination, and the delusion
thereof from corrupted passion, to bring in Religion as the subject matter or
Theme, I meant only to speak of it, in reference to moral delusion, apparent
enough in most cases of our life and action, and how far reason in us, if well
exercised, might prevent it, and to that I return. Truly, this restless busy
and prouling faculty in us, the Imagination, which flees from us like our
shadow, while we pursue it, and to espy its frauds, endeavor to arrest and lay
hold on it; was certainly given us for good, and not only in observance of
Sense, but in obedience and subjection to Reason; and it seems to continue so
in most of us, until we begin seriously to make use of our Reason, to weigh and
consider some of the Imagination's past devices, and then we observe its
fallacy: That it is often like to some kind of Subjects, which outwardly
pretend the advancement of their Sovereign's power, and will not seem directly
to resist his commands, as some of his Subjects (that is the Affections) do;
yet complying with those Subjects under hand, and enticing them to Rebellion,
makes use of him as a glorious Cipher, that under color of him they may more
easily move, and more safely and quietly domineer.

This is the way of the Imagination, and when it has thus done, that is, that
it has colourably set up Reason, and as it were deceived the affections,
baffled them, and seemingly mastered them, and brought them to its beck, as it
thinks; that it has taken freedom from the Will, and subdued all in thought;
It becomes at variance with it self, in distrust of it self, and so brought to
amazement and confusion, is at length made a captive and slave to the meanest,
basest and most sordid rebellious affection, perhaps envy, or hatred, perhaps
brutish lust, perhaps despair, and this to the overthrow and utter destruction
of reason in the end. And if this be the usual result of its treachery and
fraud; and it may be prevented, why should it not be prevented? We have reason
in us to do it you will say; I say so too, but how it will be thereby effected is
questionable.

Truly Reason in the beginning, and when she first comes to maturity, if she
means to reign well and safely, must make use of Machiavel's Maxim of division
amongst her Subjects, especially the Imagination, and some particular
affections, corrupted perhaps before she had any strength: For if they once
agree, as it were to trust each other, they will soon undermine her power, or
at least render it useless: And therefore Reason should, as it were, sow
jealousy between them, satisfy the Imagination, that some corrupt affection
set it idly on work, and show the Affections, that the Imagination labors
for them in vain; it should represent to each what drudges they often make of
each other, to their several disease and disquiet: Thus it should raise a kind
of suspicion of each other, and satisfy the whole Soul as it were in
conference sometime; that neither of them is to be trusted, or relied upon
without her authority, and mature and deliberate allowance; that they are both
deceitful and treacherous, and strive as it were to delude and supplant each
other by false presents, or false employment. And surely, whoever has his
reason any whit clear, free, and at liberty, will quickly see the dangerous
consequence of the reliance of these faculties on each other. For if ever their
familiar intercourse, and running long together without stop or stay, as I may
say, and due examination of the subject matter, do bring peace to the whole
Soul in the end; I never yet had any reason in me, or understood their motion.

But before I go about to talk of the Imagination and Affections in conjunction
together, and a remedy to prevent their united operation to our disquiet, and
perhaps final destruction: I shall endeavor to lay open and plain, an error or
two, as I conceive, we constantly retain in point of opinion.

First, That though our Imagination work and contrive methodically, and
orderly, with a kind of connection and coherence of things, as if it had the
present assistance of Reason, as we conceive, yet in many such cases it has
not, but such its work, (notwithstanding the method aforesaid) connection, or
coherence, is without the allowance or approbation of Reason, nay in direct
opposition sometimes to true and perfect Reason, and is by the impulse of some
kind of affection with the assistance perhaps of an evil spirit.

Next, That though it sometimes so work, without the impulse of any evil
affection, or the suggestion of Satan; yet it is ever accompanied and attended,
and stirred and moved with some kind of affection, how inconsiderable or slight
soever; and if it do not directly aim at the advancement of Virtue, Truth,
Justice, or the like; it has not the concurrence or approbation of Reason,
whatsoever it may seem to have.

It Is a strange thing, methinks, that men should falsely arraign that Divine and
Heavenly gift in us, and impute our greatest faults to it, make that which was
given us to direct us in sobriety, righteousness and godliness, to be the cause
of our exceeding Beasts in all voluptuousness, debauchery, wrong, deceit,
falsehood, and profaneness; that men should accuse that of actual guilt, of
which it is not guilty, or capable to be guilty; nor is blamable or culpable in
any case, but of sloth, negligence or inadvertency. That we could neither lie,
nor dissemble, nor cheat handsomely and cleverly, without being rational; nay,
men of strong reason; when it is the very office of Reason to render all
falsehood, fraud and deceit, how cunningly soever hatched in the Imagination by
the brooding of some affection, detestable and abominable to the whole Soul.
Nay, that some men should tell us, that to every Politic contrivance in us,
Reason is so aiding and assisting, that without it, and depth of judgment, we
could not contrive a false story (perhaps affirm a false story of another
contrivance) with any coherence or connection; and therefore if we can observe
in a man any thing of collateral folly, simplicity or weakness, we must believe
his allegation as grounded upon truth. Surely such assertion with what flourish
soever of words, was not from the suggestion, or allowance of Reason, but the
bare figment of the Imagination toward the gratifying some ambitious if not
covetous desire; and their own reason may one day tell them so.

Indeed I have heard of a late good Penitent (who therein could have no design)
that he should on his deathbed accuse and condemn himself with this kind of
Exclamation: O that his reason which God had given him in some degree and
measure above others, should be exercised and employed in deriding and
vilifying the Author of his Being, and him who gave it! I must take leave to
say, it was his invention only (a thing wherein few men seemed to exceed or
excel him) with the impulse of some sprightly passion that did it, not his
Reason; but that the checks he confesses sometimes to have felt against that
course, was (through Gods grace) his Reason only.

That roving, quick, and lively fancy of his, had it been obedient to Reason,
that is, that had there been made some search and enquiry into that kind of
involuntary check, that kind of confusion in it self on the sudden,
notwithstanding the outward applause it received through Sense, might have
wheeled about as we say, seen the sordid ugly visage of lust, and the
consequent of its rage, beheld the luster and admirable beauty of a chaste and
virtuous life, the benefit and advantage from thence, as well here, as
hereafter, raised zeal, and pure love again in the Soul, and became the
garnisher thereof, with rare and all manner of delightful invention: But
running its own course, as we say, it approves its past motion, supplies the
place of reason, and continuing that intimacy and familiarity it had got with
corrupt affection, was made at length the very Slave and drudg of lust.

It Is our misery by a fatal kind of consequence, that that faculty in us is so
capable to supply the place of reason; for that it is (though given subservient
to reason, and is of equal Divine extraction with it) and is (as our
affections) able to work against, nay contrary to Sense, and capable of
influence from above, and subject to the delusion of infernal power: but of
that more in the end.

It Is Passion and Imagination in conjunction together, by which we err, and
commit the most foul and enormous crimes, how cunning or advisedly soever we
commit them; and not Reason and Imagination in conjunction. Or rather, it is
from Imagination attended with some kind of passion in rebellion to Reason. I
do not observe our Law (grounded upon Reason as we say) to accuse Reason in any
case, or to make any averment of rationality in us, at the time of the fact
(although it excuses a man if he be wholly and totally deprived of Reason) we
have instigatione diabolica seductus; we have imaginatus est, thereupon we lay
the fact in some cases to be done ex malitia praecogitata, malice forethought
(and which I think is ill translated, malice prepenced, for there is no due
weighing of the matter) as if malice that sometimes subtle thing, were hatched
in and brought forth by the Imagination.

Now for this thing Malice, improbitas, or vitiositas, an evil habit of mind,
for so I take the meaning of it to be, a thing no ways natural in man, we bring
it not into the World with us, and therefore it is perhaps that St. Paul bids
us 1 Cor. 14.20.
, Be children in malice. We can discover or discern no such thing in Beasts;
there is in them anger, and a kind of revenge too, raised by the Imagination
from sensible danger, loss, hurt, or the like, but nothing continuing in them
like a passion from conceived damage or prejudice only, without the assistance
of present Sense, nor when Sense seems to afford grounds for the product of
love or kindness (things of contrary quality) as it happens sometimes in man:
Now in man it arising through a kind of mature deliberation, and not being on
the sudden, or of short continuance, like other Passions; (although St. Ephesians.
4.31. Col. 3.8.
Paul, and St. 1 Pet. 2.1.
Peter both do link it with passion) I will not so call it, and the rather
because a Learned Orator has affirmed, That passionate men are not malicious:
But I will impute it to be a strange effect of humane Imagination only, or
chiefly, and begat thereby, as it is restless and active, and What will not
Malice invent?
Proverbially inventive. And withal, I will readily grant, that he in
whomsoever it is, or harbors, is a man of weak reason; because he thus permits
this Prodigy or Monster in Nature to inhabit his Soul; but yet I continue to
think, (being begat by humane Imagination which can supply the place of reason
as I have said) it may work with some coherence and connection, and with the
help of Satan and his Emissaries palliate truth.

This superfluity of naughtiness, so termed, I conceive by Saint Jam. 1.21.
James, once bred or raised in the soul, will never let the Imagination be
idle, or attend on any thing else; and then 'twould be strange if humane
Imagination, or invention thus employed, though in opposition to reason, should
not invent formally, and with some coherence. But besides this, there are
common evil inherent affections in the nature of man, able to set the
Imagination so on work as may deceive us, and make us think it is Reason that
answers their call at our devotion, when indeed it is no other than a restless,
quick, and lively working Imagination rowsed from them. We do esteem him a man
of quick and brave parts, who seems to have a power over his Imagination, can
at any time recall it to work, as it were at his pleasure; and this we say is
strength of Reason: But I do not always look upon a man as the more rational
therefore, or that it is his Reason only, or chiefly, by which he seems enabled
so to do. Caesar we say, was a man of quick Parts; and how was he so? why, his
ambition was naturally great; and again greatly inflamed by a clear and roving
Imagination, and those two in conjunction together, ready to serve each other
upon every turn, might make us admire him. But I cannot well judge his Reason to
be greater than others, or actually to work in conjunction with those other
faculties, unless in such particular cases in which he duly observed Justice,
or out of true compassion showed and performed Mercy. He could not but be
sometimes convinced in reason (for we'll not suppose the Spirit or Grace to
work in him) that the Wars he made, the trouble and disturbance he raised in
the World were injurious and unrighteous; and therefore his invention in
pursuance thereof wrought in opposition to his Reason. I do not think he was
deprived of Reason, or his Reason clouded so far, but that if he could have
attained his aims and designs, his ambitious ends and purposes without injury
or wrong to any, he would rather have done it that way; but contriving to
satisfy his ambition, per fas and nefas, as we say, I say his Imagination,
inflamed and hurried by his ambition, only supplied the place of Reason in all
its contrivances.

I my self have sometimes designed, and contrived (as many others have done) by
all lawful ways and means, the advancement of my estate, and the settlement
thereof in my name and family; I have invented, and found out perhaps, as
probable a worldly method for the doing thereof, as another: My Imagination has
brought and laid down before me, all the letts and impediments that might seem
to hinder and obstruct; It has invented means to avoid them, etc. Yet since my
Reason has at particular times informed me of the vanity thereof, the certainty
of Death, the mutability of all human things, etc. I will not impute my
contrivance to Reason, and lay the fault on that, which disallowed the work:
but to Imagination rather from some restless affection, which it endeavored to
gratify, so far as 'twas able, and only supplied the place of Reason, to make
me strongly think, rather than firmly believe, the matter feazible by man alone.

Surely, there is something more, in Reason, or Reason is somewhat more, than
we are yet generally aware of. It Is, as I have touched, the thing, by which we
are in some measure enabled, to weigh and distinguish good from evil, and evil
from good, right from wrong, and truth from falsehood, etc. The chief and
principal ingredient of that thing we call Conscience, (however frequently
those who most pretend Conscience, make least use of it, and least exercise it)
an inherent native light in man's Soul (not excluded from Heathens) and not the
Spirit, we Christians so much talk of from Scripture promises. A gift, which
whosoever observes, makes use of, and obeys, procures to himself peace, and
quiet of mind. For, unless some disturbance in him do arise, as by the
representation of bodily danger, hurt, or loss, etc. through present sense,
which is ever of short continuance, and no longer than sense is open to it;
Observance thereof, and obedience to it, is ever necessarily, and consequently
attended with joy and comfort.

It Is not, as I conceive, the man of quick, nimble, exquisite or excellent
parts (as we term him) but the good man we so call, who, we may most properly
say, is the great rational man, or the man of Reason; We shall find a sound
Reason and quick invention, sometimes working together in one Soul; But the
quick or methodical work of the second, does not always denote the actual
assistance of the first; quick invention, denotes often, sprightly, lively,
vigorous, and active passions, and such passion (not forward and testy humors)
is usually attended with a quick, and well contriving invention, and they work
together upon each others motion, call, or notice, to astonishment or
admiration (even to the blinding sometimes of a strong Reason) but not always
that which is good; Nay often, especially through that flexible member of ours
the Tongue, that which is evil; And, that Trumpet of a rational Soul only,
given us to make a true sound, from the invention only, is made to render a
false one.

Reason that Divine gift, properly so called, and yet distinct from the Spirit,
never was the occasion of falsehood, never wrought injustice and damage to any
man; Nor of it self (unless from our neglect of its monitions) became of evil
consequence to any. Argument, or ratiocination as some men call it, has, but I
do not take every seeming manifestation, every Logical dispute, or Rhetorical
flourish to be at any time so much the proper effect of Reason, as of
invention, or Imagination. Perhaps that one word (...) signifying both Speech,
and Reason, has not only made young Sophisters mistake themselves for the
rational men, but deceived the World into a plausible opinion of them, and
begat a Faith of many things, contrary to Sense, and Experience, the best and
trustiest Handmaids Reason has in the Soul. We have coined a multitude of
English words from thence, ending in logy, to signify our rationality, as,
Astrology to be a knowledge of the effect of the Stars, Theology a dispute, or
dissertation of God, or things Divine, Analogy a comparing of things together,
Apology rendering of a cause or reason, and the like. When God knows how little
of true Reason is made use of in relation thereto, but words only; And they
might, for ought I can perceive, owe their derivation thither, or from thence,
as well as the word, Tautology. And therefore though that Phrase of Speech, be
sometimes used in Scripture, and which we translate reasoning, I do not judge
it, to be spoken of, or mean, that pure natural human insight, into the reality
and truth of things upon consideration, ever void of evil, or just offense; but
a disputation private, of words arising or offering themselves in the Soul,
from the Affections and Imagination, or from the Imagination chiefly.

Luke 20.14.
Saint Luke in the Parable of the Vineyard, and those Husbandmen, who would
have killed the Heir, that the Inheritance might be theirs, uses the words
Math. 21.38.
ratiocinabantur inter se, which Saint Matthew and Saint Mark both, express by
the word, Mark. 12.7.
dixerunt. And in the demur of the Scribes and Elders, to our Saviors question
about the Baptism of John, although all the Evangelists use the word (...),
reasoned, I have seen it, in some Translations, rendered, thought.

I must confess, Speech, as I have touched before, to be a certain
demonstration of inherent Reason, and therefore of an immortal Soul or Spirit,
but not therefore, that all speech or argument, proceeds chiefly from Reason,
that admirable faculty, which of it self deceives not, injures not, or works at
any time against right. Can you, or I, or any sober unbiassed rational man,
upon due consideration believe, or affirm, (unless where fancy supplies the
place of Reason) that any endeavor, with the best, and most polite arguments
made thereupon, for the disinherison of a lawful Heir, by any of us who can
challenge no right to the present disposition of the Inheritance, proceeds from
Reason? Can Reason do, or contrive any evil, or injustice, that good may come
thereon, (perhaps in fancy only) Does it not teach us rather to suffer
patiently, whether by stripes, imprisonment, or death? Does it at any time
teach us or instruct us to do or say, what we would not have done, or said in
relation to our selves? and this upon due examination, and weighing in the
balance of Justice, were our case theirs, against whom we do, or of whom we
say. He, who has truly, impartially, acted or spoken thus, has followed the
dictates of right Reason; not he, who has used elaborate arguments to condemn
or disable another, in the case he would think it unjust, to be disabled
himself; be the convenience, or inconvenience, to the generality of mankind,
never so great or pressing, but has rather followed his own Imagination, and
the dictates of his own lust or affection, which indeed is apt to delude and
deceive, not only other men's, but even our own Reason in the end.

I may pray to confound men's counsel, as David in the case of Achitophel. I may
pray to confound their devices, as well as to abate their Pride, and assuage
their Malice, as in our Liturgy; I may pray to be delivered from absurd or
unreasonable men; But I shall never pray, I think, to confound any man's Reason,
that will never hurt me, I am sure, or deceive me. But for want of it, or
exercise of it, in my self, I may be deceived. The Poet says, Nam neque
decipitur ratio, nec decipit unquam.
Reason neither deceives, nor is deceived at any time; in the first part of his
assertion I fully agree with him. It is that special emanation from Truth,
which of it self, or by it self, puts no fallacy on things, nor works any evil,
as I said. But unless, by Reason, he means that very light of truth, or truth
it self, which is the thing, we admire and adore by the name of God, it is
deceiveable. Human Reason, how strong soever is deceiveable, and that through
its tame compliance only to the work of the Imagination, guided or directed, as
we may say, by some base, or corrupt, or otherwise pitiful mean Affection, and
supplying its place.

Nay men do not only falsely impute, all our wicked contrivances of deep reach,
and subtilty framed, unto reason; But even all our futile idle contrivances,
well and formally, or curiously done, to Reason too. Every finely framed
Romance, every Eutopia, or Atlantis, every witty Poem (the mere work of the
Imagination) we ascribe to that, we are all become so rational; Nay if we see
but an exact Picture, or Building, we do as much, when we might better do it in
the model of every little Birds Nest. But as Reason, in the former case,
disallows every thing that is apparently false, or evil; so in this, it
rejects, of it self, every work in the Soul, and every contrivance of the
Imagination, not directly tending to the glory of our Maker, the discovery of
truth, the reformation of men's manners or the like. And doubtless at the
instant work of the Imagination, in relation to these contrivances (though not
directly hurtful of themselves) many men have had some secret whisper within
them, first of the vanity thereof, then upon a review perhaps have had some
kind of Regret, and in the end have censured, and condemned themselves, as
guilty of a crime, for such work that their Imagination or invention might have
been better employed, as they say it fared with Sir Ph. Sidney; Which could
never be, if reason had actually afforded its help toward the contrivance.

But in these very cases, I think as in the former, there is the immediate help
and assistance, of some Affection, and that the Imagination is constantly
attended therewith, and elevated or inflamed thereby, or else it would be
otherwise employed through sense, and these pretty kind of Buildings would fall
to the ground, or vanish in oblivion, before they were perfectly and completely
finished. And what kind of Affection is this? why, a desire of being admired
for our fancy, a light, airy Affection, and spawn of Pride, nourished, and
fostered in the Imagination only, and pleased with its invention; for surely
fancy barely (though some fanciful men so talk) cannot be pleased or gratified
with it self, nor do those that entertain themselves after this manner at idle
hours, do it to please their fancy only, but some impotent weak spawn of Love,
bred through Sloth and Idleness, blindly and childishly craving somewhat. For
whenever Affection in man has any strength or vigor, through sense or
otherwise, and craves real food; this Affectation, so I may call it, rather
than an Affection, soon vanishes. And surely here, of all other cases, fancy
supplies the place of Reason.

This being granted, that in our greatest and deepest Politic contrivances,
and in our most curious and exquisite inventions, the Imagination may and is
able to supply the place of Reason; that the Imagination and some Affection in
conjunction together only, can frame with coherence and connection, and that in
their operation they want reason only to distinguish of truth or falsehood, and
the consequent of their work, good or evil; that its checks in relation thereto
are but rare, its offers weak, and it is become amongst us almost a Cipher in
the Soul: Let us enquire here, if you please, how far it is, or may be in our
will and power to cherish it, or strengthen it, or how far we may become
enabled from thence, to regulate or reclaim, control, or recall, change or
alter, guide or direct our Imagination and Affections; so as from our obedience
thereto we may obtain in the conclusion not only some peace of mind here, but
eternal rest hereafter.

For reason, or ought else inherent in man, absolutely to govern the
Imagination, and wholly reclaim its wandering, nay to fix it one moment, without
some kind of deviation, upon any particular Object, (since so many various
Objects offer themselves through Sense, and since without present sense the
Imagination is agitated from such opposite and various quarters) I hold it
altogether improbable, or rather impossible. Some indeed who had read that
excellent Tract of the Government of the Tongue, (a bodily member) did promise
to themselves and us, the like, of the Imagination, a spiritual faculty. But
it is in fancy only that fancy is in our power, or can at any time be made a
faithful obedient Subject. We cannot command it by our Reason, at least we
cannot do it at our will and pleasure, and therefore chiefly and principally we
must trust the Government with, and expect the guidance and direction thereof
from, some Superior power. Yet this I dare aver, That as Reason naturally, and
as it were involuntary to us, does now and then put a kind of check to the
Imagination, and thereby cools the Affections as to worldly Objects; so it may
by observation, and some kind of endeavor or exercise so far increase in
strength, as to make us will or desire that which is perfectly good, so as our
Affection shall as it were distrust our Imagination as unable to show us that
of it self, and not eagerly embrace that which the Imagination often lays
before them. And then (the Affections a little cooled) the Imagination will
cease to contrive in that manner it often does, or at least its contrivances
will not much prejudice or hurt us.

I might here a little distinguish between Imagination and Imagination, that
is, a sudden, senseless, (as we sometimes call it, and yet perhaps arising by a
stroke through sense) vain, insipid cogitation or thought, without the apparent
concurrence of any Affection (a frailty in us not wholly to be prevented, and
for which we are in no wise answerable to Divine Justice as I shall speak
hereafter) and a cogitation allowed, entertained and embraced by some
Affection, An imagination of the heart, as the Scripture calls it, that is
perfectly voluntary as I conceive, these kind of thoughts may be surely in some
measure prevented, that is, that they be not evil, and that continually; for
our affection, (though not our Imagination) was certainly ordained subject to
our Reason; and our Imagination, at least, by consequence.

There are some men I find, who are already persuaded, or (if you will allow
it) have raised a settled opinion in themselves; that because it is impossible
not to think, it is therefore impossible to prevent a thought; say they, How
can we be said to hinder a thing before it be, or that which never would be?
And when it is a cogitation, how can it cease to be? And so voluntarily, as it
were, yield up the rein, to have their thoughts arise or work by a kind of
fatal necessity.

What I shall futurely think, I must confess I cannot possibly prevent, and yet
it may be so in my power by way of precaution, and curbing my Affections with
my Reason, as to prevent the rise of an evil thought which otherwise might have
been, and further the rise of a good thought, which perhaps otherwise would not
have been.

If beauty, or riches, or honor, or place, shall seem to offer themselves to
ten several men in their thoughts at one instant, that is, they all then think
there is an opportunity offered of obtaining or enjoying; doubtless there will
follow as many various thoughts about the manner, as there are men, and neither
could prevent at that time such their thoughts. Yet if any one of these men had
at any time before curbed his appetite in like cases; that is, made use of
Reason so far, as to show unto his Affections the vanity or inconsistence of
these things with true happiness; the vileness of obtaining them by any
indirect means, etc. (which we cannot but imagine it is in some measure in the
power of man to do) do we not think, nay can we not judge, but that such man's
subsequent thoughts, would much vary from what otherwise they might have been
or tended, and if so, a thought may be changed, altered or prevented.

If our thoughts were so far out of human power or ability, as that they are
neither creatable, mutable, or reclaimable thereby: To what purpose is all this
argument about them? We will imagine now; the Inventors, Assertors, or
Promoters of this Opinion, are like other men, and we will appeal to them who
urge it, whether they would not the good Opinion, and good thoughts of us, and
all men, in relation to their sincerity in this averment, that is, that it is
the plain demonstration of Reason in them, and no sinister Affectation
whatsoever, that induces the maintenance of this Opinion (which perhaps at
present, we think it to be) now I am sure they will offer it to our Reason, to
make trial thereof.

Now if I have no power to exercise my Reason, then is that offer to it vain;
if I have, and thereby change my Opinion, then is it in my power to change my
Opinion, and create those thoughts in me, which otherwise would never have
been. Nay this very exercise, that is, the weighing and examining the grounds
of the first rise of this Opinion, creates in me thoughts of the Inventor, such
as otherwise would not have been; ( viz.) That he who first started this game
for the Imagination to hunt after, to the confusion of it self, and the
clouding of Reason, so far as to betray the Soul to the delusion of Satan, and
averting it from a ready and willing obedience to that guide set over it, was
no good Christian, nor no good moral man.

If he were alive, I am pretty confident, he would grant, it were in my power
to be idle, that is, permit my thoughts to ramble, in obedience only, to sense
present or prior, so as without exercising my Reason (how weak soever) that
thought of him, would never have risen within me; but I should have believed,
or granted, All he had said, to be true, and then had I prevented such (as I
suppose he would call it) evil thought of him.

Reason though it be the least Earthly, or the least of cognation with the
Body, of any faculty in the Soul, yet is most like it in this; that it acquires
strength and vigor by use and exercise. If it but once reclaim the
Imagination; If but once thereby we master an unruly Affection for a time; If
from it, we once behold our past folly and madness, and have some glimmering
light of truth (besides the present comfort therein) how ready is it upon every
turn, to afford us its help and assistance? It seems indeed at first an irksom
thing to the Imagination, perpetually working as of it self, ad arbitrium, and
naturally working to feed and please the passions, to have Reason called in,
for its regulation or direction, in all, or any of its motion. It begets in us
that disease, (we fancy so at least) the Apostle calls a weariness of the
mind; Let the Affections, and Imagination, work and run together without
control, men seldom complain of a weariness of the Soul, however it may fare
with their Body, in pursuance: but if Reason be obeyed in its checks, and
called in to weigh all circumstances, future danger, as well as present
enjoyment, and to distinguish real good and happiness, from colorable
delights; We presently faint and give over, leaving our Imagination and
Affections to themselves again: And so instead of a weariness of the mind for
the present, subject it to Agues and Fevers, doubts and distrusts, anxiety and
perturbation in the conclusion, such as are far more unpleasant, irksom, and
intolerable, than the pains we endeavor to avoid.

If any man, who has felt it, shall make a diligent search into the cause of
any his involuntary disquiet of mind, he will find (setting aside some
particular cases not to be prevented) it has been from the too great trust, the
faculties of his Soul have had of each other, and the too familiar compliance
with each other, that, which way soever the one has first moved, the other has
followed, or at least not resisted as it should or might; that in their course
together, which soever has been originally most to blame, the Imagination has
been the Ringleader or File-leader; that if they had been now and then at a
little distrust, and now and then had had a little contest for precedence, and
superiority, it might have prevented that mutiny and disorder in the Soul,
which is not seldom occasioned by Reason's stepping in and exercising its
power, and showing us our Errors, when it seems too late.

I must confess every dispute, or contest amongst the faculties of the Soul, is
for the present troublesome, but who would not, if he could, endure a small
trouble to avoid a greater? A voluntary dispute or contest between our Reason,
and Imagination, is never very dreadful, or deadly, neither can I foresee any
dangerous consequent thereof. The danger is only, when it is involuntary; when
Reason is roused and awakened by some unexpected accident, sickness, crosses,
or the like, when it starts up, as it were on the sudden, and as Gods
Vicegerent (of which we were not sensible before) seems loudly to cry out, and
condemn us, for not making that use of it we might, or not obeying its private
monitions before, and this to the sudden amazement and confusion of all the
other faculties in the Soul; then does the Imagination sometimes, according to
its wonted falsehood, so far comply with it too, as to present us a prospect of
a just and revengeful God, and (forgetting mercy) his utter desertion, and
rejection of us; which likely ends in despair: but if it be voluntary, and so
the Imagination and Affections be as it were prepared for the encounter; let no
man ever fear the evil success thereof: Reason, Gods Vicegerent, will never
condemn us utterly, at such time as it works of it self, and as it were of its
free motion, to reform us.

This contest in the Soul I recommend, and this mutiny, if it might be, for the
present, I look upon as the readiest way and means, toward a settled and
lasting peace and quiet for the future. We are prone and ready enough to
distrust each other, and to fall to foreign or outward dispute and
controversy, and to go together by the ears for God's sake, as we say: But
truly, if there be in Nature any struggling or contest, any difference or
division, any fighting or combating, acceptable to the God of Nature, and the
God of Unity, Peace and Concord; it is between the several faculties of a Soul
amongst themselves, when Reason shall as it were voluntarily exercise them, and
call them to an account; when Affections good and bad, shall as it were fight
together; when Pride and Vainglory shall be undermined, and fall to the
ground, through a sense of our own unworthiness; when modesty and shame shall
quench the flames of inordinate, and more than bestial love; when perfect love
shall drive away fear, and the like. And this through Reason's showing us the
delusion of the Imagination before; all the wound we receive thereby, is, that
our Affections seem a little disgusted for their too great compliance with the
Imagination, and disobedience to some former checks of Reason, which will be
perfectly healed by their present compliance, and the Imagination hereby will
be somewhat reclaimed from presenting to them a pretense to any absolute
authority for the future.

Surely this most excellent Divine gift, Reason, was not given us barely to
condemn our selves for our neglect of the motion of Grace in us; but that there
is a kind of will and power in us attendant upon that admirable gift to act. I
own there is Grace cooperating with it, or working in it, by which it often
moves and guides us, but yet I judge it may move from some strength of our own,
or as of it self. It stands by often as it were idle and unconcerned, in
relation to our thoughts and actions; but we often find it is not dead in us,
and then surely we our selves may give it strength by exercise, or add strength
to it, and exercise it, we our selves may; and that it will sooner and better
work in us from thence, than from the enforced motion of any outward humane
application. We may desire and request men to exercise their Reason; we may lay
down before them the benefit and advantage they may reap thereby, but we cannot
properly be said to persuade them to it. For it is not a belief upon a bare
consideration, that what we at present say to them is true, that is an exercise
of Reason, (though belief in a strict sense be the work of Reason) but upon
consideration, whether what we alledg may not be false. A narrow scrutiny and
voluntary search after truth, is an exercise of Reason. And this is the work in
the Soul, as it were of it self, rather than from our persuasion, (or indeed
the work of Grace) which I commend.

We have in one place a kind of assertion of this power and ability in man (to
me seeming) from one, who elsewhere ascribes all his good thoughts and actions,
as much, and as often, to the effect of Gods Grace in him, as any man whatsoever;
and that is, St. Paul in the defense of himself before Foelix, when Tertullus
had accused him as a Pestilent fellow, a mover of sedition, and a ringleader
of a Sect; That he had Act. 24.16.
exercised himself to have always a conscience void of offense, toward God,
and toward men. What can his meaning be herein by the words himself, and
exercise? but by the one his Reason, by the other a will and power annexed to
that Reason, given as a rein over the other faculties of the Soul, that is (for
so I take his meaning to be) that notwithstanding his opinion, notwithstanding
his Affections adhering, cleaving to, or going along with such opinion,
notwithstanding a subsequent will or desire, that the World should embrace that
opinion or belief ( viz. of a Resurrection) which he himself had entertained
with the allowance and consent of Reason; He endeavored all along by his
Reason so to keep those other faculties under subjection, as that they became
not offensive to God or man: and from thence, as I infer, he implicitly avers,
That in entertainment of that opinion, he neither imagined evil, desired evil,
willed evil, or prayed for evil to any man for dissenting from him in opinion;
that his Imagination was not hurried herein to gratify any evil, ambitious, or
vain affection, that he neither meant or intended, or could foresee the
disturbance of the present Peace or Government of that Nation, in the allowance
or declaration of his belief; that he neither desired, or aimed at riches,
places, preferment, or popular applause, or admiration thereby. So as when he
came to review and re-examine his past thoughts and actions in the judicatory
of his Reason, he doubted not but he should find quietness of mind, and no
disturbance amongst the faculties of his Soul; nor God, nor man (justly)
offended thereby. I wish we all in matter of belief endeavored as much, that
is, exercised our Reason therein. I affirm we may and can; and that is the
readier way by this work from within to obtain and procure (his words are
there, ad habendam) a Conscience void of offense, than by the Imagination,
raise a Chimaera in the Soul, a Conscience vulnerable, in complaint, from
without; a thing only offended when the Imagination and Affections are crossed
in their course together, and not else.

I do not presume here, to propose, or offer this exercise of Reason, which I
affirm to be in the power of most of us to do, as any absolute way or means, by
which our Imagination and Affections may be reduced to work, and lay hold on
that which is good only (that I refer to the only fountain of all intellectual
as well as other beings, through our humble Address and application thereto, in
Prayer from some sense of our own weakness, and reserve it for a Conclusion)
but as a preparative thereto; Neither has my Imagination hitherto, so far out
run my Reason, or so supplied the place thereof, as to make me believe St.
Paul, or any other, was ever wholly void of offense, or trouble of mind
thereby. But my Reason (I trust to say so) informs me, that did we make that
use of it, we could, or should, we might espy the fallacy of our Imagination in
many particular, if not most, cases of our life; And to endeavor to awake it,
in our selves, or others (if these Papers happen to be seen) is my chief aim,
and I hope and trust, it will prove no cause of offense.

Experience (something more than memory, for it is a judgment passed upon
memory) methinks might help us a little; It Is to Reason, as memory to the
Imagination; A Fort, to resort to sometimes, from which it makes its sally, or
exit, usually with some greater strength and vigor than before. And methinks,
if Reason were not Master in us before, this thing Experience, which is
certainly Mistress in most of us, might help to make it so; To see we have been
deceived by our Imagination, and that from thence, a kind of false or feigned
belief has been raised in us, is sure, the readiest way to prevent deceit for
the future, and raise in us a more true, and substantial belief from Reason.

How often have we observed our Affection, nay our whole Soul, disturbed and
disquieted, through the delusion of this one faculty in us, the Imagination?
Has not that often put diverse and various colors upon Objects, as it were
through Sense, at several times, and upon several occasions? while Sense
continues one and the same, to day, and to Morrow. Have we not, as it were
Yesterday, beheld things as Delightful, Beautiful and Pleasant, through that
false glass only, which to day we do not? Has not that alone, and not Sense,
raised the Proverb of the Crow? He who has at several times received favors
and disgraces from Court; He, who has at several times received admission, and
denial to Church preferment (with either of which I was never acquainted or
concerned) is better able to set forth to the life his various prospects
through this glass, than I; and better describe, how ugly, or beautiful the
feet of those men, from whom he has received both denial and admittance,
obstruction and furtherance, have seemed at several times; and I wish some men
would consider it.

Is it not the strength of this one faculty alone so predominant often in us,
that introduces various forms of one and the same thing? Beasts do love, and
fear, as well as we, from sense of a particular Object; but I can scarce
conjecture, the Imagination in them can so far alter the form of the Object, as
to make it seem various to several Beasts of the same species, at one and the
same time. This we find, and may observe it does, in us Men; a Bush, at a
distance, will seem to one his appointed Friend, to another his Lover, to a
Third a wild Beast, to a Fourth a Thief, to a Fifth an evil Spirit, and to a
Sixth a good Angel, according as a present fancy shall render, with the
assistance of some formerly debauched or deceived Affection.

Now, howsoever I adjudge, affirm, or maintain, Affection to be the original
cause of motion, or work in the Soul, I do not adjudge it originally to blame,
or to be the chief and principal cause of every uneasy, or evil motion in the
Soul; but that the Imagination is first and chiefly to be blamed; and that
Affection would never embrace any thing as good, or reject any thing as evil,
which are not so in their Nature, if the Imagination did not first present them
as such. Human Affection, originally good, naturally tends in desire to that
which is good; But because the Imagination, the perspective by which it looks
abroad, is not able of its own strength, to afford it a full and true prospect
of any such thing; it many times presents unto it in haste, things, as good,
and beautiful, which, in truth, are not; which once accepted by the Affections
as good from that false glass, they adhere thereto, and are not easily removed,
but disturb us, whenever we are informed the contrary by others, beating upon
our Reason through sense, or, indeed, that our Reason of it self shall too late
inform us otherwise. It Is from the checks of Reason, at peculiar seasons, that
that saying of video meliora, etc. has arose, not from the Imagination, which
is most apt to delude us; that, we follow, and are most prone to follow, and,
if we are once given up, shall surely follow, as Scripture it self seems to
intimate, placing the foolishness of our hearts, Romans 1.21.
subsequent, and attending on the vanity of our Imagination. And therefore we
should strive, as far as we are able, to rectify that one faculty, in the
beginning.

Does not experience daily show us, this one faculty in the Soul, has deluded
every thing that may be called an Affection in us, by representing things on
the right hand, in a far more pleasant, and delightful, and on the left, in a
far more horrid and uncouth dress, than in truth they are, or prove to be, when
we become really acquainted with them, and by our Affections seem to taste
them? Every man who has promised himself Place or Power, (with the delight
thereof) to gratify Ambition or Revenge, Honor to gratify Pride, Riches to
gratify a Covetous desire, Fleshly pleasure to satisfy a more than Beastly
lust, and enjoyed either, I am sure will own it to himself; and that a
Mohammedan Paradise best agrees with fancy alone, and by it self, as it were;
for whatsoever may be called an Affection, no sooner tastes it, but it loathes
it, and wants the Imagination to put fresh colors on it again, to raise a
fresh, or, as it were, a new desire.

The things, which the Imagination at first presents as ungrateful to the
Affections, we are rarely so long, and so well acquainted with (because we shun
them, and turn from them in thoughts, as often as we can) as with the help of
experience, to make a true judgment of our Imaginations false gloss thereon,
and we are never willing to stand out the trial. This I am verily persuaded,
that, that most dreadful Gulf of Death, is chiefly so framed from the
Imagination, and is not such, without its deception: And that those, who have
shot it, if they could return to us again, and declare what might be most for
our ease and quiet, in relation thereto, would bid us, not to read the
Treatises thereof, which some have made, and framed by their Imagination, but
advise us to exercise our thoughts, toward the performance of moral duties,
rather than busy them about that which serves but to aggravate and enhaunce
terror. And I do further believe (how e're we accuse our Affections therefore)
that it never was sudden joy, or sudden fear or grief (as is storied) that
has killed men: those Passions are not so much to be blamed (how suddenly
soever they are awaked) they only embrace or avoid, as they seem directed; but,
that it is a strange sudden exaltation of the Imagination, a thing seated in
the brain, which from its violent heat and motion there, is able to dissolve,
and dissipate, our vital Spirits, and stop this breath of life in our mortal
Bodies.

I do not impute our common distractions, and disturbance of mind, (grounded,
as may seem to most, in fears and jealousies) so much to the fault of men's
Affections, as their Imaginations (though Affection be to blame too) Affection
in man is generally good, and inclinable to peace and quiet; and if it work the
contrary, it is from some false light of things, darted from the Imagination,
however raised or kindled therein. There are many thousands, no doubt, who from
the bottom of their hearts, wish and desire the quiet and peace of their
Country and Nation, and yet at this instant very much help to foment its
differences, and are ready to bring upon it the contraries thereof, Trouble and
War: and this from a false and vain Imagination only, or chiefly, that we might
be happier than we are, because we seem not at present so happy as we would be.
Which deceit of the Imagination, men usually observe when it is too late, and
wish themselves again but as happy as they have been. But it is a strange
thing, that they who have once observed it, and found themselves deceived
thereby, should a second time suffer their Affections to labor under the same
fallacy, and not observe from Reason, backed as it were from Experience, that
we may be deceived thereby, and therefore carry such a suspicion of the
Imagination in our Soul, as not to let our Affections, too deeply engage with
theirs, who may possibly endeavor their own advancement, rather than our
reformation, and amendment, and aim at the delusion of our Imagination, by
mormo's and spectrum's raised and shot into it, through sense, absurdly enough,
rather than the enlightening our Reason, by offering us any thing of weight or
truth.

Nay, when the Imagination without the least ground, or concurrence of Reason,
has once framed a belief in some men, and thereby captivated their Affections,
how ready are these faculties together, to spread the infection through Sense,
in others, by the most ridiculous ways and means that may be? Every Apparition,
every Blazing-Star, must portend, if not infallibly denote to others, as well
as themselves, Sedition, Troubles, Wars, Subversion of Monarchy, or what else
men readily would: And truly so every such thing does, if we exercise not our
Reason, and it happens once to become a general belief amongst us, from the
fallacy of our Imagination, by the Devils Emissaries, that there is such a
portent; but if men would be prevailed with to make use of their Reason, I
affirm, (and they would see) these Apparitions portend no such thing; But that
it is in our power at all times, to change the seeming evil consequent of these
Signs, or Face of the Heavens; and I will plainly tell you how. Let every one
of us endeavor to amend one, (our Prognosticators especially) himself rather
than another; Let each single person begin to lead a righteous, sober, quiet,
humble life, let him submit himself to all Power, Laws, and Ordinances already
established, for God's sake. These I am sure are the dictates of right Reason,
and these are things as much in every man's power, as any thing imaginable. Be
but this (and Reasons dictates, when it dictates, are the same in all men,
though that be sometimes weaker, sometimes stronger, and sometimes blind in
man) once observed, we become again, as it were of one mind, and if we become
of one mind, Sedition is necessarily wanting, and if Sedition be wanting, I am
sure it is impossible, Troubles, or War, should happen amongst us. So as, it is
we alone, are able to make a Star portend good or evil, which of it self
signifies nothing of concern to us.

When plain down right Reason is neglected, the subtle Imagination inflamed,
and our Affections once wedded as we say to Opinion, what monstrous consequent
beliefs are begot in the Soul? Is it possible, think you, from Reason, to have
a belief raised in any man's Soul, of his own merit or worth in relation to any
future state? Is not every man conscious thereby, of his own defects and
unworthiness here, of his treachery and falsehood, of his Irreligion and
Profaneness, of his want of Charity to his fellow Creatures, and want of due
veneration to his Creator? Can any man behold himself (and in some degree and
measure know himself, which is a thing utterly impossible of another) and not
condemn himself by his own Reason, if he have any, as acting sometimes against
the plain light of that? and look upon himself, as St. Paul, the greatest of
sinners, because it is impossible he should behold, and perfectly know, any
greater, and throw himself at last at the footstool of some infinite Mercy? I
am sure no man can do less, that makes present use of that faculty, at other
times neglected. Whence is it then, that some men elect, and Saint themselves,
without any present respect to such infinite Mercy, and behold others as
Reprobates and Castaways, discarding all Mercy out of themselves? Is it not
from opinion only, and the bare work of the Imagination in them? And is it not
wrought and effected principally, from others disagreement with them in point
of Opinion, relating to the ways, and means, and methods of obtaining future
Bliss and Happiness? Affection sure is not herein originally to blame, neither
can any peculiar affection (unless Pride, the spawn of the Devil) be found,
that should inflame or exalt the Imagination above Reason in this manner.
Before men thus differ in Opinion, they love and affect one another well
enough, but after Imagination has raised several beliefs in several men
(perhaps about a trifle, and that which is not worthy to be a subject of
belief) they generally, mortally hate, and persecute each other. Herein, I say,
the Imagination is chiefly culpable, and raises such a belief merely for want
of a little exercise of Reason; For, that, duly consulted, I dare say, would
raise another manner of belief in us, that is, that without just provocation,
and the immediate necessary defense and preservation of our own Bodies, we
ought in no case to wound and destroy another: And then would this Diabolical
imaginary belief vanish, and we should be at Amity again; which, God of his
infinite mercy, by the strengthening or enlightening our Reason, or otherwise
of his immediate Free Grace (so far as it may agree with his holy purposes
toward the setting forth his own Glory in the end) grant unto us all! and that
we become not more savage than Beasts, whose Imagination working upon the inlet
of Sense barely, frames, and contrives no further than self-preservation, nor
is vainly exalted in any of them into a belief of self-worth, or Spiritual
Prerogative or Sovereignty above their fellow Creatures, so as to destroy one
another as a Victim to Pride, but only to present Rage, or Lust, or Appetite.

I am so far from accusing Passion, as the Original Cause of our Errors, and by
consequence, our Trouble and Disquiet (which I rather impute to the bare work
of the Imagination, and that chiefly through the delusion of Satan) that I do
think, there is not a greater, or stronger Bulwark against the idle and wicked
excursion of the Imagination, whereby our Troubles do arise, nor a more
effectual means for the opening and strengthening our Reason, by which they are
soonest allayed, than some peculiar Passion, inherent, and raised (I will not
say by the Imagination, for the Imagination alone I am sure cannot do it) in
the Soul; and that is, Sorrow, a thing we are ready and willing to shun, and
condemn in our Imagination, before we become well acquainted with it by our
Reason. Of the usual blessed effects whereof, I mean to say somewhat in this
place, in order to a Conclusion.

By Sorrow, I do not mean every Grief, Anxiety, Trouble, or Perturbation of
Mind, but, that Dolor flebilis mentioned; a mollifying and melting of the
Heart, through some seeming irreparable loss, but so mollified or melted by a
stronger power than the Imagination; which thing, though it continue not in its
first state or height, but resolves into a kind of joy at the last (and indeed
while it is, is no other than a privation of some preceding joy or delight) yet
retains so much of its first nature and quality, that upon remembrance thereof
(and if it were real, it cannot be utterly forgotten) it will remain as a guard
to suppress the treacherous attempts of the Imagination (or rather the Devil
through the Imagination) and consequently the Insurrection of all base and
sordid affection, or, if you please, against the excursion of other Passions,
and consequently, against the deceit and falsehood of the Imagination.

The Imagination is usually of a towering quality, beholding all worldly goods
under it, and, not seldom, is as liberal of its Promises to the Affections, as
Satan to our Savior: And this puts them all in Arms, and whatsoever Mastery,
Victory, or Enjoyment is obtained, there will be Mutiny and Trouble, and
Disorder, amongst those common Soldiers of the Soul; which this one single
Passion, raised, is only able of it self to prevent or allay. For it cools the
Imagination only, while all others inflame it, and rejects those Companions of
Envy, Hatred, Malice, or the like, which other Passions usually call in to
their assistance, by the help of the Imagination.

There is no doubt; neither shall I gainsay, but that every man,
notwithstanding the present Dominion of Sorrow, or any other moderate lawful
Passion, retains in himself the Seeds or Roots of every irregular unlawful
Passion, which may in time spring up, and bear a bitter Fruit to the Soul; yet
this Covering, like Snow, which has in it the qualities of Cold and Heat both,
will obstruct their springing forth for the present, the usual consequent
whereof is a good and plentiful Harvest.

Sorrow I affirm is a melting of the Heart from above (for it is not any
apparent cause can do it at all times) and a new moulding all the affections
through a rectified Imagination. Now whether it arises at any time, from the
weight and sense of a man's Sins, the loss of his Relations, or other cause
whatsoever; if it be true and real, without too much mixture of some other
Passion, I dare boldly and confidently affirm, it will have this effect upon
every man, that he shall not for the present, plot and contrive for the
gratification of any evil affection whatsoever; but that, that thing we call
Imagination, shall render all its former Devices, in such case, abominable, and
loathsome to his Affections.

Those busy contriving Heads now abroad in the World, who think they have
Reason working in conjunction with their Imagination, did they feel, or had
they ever felt, this Affection or Passion, truly regent in them; were they, or
had they been once sorrowful, for permitting their Affections to be wedded to
their past Inventions: I am persuaded they would not pursue their present
designs, with so much eagerness or greediness of Mind, as perhaps they now do,
nor would they pass over so slightly and unregarded, all those Bonds of Amity
and Friendship, Truth, Justice, Mercy, Pity and Compassion, and the like, which
God has imprinted in their Nature, and given them Reason to enliven the same,
and by which plain Light, they would almost necessarily walk, did not the
Imagination by Passions clean contrary to Sorrow, dazzle their Prospect by
obstruction thereof.

Does not the Imagination, upon the least reflection of Sorrow, cease its
working, to supply or foment all Lusts of the Flesh, and the Eyes, nay, strive
as it were to suppress them? Is it possible that any Pride of Life, should so
far infest the Imagination, as to render it obedient thereto, or to comply with
it, when Sorrow has possessed the Heart, a thing necessarily attended with
Humility; that is, a low esteem of ones self? Can any man in Sorrow, do, or say
that to his Neighbor which Reason forbids? Let Envy, Hatred, Malice (those
pleasant Companions to some) receive entertainment and compliance in the
Imagination, at such time, if it be possible: Nay, let a man then, so much as
think evil of any man but himself, the space of one moment, I will tell him, he
either was not truly sorrowful, or I understand not yet, what true Sorrow means.

Whereas, Love (I mean not that which is pure) sends the Imagination on a
thousand idle Errands, Fear disturbs it and distracts it, Foolish Joy ravishes
and confounds it, and some of them make it raise a thousand Chimaera's; Sorrow
alone, shows the folly of the Imaginations attendance on all other Passions,
while it holds a Glass to it self; and although it be esteemed an heavy lumpish
Passion which no ways quickens the Invention (a faculty in whose work we much
glory, though it work our shame and confusion in the end) but rather dulls it:
Nay, though it be not of it self, so active and sprightly abroad as some other
Passions, yet it is not altogether idle at home, it sweeps the Soul clean of
much Rubbish, casts out, and disburthens it, of many foul things, and invites,
as it were, Love and Charity, and Good Will, to garnish it and possess it in
the Conclusion.

To rectify, or cure our Imagination this way, is most certainly out of our
power; we cannot melt our selves thus, at our will and pleasure, and therefore
it may seem vain to commend it to any man; I only mention it to this end, That
they who look upon it as terrible and grievous, may prevent it beforehand (if
so be they can) For he who can or will follow the plain dictates of Right
Reason, and not his own Invention, shall never certainly fall into it: But if
any man shall have done otherwise; Let him pray for it, let him help to advance
it, and entertain it thankfully, if he find it coming upon him (and that is a
thing may seem in man's power) and look upon it, as a most blessed Remedy, sent
in aid of Reason, toward the cure of an unruly wandering Imagination, and its
Attendants, unquiet and disorderly Passions; and without which, we cannot
easily be relieved, and cured of them. A blessed weakness or sickness of the
mind, which (if the Imagination, through the delusion of Satan, make it not to
end in Despair) will so help Reason, as to render our Soul in a more perfect
state of Health than ever it was before.

Humane Imagination, is the most strange thing in Nature, nothing so strangely
working, nothing so strangely set on work; nothing so deceiving, nothing so
deceivable, nothing so suddenly alterable, changable, or mutable, nor by such
various and diverse ways and means; I have often in my thoughts compared it to
many things, but to none so often, as that thing which our Savior has
resembled the Kingdom of Heaven to ( viz.) a Drag net, which by the impulse of
somewhat (it may be sometimes that good Spirit we have mentioned, it may be
sometimes an evil one, it may be our affections from the agitation of the one,
or the other) gathers, and brings into this Land of ours, things of every
kind, good and bad; which if some other faculty of our Soul be not able to
distinguish, and sever the one from the other, but that our whole Soul does
embrace, and greedily feed on whatsoever is brought in without any difference,
she is in a great deal of danger of being infected with many diseases: And so
much the rather, as that the imagination being of equal divine extraction with
our Reason, and capable to work without regard to present sense, it becomes the
door, if not well looked to or guarded, by which Satan sliely enters in, to the
possession of our Souls with an Imaginary belief, against Reason, and Sense
too, and brings us to entertain error for truth, evil for good.

There are many seeming ways, so far to reclaim the Imagination, and so far to
stop the common usual course of its extravagancies, as that we become not
confounded, nor greatly, and grievously disturbed in the Soul thereby, that
have (through that very faculty it self) occurred to my mind, I had once
thoughts to set them down: But when all is said that can be said, or thought
that can be thought, and we proceed to make our Judgment thereupon; That one
(chiefly Divine) faculty, Reason, which God has placed as his substitute in our
Souls, tells us, our thoughts of themselves are vain, and shows us our
insufficiency, and informs us, we are, as of our selves, a thing of naught, and
left to our Invention, worse than naught: It bids us cease our vain
Imaginations, if so be we can, and humbly resign our selves to that very power
from which we think; so to think as may be most pleasing thereto, and safest
for us.

We are all, God knows, as to what is good, dull of Invention, frail of Memory,
and weak of Judgment, whatever our Will or Affections are, or seem to be; and
the sight of that, might well put a stop to my Writing. But you (and every man
who finds and owns himself under that Notion) will I hope pass by, and pardon
my infirmities, if there appear any discrepancy, between these and my former
thoughts, already set down in relation to this Subject: And the rather because,
you well know, all my former Papers were out of my custody, whilst I was
employed and busied in these. I have already exceeded the bounds of an Epistle,
and will trouble you no further, save in relation to some former demonstration
of my weak judgment relating to this faculty of the Soul, the Imagination,
under these four several following heads distinct and a part, and those I am
bold to set down, as follows.

I. That the Imagination, of all the faculties of an human Soul, is most
subject to infection, change and alteration, from the humors of the Body. II.
That the guidance, regulation or Government thereof, is least in our power, of
any faculty of the Soul. III. That it being a faculty, the Government whereof
is so much out of, or beyond our Power, We are not answerable for its
Transgression, unless, where some other faculty, more in the power of our will,
through the light of Reason, does apparently concur, or comply with it; Or that
through the negligence of our Reason, it was the cause of the Imaginations
incorrigible rambling errors. IV. That it shows its Divinity and extraction, as
well as any other faculty of the Soul in the manner of its Work. That set on
work in relation to its own motion, it necessarily terminates (with the
allowance of Reason) in the thoughts of, one, Eternal, Wise Being, or Mind,
Governor, and disposer of all things. That from such thoughts, we are
necessarily stirred and incited, in all the faculties of our Soul, to fly
thither for relief, and to receive direction and guidance from thence chiefly.
That yet herein, necessary care is to be had and taken, that we retain, and in
some measure make use of our Reason, lest we become ensnared through the
delusion of Satan.
I. Notwithstanding my Opinion of the Souls extraction, its Divinity, and
Immortality; its power here in a Body from Heavenly influence to mount
sometimes above sense; its strength to resist all foreign delusion through
sense by Reason; Its capacity to work without a Body, or the help of that more
present inlet, bodily sense; Yet it is in my judgment, while it remains in a
Body, so far subject to some Mists and Vapors arising there from, that the
Imagination, the Eye of the Soul, is thereby often deceived: And so far
deceived thereby, that Reason, though it remain in its native strength, cannot
correct its wandering, but is forced to yield its allowance and consent, and to
be led as it were captive by the Imagination.

This faculty, the Imagination, the Eye of the Soul through sense as well as
otherwise, necessarily and perpetually working and in motion, Upon any
distemperature of the Body, whereby sense is in any degree or measure clouded
or disturbed, is apt of it self to frame and raise strange Idea's and make
strange representations to the other faculties, to the amazement and confusion
of Reason; To the allurement, inticement, or attraction of other faculties from
that which before they naturally were bent and inclined to; and thereby at
length, to the captivation of Reason it self.

This happens not from every humor, or in every disease of the Body, but in
such disease, and from such humor only, as, by fumes sent into the brain,
clouds, or darkens that port, or inlet to the Soul, Sense: Or so disturbs or
obstructs those passages, that they cannot afford that assistance to Reason, as
usual, against the deceit of the Imagination. Sense I say, a passage, way, or
means, by the perfect openness and clearness whereof, Reason often makes a
better, and truer judgment of things, than it can, when those passages are a
little obstructed, and yet to the Imagination, seem open and clear.

In sleep, when that port, Sense, is as it were wholly shut up through fumes,
Reason (without blame) leaves the Imagination, as sole Master in the Soul, to
frame and introduce Idea's of it self, which in reality, are not; Yet upon the
opening of Sense again, they vanish, or are presently rejected, and cast out of
the Soul as idle. But when that port of Sense is open, and the Imagination
presents to the other faculties of the Soul, as if what it presented, were
rightly and truly formed through Sense with the allowance of Reason, and
thereby a vain belief (a thing somewhat more than a Dream) is raised, perhaps
to the terror and affrightment of the Affections; Reason not able, absolutely
to contradict the Imagination, because it seemed to have the concurrence of
Sense, is sliely drawn into a kind of consent; and this not seldom occasioned
through gross humors in the Body. In which case, there is in my opinion a kind
of defect, let, or disease in Sense (though not apparent) as well as fault in
the Imagination.

The Imagination is capable of distemper, two manner of ways, corporally, or
spiritually, as we say. But those two kind of distempers of the Imagination;
the one from the Body, to the Imaginations deception of its fellow faculties in
the Soul; the other from those fellow faculties (as violent Affections) to the
deception, or rather confusion of the Imagination it self, being often
confounded together, and the one, not sedom mistaken for the other, and the
fault of the Body imputed to the Soul, and the fault of the Soul imputed to the
Body; I have thought good to set down here some kind of mark, by which they
might be distinguished (though I offer it not with any great confidence, as the
light of an infallible truth appearing to me) and it is this.

That if at any time we find and observe a Body healthful (as in most
Lunaticks) and withal, the Affections very vigorous and active; and every
design and bent of them, ready to be put in execution by the will, and the
instruments thereof, bodily members; There we may rationally adjudge the
distemper of that Soul to be occasioned no otherwise than by its own default or
neglect, and the Original cause of the disease to have been the too familiar
intercourse and trust, between the Affections and the Imagination, from the
neglect of Reason, and a thing, which Reason might have prevented.

But if we find and observe the Body infirm, heavy and lumpish, and not active,
or ready with the Affections, to put in execution those things which are framed
in the Imagination, but that there is a kind of Terror or Horror observable
over the Spirits, and a doubting and distrust in the Soul, there we may impute
every false gloss, and fictitious formation and contrivance of the Imagination,
to have its rise or result from some gross humors in the Body, such as we call
Melancholy, such, as Reason in its greatest strength, could not rectify or
prevent, though it strived to resist; Nor are the Affections to be accused,
justly, of any inflammation or disorder through the delusion of Satan, or
otherwise; Neither can we justly think, there has been any wilful defect or
neglect in the Soul to occasion it.

Further thus; when Pride, or self-Love, or Covetousness, with their Offspring
and Darlings, Anger, Revenge, Hatred, Envy and the like, distemper the
Imagination, and cause it to wander without any order or Government, raising
false and fictitious sights in the Soul, the usual resort is abroad, and in
relation to others vileness, or baseness, overlooking all that is really, or
may be espied in Imagination at home; and in this case, we cannot so well
impute the distemper to humors naturally bred in the Body, as to the Devil and
a wilful negligence in the Soul. But when men, without any great or visible
Errors in the Affections, condemn themselves falsely, when the Imagination works
at home, and nothing seems vile or odious to a man, but himself to himself; I
judge the fallacy to arise merely from dark and dusky vapors in the Body (nay
I cannot see how it should proceed from any unruly or depraved Passion) by
which the Soul shut up as it were a Prisoner, from free communication with
other Souls, laboring of it self, and in travail to be relieved; for want of
help, a consternation is suddenly raised in the Affections, and from them
again the Imagination suddenly and violently set on work, Sense before clouded
is almost destroyed, it becomes as useless as in a Dream, the Imagination
becomes without control from without, and is sole Master and will be sole
Master till these vapors are dispelled or allayed which is best done, as I
think, by Bodily Physic.

When I once see men come to Visions and Revelations, and pronounce and
proclaim them, as given or sent to direct and instruct others thereby; I shall
very much suspect, their Soul more nocent, or more defective than their Body:
But if I find nothing but self-censure, and self-condemnation in man (unless in
case of a very apparent wicked life before) I have ever been so charitable as
to think strange and dreadful seeming Apparitions in the Soul, rather to be
raised first in the Imagination through some defect or obstruction in bodily
Sense, than that the Imagination through Affection deludes Sense, and that the
Soul of it self is purer than we can well judge of through our Senses barely.

Most certain it is, and experience tells us how subject this one faculty in
us, Imagination, is to sudden change and mutation from things merely Earthly,
received into the Body; how a little Wine will sometimes clear and elevate it,
how the anointing with peculiar Oils will dull, and infest it, how particular
Herbs and Plants will presently distract and confound it. Neither can we, I
think, rationally observe the sudden alteration of any one faculty of the Soul
from any distemper of the Body barely, but this. I neither cease to love, what
I loved, nor hate, what I hated, nor believe what I believed, nor will what I
willed, from any sudden fumes of the Body; nor, indeed, until the Imagination
by its continued disturbance from thence, shall have raised and put on other
colors on the Objects, and through its influence it has over the other
faculties, in time subjected them to accept such Colors as true. The
Imagination is many times suddenly changed and altered, distracted and
confounded from mere Bodily Diseases: and so (it being as I have said the Eye
of the Soul) all the other faculties from thence are led into Error, the evil
consequents whereof (the Body only or chiefly faulty) certainly God in Mercy
will not look upon as punishable, or take vengeance thereof; to which I shall
speak somewhat more at large in the third place, but first declare how far, I
think, the work of this faculty is out of, or beyond our power.

II. It is a common saying with every one of us, when any Foreign Power lays a
restraint upon our actions; We can think what we please, or what we list;
Which, if it were universally true, might perhaps in some cases render us more
miserable, than men of themselves can make us, by disquieting those Affections,
which they cannot disquiet, but through our own thoughts; Which are often
strangely diverted, and the Soul at better ease, than if that faculty were in
our absolute power. But, blessed be God, since our will is not generally so
good as it should be, the Will has no such native power over the Imagination.

It Is not the strongest Reason, the best Will, nor any other inherent gift of a
Soul, placed in the most healthful, athletick, sound and clear Body; that is
able wholly to direct this faculty, or guide it in any good or regular course,
for any space of time; Whatever men pretend. Indeed, I have heard of some men,
who have so far gloried in their abilities this way, and with all their
devotion toward God (for he is now and then formally brought in, when we are
minded to glory of our selves) as to affirm, They have been able to pray
several hours in fervency of Spirit, without the least wandering or extravagant
thought. Such, are very divine men, we may well think, and happy were we all,
if we could be so, in some less degree. But yet I wish, no man deceive himself
herein, and that through his own Imagination ( ex post facto, as we may say)
chiefly, and so have a belief thereof raised from the immediate work of that
faculty, rather than grounded on Reason, or (what indeed is the impress of a
right Imagination) perfect, and sound memory. Surely to raise this belief, of,
and in a man's self, a man must be in, what we so, call a Trance; Sense must be
closed, and shut up for a time, against all Battery: In which case, we'll
grant, the Imagination to be sole, or chief Master in the Soul, and then it is
no marvel, if it deceive men into such a temporary belief. But I dare appeal to
any such seeming devout Enthusiast, if he has been at the receiving that holy
Mystery (a Spiritual Banquet, whereat men usually are, or should be, as intent,
and careful to keep their thoughts from wandering, as in any case) whether,
presently after, he were not able to tell me, the color of the Bread, whether
white or brown, the fashion of the Chalice, or the kind of Metal, what Vestment
the Priest had on, what looks, or gesture, or action he used in the
administration thereof, and the like. Now if he will confess the remembrance of
any such thing, which I dare say, he cannot truly deny, I may be bold to tell
him, His thoughts somewhat wandered. For Memory being no other than the impress
of Imagination, or a cogitation renewed, his cogitation did a little ramble,
and was, through sense, employed about visible Earthly things. And so long as
we retain our Senses (which I pray God we may make use of, with our Reason, for
fear of a worse inconvenience) we shall scarce be able to judge otherwise of
our weakness, and infirmities herein, but have such a true sight of them, as we
ought to have, and make us humble, not proud in Spirit.

I do confess, we seem to have some little power over our Affections, from the
very light or strength of Reason in us. Not to let them move one way or other,
in relation to objects introduced in the Soul without some kind of precedent
allowance, because before they fix, or indeed fly as it were out of the Body,
toward embracing or rejecting any thing, there is a kind of Consult. But the
Imagination in its first motion, admits of no consult, nor is capable of
Reason's correction till after it has moved. Nay, it is so swift and sudden of
motion, as nothing whatsoever, can rightly be compared to it in velocity, and
swift rise. It Is well, if we can any wise stop it, or change it, or alter its
course in the end: And surely whenever that is done, it is done by, or
through the Affections, not Strength of Reason, or power in Will, immediately
over it. Affection first a little regulated by the light of Reason, and made,
as it were, to expect some directions toward the embracing true Happiness,
does much help toward the correcting our Imagination. But in this correction,
we shall find, or may observe, the Imaginations, better, and more regular
motion, to be, rather by the allurement of some Affection, than the impulse of
the Will, or immediate strength of Reason. Neither Reason, nor Will, can wholly
reclaim it from following, or complying with Sense, nor force it to work clean
contrary to a present affection. So as, we must resign it up to some Power, or
Will, than our own, if we expect it should be guided, by any such thing, as
what we call Power or Will.

III. This being premised, That we have no absolute Power or Dominion over the
Imagination, but that, as it necessarily and perpetually works, and we cannot
quiet it, so it sometimes works against our real Will, and we cannot reclaim
it (for who is there, who willingly, as I may say, lets it present death of
Relations, Friends, and other losses, etc. sometimes beforehand, and withal in
such dreadful colors as it does) and that all the rein that we may be said to
have hold on, is only from the power which our Reason has over our Will, not
to let our Affections fasten on, or long embrace what is presented to them by
the Imagination, if so be our Reason allow it not: This I say premised; Let us,
if you please, here examine, how far we may become liable to Divine Justice, or
Humane Justice either, for our Errors happening, or like to happen, from the
work of the Imagination, as principal. Whereabout, having many times puzzled my
self, in relation to the manner of the Souls working, you shall here have my
judgment, or the allowance of my weak Reason, with submission to a stronger,
your own.

But here again, as all along in treating of the Soul, we must suppose, in the
motion of any one faculty, no other Principal faculty is wholly exempt and
secluded, but has some kind of (seeming) consequent motion with it; As is
observable in our very Dreams, wherein men do not only imagine, but seem at
least to affect, seem to argue and weigh, and seem to will; Nay some in
pursuance thereof, have bodily motion, they talk, they arise, they walk, etc.
For if the Imagination were not attended with those other faculties, or did, or
could at any time work alone, or singly of it self, I should readily acquit it
in most, if not all cases, as blameless.

Now then, thus I think, whatsoever false, or naughty or vicious presentment of
the Imagination (that is, a first entertainment in our thoughts, what seems
contrary to Gods revealed will, or that law of his imprinted in our minds, if
search and inquiry were made) is gratefully accepted by the Affections (Reason
then in its full power and strength) though Reason so far restrain the will,
and them too, as that there follows no overt Act thereupon, I think does make
us culpable, that is, we sin. Because, were our Affections such as they should
be, or such as we might through our strength of Reason, with the invocation of
Divine assistance, have made, or rendered them; they would not gratefully accept
any thing that were evil, but have a reluctance against it, and decline it from
some prior instruction, I may say, rather than present correction. But if the
Affections, upon the first touch of the Imagination, do loath and abhor that
evil the Imagination brings or lays before them; We are in no wise answerable
for the irregularity or evil contrivance of our Imagination.

If Reason be totally disabled to work in us that which is right (the defect we
call ideocy or perpetual madness) without any negligence or default in us, we
are neither answerable (as I think) for our evil Imaginations, evil Affections,
or Intentions, nor consequently our evil Actions thereupon. But if that
disability came upon us by our own default or negligence; I think of it
otherwise in relation to God, and punishable by him, however it may be
dispensed withal here, by man.

If Reason be disabled naturally and inevitably (though for some time only)
through the fumes of the Body, and the very inlet, Sense, stopped (as in case
of sleep) though the Imagination invent that which is evil, and some of the
Affections embrace the same, and the Will seems to agree and consent thereto;
yet is the Soul blameless before man, I think, and God too: For that, Sense
being shut, and the Imagination as well counterfeiting the same, as supplying
the place of Reason, we may without any prior obliquity in our Soul, seem only
to have the consent of those other faculties to our Imagination; Which other
faculties, will utterly abhor, abominate and forsake what that contrived, as
soon as ever Sense is open again, and that they have the influence of any
clearer light to move by. And therefore I cannot judge any man culpable for any
Act of the Soul whatsoever in a Dream; Let him seem to plot and contrive first,
then, to strike, wound, or kill any man whatsoever, I shall not condemn him.
Because it is not, usually, any natural malignity of Affection, or any evil
inclination in man's will that first forces the Imagination to conceive or
entertain Evil against Sense, but ardency a good and lawful Affection which
forces the Imagination, for the want of the light of Sense, to raise a fear of
deprivation of what we best love; and they together, such fear and fancy,
composing a Tragedy (for there is no man but dreams oftener of the death of his
Friends than of his Enemies) often make us seem the Actors our selves. I, or
any man may dream of the killing of his own most beloved Child without offense;
Nay, a man may by way of case put, how doleful such an act would prove to him,
imagine and think of it waking, and yet loath and abhor the Act, nay tremble at
the very thought of it; And therefore it appears to me, a strange folly as well
as cruelty in Dionysius, if the story be true, That put one of his best friends
to Death, for dreaming he had cut his Throat, and alleged no juster cause than
this; that what he thought on in the Day, that he dreamed on in the Night. Had
the party that told his dream, withal affirmed that his Affections seemed
delighted and pleased with the Act; I should have thought there had been some
ground for the execution, but without such declaration, no color of Justice
for it.

If we voluntarily drown (as we say) our Reason with Wine, we cannot excuse the
irregular motion of the Imagination, nor the assent or compliance of the
Affections therewith; much less the assent of our will, and the putting our
thoughts and designs in execution; Yet I cannot allow, that there is thereby an
exaltation of the crime, as some Lawyers would, because there is an exaltation
of the Imagination. There are two sins indeed, but the latter is not made
greater by the former, but rather the contrary. In no other cases of Reasons
disability, whether temporary, or perpetual, whether that we call Delirium,
Lunacy or Phrenzy, and all that we comprize under the general notion of non
compos mentis, I do verily think, that if it happened, or came, by the default
of our own Soul, we are answerable to Divine Justice, for the deliquity of our
very Imagination, and the consequent Acts thereof; nay I cannot see, why we
should altogether exempt men from human censure, and corporal punishment, if
the evil of their Imagination appear at any time by overt act, provided that
punishment extend not to the present separation of the Soul and Body, so as to
leave the Soul remediless by Death, which for ought we know might recover its
pristine state here, and so, purify it self for another state hereafter.

Most certain it is, men can in these cases of Lunacy, etc. (happening one way
or other) imagine, and design evil, and not seldom accomplish and compass their
evil designs. And therefore our great Lawyer in commenting upon the Statute of
the 25th Ed. 3. of Treason, wherein the very Imagination is struck at, shows
very little of a Philosopher, whatsoever he shows of a Lawyer, in my judgment,
by telling us, That a man, Instir. 3. part fol. 6.
Non compos mentis (a man who is not Master of his Reason, or Reason is of no
power or Authority in him, as I expound it) is totally deprived of compassing
and Imagination. I think he might more truly affirm, that he who imagines the
death of our Sovereign, with any the least appearing assent of his Affections,
is, Non compos mentis, than that a man Non compos mentis cannot imagine, or
have his Will and Affections assent to that Imagination (which we find but too
often in these kind of men) And truly since all our safety depends much on that
of our Soverigns, and that Lunacy may be so acted, as the wisest of men cannot
discern the reality thereof, I think that Comment might well have been spared,
and the question left undecided, till there had been a necessity for it: which
God prevent! and so of his goodness direct all our thoughts, as that they do
not outrun our Reason too far, and kindle in us such a blind zeal, as requires
at length a greater power than Reason, to control and suppress.

I must confess I have ever looked upon this one faculty in us, Imagination,
sufficient to show us, that the extract of the Soul is Divine: that as it may
be, and often is, rather than any other faculty, immediately influenced from
that good Spirit, and by it we are enabled sometimes to think that which is
good, without any precedent motion of any other faculty; so it is most subject
to delusion from infernal Powers. That duly beheld; it almost necessarily
drives us, toward an invocation of one Eternal wise Mind, the Creator,
Preserver, Guider and Director of all its works. Which is the chief, and last
thing I designed to set down in this Treatise.

IV. We cannot deny unto Beast these four faculties of a Soul, very fimilar
with ours, Imagination, Memory, Affection, and Will; But we may and do
rationally suppose (for we cannot observe more in them, or the contrary) that
they imagine through Sense, they remember again from Sense, they affect by
Sense, and Will in pursuance hereof only, and not otherwise, as we have touched
already: neither can they, or are they enabled to weigh and consider, so as, to
raise within themselves an evidence of things unseen; which is the proper act
of Reason, a thing merely incorporeal; and necessarily moving upon the
cooperation, and making a judgment with the assistance, or help, of other
faculties, of themselves somewhat more than corporeal likewise. So as, all our
faculties are of Divine extraction, and capable to be wrought upon otherwise
than through Sense, though indeed they are most commonly roused and set on work
through bodily Organs, as those of Beasts.

Most certain it is, that we do, (as well as in that excellent faculty, Reason,
whereby we are enabled to ponder, and weigh, and try, and judge of the reality
and truth of things) herein excel them, and go beyond them: That we do now and
then wish our selves out of this Body which we could never do from Sense; and
desire a clearer evidence, or manifestation and appearance of the truth and
reality of our own being, and all beings whatsoever, the original from whence,
etc. than Sense is able to assist us in, or indeed can rightly afford us. Then
next, are not all our Affections readily employed upon things merely
incorporeal, and insensible, whenever they offer themselves or are offered
thereto? Do we not love and admire Truth, Justice, Mercy, etc. Do we not hate
the contraries thereof, falsehood, wrong and cruelty? Every one will confess
this. But now, how are things brought in this shape to the Affections? Why,
chiefly by an Imagination capable of divine impression; an Imagination that may
be wrought upon, otherwise than through Sense, and able to introduce
apparitions to the other faculties of the Soul, without the least help or
assistance by Sense, so as human Imagination is most certainly divine.

It Is no battery upon the Soul through Sense barely, no inculcating, or telling
us by word or Writing, that Virtue is amiable, which properly make it so to us;
But first an Inquest (our Imagination) that presents, and next a Judge (our
Reason) that allows and approves of it within us, as such. Indeed Imagination
in Beast, lodged immediately over the doors of Sense, does from thence work so
strangely to our admiration; so circumspectly, as I may say, direct their
Affections and Will, as that it has obtained the allowance of some to supply
the place of Reason in them. But there is none I suppose that ever admitted
them, so far rational, or indeed so far imaginative, as to search after the
ground of their Imagination, whether Sense barely, or somewhat more; or once to
imagine or think after what manner they thought. Now surely these thoughts
arise in most of us, as of themselves, and if that proceed from any stroke
through Sense barely, I have no Reason: and could I not fancy to my self there
were existent that which eye never saw, nor ear ever heard, etc. I wanted human
Imagination, and such an Imagination barely can never proceed from the Body.

Well Imagination in us alone, revolved, is a thing that most certainly
declares our Divinity and extraction, for it shows it self penetrable,
otherwise than by Sense. Nay, it appears, being revolved, to be made to work
and lead the Will and consequently some Affection in direct opposition to
Sense. How were it else possible good men should be willing to die, and leave
this World? It Is not Reason alone and by it self can model and frame a more
pleasant state, it is not all the bare telling us, there is such, will do it.
How were it possible, as I have touched before, that an evil man should be so
weary of his life here, as to let out his Soul with his own hands, or by any
voluntary act? which Beast never did; It Is not any stroke through Sense alone,
can render his life more miserable to him than all others; there is nothing but
self-preservation, and self-existence offers it self through Sense. The
Imagination alone is the cause, It is wrought upon diverse and sundry ways, as
Divine, not subject to strokes through fense only, but some way else, and from
somewhat else than corporeal. We are assaultable diverse ways, and in sundry
faculties of our Soul; and I deny not but supernatural power (not tied to
order) may work its effect originally in Affection, or the Will; but I do
think, this facile, pliable, restless, and ever working faculty, the
Imagination, is oftnest directly and particularly assaulted from insensible
powers, and the work of our conversion, as well as destruction, not seldom
begun there.

The Imagination ever meets with somewhat Divine in its own work, admit there
were no other faculty apparently in conjunction with it at first. It is
commonly said, that that man is of very weak parts, or ordinary capacity, or in
an evil condition, who cannot entertain himself with his own thoughts. Now if
he do but that first (and no man can but do it sometimes) that is, think of his
thoughts, he will have Affection and Reason attendant, and then he must needs
see, and be inflamed therewith, that these thoughts of thought arose from
somewhat more than Sense, no Sense could lead him back to think of thinking, or
be the direct occasion thereof: and proceeding further to weigh and consider
the manner of his thoughts, together with his sometimes strange Affections, he
will by a kind of necessary consequence observe, that Imagination in man is not
merely actuated through Sense, and that, by these two consequents.

First, there will appear to him, there was no certain method or order in the
motion of the several faculties of his Soul, but that sometimes the Affections
seemed to move from the Imagination, sometimes the Imagination from the
Affections.

Next there will appear an independence and direct breach of his thoughts at
peculiar Seasons, and that without any new stroke through Sense; for though
there be generally, as I have touched, a concatenation of man's thoughts (as
certainly there is always in Beast) until that link be broken by a stroke
through Sense, yet upon due examination, man will find it otherwise at some
time in himself.

I. That there is no direct approach from one human Soul unto another but
through Sense, I confess and agree, and that he who would inform or rectify our
Reason or Judgment, and bend and incline our Affections to, or from, that thing
it already stands bent or inclined, must necessarily enter that way, that is by
Sense, and thereby consequently first make some slight touch upon the
Imagination. So as, the Soul seems generally to work from Sense; first by the
Imagination with the assent or allowance of Reason, and next the Will and
Affections, and yet even in this manner of its work, there is so sudden a
stroke upon all of them as it were together, that no man can directly affirm,
priority or posteriority in the work of either of those faculties of the Soul,
or that one is in time before or after other. But when we are sometimes alone,
and the Soul works as it were of it self (though indeed not of it self) without
any apparent stroke through Sense, it may be, nay appears upon a serious
retrospect and consideration, otherwise.

Do we not, or may we not observe, there has been sometimes a burning within
us? our Affections on the sudden kindled and inflamed in a kind of expectancy,
we well know not how or of what? and so as it were creating thoughts in us,
diverse from what we ever had, or perhaps otherwise would ever have been.
Sometimes we find Reason suddenly enlightened, to the disallowance and
correction of our present as well as past thoughts, Will, and Affections,
whereby there is a strange mutation wrought in the Soul; Sometimes we find such
a thing as a Will wrestling and struggling in us, to change and alter our
present thoughts and Affections, and they have been changed. But more often may
we observe, a sudden irresistible thought arising in us (without any help or
assistance of Sense that we can perceive or observe, nay sometimes in a direct
opposition to Sense as it were) we know not, nor can find whence or how;
whereby our other faculties subjected as it were thereto, some work is wrought,
tending in the conclusion to the glory of some all-powerful irresistible Will,
as we conjecture by the consequence, and shall most certainly find in the end.

Now if the course and manner of the Souls work be not always the same, but so
various and seeming preposterous, so alterable, mutable or changeable in its
work, and yet that alteration is not made by any stroke through bodily Organs,
neither is there any apparent cause to be found, why the Affections should be
inflamed, or Reason enlightened on the sudden in opposition to an evil or false
Imagination, or an Imagination suddenly raised in opposition to delectancy
through present Sense; then is the Soul (in every part) a thing most certainly
Divine, capable of insensible influence, and not extracted from the Body. For
if it were of the Body, and so necessarily required, for its motion or
agitation, a stroke through bodily Organs, the course of its motion would
always be regular, and continue after one and the same manner: Man must see and
feel, and hear, etc. and perfectly conceive by his Imagination through Sense
before he be affected, and then I should be ready to grant, the Imagination to
be the Principal faculty in man's Soul, and the other faculties to be raised and
created thereby, and to work in obedience thereto, as I hold it does in Beast;
But so long as I find I have willed, I have affected, I have imagined, without
the help, beyond the reach, and sometimes as it were in a direct opposition to
Sense, I shall continue to believe my Soul is somewhat more than an extracted
quintessence of the Body, and subject to the influence of some incorporeal
power.

Nay were not the Imagination, at least, subject to the influence and stroke of
some supernatural, invisible, insensible power,

II. There would necessarily be a certain concatenation of my thoughts, and a
dependence upon each other, until they were interrupted and broke in sunder by
some immediate stroke through Sense, which happens not at all times, as may be
observed.

I do here agree that there is generally, as I have touched, a concatenation of
all men's thoughts, even at such time as they seem to ramble upon some prior
inlets through Sense, without any introduction or help through present Sense;
But yet narrowly inspected we shall find and observe, the Imagination now and
then to catch and lay hold on (or rather to be caught with) things, strangely
different from, and independent of, what it last entertained; and that a
thought may succeed a thought, such, as has neither the least dependence with
the former, nor yet can be found to proceed from the stroke of any Object
through Sense, present, or prior, For instance, After a long sleep, wherein the
Imagination has roved some few hours, and in those few hours has touched upon a
thousand several things, and each several prior thing might be found the cause
of introduction of the subsequent (if the impression were so deep, or our
memory so good in sleep, as to afford us any ground for asearch and observation
and judgment thereon) we no sooner awake (whether through a vain fear or joy
attendant upon a vain Imagination, or otherwise from a sufficient temporary
refreshment of the Body, etc.) but there is sometimes darted as it were into
our Imagination (we may say before our Reason is awake) something as clean
different from, independent of, and contrary to, all our past thoughts, as may
be, or is possible; perhaps very divine thoughts, such as were not in us at any
time before, possess us for a while, and pass away again without due regard or
examination; perhaps good moral thoughts, of Justice, etc. clean different from
what we had at any time before, arise in us; and this in such dark and quiet
silence of the night, as no Sense could help it to catch hold on, unless that
of feeling; by which these thoughts certainly could never arise.

Nay we will put this waking case of the Imagination, if I were looking, and
lusting, and withal contriving to satisfy my (what some men may admit innocent)
Lust, that is, all my faculties were busied and employed in the fulfilling
thereof; and no battery through Sense is made upon me, nay no recollection from
any former stroke through Sense occurs to me; If I shall on the sudden (be
startled through Imagination, and begin to think that which I never thought
before my Will and Affectons still standing bent and inclined as they were
before) that the thing I am now about is evil, (be it Reason, Conscience, or
Grace, or whatsoever men are pleased to call it, that is the cause of such
thought) most certainly my Imagination is not the Subject of a bare stroke
through Sense only, but somewhat more: For to think clean contrary, on the
sudden, to what a man thought, without the help of Sense, nay perhaps against
the present delectancy of Sense, shows more of a mere spiritual effect in the
Soul, than bare independency of thought can do. And he who finds not, and
acknowledges this sometimes strange stroke upon his Spirit, (upon his
Imagination at least if it go no further) is wholly deprived of the custody of
that seal or stamp of the Imagination, which we call Memory, or else is very
stubborn.

The Soul is doubtless a good subject to think on. If the very thoughts of it
in general, raise not such a sight and such a belief in man, as shall make him
endeavor to pursue that which is good and right in the sight of all men; It
will raise such a doubt, attended with some kind of fear, of its perpetuity, as
shall somewhat obstruct his pursuit of that which is evil and naught in the
sight of all men. But above all, the very thought of his thoughts in
particular, how strangely they arise, how inconsistently they work, how
insensibly they are employed, shall amaze him for the present, and at length
drive him to the invocation of some Spiritual Eternal Omnipotent being.

Lord evermore keep this door of our Soul! this common passage, that nothing
enter thereby to the pollution or disfiguring this most admirable frame in
Nature; lodged in human Body for the present, but made to endure after the
dissolution thereof, to thy Glory, whether by misery or happiness, and though
parted from that Body for a time, never to vanish. Keep it shut, against all
deadly and destructive assaults, from Satan and his Emissaries. Never let it be
wrought upon to contradict Sense directly, and Reason too, though it sometime
surmount both through thy gracious influence.

When a man begins to think, how far his thoughts are out of his power, how
little his own, or of himself (and who is there that now and then thinks not
after this manner) and that Sense is not the only inlet to the Soul, but we are
often led by the Spirit into temptation, as well as guided to that which is
good; It is sufficient to make a man besides himself I confess, and on the one
hand, if he pursue that which is palpably evil in the sight of most men, to
excuse his sloth with a kind of inability in himself to resist; and on the
other hand, if he find out, or light on that which is good, but in his own
conceit and Imagination, to mount a little too much above himself, and conclude
he is graciously inspired.

This notion of an insensible Spirit working in man, and this insensible
thinking, say some, proceeds from a scurvy black humor in the Blood only,
called Melancholy. Well let it be so thought by some for the present (for it
cannot be made out) so long as we retain our Reason to correct our thought in
some measure, think not too highly, nor too dejectly of our selves, are not
dismayed, nor altogether confounded in thought: And then in, that thing called,
Reason, Let any man (first waving his objection of Melancholy as much a
chimaera of his making in some cases, as any God of mine) show me and convince
me by any satisfactory argument, why my thoughts (if but thoughts alone) have
been thus intent and busied on this subject (the Soul of man, whence it is,
how, and after what manner it works) beyond many thousands of men, endued with
more sprightly or lively Affection, of clearer and quicker Invention, of better
and firmer Memory, of stronger and sounder Judgment, of every way greater
abilities, attended with fitter opportunities, and greater leisure, less
pestered and troubled, or sorrounded with wordly affairs, or indeed the
pleasures of the World; And this at such times as I have strived to cast away
the thoughts thereof, and could willingly have pleased my self with sensible
Objects, even offering themselves as it were to my Affections; and I shall
adhere to him and become his Convert.

In the mean time I cannot believe the more than ordinary employment of my
thoughts on such subject proceeded from any peculiar humor in the Body, nor
that any stroke upon the Imagination through Sense at any peculiar instant
before caused it; Nor yet do I believe or so much as once think it to have been
the immediate gracious influence or inspiration of that Holy Spirit. I have
always had so much strength of Reason left me, as to keep me from that
inflammation of Opinion, and I pray God we may all so have, howsoever he is
pleased to work in us: But this I think, and find, and know, that man's thoughts
are not always of himself, and therefore I very well agree with the melancholy
temper (as it may be thought) of those men, who have prescribed us the
following form of invocation of the Almighty Spirit of the World, and that
immediately before the hearing his Commands, that it would please him, Unto
whom all hearts be open, all desires known, and from whom no secrets are hid,
to cleanse the thoughts of our hearts (where I yet hold, most of them are
hatched or fostered, at least our considerate thoughts) by the inspiration of
his Holy Spirit, etc. But I do not agree with that man that shall now a days
affirm, that his or any man's particular Thoughts are thoroughly cleansed at any
time; we cannot so judge by our Reason, while we consider the vanity and folly
of our Thoughts at most seasons, and I am sure we have nothing else, properly,
to judge by. Some will tell me, my Reason is carnal, and cannot judge of
Spiritual things; I say Reason of it self is not carnal, it is of Divine
extraction (I think I have made it so appear) it is an heavenly gift already
bestowed on us, and by which chiefly, we must try the Spirits wherher they are
of God or no; I, and that too, through Sense most commonly, for he who tryes
and judges otherwise, does it from Imagination barely. Some will tell us of
their faith, their zeal, or love of God; If it be pure, and real, I will
readily admit it to proceed from that gracious Spirit: But how can I, or they
themselves, well judge it to be, otherwise than by Reason, from sensible and
visible effects? That may deceive us indeed, but that is the best and safest
Judge we have in us at any time. I know not how to appeal to men's Spirits, in
that notion some accept the word, viz. an immediate light or voice from Heaven
that dictates; but I appeal to the chiefest, safest, and best distinguishing
faculty of their Spirit, their Reason; Whether in the case aforesaid, (relating
to Gods express commands, as well as those private ones written in our hearts)
If the thought of our Hearts were cleansed by the immediate inspiration of his
Holy Spirit, we should then look upon obedience toward our Superiors and
Governors, Chastity and Temperance toward our selves, Truth and Justice, nay
Love and Charity toward all men, as absolutely necessary and consequent, as
Zeal, heat against Idolatry and Profaneness, or our observation of days. We
cannot rationally think, though that Spirit be not limited or confined, that
the good effect it has upon man, will not be as visible, in one equally known
duty as another; Or that we can be truly zealous (though Imagination may
sometimes render us so to our selves) but we must be truly charitable.

I cannot yet think we ought to be so born again, as afterward to cast away
our Reason, or so much to neglect it as not duly to consult it (a thing through
which, chiefly, we are born again if we are born again) but follow our
Imagination only. I do not think Reason was a thing given us, directly to
resist or oppose, and wholly reject every stroke, that first wounds or
possesses the Imagination, or Affections, if it came not directly or apparently
through Sense, and presently conclude it the sole Embryo of the Imagination;
No, Reason, the best and strongest, does many times give place for a trembling
yet fast hold on Mercy from Eternal decrees. But yet I think, that in the most
evident cases of an immediate work, of some other Spirit than our own, in and
over our own, we may, nay we ought to retain, and make use of our Reason, by
considering, weighing and trying all sensible consequents, that may happen,
whether good or evil, and curb the Imagination and Affections, for entertaining
them in other colors, than what upon due advice, that only or chiefly puts
upon them.

The worst enemy of mankind needs no greater advantage over men's Souls, than to
have them follow, or be given up to follow their own Inventions, or
Imaginations, without any dispute or struggling of present Reason within them,
to behold the deception and fallacy, that may be therein. He shall never want,
besides ordinary Sinners, Enthusiasts, Dreamers, Visionists, Prophets, etc.
and, with the help of some base Affection, Statists, and modellers of
Governments, enough to set the whole World in a flame and uproar. (And that
they do not, as the World now seems to go, is God's wonderful providence over
it.) If a man once come to lose the use of that rein, or let it go, or rather
cast it away by the strength of some Affection (that is, devise and pursue,
that which he would not, others should devise and pursue, were his case theirs
and that in justice too) I doubt even his Prayers to God, to direct the course
of his thoughts, or his present thinking only, that that which he thinks is
right, will little avail him in the end.

For such particular persons, as pretend and positively affirm, to see visions,
and hear voices, and declare them, as sen^ of God; I wonder there is any man of
the least Reason, that gives any credit to them, or hearkens to or regards
them, further than with pity and commiseration; when he observes the
Imagination to be so far exalted, as to be Master over, and command Sense, as
well as Reason; and to raise a fictitious Sense, or conceive it self raised
through Sense, when indeed there is no such thing. And yet we see such accepted
for men in their wits, as we say, and allowed of by some Statists, who would be
angry perhaps we should tell them they wanted Reason, although we may truly
tell them, without just cause of offense, they do not lay aside all passion to
exercise it. If there were two, never so credible witnesses, who should testify
upon Oath, a call, or voice of this Nature to a third person, and own as much
as is recorded of those who journeyed with Acts 9.7.
St. Paul to Damascus, I profess I should very hardly give credit to any such
thing now adays. For being already sufficiently satisfied and convinced, even
in Reason, that the Reason and necessity of supernatural Oracles, Revelations,
and Miracles (since God spoke to us by his Son, in those last days Heb. 1.2.
and the Christian Religion was fully established) is at an end and ceased, I
shall rather believe there were some imposture in the case, or the Imagination
of those two labored under the same fallacy with the third, by infection from
it, and by a kind of Sympathy (to which way of fallacy some of the learned have
subjected this faculty of the Soul) and that neither of them, in reality, heard
ought.

It Is Imagination only or chiefly, which renders men thus bold and familiar
with God, which makes them so positive and dictating to man. Reason is not so
towering, it is ever attended with humility and fear; It is weak in us, God
knows, and it is his Wisdom and Will, it should be so; yet a faith from thence,
though weaker and trembling, is usually more lasting, than from that
predominant faculty in man, Imagination. It Is Imagination that makes us believe
well and highly of our selves, and meanly of those, whom it might seem in
Reason, God has placed over us, dictating and prescribing forms of Government,
with a nolumus hunc, or hunc, regnare: But in this very case, Affection may
rather seem to corrupt Imagination, than Imagination to debauch Affection. I
did once mean to discourse to you of the general deception of mankind herein,
but I know you see and espy it, and God alone is able to prevent it, which I
trust he will do in some measure, and therefore lest I seem to some to be of
any party, I forbear; and to all such as at present hearken to our
argumentative (as if they had Reason on their side) Imaginatists, I have only
this to say: If they have left them but half an Eye (a Phrase sometimes used
for an ordinary Reason) and will but make use of it, if they then do not find
out, and espy, some self-Affection aiding and assisting most of our Contrivers
Imagination in their Plat-forms and Expedients, rather than Reason, Let them
then swallow down with them this as a good rational maxim, That evil may be
done, that good may come thereon.

I have ever in my judgment looked on evil Affection, and strong blind
Imagination, always so actually in conjunction together, above other faculties,
to our confusion; and so pernicious to our present and future happiness, as
nothing more: I know not which to give the precedence to, nor indeed well how
to distinguish them in some cases. Pride, in general, the Mother of all evil
passion, is defined (and rightly defined) to be, nothing else but a good
opinion, or high conceit of a Man's self; Spiritual Pride is somewhat more, it
is a bold presumptuous arrest of the Deity, making him our Inmate to cover and
color our Pride; and where that once is, and takes possession, it is in vain to
knock at the door of Reason. If I should admit Reason it self to be wholly out
of our power, and that we were specially directed in our very judgment, I can
yet say truly with David Psalm. 2^.9.
, Them that be meek shall he guide in judgment; and if you who are God's
Ministers over us could through his blessing once change or metamorphose that
passion in us, Pride, into its contrary, lowliness of mind, then should we all
see the vanity, madness and folly, of most of our past inventions, then should
we be all of one mind, then should nothing be done by us Philip. 2.2.3.12.
through strife or vainglory; then would men obey, and withal Philip. 2.2.3.12.
work out their own salvation with fear and trembling, rather than, through an
exalted Imagination, believe, God works that in them which may be from the
insinuation of Satan; wherein, that you may prevail in some measure, God (to
whom be all Glory) crown your labors. Amen.

EPIST. VI. Wherein the Author treats of the various impress of the Divine
Power, upon each particular created substance, more especially upon the Souls
of Men: And further shows, how prove we are to mistake about the case and
temper of others and our own, and that they generally are not, what they seem:
And thence proceeds to discourse of Friendship, and of Love.
MY good and kind Friend (for so I am bold to salute you in this Epistle,
wherein I mean to say somewhat of that human, yet sacred tie, Friendship) Let a
man behold any thing he will or can, and search for the original cause of its
so being, and it is somewhat a wonder to me, he should prove so stupid and
senseless, not to behold it; or at least not to afford it some proper
attribute, and allow it so much as the title of incomprehensibly Wise, or the
like; since that Ps. 75.1.
that his name is near, his wondrous works declare. Some such different or
distinguishable form there is in every visible Body whatsoever upon the face of
the whole earth, narrowly inspected or observed as, that (howsoever we
generally style all things the work of Nature) our Intellect, by and through
our Sense, is able to espy some Image of an infinite wise Essence, ruling in,
and through that thing we call Nature; for she of her self as a blind Goddess,
like Fortune, could never imprint so various a stamp upon every individual,
unless directed by such a first power, as is eternally one and the same, and
yet able to give various forms unto every created, or extracted substance; but
would produce, though not the same, yet often some indistinguishable, or
unperceivable like.

I do not think it will be denied me by any rational man, that amongst all the
faces of men (not the worst index of a Soul) which have been or now remain upon
the face of the Earth, there never were two Visages (as we say) so like, but
that they might be easily known or distinguished from each other, or the one
from the other; And if I should of my self further allege, that there never
was one single grain of Corn, nay so much as one single medal, of the same
metal with others, and receiving its impress from one and the same stamp or
mold, but there might be found upon the same, by diligent and curious
inspection or observation, some different form or mark sufficient to
distinguish it from any other, which could be produced of the same kind or
species, I should say no more than is true, being confident that no man is able
to produce two such Bodies together (of any magnitude) wherein I, or some
other, may not be able to show him an apparent diversity. I would fain know how
it otherwise comes to pass, that the Be knows any one of a separate Hive, or
the Ant its own Eggs (though I find not that quick inspect in other Creatures)
as may be observed in the stirring of their several heaps; But my meaning here
is not to trouble your more serious thoughts about Flies, but to let you know
mine, in reference to the Souls of men chiefly, with some grounds and reason
thereof.

They have been these; That amongst all the works of Nature, or more properly
the God of Nature, no such great and various dissimilitude is to be found, as
in that chief and principal work of his, the Souls of men; whether of
themselves, or arising from the subject wherein they work, shall not in this
place be my chief enquiry. But since we daily find, and observe, or may so at
least, a Soul of a great magnitude enclosed in a narrow Body or Prison; and a
very narrow small contracted Soul, in a large one; A vigorous and active Soul,
in a weak Body; A feeble, in a strong and well built one; A bright and
beautiful, in a cloudy and deformed one; A black and deformed, in a clear and
beautiful one; nay any in any; we have no Reason to conjecture that it receives
any chief or sole power of its operation from thence, much less its strange
vicissitudes and changes; since Seasons may be observed, when though through
the Organs of Sense, all the most pleasant worldly objects are let into the
Soul, it will be dismal and sad, and sometime notwithstanding all the ghastly
Spectacles which can be presented to her, she will be pleasant and joyful; and
all this as well at such times, as the Body is strong and vigorous, as when it
is weak and feeble; as well sickly as healthful, and as well healthful as
sickly: And that the Body should cause a visible mutation in the Soul, when
there is none discernible in it self, by the very Soul that inhabits it, will
hardly obtain a rational assent, but that they are as they are, by original
Creation, or some external actuation.

We vary from one another in relation to our Soul's acting, far beyond what any
Creature does from others of the same species with it self; Some similitude or
likeness of the Souls motion is to be found in them, but none, or very little,
amongst us. And this various and different kind of operation in us, as to
Intellect and Affection both, shows an original dissimilitude (for being as
much alike one another in Body, as any Creature of one species, we should act
as much alike if the Soul had its being from the Body) rather than any
accidental or casual one, happening from some formation of the flesh. Do we not
observe all Brute Creatures of one and the same Species, though in several
Climates, to use the same way of policy in point of their preservation? Do they
not build their Nests alike? and do they not express their Intellect alike;
whether by obedience or disobedience to us, whether by their crouching,
fawning, or resistance? Are they not alike cunning? But are there two men to be
found in the World, think you, who, left to themselves, without instruction, or
without a Precedent or Platform before them, would do as they do in their
kind? Surely besides the various form of each, one would prove a Lucullus, and
another a Diogenes; one would think no dwelling too spacious and beautiful for
him, and the other would think a mean and plain one were most useful, and best
became him. We differ in the manner of expressing our Intellect legibly,
equally as in our Intellect; Could we behold the formation of the Issues of
several men's brains, upon any subject matter, we should find one man's begun at
the head, another at the foot, a third at the middle, and none alike, but
every man's variously; One would bring forth his Brat with all its lineaments
and features at the first, and yet perhaps a weak one; another his, very
deformed (with much labor and pains licked into form, according to that
erroneous Tenet of the Bear) and yet perhaps a strong one: And were licking, or
rather correction and amendment of the most perfect and exact piece, committed
to diverse men successively, we should find in some space, it would prove like
Theseus his Ship, renewed by planks, it might retain the first name, but would
not have one jot of the old materials remaining. We scarce comment or expound
alike in any degree or measure: that agreement of the Seventy or seventy two
Interpreters is related as a wonder, and were I assured of the truth of the
relation, I should so esteem it, nay one of the greatest wonders the World ever
afforded in story.

In this great and chief work of the Creation, the Soul of man (especially
wrought and effected for the setting forth the Glory of the Creator) wherein
there are diversities of gifts, and diversities of administrations, and
diversities of operations, and one God who works all in all; It is no wonder,
that we are altogether ignorant, either in our selves or others, of the power
and manner of its operation; but are enforced to leave that to the Creator, and
are only able to behold and see the great variety and strange dissimilitude of
human Souls (beyond those Spirits of other Creatures) how unlike every one is
to another, and sometimes to it self, for want of a gracious influence, and
thereby behold that one single and simple essence, darting out its various
rays upon all the World, and our selves chiefly. It is we alone, that may be
most like that essence, who are most unlike one another, by his drawing us to
himself, and as it were renewing this wonderful Image of his, perhaps variously
defaced, but happily mutable. Did ever man yet behold two Souls, naturally, as
we say in common acceptance, alike? There is one who venturing upon
comparisons in the case, amongst others, brings in Demosthenes and Cicero
together, and tells us in his entrance upon their lives, how fortune might seem
to have framed them out of one mold, and Nature fashioned their qualities
alike; and yet in the Conclusion, he tells us, that as their Phrase differed,
and the one was grave and harsh, the other jesting and pleasant; so one of them
was sharp, perverse, froward, and sour of Nature, the other complaisant; the
one modest and bashful, the other full of ostentation, and extremely ambitious
of Glory, or vainglorious; the one excessively Covetous, even to corruption,
and the selling of his eloquence; the other not so, but liberal and just. And
surely had he been thoroughly acquainted with their several dispositions, he
might have found diverse other contrary qualities in them, and perhaps not two
alike in any degree, and those mutable too; and their tempers so to vary, that
he might have seen his pleasant man sometimes froward, and his froward
sometimes pleasant, and not been able to give a reason thereof. I do agree that
a curious Painter is able by his Art, to give such a true representation of any
face, that we shall know it to be meant of such an one, notwithstanding all the
disguise that can be put upon it, either by frown, or smile, which yet is the
Soul's work; nay age shall not so wear out the lines of it, but that to a
curious eye, upon comparison, it may be known: But truly to delineate or
depaint any Soul by ones pen, requires a far greater cunning, than its window
(the face) by a pencil; there will be found no Apelles for that: that Art
indeed a man might wish for, as the Ars utinam mores, animumque effingere
possit.
Poet did; and to know men before we deal with them, might prove, some would
think, an happy thing; But it is far safer to trust to a Divine Power, in the
present moulding of them, than to think we our selves shall ever know, of what
frame and fashion they are, or to what height we may screw them. It is that
alone, which is both rough and smooth, sweet and sour, and yet the same, as
the Difficilis, jacilis, jucundus, acerbus, et idem, Nec possum tecum vivere,
nec sine te.
Poet pictures his companion; and the fiction of Proteus, no doubt, had its
rise from some other power over his Soul, not from any power he had over his
own Body. Surely were there any Soul to be found, that might appropriate to it
self Queen Elizabeth's Motto, of semper eadem, I should adjudge it to be
somewhat more than human, and then believe a man might easily know himself, but
that is no such easy matter; if it were, every one would observe it of
himself, and we need not maintain (as an Heathen says) and avow, that that
saying, or command, came down from Heaven.

I know a Gentleman, who was wont to say of himself, that he merited not any
praise for his being a just and honest man, for that he had a plentiful estate
left him, which he enjoyed in peace; Had I been poor, says he, I know not what
I should have been to become rich; I fear I should have been a knave; which was
a true saying in the main, whether the good man feared it or not. The knowledge
of a man's self is more heavenly than the command, and if ever man had such a
gift as that, I am sure he must receive it from Heaven. There is certainly such
a saying came down from Heaven, as, Ye know not of what Spirit ye are: are
though that speech, as you seem to intimate in one place, may receive some
limitation or qualification, and it may be manifest to any man, upon search for
the time past, from whence his Soul had its motion, and in what state and
condition he at present stands; yet surely no further than the very present;
for if any man could foresee his future thoughts, or the motion of his
Affections, his consequent intentions and actions, etc. he must necessarily
know more than himself, and dive into the secrets of the Almighty, after what
manner he has preordained all things to work for his Glory.

Every particular Soul is so unlike every other, and (not subject to any course
of Nature) sometimes so unlike it self, that it is not to be known by any but
its Maker; neither is any man able to declare, or rightly conjecture his future
manners. And this is from the goodness of God, that we might find just cause to
ascribe all goodness (if any such thing be found in us) to him; Rely on him,
trust in him solely, and thither fly for relief in all our wants, and for a
cure in all our infirmities, and not to ascribe any thing to our selves, or any
other Creature.

There are some perhaps who seem to think the Souls of men more similar in
their original Creation, or emanation, than in truth they are; And that of
themselves they would be more quiet, and bend or incline more one and the same
way (perhaps like those of Beasts) were it not for some several Genius, or
instructor, that every human Soul had for its concomitant, whereby it is
sometimes directed, bended, or inclined. Indeed I do think there is such a
thing as a Genius in every man, that is, some distinct or different character
on every Soul, in the manner and way of expressing and delivering it self out
to others, such as thereby a wise man, when he comes to be familiarly
acquainted with it, will be able in some measure to distinguish it from any
other, as well as the face by any grace or feature, and so a Soul may be
outwardly distinguished, though not inwardly known; And the Soul has most
properly this attribute bestowed on it, or conjoined to it, when by some
unusual sharp edge or smart stroke, it enters with a kind of life into others,
nay gives life to Paper it self (as he who had a very quick and piercing
Genius, seems to Nescio quid plus est, quod donet Saecula chartis,
Victurus, Genium debet habere liber.

express it) and not for being led it knows not whither; for if by Genius men
(who talk of it) mean any informing, helping or assisting Spirit, diverse in
creation from our own, and such as Socrates is said to have had (whether by
name Genius or Demon) I understand it not, nor can find in Reason, any manner
of way, how a man should become so well acquainted with any such Familiar. I
deny not, from Scripture, but that we may have tutelary Angels or Guardians;
And I believe (besides vulgar sluggish ones, which seldom gratify the innate
appetite in themselves) there are confident daring Spirits enough, which for
secret purposes, best known to God, find not always resistance (though
sometimes restraints like that of Mark Anthony's in Caesar's presence) and from
thence men frame and fancy within themselves, some brave discerning Spirit or
Genius more than in truth they ever were endowed withal: But if every Soul has
necessarily this kind of Attendant, to advise with, and to inform him, what
were best to be undertaken or let alone; whereon to place his Affections in
this World, or not to place them, and the like; My Genius has proved a very
ignorant one, or else deceitful and treacherous to me: for this I can say,
whenever I have been confident to obtain, or trusted in my own strength or
wisdom, I have ever had the worst success; when I have feared or suspected the
worst event, things have succeeded better; When I have placed my Affections too
strongly on any thing, it has never prospered so well, as those I less
regarded; which is ground sufficient for me to believe, not a Genius or
familiar Spirit, but, a God on whom I might cast all my care, and who cares
for us. And surely the Soul of every other man, notwithstanding any liberty of
Will it may now and then seem to it self to have, upon diligent inspection, and
view of its own strange, and sometimes weak, and ignorant manner of operation,
and yet better than it self, or its Genius could contrive, may soonest
terminate, and rest in the opinion of one original Spring of all motion, that,
sum, and non mutor, without introducing any strange Spectrum, Genius or
Familiar; or yet delivering it self up to the dominion of Necessity or Fortune.

These strange opinions we have, in relation to our Souls, and the
impossibility to discern our selves thoroughly, much less others, subjects us to
false opinions of our selves, and false conjectures, at least, of others. For
as to the discerning part of another Soul, the Intellect, doubtless we commit
sometimes great mistakes. There are, and have been certainly many Souls, who
though, for want of some outward ornament, or some casual advancement or
improvement (by which we are only capable to apprehend them, or conceive ought
in relation to their Intellect) they have not been able to express themselves
plainly and evidently to the capacity of others; yet have had a very clear
inspect into the truth and reality of things; And we are not rationally to
think, because we find them not in story, that therefore there were no wise men
before Apollo, as well as valiant men before Agamemnon, and so are, and will be
for the future, unknown and unheard of to us. Nor should we look upon our
selves, who dare to set forth our folly and weakness, rather than ought else,
legibly to the World, to be the only men of parts. God knows how far the best
and wisest go astray from the truth, and it might be easily evident to
humanity, if men would take the pains to weigh things, how much light coin has
passed for current. Men there are, who have words at will or command, and know
how to place them in excellent order; but if they were to pass Solomon's test,
and should be duly weighed in the balance, we should find them to be but
words, and carry nothing of weight or solid matter in them.

As to the censure of the affectionary, or embracing part of man's Soul,
doubtless we commit as many, and as great Errors and mistakes. That
unsearchable thing (as Prove. 25.3.
Solomon terms it in a King, and doubtless is so, in others) the Heart, is not
certainly known by any outward motion, neither the gesture, nor the lips will
at any time fully discover it to a spectator, or auditor; and there is little
trust to be given to what a man receives in at second hand; It is so ordinarily
mistaken in man, that truly he who would judge aright, had need I think vary
from the general censure of the World. If a man be but a little facile, he is
presently esteemed for good, and yet perhaps the Italian Proverb may be
verified of him, Tanto buon, the vale nient.
That he is so good, as that he is good for nothing. There is a great mistake
of that which we call good Nature; I for my part think, that if a man be so
soft and pliable, as to take an equal impression from all men (that is indeed
none) he has little of real goodness in him. He who will never be angry, will
(in a strict Sense) never be pleased; and he who never thinks evil of any man,
will never think well of any man, nor becomes ones special Friend, upon the
ground of a virtuous and good life; and though Charity prompt us to think the
best of such a man, yet Reason informs us (and without breach of charity we may
think) nothing really good, that is insipid; and that if a man have lost his
savor, and taste all things alike, there is little of virtue in him,
whatsoever there may be of goodness. Goodness, if there be any such thing in
man, must since our Fall (how ere we were created) be looked on as a Grace, not
a natural habit, and he is only good, who intentionally, in respect to God, is
so; not he, who is, as it were, so habitually, or casually, and unawares to
himself, as we say. I am sure it is no uncharitable part in man, but rather the
contrary, to think, that some persons, whom we seem to behold surly, cross and
peevish in their words, and actions too sometimes, have good intentions and
meaning in the general: And though in propriety of Speech, a man cannot be said
to act against his Will, but the Will ever accompanies both words and actions;
yet there may be something besides of a latent Will in the Soul, or wish of
good to the party injured, even at the very time of the injury.

Indeed it is said, he who is of a currish churlish Nature, should sacrifice to
the Graces; but we might pass him by, and pardon him without Sacrifice, and
ascribe that to the Bodies temperature in that particular case, which we are
but prone and apt enough to do, in many other cases. There is a kind of
condiment, or sharp acrimonious humor in the blood (not that the Soul is made
or compounded of any such) which the Spirit meeting with in its operation or
motion, raises outwardly a kind of mire or dirt, and yet may be clean it self.
I have seldom met with injustice, oppression cruelty or rapine in a snarling
habit, though I have often seen them all in a fawning one, and that Scripture
verified, there are things smoother than oil, yet are they drawn Swords. There
are rugged, obscure and dark passages in Palaces, which lead to the fairest
rooms; and there are soul Sepulchers, outwardly painted, and constant bright
and pleasant shining Tapers, set burning before them: And we often therefore
judge amiss, when we judge of the mind by such indications.

It is a blessed happiness, when a quick working Soul, can at all times fly
abroad into the World, and search every thing to the quick, as we say, without
offense, and without venom; but it is very rare, that that salt, or gall, which
has been allowed ever by the learned to quicken the Invention, should not
sometimes exceed due measure, and be mistaken for ill nature in the Affections.
Affection, of it self, is not evil by nature, it is blinded since the Fall, and
strangely led; and truly whether it be good or evil, upright or crooked in the
main intention and consequent, is impossible for us certainly to know.

It is esteemed now adays, and perhaps ever was, the principal part of a Wise
man, to become acquainted and versed with the several humors and tempers of
several men, and thoroughly to study and know a man: But as it is an insidious
study, I think, unless in case of your profession only, with a purpose barely
to reclaim the Soul, and make it better; So it is a very fallacious one, and in
that respect may doubtless be very well linked with that of judicial Astrology,
and many men have but deceived themselves, while they thought to know others.
Surely he who practices upon any Individual, beside himself, and pryes narrowly
into others, is not like to find any path, that will lead him toward
Happiness; This he will be sure to find in every Soul, a self-love, enclosed
about with Briars and Thorns, and it being in no man's power, to eradicate or
grub up those Briars and Thorns, growing in every man by Nature, as we say
(unless in himself, if so be that) he may chance to be scratched, and torn
thereby, while he thinks to bring that love to his own Lure.

He who is so curious to inquire into men's Natures, and Dispositions, and
thinks he has found out every root and string of their Affection, and judges
good perhaps, to endeavor some mutual and interchangeable transplantation of
Affection (that thing I mean to speak of friendship) for the melioration
thereof; had need be very wary and circumspect in his choice, and rely upon a
Divine watering, and pruning too, as well as his own planting; or else perhaps,
though it grow, and thrive with him, it may bear him little or no good Fruit.

The variety and diversity of human Souls with their several seeming
inclinations, and sudden alterations; and that innate, unsatiate love in man
(receiving its inflammation sometimes otherwise than by Sense) from whence,
every one labors and travails to secure and advance it self, by some means or
other; and especially the difficulty of discerning the motion of the Spirit in
a man's self, much more in another, is the cause in my opinion, why there is so
little of true, and real Friendship amongst us in the World, and that there
have been in all Ages, so small a number of faithful Friends reckoned up, and
that our love is changeable, mutable, and unconstant: When as we may daily espy
in other Creatures of different Species, even a Lion and a Whelp bred up
together, a constant and continued love to each other, during their lives, I
may say, without design, or without dissimulation.

Of Friendship I have read, or been taught somewhat, when I was a Boy; which as
I long since utterly forgot, so I mean not now to have recourse thither again,
or to any other Author that treats thereof; but having already adventured to
meddle with the Soul, I am minded to say somewhat of that league or union of
Souls, Friendship, to you my Friend; and to give you my natural thoughts of it
only, according to my plain rustic way, and manner of delivery.

Friendship, I take to be an union, or knitting together of two Souls (as is
expressed of Jonathan and David) in amity, so as the one loves the other as it
self; Or more particularly, An human, yet sacred tie, made and contracted
between two Souls, in the mutual and reciprocal aspect, of some similitude and
likeness in each other; Each shining in some degree, after the similitude and
likeness of its Maker. So that to the contracting thereof, it is necessary the
party who loves as a Friend, do behold in the other some Image or shadow at
least, and Goodness, Truth, Justice, Mercy, Love (especially) and the like;
without this view or supposed view, there can arise no such Love as is called
Friendship. Or if you please, we will in short define it thus; Whereas Charity
is a general love to all men, for God's sake; So, Friendship, is a love to some
particular person, for the persons sake, yet ever having a respect to God.

Friendship being a kind of alliance of two Souls, resembles somewhat an
alliance by blood, or a consanguinity, as we call it; He who would make out
that to any man, must necessarily resort to some one fountain, head, or
Ancestour; and from thence trace, and bring down the blood to himself and the
other party, without any corruption or attainter intervening. And our Soul
being a distinct gift, and a distinct creation or breathing which we receive
not from our Parents; it is necessary in Friendship, that as two Souls
concenter in belief of one head, and fountain of their being; So there be no
visible corruption thereof, but that each participate somewhat of the Image of
its Maker, and leave not quite off, to be Loving, Just, Merciful, etc. at least
be not stigmatized with any Character of Uncharitableness, Injustice, Cruelty,
or the like; whereby that Image seems defaced; and therefore no Atheist can be
a friend to any man, nor any other man so to him: For if there be such an human
Creature in the World, who verily believes there is no God, he must
consequently believe, there is no such thing, as Justice, or Mercy, or no need
thereof toward our particular quiet or well-being; and such man's kindness,
whatsoever he pretend, is no other than a mere self-love and respecting himself
barely, and not Friendship; neither can any one love that man, who rejects or
disowns the Wisdom of his Maker, and attributes all to, what we call, Nature,
or Chance. Besides this; If there be any men, who own a God, and yet live as
without God in the World, though they readily perform all offices of kindness
faithfully to each other, that I hold not to be Friendship but call it rather a
Satanical League, than Friendship, (such as St. James terms Jam. 4.4.
enmity with God) For a league of Friendship, ever respects God; because,
unless in respect to our selves, there can be no other original cause to love
one another, but God alone, who endowed us with a love extrinsick, as I may
say, and such as is not natural, or arising from the flesh.

The Soul of man, in the Body, is prone to cleave to Earthly things, and many
Leagues it makes, and Alliances it does contract. Some upon considerations
merely accidental and transient, and which fail with those considerations; such
is that with respects the bounty of another, as Solomon says Prove. 19.6.
Every man is a Friend to him that gives gifts, or as the wise Son of Syrach
Ecclus. 7.33.
Liberality pleases all men, and so gains applause, respect, and Friendship
(improperly taken:) but the Friendship thereby obtained, proves but like the
Winter Brooks that Job speaks of Job. 6.15.17.
that what time they wax warm they vanish, when it is hot they are consumed out
of their place. The paths of their way are turned aside; they go to nothing,
and perish: And when we stand in most need of their help, will most surely deny
it.

Sometimes again, love proceeds from external relations, as that which a man
bears to his own natural Product, which although it be usually real, and
lasting, and is allowable, good, and lawful; yet is not praiseworthy and
commendable; the like being to be found in Beasts, and would be as great and
lasting in them, had they equal knowledge of their own with us; nor can be
called Friendship, since it seldom and of it self begets a Love mutual and
reciprocal, and cannot indeed be termed other than love of our selves.

That which does come nearest to it is the love in Marriage, which being mutual
and reciprocal when contracted upon fitting terms, the Man and Wife thereby
are, as our great Lawyer thinks according to Scripture he has rightly defined
that mystical knot, Two Souls in one Body: And when it respects Virtue chiefly,
they may be said to be one Soul in two Bodies.

When two Souls can place a repose in each other, without distrust, or
diffidence, when they dare trust each other as Gods, though men, that I call
Friendship, which can never be without some (imaginary at least) sight of
Truth, Justice, Love, etc. the one in the other. To such a love I will afford,
and affix the Attribute of good. And doubtless such a mutual Love affords the
greatest pleasure of any thing our Souls are able to frame to themselves here,
and comes nearest in delight to that pure love of God, even for himself, which
of his mere love and goodness, now and then, as the earnest of everlasting love
and joy, he bestows on us for his Sons sake, and is chiefly effected through
faith.

This being premised; that every love which is praiseworthy, and which is able
of it self to create an alternate true Love, necessarily respects a Deity: Let
us behold, if you please, how far it ought to respect humanity too, and with
whom we may contract a Friendship. By the very profession of Atheism,
notwithstanding any seeming kindness, all obligation of mutual rational amity,
is become null and void, for the cause aforesaid. I may have charity for such a
man, and relieve him in his want, but charity differs much from friendship, and
is somewhat of an higher Orb; for charity respects God only, or chiefly, though
rationally, and we thereby pay a duty barely to him, in his Image, which we
behold with our Reason as his, however, or which way soever defaced. But this
other love respecting man, as well as God, and man chiefly, and God
secondarily, as I may say, cannot arise without some apprehension of human
recompense, or expectation of a reciprocal kindness; and that cannot be from an
Atheist; for how can I think that man's Soul will ever be knit to mine in amity,
who denies the very cause of its own existence, and attributes that to chance,
which I do to Wisdom and Love. Human love, stirred through opinion, with
Reasons allowance, necessarily requires an agreement in opinion about the
Author of our being; For where we vary in opinion about the manner of our
Creation, or Extraction, there is no ground for rational Love as fellow
Creatures, or fellow Members. But whether this kind of Love, called Friendship,
requires any further consent in opinion, than that there is one God, eternally
wise, Maker and Creator of all things in Heaven and Earth, and a just rewarder
of Virtue, and punisher of Vice and the like, let us, if you please, inquire a
little further.

Why truly I can see no just Reason, why we may not contract Friendship with a
Turk, (as well as Christian States and Princes make Leagues with them) or
having contracted Friendship with a Christian, why I should dissolve that knot
of amity, imagine he turn Mohammedan; (which I cannot so much as imagine at
present, if he ever were a true Christian) provided I behold and continue to
behold in such person, according to the best judicature of my Reason, the
worship of a God, and an unfeigned endeavor to be led by the clear light of
truth, and a continued resolution, not to forsake those known, and approved (by
all men) paths, of Justice, Judgment, Mercy and the like, which tend toward
her. Friendship being a voluntary union of Affections, between man and man, and
so of human product; It is not requisite, it should have the approbation and
acceptance of Faith, but it is sufficient, it have the allowance of Reason,
which is the proper Judge of all human actions: It is an human League or tie (a
duty if you please) of loving one another as men, and that, not as men out of
the Body (though it be a conjunction of Souls) but in the Body; and therefore
if we think and adjudge, the Will and the Affections in man, good in the main,
that is, constantly bent and inclined, toward some good, we are not to reject
such an one, in point of Friendship, because he believes not just as we do, or
because we think he wants those graces (things out of an human rational
prospect) which we suppose we have: We should friendly endeavor to inform his
Reason, and heartily pray for the further enlightening of his Spirit; and so
long as we behold faith in his practice, whatever he want in the theory, begin
to love him, and continue to love him. If mercy and truth forsake not a man, I
know no Reason, why he should not find favor in the sight of man, as well as
God, according to Prove. 3.3, 4.
Solomon; or why we should relinquish virtue in the Race (which doubtless is
not in vain) whatsoever it meet with at the Goal.

Our different opinions in point of Religion (though they ought not) prove
often, I confess, a great obstruction to Friendship; but yet there is a
greater, which puts a stop to it, through the whole race of mankind, of what
temper soever, or what opinion soever; And that is (besides the strange
diversity of human Souls in point of opinion, the difficulty of discerning
another opinion, and man's mutability too therein) the difficulty of discerning
the very right bent, or inclination of a man's Affections, or distinguishing
that which is real, from counterfeit ware, by reason of that false vail which
every human Soul (the simplest and weakest) has ready at hand, and is able to
put on, and wear, by looks, and gesture, as well as speech, and that is,
Hypocrisy, and Dissimulation; which no other Creature but man, how sage
soever, did, or could ever yet, put on: Charity sometimes overlooks this
natural habit in man, but Friendship, a thing of human product, and expecting a
return, which charity does not, trades abroad very seldom, and sparingly upon
this account of counterfeit wares, and men are loath to venture, for fear of
false returns.

Of Dissimulation I mean to say somewhat in another place, how little it ever
advantaged any man; and therefore let it suffice here, only to say of it, that
it is the very bane of Friendship; and whenever it is beheld as an habit, in
any man, that man must not expect Love and Friendship from another. That Love
is the Loadstone of Love is a trite, and true saying; and therefore he who
would attract it in this case, had need carefully observe the Apostles rule,
and, Romans 12.9.
let his Love be without dissimulation. It cannot be with it, I am sure,
acceptable or pleasant, but nauseous and loathsome; Dissimulation seen in any
man, being a thing, that gives an ill aspect, and an ill relish and savor, to
that, and other the best indowments in a Soul. It was the variety of human
tempers, and the difficulty of knowing them, that I principally respected in
the writing of this Epistle; Friendship, and the want thereof, came in
accidentally to my thoughts.

Well, perfect and complete Friendship, between any two, is, as the Heathens
feigned their ancient God, begotten of time; notwithstanding this, it must have
a beginning, and comes to pass many times on the sudden, in an instant, as
soon as a man 1 Samuel 1.8.1.
makes an end of speaking (as we find that of Jonathan to David) if we
perceive, or at least think there be integrity of heart in the Speech. Yet in
this league of Friendship (sometimes too suddenly made and concluded) we ought
to take some care, that it be such, as may be lasting; and that since, as one
says, All old Friends were once new, we make such a choice of a new one, as
that he may prove an old one; and this requires circumspection and prudence in
the doing.

The mutual view of Truth in two men, as it is a most delectable prospect to
each other, and may be termed an happy interview between two Souls; so it is,
in my opinion, the most likely thing to engender between them, a real and
lasting Friendship. I do not mean here, by the sight of Truth, Truth in the
theory; that thing of which we have sometimes a glimmering light only, and no
more, and for which we proverbially reject Plato and Socrates's Friendship, to
admit her in our company, and yet know not when we have her; but naked Truth,
practick Truth, Fidelity (if you please so to call it) or plain and upright
dealing, when a man upon no occasion will lie to deceive his Nieghbour, nor be
drawn or enticed to commit a falsehood, for the gain of the whole World; and
besides, upon just occasion will open his mind plainly. I know it is not
prudent or requisite, we should always speak what we think; but if we do speak,
to speak as we think, is ever best, and most acceptable to a good man. I do
think that person, whoever he was, who first delivered it to us, and set it
down as an observable Maxim, Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit, to have
been, not only a Sycophant, but ignorant of the ground of true Friendship; and
I would not advise any man to choose his Friend, from any Obsequiousness,
Fawning, or Flattery. If you can behold Truth naked in any man, and can adjudge
him to be of a settled mind and resolution (not James. 1.8.
double-minded and so unstable in all his ways, as St. James describes him) we
will render you the man if you please in Horace his words, justum, and tenacem
propositi virum, and withal moderately wise; such a man you ought to love, and
embrace, and with such an one, you may safely contract Amity or Friendship; But
when you have so done, you must trust in God to continue him such; for I think
you will love him no longer, than he is such, neither do I think it fit, you
should; For I do think men are mutable, and I do not look upon any League of
Friendship, how fast soever made, like the Laws of the Medes and Persians, but
that the same is alterable, and may be dissolved, and abrogated, without any
just blame. For though it be an human tie, in the reciprocal aspect and mutual
promise of each other; yet having ever a respect to God, as I said; if we shall
find our dearest Friend, to sully the brightness of that Image, which first
invited us to love him, and notwithstanding our admonition, to cast off that
and to assume and bear about him the image of Belial, we may reject him.

Thus much I remember yet in Tully (who would necessarily have all Leagues of
Friendship inviolable, and perpetual) that he utterly condemns that Saying of
Bias, Ita amare oportere, ut aliquando esset osurus, and truly as a Christian I
cannot commend it, for that I believe we should hate no man, upon any account,
much less that future hatred should possess our thoughts, at the time we make a
League of Friendship, or begin to love in that sense: But this I think may be a
good rule herein, and I will adventure to give it you in Latin, Ita amare
oportere, ut cessante (vel deficiente) causa originali amoris, possis, tuta
fide, non amare. For Friendship should not be entered into by a vow, and in such
words, as Marriage, for better, for worse; Yet since it is an human and sacred
League, we should be careful not to be mutable herein, though we are in other
things the most mutable of any Creature; but then only cease to love our
Friend, as our own Soul, when it is apparent to all the World, as well as our
selves, that he bears no Love to his Soul himself, nor will be prevailed with,
by any persuasion, to regard it more.

It is a rare thing to find the Prove. 27.19.
heart of man to answer to man, as in water face answers face, according to
Solomon, so much as for any short space, much less to be of any continuance. A
man shall sometimes meet with St. Paul's case, 2 Corinthians. 12.15.
The more he loves, the less he is loved. But if men do now and then happen Ps.
55.14.
To take sweet counsel together, and walk into the house of God as Friends,
according to David's expression; Either of them may find the consequence
thereof, as he did there; and elsewhere, that Ps. 62.9.
the children of men are deceitful upon the weights; And therefore there is
little trust to be placed in this human tie, or obligation, but that is to be
lodged chiefly, or only, in him, who raises us up Friends beyond expectation,
and when even Ps. 27.10.
Our Father and Mother forsake us, takes us up. This notwithstanding, it may
not be amiss for us, though we never expect to tie that sure knot of
Friendship, so much talked of, with any, to see of what thread the Materials
are, or ought to be spun, of which it is made, to search out and view what kind
of Love there is in man, peculiar to man, see the ground, or inition of
Friendship, in what we call, or most properly call Friendly Love, and learn to
reject no man, who offers us this bond of Amity, for want of that
Authentickness we only imagine it requires, viz. the Seal of Election and
Grace, which no man ever yet saw, or could see I doubt in others (unless in
Imagination.)

I have formerly thought, and set down my thoughts in my Treatise de Anima,
(which I exposed to your view) Love, to be the substantial part of an human
Soul, flowing from that immense Ocean of Love, the great and wise Creator of
the Universe; and I do yet think it so, and confined to, or enclosed in an
impure Earthly Body for some space of time, where it does for the present
necessarily work, burns inward, and sometimes flames outward; and according to
its motion or inflammation here, either by Sense, Reason, or Grace, we give it
its denomination, and attribute to it several names, and sometimes call it
Love, sometimes Lust, sometimes Charity, and sometimes Friendship. The Latins
have the same names (besides others) viz. amor, libido, Charitas, amicitia,
though they distinguish them not always according to that notion, or in that
sense, I intend or mean to do in this place.

I say, Love is the principal, or sole, proper active Ingredient (if I may use
that word) of a Soul. For as for Fear, Envy, Anger, Hatred, Malice, or the
like; they are but induments or Apparel, or Armor, which Love puts on, or
bears about it, as I said, in its march or travel here. It is that thing in
man, which has often possessed and taken up, or employed my thoughts, how
strangely, diversely and variously it works in several men, and no less diversely
in one and the same man at several times. And therefore I am willing to behold
it again, and say somewhat more of it, according to my capacity, under the
aforementioned heads of Love, Lust, Charity; and of Friendship, only, orderly,
and in course.

When there is no motion in the Soul, further than for the pleasing it self, or
the Body it inhabits, or it has no other chief respect, than to their worldly
ease and pleasure only, and looks no farther therein than the obtaining Riches,
Honor, Children or the like, I call it Lust, or self-love.

When it beholds God alone, as the only perfect good, and the Author and giver
of all goodness, and places a trust and repose in him, without taking any
anxious thoughts, or care for worldly things, and delights the Soul in the
Contemplation of his absolute and complete goodness; I call it pure Love, or
Love in the abstract.

When from it, or with it, the Soul beholds all men, as Gods special work, and
pays a just and due respect to every member as his Image, howsoever deformed,
or which way soever defaced, without any great respect to persons; I call it
Charity.

When it primarily respects and embraces particular persons, for some visible
inherent goodness in them, and God only secondarily, as the Author of all good
in man; I call it Friendly Love, or the inition of that mutual aspect or
League, we term, or name, Friendship.

The first of these, is directed and guided by Sense only, or Reason
captivated; the second by Grace; the third, and fourth by Reason at liberty,
with some assistance or help of Grace.

The first of these we may not improperly term Natural; the second
Supernatural; and the third and fourth may be said to participate of, or
proceed from both; viz. Nature and Grace.

The first works or burns inwardly only; the second flames outwardly, and
directly ascendant; the third and fourth flame laterally outward, after several
ways (for the one is more intense upon particulars than the other) but both
point upward.

Love in man (of it self good) I have called and do call here, when it greedily
catches at, or lays hold on any thing before it, Lust or Concupiscence;
Cupiditas effraenata; that is, Love unbridled; for so I take the meaning of the
word (...), to be; and withal a greediness in it, (unbridled) to be presently
satisfied, as (...), aviditas cibi, signifies. Reason, I have said before, is
the proper rein of human Affection (though there be a hand above which
sometimes guides or directs it) and when that rein is laid aside (as truly it
is when we look no further than our present ease and pleasure) and Love moves
by Sense only, or chiefly; We may well call it, Lust, or an unbridled Desire,
and not Love. The word (...) is by some often referred to a peculiar fleshly
desire, but I take it more generally, to signify a greedy desire of any Worldly
thing whatsoever, and so does Saint John seem to make use of it, according to
my apprehension of his meaning, where he opposes the Love of the World, and the
Love of God, to each other 1 John 2.15, 16, 17.
Love not the World, neither the things that are in the World, if any man love
the World, the love of the Father is not in him, says he; and then immediately
after makes use of the word (...), For all that is in this World, the lust of
the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father,
but is of the World, and the World passes away, and the lust thereof, but he
that does the will of God abides for ever. And St. James immediately after his
speaking of a Jam. 1.12.
Crown of Life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him, uses the
word, Lust, as a degenerate Love, by which we are drawn aside; Which raised in
the Soul, and coupled to the flesh, conceives and brings forth sin. Now I have
called this Lust natural, because, since our fall, Reason being much clouded by
the Flesh, it is for want of Grace, most prone to be led by Sense in every
human Soul, as well as bestial; And because it chiefly respects our selves, I
have defined it to be an inward burning; And truly human love thus pent in, and
a thing very vigorous of it self, although it cannot be satisfied within, shall
never want any fuel to feed it, which Sense is able to bring in with the
Devil's assistance; But this inward burning generally creates a smoke and a
smother in the Soul, sometimes visibly to a spectator, and often feelingly to
the owner; and how ere it may sometimes warm, or comfort, for the present, is
never delightful or pleasant in the end.

When this Love in man is pure, or purified, as we cannot describe the manner,
so we cannot describe how joyful and delightful a thing it is; Neither is any
man able so much as to imagine it, unless he have in some measure felt it, and
then perhaps he may cry out with David, One day in thy courts is better than a
thousand, etc. I know there is no man but would take it in great scorn to be
told, he loves not God; every one pretends to that, however he deal with his
Neighbor; but sure this kind of Love (the most excellent) will never be made
visible in any, to the wiser sort of the World, but by some outward, clear, and
manifest demonstration of the two following kinds of Love, to our Neighbor,
and to our Friend: And 'twere heartily to be wished above all things, that
self-love did not often colourably set it up, and march under its seeming
Banner. It may and has done so, certainly; which is so base and treacherous a
self-love, that the name of Lust or Concupiscence is too good for it; neither
can any man invent a name for it, which may properly refer to man; It Is
inhuman, and worse than sensual, it is Devilish, neither can I call it other
than Devilish, when men once endeavor to open a way to their self ends with a
scriptum est.

Toward our present ease, and quiet in the World, I have already declared my
opinon, that the observance or performance of that second great Commandment,
that is, an Universal good aspect, or the bearing about one, a love and
kindness for every individual Image of our Creator, let that Image never so
much vary in opinion or fancy from our own (we will again set it down in one
word as before) Charity, is that unum necessarium: And this is a thing, which
in my opinion every man might (God assisting) blow up and enliven in himself by
his Reason, so as his Love might flame out on every side, as I have described.
But that is not the thing I am now upon, neither was the consideration of it,
or of pure love, or of self-love either, my chief aim or design herein; but
Friendship or Friendly Love. A thing which though it seem not so absolutely
necessary toward our future, or present well-being, as Charity, yet usually
attends and accompanies it, and may seem to be, and proceed from one and the
same head, or cause in man; therefore let us, if you please, a little behold
it, and inquire into that cause, and find out, if we can, the true original
fountain thereof in man; and how love in man, comes to be inflamed after this
manner of way, we call Friendship.

I have already said, that toward contracting Friendship, the raising Friendly
Love, or moving Love in man after that manner of way, it is absolutely
necessary, we behold in each other, some imperfect shadow at least, of those
excellencies, which are complete and perfect in the Deity; that is of Truth,
Justice, Mercy or the like: Now these being things, as I said elsewhere, which
have no corporal shape, and such as are no ways obvious to Sense; It must be
Reason solely that is able to behold them, and judge of them; And therefore
friendly Love necessarily arises, and moves from, or with the sight of Reason;
and we may strictly, and most properly, call such a Love, rational Love.

Now for that sensual Love in man, having Reason in company with it, and
oft-times assisting it, and contriving for it, engenders such a mutual Love
between men, as very much resembles friendly Love; nay, for that sensual Love,
and friendly Love, are often complicated, and twisted together in man
(incorporated let us say, if you think good) 'twill be necessary we find out
the true original of each, and the real difference between them, that so we may
rightly discern, and distinguish bettween them.

First we say, friendly Love, properly and strictly, is a motion of Love from
the sight or judgment of Reason free and at liberty; Where that, of it self
able only to behold, and beholding some image of good in another, is moved to
stir toward that particular person, as the cistern or receptory at least of
that good; without any expectation of recompense or reward, other than a
reciprocal Love, upon a review of the like good in the party himself that
loves. Other love than this, that is, a love arising upon the bare view of
good, without other expectation than aforesaid; whatever aid or assistance,
Reason in a manner captivated may afford toward it in the first motion, or how
far soever it may contribute toward the continuance thereof, or the making it
lasting, or invitatory of a reciprocal Love, although self ends occur not for
the present to a man's thoughts, but he is, as it were, insensibly drawn
thereby; the same is no other, than a sensual, or self-love. And therefore all
those seeming endearments of Liberality, Wit, pleasant demeanor, or the like,
are no other; and our ordinary mutual visits and associations in clubs and
companies, whatsoever Reason may seem to contribute toward them, of
themselves, raise no other Love than such: We are delighted in the company, we
hope to improve our parts thereby, we expect advancement, or we look to secure
our present acquists, or enjoyments, and the like; And this is no other than a
self-love; Which kind of Love, though it seem sometime to burn outwardly, and
that with eagerness and violence, yet it sits but on the top of the heart, as
we say: It Is shallow, superficial, and mutable, seldom lasting longer than a
man beholds an outward motive with his eyes, or the like; It changes upon every
change of Sense, is driven to and fro, and sometimes presently vanishes. For
Sense, not able to penetrate into the depth and nature of things, cannot of it
self make any deep impression into the affectionary part of an human Soul: But
Reason is able of it self to do it; for when that shows to the Affection any
thing truly lovely in man, it informs man withal, he ought to love, and that
with some trust and confidence in the party loved.

I do not think but that Reason in man, may be so far debased, as of it self to
behold and judge that thing as good, which in truth is not so, through some
mist which self-love, full fed and pampered from Sense before, has raised in
the Soul; and in that case, Love, though Reason seem to be the conduct of it,
may change, upon every change of Sense; But whenever Reason free and at
liberty, and withal clear, does once direct or guide love to such an object,
Love in that case will not easily be moved, but must be haled away by the same
strength, which directed and guided it thither, neither shall Sense soon loosen
it. Fidelity in man, or some ground whereon another may place a trust, must be
the foundation, on which the first loving stone (if I may so say) of Friendship
is laid; and he who brings the second, must do it on the like ground, and so
perhaps the Building will be united, and raised to some height, and it is Reason
only is able to show us this ground: Sense of it self is not capable to behold
it; nay let Sense but point out a foundation, with Reason accompanying it, and
for a time assisting it, if Reason once draw back a little, and show to the
Affection any ground for distrust; though we cannot say, but a man may continue
to love, yet it will be but a weak and feeble Love, and such as Friendship can
never be raised thereon. And therefore though a man heap all the kindness he
can possibly invent, and rain showers of Gold upon another; If that other
having his Reason about him, free and at liberty, do but once espy, that he
defrauds a third person by injustice, toward the doing it; Let him take my
opinion for Oracle, for I will deliver it as such in this case, though he Prove.
6.35.
augment the gifts, as Solomon says in another case, That man shall never love
him, at the bottom of the heart; and yet there may be, and continue a mutual
Love between these two, grounded upon Sense, but no interchangeable view for a
trust, which I say is the ground of Friendship. This is the prospect of Reason
only, and within its Judicatory, and not the view of Sense, no nor of Grace;
for that is a special divine gift, not inherent in us, which ever bearing
Charity in company with it, through Charity, is apt to pass too favorable a
censure, and condemning none, beholds every man through it (notwithstanding any
inequality or the like) a fit subject of Love.

Now because self-love, or sensual Love, Charity, and friendly Love, in man
only, may all subsist together, at one and the same time, and they are so
complicated as we said, and folded one in the other, that we do not easily
distinguish them, and now and then a pretense only of the love of God, is
wrapped in amongst them, I will further endeavor to distinguish them a little
by a plain familiar instance or two.

I behold somewhat of truth and fidelity in a man, by the judicature of my
Reason, I relieve him in his Wants, I after confer many gifts on him; You Will say
he has reason to love me; I say so too, but it will be but with a sensual Love,
notwithstanding his Reason; for in the first case he may think; and his Reason
may well allow of such thoughts; My Charity or kindness, was with an eye to
some praise, to be seen of men, etc. or at least in expectation of some future
reward, and not from beholding any thing of good in him: In the second case he
may with the like reason conjecture, my liberality flowed with expectation of a
return, and with some reference to my own Worldy advantage, that I intended to
make use of him, or the like. But if at any time there appear to this man, a
sight of truth in me; that upon the greatest advantages, or greatest offers and
temptations to desert him, I stuck to him, and would not be drawn to do him the
least injury, or injustice, for any gain whatsoever, and he behold the
principles of Justice and Honesty engraven in me; He will then think it
proceeded from my view of his deserts, and some good I saw in him, and seeing
the like in me, and placing some trust and confidence in this my Love, he will
make me a return, and love me cordially, as we say, with the allowance of his
Reason, free and at liberty, and this I call a rational Love, or friendly Love,
and the inition of true Friendship.

We will imagine there are three persons, before whom I have a Cause depending,
to corrupt whom I offer to each a Bribe; the one refuses, the other two accept,
and thereupon I have a Judgment by the two, according to my sensual appetite or
desire, and am very well pleased therewith; the question is, whether of these I
should love best from my heart root or soonest enter into a League of
Friendship with; Undoubtedly he who refused; and yet I must necessarily love
the other two, who gave judgment for me according to my sensual desire, best,
with a sensual Love; Now in this case of my sensual Love to the two, Reason was
assistant toward the raising of it, or else I could not have thought on a
Bribe; On the other side, Reason free and at liberty, must be the thing solely,
which causes me to love him who refused my Bribe, and that in beholding his
integrity; for it is impossible I should do that by Sense, his action being, or
working visibly against my interest.

There are two Litigants before me; the one a Christian by the Seal of Baptism,
and outward profession, as I know; the other not, but a Turk, we will suppose;
These two I delay in point of judgment, with some show perhaps of my readiness
to take a Bribe from either; the Christian offers me one, the Turk not, but
trusting to the merits and justice of his Cause, and hating and detesting
corruption in such case (as I observe) utterly refuses; though upon hearing, I
were fully satisfied of the justice of the Christians cause, and gave judgment
for him; whether of these two, think you, should I have the firmest or deepest
Love for, or soonest enter into a league of Friendship with upon occasion? I
will tell you, the Turk. For as concerning the Christian's action, my Reason
will inform me, that there is no person that endeavors to corrupt me by Bribe,
but either thinks I am unjust, or at least would have me so. If I once suspect
he thinks me unjust, 'twill be in vain to love him after the manner of a
Friend, for he can never love me so again, or place any trust or repose in me.
If I perceive, he would have me to be unjust, he is most certainly so himself,
and then I can place no trust or repose in him. Now if outward profession were
to be the standard of this Love, and my own Religion the guide, I should sooner
make choice of the Christian for my Friend; For I behold him through Grace, the
better of the two, and believe the Turk a Reprobate, notwithstanding his hate
of corruption, and Love of Justice, and that the Christian may be by repentance
in the state of Grace, notwithstanding this injustice in him; yet beholding and
condemning falsehood in any man by my Reason, I cannot in that man place a
trust, or repose, with allowance of my Reason, nor raise a trust in my Soul, so
as to confide in him, which must be effected through Reason, as the proper
Judge of human Safety, or felicity here; for upon that is Friendship builded,
not on future hopes, or Heavenly prospects; And therefore Grace, which is a
kind of prospect, through Faith, of future felicity, can neither create
friendly Love, nor judge rightly of a fit subject thereof; but Reason.

Whoever would be my Friend, I desire he may so be, from the very formation, as
well as allowance of his Reason. I know not what any man can behold in me
(whatever he see in himself) worthy friendly Love, by any other light than that
of Reason; Neither do I know, if his love should move otherwise, or by a
greater gift, how to repay him (a burden to every man till it be done) but by
such a return, a Love from my Reason; since I confess, I have no other light to
do it by, nor without it can judge of the reality of his Love, or any good in
him. I know there are some men, who would confine their Love to move only by
what they call the Spirit; but whether it be not the Spirit of Delusion, rather
than Love, will appear by its confinement within such a particular Sphere. That
Spirit of Love, surely directs us not to reject any man, in whom we behold just
and upright dealing, and other effects of a sincere, and well-disposed mind, by
our Reason; what falls not within the compass of that light, viz. Reason, may
be beheld by him, who infuses it through the merits of his Son, not by us; And
whom I think we do ill to vouch in our ordinary familiar intercourses, and to
make him so much a party that he must love only as we, whilst we love only as
we please, and as our own fancy does direct us. To love as Friends needs not
the seal of adoption and Grace, the seal of Creation is sufficient. You have
seen doubtless, as well as I, contracted mystical subscriptions, in very
familiar Epistles, such as, Yours, or thine in the Lord, only; which though it
be good and allowable in some Sense, cannot be acceptable in the common notion,
as we are men, neither can we rationally think, such men will ever love us as
sober men, when once they seem to think themselves out of the flesh, while they
are in it. But we may allow such as in our days use the salutation, and who
make bold thus to write in every Epistle, to cloud their kindness in Divinity;
since there never was party (some thereof at least) that bore about them less
of humanity. But if such kind of men, who would seem out of the flesh here, and
reject all moral Virtue and Goodness, as insignificant, will not be drawn to
affect, or love us, otherwise than aforesaid; nor embrace us for any Justice,
or Mercy showed them (for as for Spiritual Graces, theirs and ours are equally
invisible) we shall do well so to frame our ways, as to please our Maker, that
if they become our enemies because we do not take the same imaginary flight
with them, they may, at least, be at peace with us, and that if it be possible,
as much as in us lies, we may have peace with all men. In the Christian World I
doubt, nay I believe, there is least visibility of Friendship, and this I take
to be the cause; that the very outward noble badge or cognizance of
Christianity (I will not say true Christianity) by the help of Satan, has so
much elevated many Souls in opinion and fancy, as to make them think no others,
who wear it not outwardly for ostentation and show (as themselves) worthy their
common Friendship.

It is a seeming unhappiness in our nature, that our Affection cannot be long
at rest, and that Love in man only, has such several Pilots or Guides; Sense
would have it stay at home chiefly, and please, or work for the Body; that at
least it should not move far, nor otherwise than to bring in freight for the
ease and pleasure of that. Reason would, it should traffic abroad, and embrace
whatsoever that heholds good and virtuous, laudable, and amiable in another
man, and the man withal, therefore. Grace now and then raises it to mount
upwards, and beholding that fixed bright Star, by which we all move, attracts
it in some measure to bend and incline thitherward, without regard to danger.
It moves at all these several Summons or calls, wherein that in Beast never
stirs otherwise than from Sense. But yet upon every turn and occurrence so weak
is our light of Reason, and so uncertain, and often clouded (through our sins)
is that other bright and gracious light, that it is apt to be drawn and haled
home again by Sense, and then it catches up every weapon, offensive and
defensive, for the Body; Anger, Fear, and the like. Thus are we tossed to and
fro, as it were by contrary Winds, and often shipwracked, before we come to
shoot that dreadful gulf of Death, and we may well cry out before the time, O
wretched men that we are, who shall deliver us from this Body of Death? Reason
sooner than Sense, will show us some ground whereon we may anchor, and fix our
Love, as it were, in a good and pleasant harbor for a time, but it self will
often loosen it again, by showing us, it is sandy; that there is no trust in
man, nor in the children of men; and that whatsoever we see of Justice, or
Truth, or any thing of goodness in them, for the present, those are not things
of permanency in them. Men are various, fickle, and mutable in their Habits,
and in their Affections too; We cannot rationally trust our selves, We have no
power over our selves, it is most certain; And we have beheld some, seemingly
very rational, for want of Grace, destroy that Body they best loved, their own,
with their own hands; And how then can we place any settled trust in another?
Faith must throw us out at last, an anchor for the Soul, sure and steadfast, and
that must be of Love, not that it directs, or should direct our Love, quatenus
human; that is, and ought to be guided by Reason; But it may inflame our Love
to that height toward our Maker, that we shall not be troubled above measure,
though we behold the inconstancy of human Nature, and the falsehood and
treachery of our dearest Friends, though they deceive us, and all the World
forsake us, nay Psalm. 46.2
Though the Earth be moved, and though the hills be carried into the midst of
the Sea. We may wish perhaps, but as much setledness of Affection, and seeming
constancy of Nature amongst our selves, as in those poor Creatures which serve
us, and were created (next to God's Glory) for our use; that we might find
ground to trust each other here, and lodge our Affection safe, out of our
selves, for a time, in any fellow-member, since we can behold no better by our
Sense, nor comprehend what is above us, by our Reason; But his Wisdom is
infinite and unsearchable, and yet perhaps may appear to us herein, that we
should trust (even while here) in none, but him, who is for ever one and the
same, and Lord over all; And who, if we love him, will withhold nothing he sees
good for us, and become himself our Comforter in all our Afflictions.

EPIST. VII. Of the different vain pursuits of the Souls of Men, wherein we are
ready to accuse each other of Folly, though not our selves, and yet are all
Fools in some degree. That no pursuit of the Soul here, is praiseworthy or
commendable, further than it intentionally advances God's Glory, which is the
mark set before us, and which if we do not behold, in all our travails, our
labor will not profit.
IN my Treatise of the Soul, I made some glance at the various and different
pursuits of it in man, that is the affectionary or embracing part of it; but I
could not but behold withal the several opinions that men seem to have of the
pursuit of each others Affection, how vain every man thinks that to be, which
he himself affects not, or desires. But the beholding the variety of opinions
and judgments in the case (with the folly and madness of all men) would have
conduced little to the present cure of any Soul diseased, and therefore I
needed not to insert my thoughts thereabout in such Treatise; but have reserved
and now sent them to you for your perusal.

Truth is, all our courses (as various as they are) in any excess, and not
necessarily relating to some other end, than what they seem to an ordinary
Spectator to tend after, are equally frivolous and vain; and though we are
every one of us very dimm-sighted toward any espial of our own follies, and
ridiculous eager and longing pursuits, yet are we quick and apt enough to see,
and deride the same madness and folly in others; and we never need, with the
Psalmist, attribute laughter to him who dwells in the Heavens, from his only
or alone beholding our futile contrivances; since we our selves are able to
afford it one another, from the weak inspection we do, or are able to make into
any man's madness or folly, but our own.

I do think the Creator of all things, who affords himself that blessed center
of rest unto our Souls, and to whom our best and chiefest Affections, might
from very gratitude rationally tend, has of his abundant wisdom and gracious
goodness, permitted and allowed them, not only a diverse and innocent vagrancy
toward various and several terrestrial objects; but withal, so framed the
Intellect and Judgment, as that each several person shall in some manner, or
measure approve and allow of such honest tendency of his own Affections, beyond
those of another man's moving another way; and take such satisfaction and
acquiescence therein, and now and then to hugg and please himself in his own
choice, as either to pity or deride another whose labor or endeavor is
exercised in a different way, though that of either (unless in relation to the
advancement or setting forth the glory of that first cause which few behold) is
equally vain. Do we not think our State Politics look on all others, as Fools
and Idiots? And on the other side, some whose Affections are not so Worldly
mounting (though perhaps they carry about as able a purveyor or contriver for
their Affections) laugh at those gins and traps, those men lay, to catch
themselves as often as another. Surely if a man could become a discerner of the
thoughts, he might espy in a number of Mechanics, very mean, if not derisory
ones, of a man employing his time, beating his brains as we say, or at study
for some rare, new or useful invention; although without some such labor, or
study at first, such a kind of Democritus, had neither known his craft, or
mystery so called, nor had been acquainted with that God he adores, and so much
labors for, Mammon. And on the other side, every ordinary Virtuoso is ready to
deride, and contemn such a Craftsman, whose ordinary course of life in his
Shop, has little more of sagacity to be imputed to it, than that of a Spider in
his Web, nimbly running and catching at every one that enters, to suck some
profit or advantage therefrom. Neither of these perhaps beholding a wise
disposal from above, or so much as once extracting from their Intellect any
such Moral, as might be deducible from such like story, or Fable, as is made of
a blind and lame man's meeting together, that the ones sight was given to
direct the others legs, and the others legs, to assist his eyes, or sight. Now
though some things have obtained the general assent of the best and clearest
Intellects (as we observe by the daily pursuit) to be good and desirable, as
Power, Dominion, and Empire, Ornaments rather than goods, and allowed as good,
to please the Ringleader of Affections to Perdition, Pride; Yet that judgment
is passed over, before the enjoyment, and though Pride will not suffer it
publicly to be reversed, I dare boldly say it is ever done in private; and were
it not for somewhat of Pride, every public man would become private. Indeed,
the Soul which pursues dominion may at preview expect beautiful Attendants and
Concomitants, and to have many, if not most desirable goods in its power, as
Riches, Pleasure, Ease, etc. I, and Wisdom too by imputation: Yet were it
possible to resort to the greatest Favorite, the World ever had in that case
(and for instance let that Favorite be the first Caesar) and obtain his
response, as to his own happiness, while here; I do believe and am fully
persuaded in my self, it would be to little or no other effect, than what we
have received at home from one of our own Nation already, That men in great
power and place, must borrow other men's fancies and opinions to think
themselves happy by, because they are never so in their own. I would not be
thought here to descant upon those, whom this cross is barely laid on
(doubtless God makes it more easy to them, that we can reasonably imagine) but
I speak of such, as snatch up this cross, to lay it on their own backs, who
certainly are Fools therein, and I know not why we may not well account that
man, Caesar, of the number. There was never any thing attributed to him, or
said of him (and much has been said) which, I protest, I ever held upon serious
thoughts, worthy emulation, unless his great mercy and clemency; which every
private man is capable to appear with, though not in the same luster, and
splendour. Solomon's truth is able to extort confession from any man in a
sedate, and sober temper (with an only added to it) that Prove. 19.22.
that is to be desired of a man is his goodness; and it was a magnanimous and
noble saying of Alexander (whom upon comparison with the other I cannot but
ever prefer) to Taxiles, a great and wise King by the story, I will fight with
thee in honesty, and courtesy, because thou shall not exceed me in bounty and
liberality. A great Commander (though not so great as either of the other)
could once say; that were not the mercies of God, great and infinite, men of
their profession, and course of life, could have little hopes of any future
bliss of happiness. And certainly as little real happiness, or quiet, is to be
expected here, even in this World, by one whose course of life is a very
bereaving of many innocent Souls of their very outward and present peace, ease
and rest: And yet we would most willingly be all Caesar's, if we could obtain
that Title, Power and Dignity without labor and pains. What Is the cause of all
this? Why I will say it is Pride, and 'twas that only, that in labor and
travel; brought forth those words from Caesar, That he had rather be the first
man in a mean Village, than the second man in Rome, which I think neither was a
wise, or a manly Saying, (though others will think otherwise) and that it was
the thought of future fame, and glory, that framed it. Fame with her painted
wings, memorious fame, well, it is a great sign of the Souls immortality, that
seeing she must not always abide here, would leave a perpetual remembrance of
her self behind; And yet as it is vain to think, that the Soul of the right
Caesar, is at all sensible of its fame, with us; so I offer, whether any of us,
may not if we please, be an imaginary Caesar, and that is as well, in this case
of Fame. For if a man will but take the advice given to the covetous man in the
Fable, who had lost his hid treasure, that he should take and hide a stone, and
imagine it to be Gold, and it would have the same effect toward his happiness:
So let a man but think, that after his death, that Soul which is so much
magnified, by the name of Caesar, shall be his; It will be then, all one, as if
he had been the man, while he lived.

But who is so mad to part with any one Virtue, for Honor, as necessity often
inforces, if a man will needs get it? It was a pretty Saying, and it may be a
true one, of the Priest to Marcellus, about to build a Temple to Honor and
Virtue, that those two Gods could not dwell together under one roof; nor I
think be brought together to attend on one Soul, unless Honor were Native with
it.

A man of a stirring Spirit, if he be not building Temples here for Diana, that
is gains (a thing not of so great esteem in the World though as generally
affected) he will usually be building of Babels, to get himself a name. We
shall find in every brave Spirit (so entitled) something of the Roman temper;
It would leave some mark of its being here, and never considers of any such
saying, as, Lu. 12.20.
Thou fool this night, etc. much less that the world may be, and continue, when
neither the word Roman, nor the name of any one Family, or People, now being on
the face of the Earth (unless what is already registered in Scripture) shall be
used in men's mouths, or so much as known. Let no man too confidently think of
immortalizing his name, either from Writing, or the Press; It was a bold
thought, as well as a saying, which proceeded from one, when he had finished
his work, that it should live, in despite of Jupiters Iamque opus exegi, quod
nec Iovis ira nec ignis, etc.
anger. We may well think (notwithstanding his elegance) he never rightly
understood his Jupiter, that is, an eternal power, who making all things out of
nothing, is able to reduce all things to nothing; and cause things which have
been, as if they never were. This bold saying (with some of the like of his
fellow Et cum rupta situ Messallae saxa jacebunt etc,
Me tamen or a legent --

Poets) though it be not actually confuted in our days, is not therefore to be
received as Oracular. Though I believe the Creation of the World with others, I
find no firm or just ground to believe it is so near an end as some others have
accounted it, from Prophecies, which I much doubt, whether any of us ever yet
rightly understood. And then we may as well believe in Reason, the future
oblivion of all present actions, as the present oblivion of most past ones, and
that, of Nations, for ought we know, or can reasonably imagine, endowed with as
brave Spirits, and as industrious to preserve their memory, and deliver it over
to Posterity, as we our selves. A thing, the whole race of human Nature (for
want of truly beholding a present Vanity, and another manner of future
felicity) has, is, and ever will be, prone unto: And I my self am prone to
think, that before any imaginary fifth Monarchy takes place, that is before the
World have an end; there may be yet fifteen (or more) successively take place,
and amongst these, it is not altogether irrational to conjecture, that God to
punish us for our Pride and self-conceit here, or other secret purposes, best
known to himself, may raise up one of such power, that he may give Laws unto
the World; One, who may make such a destruction, as that in after ages,
Learning and Arts, may seem chiefly beholding to some of his Successors, for
its rise. And yet in this rage and tempest, to show his own power and might,
according to his promise, preserve entire his Holy word. Some have imagined,
the Turk may do as much, as I have said. Well! we have authority to say, Of
that day and hour knows no man. We reckon and account upon time, while we
live; but as time is nothing to God, so time will quickly be no more with us,
but we shall be swallowed up in Eternity. Indeed upon a call to repentance, St.
John Baptist's words are true, and necessary, the kingdom of Heaven is at hand:
Our passage is quick and speedy; and our Souls, now Earthly Inhabitants, must
in short space know their doom: And were it imaginable, that they with our
Bodies could sleep and become as 'twere insensible till that last day; though
they should sleep together Myriads of ages, yet upon sound of the last Trump,
and their then awaking, it could seem no otherwise to them, than as yesterday.
Here do we often hunt after we know not what, and think to catch hold on
something stable and permanent, but when our very Bodies awake again, through
their very instruments of Sense our Souls may behold themselves to have been
here, but in a dream.

This inscription on all things here, Vanity, whereof Solomon seems to have had
a full and clear view, and was the man who first delivered the same over to us
in writing, is a very good, and, I may say too, a gracious sight and prospect,
and a very ready one, I think, to point us to inquire after, if not find out,
something which is free and clear from such inscription: But it is a further
most gracious and glorious donative, if we ever behold it, and we must never
expect to behold it, as of our selves, and from our own strength; our Optics
are naturally too weak. There have been many, as well Heathens as others, who
have obtained a pretty fair view of the vanity of all things here below, from
their very light of Reason: what any of them saw farther, I cannot say, nor
will go about to determine; but I should have thought that tenth Satyr of
Iuvenal, to have proceeded from somewhat more than an ordinary poetical rapture
or fancy, had it not been for the conclusion therein, monstro quod ipse tibi
possis dare. When once we think we behold that sight, as of and from our
selves, our eyes become weak, and dazzled, and from too intent a view of this
World, we are disabled to see and contemplate the glory of another; that sight
must be reached unto us, upon our humility in beholding the other, and of our
selves we cannot reach it: But this is a needless instruction for you, and
improper for this place.

We were minded in our search to inquire and behold, what and how far worldly
employments of the Soul were necessary and commendable; Whereabout I never
thought it good, to endeavor to hang clogs and fetters on any man's, but rather
add wings to it. Neither is it good to amaze men with speculative Notions, but
rather to encourage all men to be up and doing, provided a way be opened first,
to behold that mark which every Soul should chiefly aim at; and that is, God's
Glory. And therefore if a man can behold that, and place it as the prime
object, and make it the main end, and chief Scope and design of all his work
and motion; Let him go on, though he expect and promise himself thereby, Power,
Honor, Riches, etc. besides. The Heathen in setting forth and painting of
Virtue, covered her with fair and rich outward ornaments, and trappings,
because they thought no man would take hold on and embrace her naked; And it is
no more than what usually are found belonging to her: Yet these appurtenances
should not be looked on, but in transitu, and esteemed a dowry of Grace after
Marriage, not of necessary compact before.

But besides a good primary intention, in every Souls motion, it will be very
necessary and requisite, for every Soul to keep a due and constant watch over
her self, lest at any time unawares she sacrifice to her own nets. For though
her good motions like Springs, may seem to proceed out of the Earth, yet they
are in truth from the Sea; and though as the Earth, we receive fruit and
increase thereby, we ought at no time to dam them up within our bowels, lest
they become putrid and unwholesome; but allow them a free passage, and give
them a quick return, by way of acknowledgment, to that bountiful Ocean of
goodness; as the necessary means of a fresh supply. I know nothing but that
Agrippa his Oration, might be good, nay so good, as a Stander by, might in a
good Sense take it to be rather the voice of God than man; but if his Auditors
acclamation in applying it solely to him, were gross flattery, I am sure his
reception in that strict and narrow Sense, must needs be a damnable presumption.

Satan is a subtle Politician, and doubtless many, who in the beginning of
their race, have set forth with an eye, only or chiefly, fixed on the Glory of
God, and the general good of man, have by baits thrown in, and casually
happening in the way, diverted their eyes a little from the course they first
steered, and cast them inward on themselves, and at last converted public aims
to private, or at least so intermixed or allayed them, as that they could not
be taken for current. And when once our actions begin to carry upon them, our
own image and superscription, it will be no difficult matter for the Devil to
persuade us to own the Metal as well as the Coin, and make us think and own our
selves, as well Miners as Forgers of our dependants fortunes and our own.

But he who steers chiefly toward God's Glory, and holds out in a straight and
steady course, whatever outward Mat. 6.29.
glorious acquisitions (as we sometimes call them and Solomon in all his glory,
etc.
Scripture allows) he obtains collaterally; As he will find no cause to condemn
himself, so neither do I, and as no man I am sure can find just Reason to envy
his Worldly Power, Pomp, and Authority, knowing at the best, and honestly
obtained, how transitory and fading all Worldly habiliments are; So none of us
can justly condemn or accuse such a man of vain glory, but we may allow him
some such Euge as David took up upon another account, Good luck have he with
his honor, let him ride on; And we who seem to want, what such a man enjoys,
may by our contentedness in a mean estate, with cheerfulness and alacrity,
glorify God together with him, since the World is able to afford, Power,
Authority, great Place and the like only to a few, and small number of men.

This Gloria in excelsis (by the way) ought to be the Canticum of our Souls in
all our travail, and to have its rise from our strongest and best Affection. It
should be the Motto we carry along with us; but in a white Banner, as the
Ensign of peace, and not that of In nomine domini, in a bloody and warlike one.
It is indeed a most angelical Anthem, yet it must be taken whole, as they sang
it, or not at all. I have wondered at the once leaving out Gloria patri, etc.
appointed to be, as the bearing of those Heavenly Songs, or Hymns of David, and
have sometimes thought, it would never have been ordered to be omitted, unless
by those, who desired neither peace on Earth, nor good will toward men. This
is a thing, if any, to be preferred above our own salvation; and I must take
leave here, to be of opinion, It was this alone which made St. Paul wish
himself Anathema; for in my weak judgment, I cannot take the meaning of those
words (ushered in with such a serious protestation as, I speak the truth in
Christ, I lie not, my conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost)
otherwise; I cannot think, his Charity did so abound, or overflow, as that he
wished his brethrens salvation before his own, as some: For to wish evil to
ones self, is impossible, and to wish another good before ones own, is so too,
and also irregular; we being at utmost commanded to love our Neighbor, but, as
our selves; the whole heart is only due to the Maker, and Framer of all hearts,
for whose Glory all things were made. But this I think is his meaning; that
were it possible God's Glory could once come in competition with ones own, or
other men's salvation, the first were to be preferred by us; And this he brings
in as a Preface to his explanation of God's promise made to Abraham's Seed;
that all are not children of the promise, which are Abraham's Seed, but some
others; and is an answer to an objection, which might be made by the Romans, to
whom he preached that promise, as seeming contrary to the letter thereof.

Were God as cruel to some one peculiar part of his image, as kind to others,
under the Notion of Predestination, as some have represented him in their
fancies, and so rendered all his Precepts and his Promises of none effect, which
God forbid; And were I assured, notwithstanding all my diligence, all my
endeavors, and earnest requests, to perform his will, that I might obtain his
promise, that I were one of that irrecoverably secluded number; I do yet at
this present think, I could notwithstanding any such assurance, make my exit in
these very words; Glory be to God on high, or sanctisicetur, or magnificetur
nomen tuum. And certainly who ever makes a true search into himself, and
consults his Reason, whereby he will find God's prerogative far greater over
us, than the Potter over his Clay, will find cause to do as much.

Well! he who keeps within such a path, as points, and tends directly to God's
Glory, and the general good of mankind, God's visible Image, without turning
quite out of it, into some other By-path or corner, what ever ornaments or
covering he gets, which are often scattered in the way, he may lawfully take up
and wear, and which we esteem, and account of as good worldly Blessings; But
yet notwithstanding we so do, when we consider how cumbersom they are, and how
troublesome they often prove to the owner and injoyer, (especially all outward
ones which concern the Body barely: and which when superfluous are reserved but
for one Sense to feed upon, that is the Eye) we may with Reason reject them;
And though some men have made a shift sometimes, to keep on those Plumes and
Feathers of Honors, Riches, etc. and wore them perhaps, both safely, and
easily, during their lives; Yet since we are able daily to behold, how
certainly they are shed, or moulten by every man's Posterity, if not stripped
from them by force and violence, and that usually, in a very short space of
time, although they were thought by the Ancestor, very fast pinnion'd to his
progeny; We can by no means exempt any of them, from that title Solomon has
given them. Nay, we have thought and said that even Fame her self, which has
the most lasting Feathers, and strongest Wings, may yet lose them, and perish
in oblivion. And therefore there is no Reason for man, to be very eager in the
quest of any thing this World is able to afford him; neither can we think but
our most fortunate Worldly contrivers, and happy men, as we esteem them,
infected in some degree with this common disease of Folly and Madness in the
World, have felt the anguish and trouble thereof.

EPIST. VIII. That any complete Happiness here, is a thing merely in
speculation. That natural indowments or excellencies in the Soul, do conduce to
the Ease, Peace, or quiet thereof, and so are desirable though we attain not
happiness thereby. Learning or Knowledge, Wisdom, Prudence, and subtilty
considered. That even Prudence the most likely conduct to happiness, was never
yet the constant concomitant of the clearest or brightest human Soul.
THE Souls of men while they are here below, do all agree in this one thing,
that is, in a wish or desire of being happy; But what Happiness is, wherein it
consists, or how in some measure it may be attained, even here, there is not
one Soul, but in some kind or other, at least in some degree or measure,
differs, and dissents from its fellows. Indeed happiness is a thing so quite
out of our reach, and out of our view, since our first wilful turning from it
to run after a game of Satan's starting, that it is a very blind and cold chase
to the best of us. Diverse there are who make a cry of it several ways, and we
are prone from that general desire, or wish, to hearken and run after them
sometimes; and yet when we come to try it, after some stay upon it, we find it
to be but a false cry. For as our future final and Eternal Happiness, is
wrapped up from us in such clouds of darkness, that we had need Corinth. 12.1.
come to visions and revelations, and as St. Paul expresses it, be caught up
into the third Heaven to have a glimpse of it: So even our very present
temporal Happiness, and peace of mind, is such a mystery, rather than an art,
as no man could ever yet find out the exact materials, from whence it should
necessarily arise, but every one must acknowledge it, in some degree, to be the
gracious voluntary rays of an Eternal essential happy Being, now and then
darted on us.

What do we talk of finding Happiness here? The shadow whereof would sooner
cool our appetites, if we groped not after, and catched too greedily and
earnestly at the substance. A full persuasion that Happiness is altogether out
of our reach, nay out of the clearest sight, may as much conduce toward it as
any thing I can imagine.

Happiness is a thing, that perhaps is oftnest found of them that seek it not,
and that if we go out of our place, and our desires are bent upon, and our
thoughts straggle too much after it, it is not seldom but we may be compared to
the unclean Mat. 12.43.
Spirit, walking through dry places, seeking rest and finding none, and would
gladly return to the place whence we came. Happiness is not a thing to be
Chymically extracted out of any Earthly materials whatsoever, and a man will
find it no less folly to promise it himself, upon the enjoyment of any thing,
than it is to promise himself an assurance of the thing, before he obtain it.
But as it never was inseparably annexed to any state or condition, nor the
certain Spouse of any mortal; so need no man pronounce an absolute divorce of
it, from any state or condition whatsoever, but that in some degree and
measure, it may be embraced and laid hold on; But that must be by looking
directly up, where she is essential and permanent, and so we may receive some
gracious drops of it, to refresh us in our journey. Seem our present way never
so dirty or miry, never so ragged or stony, never so sharp and thorny, it is
good to plod on (without thoughts of planing or levelling it our selves)
without looking behind or before, and on either side, or indeed too curiously
and narrowly on it, or striving to leap out of it without a call; now and then
casting our eyes upwards, till we are insensibly drawn out of it, or it be
rendered whatsoever it seemed before, a way of pleasantness, and our paths are
peace; which are only the ways of right Wisdom, immediately sent from above.

Were it in the power of the Will (that Sheriff in the Soul) to give the
Affections possession of all kind of Worldly goods, ever enjoyed by man, in
such order and method, as the most contriving Imagination could invent, and a
man could make himself Prince of what Eutopia he pleased; I question much,
whether he would be long content, if the Heaven were in his Eye, or any thing
could present it self to his mind, which were out of his reach. I do agree with
him who said, that to be Content is but another phrase to be Happy, but how
this thing Content is obtained, will prove the main question. I cannot yet find
ground to think or believe, the materials whereof Content are framed, are in
our own breasts, orat least anyways at our own disposal, or that it was ever
yet in the power of any mortal, to build or make ready a Temple for her, as has
been fansied of old for other Graces. She is very fickle in her habitation, and
comes and goes, at the pleasure of some greater Power, than Earth barely
contains. St. Paul had got her, and learned her, he tell us; and how he could
Phil. 4.13.
do all things; but I must take the liberty to say, I should have distrusted
the verity of his affirmation, without the immediate subsequent words added;
through Christ which strengthens me. I find elsewhere, he was like other men,
and had his fighting without, and terrors within, 2. Cor. 4.8.
troubled on every side though not distressed. And surely, he has a very dull
Sentinel or Watchman in his Tower above, who has not often alarms in his
inferior faculties below, and those common Soldiers of the Soul, (as I have
called them) readily catching up their Arms, or at least sullen and discontent,
and not moving as they should; and there is no absolute perfect remedy to allay
them, or please them again, but by recourse to, and yielding them up to be
governed by the wise disposer of all things; who of his free bounty and grace,
if we become once able to see his hand, is pleased now and then to shine upon
us, and show us his face. And if at any time he but Psalm. 30.7, 8.
turn his face from us, every man is in David's case, troubled, and will find
no other way for cure, than crying to the Lord, and getting to his Lord right
humbly.

If we examine the word Content in a literal sense, it seems to me, to be a
fullness, or satisfaction; we talk of continens and contentum, in such a Notion.
Now if the Soul of man be a special Divine Emanation* (and we the rather hold
it to be so than that of other Creatures from its common inordinate craving) I
cannot see in Reason (which is the surest mark of our existent Divinity) how it
can be filled at any time, otherwise than with hope; which, being an aerie
thing (and as Solomon says Prove. 13.12.
deferred makes the heart sick) in comparison of fruition, will often admit
the entrance, or intrusion of somewhat else, not to fill it, but to rake and
tear it for a time, and therefore it must be some gracious stop of the Souls
craving, rather than properly its satisfaction, or content, some blindfolding,
or hooding from the ordinary presentiments of the World; Some little diversion,
and way of exercise of all, or at least, its best faculties, as it were out of
our selves (and that by the gracious warmth of that Sun of Happiness) in duly
beholding his Image first, (the earnest of Happiness) since we cannot behold
him as he is, which is Happiness it self: And how this may most commonly
happen, or readily come to pass, I have endeavored, according to my ability,
to declare, under that often happy prospect of true Charity.

Now give me leave here to speak a little of some things, wherein we are often
deceived. To mention ought of Happiness like to arise from any bodily
pleasures, common to Beasts, as eating, drinking or the like, (wherein Man
becomes as certainly deceived as any thing) were below a manly Soul. But I
shall speak only of the Souls peculiar seeming satisfaction in hope according
to that saying, Soul take thine ease, thou have goods laid up. Surely many men,
who have spent their years in turmoil as well as their days in Vanity about it,
may be said to have gathered much, and tasted little; some have had so many
pleasant seats, as that they could not take their pleasure in any, and perhaps
have entered Friendship with so many, that they could never enjoy the Happiness
of true Friendship with one. On the other side, any sedentary contemplative
course of life, will as soon deceive a man's expectation; that seeming
withdrawing a man's self out of the World, while he is in it, and a poetic
fancy of some Earthly Elysium to be found here, will never create that satura
quies, so much talked of; it may prove a vale of rest unto the Body, but not
unto the Soul, nor a Happiness to either. The Imagination cannot be at rest one
moment, and whatsoever it brings in, to the Affections, if it appear not useful
and necessary, it will prove but unsavory to them, and be so rendered now and
then by it self; and raises them trouble about trivial matters, as quick and
soon, as about weighty. The proper, chief, and peculiar pleasure or delight of
the Soul, from any cause that ever I could find, or guess; is the reverberation
of some good works, or a light or joy arising or springing from thence, which
in a retiredness from the World, will miss of many objects to act upon, from
which this Happiness might redound. I know there was a great Emperor and a
wise, who after he had tasted what Fruits busy greatness (but perhaps not good
works) could afford, voluntarily surrendered up his Scepter; and could not be
prevailed with, upon the greatest invitation, and most urgent Reason, to accept
it again; but feelingly said, it is likely, He took more true delight in the
growth of the Lettice in his Gardens, than the increase of his Dominions. And
doubtless there are many more would give up their Verdict for that state of
life as most of all tending toward Happiness, which God appointed Adam in the
state of his Innocence: But I, who have had some taste of the pleasure of it,
and perhaps better understand it, than some who admire it will not recommend
it, as a station wholly exempt from disquiet. Even since our first Trespass, we
are subject to be afraid, if we hear but a voice in the Garden; and the very
withering of any gourd we have there, is enough to raise our anger, especially
if before, like Jonah, we rejoiced, or were Jonah. 4.6.
exceeding glad, at the growing of it, though we ver. 10.
made it not to grow.

I do not think but there are, and have been many, of late days, as well as in
David's time, both public and private men, who Psalm. 49.18.
while they lived, counted themselves happy men; nay some who have lived all
their days in the Sunshine of the World, and set at last too, in brightness,
and, though their pomp has not followed them, yet have escaped that Prophet's
prediction, of never seeing light, and are now at rest, and happy; but these
are but rare Largesses of Gods bounty, and goodness. Such a condition there
might be, and they might be contented in it; but yet they could not be so happy
as to cross Solon's observation of Ante obitum nemo, supremaque funera, etc.
since they could never be secured from danger of misery or the thoughts of it.
And therefore in our search after some proper way and means to reduce the Soul
to a quiet state, which effected, is some degree of Happiness, we must reject
what are called the goods of the Body and Fortune, and have recourse to what
will enlighten or improve that which is eternal in us, and is truly our selves.

Amongst which what we call Learning may deservedly be ranked. But yet I think
the multiplicity even of that, which is rather the treasure than the goods of
the mind, does more distract than instruct us, more burden than ease and
satisfy the mind. Of this I take St. Paul to speak when he says, knowledge 1
Cor. 8.1.
pusseth up; and that Solomon meant no other, when he tells us, He that
increases knowledge Eccles. 1.13, 18.
increases sorrow, as appears by his foregoing confession, that he had given
his heart to seek, and search out by Wisdom, concerning all things that are
done under Heaven, which he found a sore travel. Surely it is acquired and
adventitious knowledge, not the power to know and discern so far as may concern
our future safety, that molests us, for of that Solomon says, Prove. 2.10.
It is pleasant to the Soul. The bringing in of Foreign Plants, and setting
them in a man's own Soil, provided he have a judgment to distinguish good from
evil, may be good, and in some measure pleasant: but to have his own Soil
improved, to such a degree, as to raise, or produce as wholesome, and as savory,
and such as may nourish, and heal, as well as delight him, or others (which
every man may do in some measure by digging at home) is better, and will prove
more cordial to him. He who takes in too much of this Foreign kind of Lading,
will find it (though light, yet) cumbersom, and troublesome: and neither please
his Pilot, nor his Passengers, his Intellect or his Affections. I cannot but
think, that many, originally excellent, brave Souls, like clear Springs, might
of themselves and from themselves, have afforded pure and curious Waters,
which, by receiving in so many inlets, and imagining thereby with a rapid
stream to carry all before them, have become not only useless, but troubled and
muddy, and withal not seldom lost as well their original name, as their Virtue,
Repute and Estimation. Truth is a blessed thing, and happy is he (I will
affirm) that finds her, but there are few of our high-flown learned men, I
fear, whom we need envy that Happiness. Certainly there are many deeply read as
we say, and we may give them the appellation of great Scholars too, who have
lost her in a crowd; that sought too much abroad, when perhaps with less
labor, and God's blessing, they might have found her at home, naked as she is,
and so, naked, have better presented her to the ignorant and mean, and such as
are not capable to receive her with any large Retinue, or Attendants. However I
am somewhat confident, she is not to be delivered shackled and in Fetters; nor
to be established, or set up by an Ergo: and that Logic is so far from being
any good Sentinel, or Guard for Science, that it is (as some before me have
held) fitter to establish an Error, than to discover or open a way to Truth.
That I seem to declaim against Learning, as a let, rather than a furtherance
to Happiness, I know I shall obtain your pardon, because I believe you Wise,
and Charitable, as well as Learned; and for any other, who may chance to see
this, I may hope the like from him; For if he be so happy by that kind of
Knowledge barely, he will pity my Ignorance, and want of Learning.

I do think, the advancement of Reason, may be without the advancement of
Learning, and that if any man could frame together materials for such a Work,
it would prove the more Happy, though it were not the more Learned Book. Now if
we admit or allow of any thing good here, and withal desirable in any measure,
beyond what is absolutely necessary to support us in our Travail, toward some
future, constant, permanent, settled Bliss, and Happiness (for certainly we can
never lay hold on, and enjoy such here) it must be some inherent gift, which
may adorn and beautify the Soul it self; and such, as well used, may give us
not only a little light toward our Journeys end; but afford us some warmth and
comfort also by fits. A gift whereby the Soul may solace her self, and though a
Prisoner, yet become a Prisoner at large, as we say, and obtain a little fairer
prospect, than barely out of the gates of her Prison, the organs of Sense. And
that is in some measure, a clear and right understanding of things here, while
she is here, or in a word Wisdom.

Wisdom is a general word, and so we would have it here accepted. For properly
and strictly taken I think it to be (however we hold the Book that so defines
it for Apocrypha) Wisd. 7.25, 26.
The breath of the power of God, and a pure influence, flowing from the Glory
of the Almighty, A brightness of the everlasting light, and the unspotted
mirror of the power of God, and the Image of his Goodness. That more immediate
(and no way habitual or inherent) light of the Holy Spirit, which leads by
the paths of Virtue, unto everlasting Bliss and Happiness, whereof the fear of
the Lord is the beginning, or forerunner; and is in truth no other, than what
St. James calls, pure religion and undefiled. Which being a thing, not to be
discovered by man in man, but to be judged of, at such time, as Solon would
have Happiness (and that certainly must be after death) is a fitter subject for
Divines, under the title of Grace, in the most acceptable Sense, than for me.

This indeed is a thing to be desired, above all things, and without
limitation, since Prove. 3.17.
her ways (wherein she leads us) are ways of pleasure, and all her paths,
peace. But since he who has told us so much, has this saying withal, Prove. 8.12.
I wisdom, dwell with prudence; I have thought good here to speak a little of
good moral Wisdom (whereof Solomon has left us some Precepts) under the name or
title of Prudence, how good and safe a guide it may be for us, and how far it
may receive admittance, to cohabit with that special divine gift, Wisdom. And
also, to say somewhat, of a different kind of worldly Wisdom, and which seldom
cohabits with her, under the name of Subtilty: Because it is a word attributed
to that old Serpent, upon his first deceit to man; and words, the index of
things, if not someways regulated, are apt to confound our Intellect.

The thing I am now about to speak of, is indeed no other than what I have
already handled, Reason; we may call it here Reason clarified, that inherent
gift in man, which, when it is somewhat clear, and guides and leads us, without
transgression of any rule either of Justice, or Charity, but follows Truth, so
far as it is able to discern her, and is not dazzled by any Mists or Fogs,
arising from some erring, and extravagant Affection; I call Prudence, or right
Reason. But when it beholds things, as quick, and nimbly, and at as great a
distance as may be; If it in any wise transgress the rules before mentioned, or
become swaied, bended, or inclined, as aforesaid, I can give it no other name,
than Subtilty, still allowing it the attribute of Reason, though not right
Reason; or else we must rank a great part of Mankind, under the mere classis of
brute Beasts, and take from them the title and dignity of rational.

That this desirable good, Prudence, or a clear, or right Reason, may be
inherent, and enjoyed in great measure by man, and yet avail him nothing
toward everlasting Happiness, nor he prove wise unto Salvation, is a thing, I
will not, or cannot deny. All that I am about to allege, is, the one is no
let, or impediment, but rather a furtherance, for the coming of the other.

The cohabitation of Wisdom with prudence, in the same person, or whenever they
are the indowment of one and the same Soul, is a most blessed, and admirable
gift; and why there should be sometimes, seemingly maintained, a kind of
necessity of their separation; and that the lesser, must wholly give place, and
cease to be, for the introduction of the greater (though it is very likely,
this thing I call Prudence, has often by a kind of degeneracy into what I call
Subtilty, forced Wisdom's absence) I trust, and believe there is no firm ground.

We should not be so out of love with the word Magus, as to condemn all, under
that notion, and hold all Philosophy to be vain, and so conclude not any wise
are called, because St. Paul has said 1 Corinthians. 1.16.
Not many etc. or because Solomon has truly told us, Pro. 21.30.
there is no Wisdom, neither understanding, nor counsel against the Lord, to
argue there is none for him; is more than I think, we have commission to do. It
is an undeniable truth, that the wisdom of this World, is foolishness with God,
and that Wisdom, in the abstract, is God's peculiar, and to be allowed him,
with an exclusive particle, as St. Paul has done it, Romans 16.27.
To the only wise God, or 1 Timothy 1.17.
To God only wise, etc. And he, who is not at all times ready to deny himself,
and wave any self-sufficiency in that point, never merited the title of
Prudent. Yet without any necessary self-denial, it may not be improper, or
imprudent, to allow an inherent kind of Wisdom in man, as God's gift, if it be
owned with the same qualification, as our Savior approves or allows in case of
Riches, that there be put no trust therein. It Is a good caution, and
commendable, to put men in mind of not trusting to either; but absolutely to
condemn the Owners thereof, if any such, is not so. Perhaps it were to be
wished, that some men, who, to lay a good foundation for grace in their
Auditory, as they seem to pretend, do utterly decry all other excellent gifts
of the Soul, under the name of Worldly Wisdom, and would have it rooted out, as
obstructive to Spiritual gifts, as they peculiarly term them, were such indeed
themselves, as they desire their Auditors should be; that is plain, simple,
well meaning men. But since the number of weak and foolish men, does always far
exceed that of the discerning and Prudent; and since weak and ignorant men, are
soonest won by a smoothing kind of Flattery, that theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven, and to them alone belong the Promises; We have cause, I fear, to
suspect that some, who are very sollicitous, and over-earnest Preachers of this
Doctrine to others, are not free from subtilty, or policy therein (though of
Prudence they are, and such as I say may cohabit, and well agree with Wisdom in
the same Soul) and take up, and make use of those very Sayings, which were
chiefly meant and intended by St. Paul, against themselves.

I do not allege it as an observation, worthy any regard, neither do I know,
whether it has been made before; But we find not St. Paul any where, so
strongly declaiming against Worldly Wisdom, twice together citing the Prophet
Esaias, Where is the Wise? where is the Scribe, etc. as in those two or three
first Chapters to the Corinthians, and that immediately after his complaint of
their divisions, and telling them, how some said they were of Paul, some of
Apollos, some of Cephas. As if he should seem to allow a kind of policy or
Worldly Wisdom, in those factious sidings and parties, and admit, how
advantageous it might prove to the leaders thereof; yet God, and Truth, being
still the same, There was no need to fight, or contest for it, under the
peculiar Colors, or pretended Banners, either of himself, or Apollos or
Cephas. But that, such their doings, were Folly and Madness in the sight of
God, and not in reality Wisdom, as perhaps they esteemed it. He tells them
(immediately before his declaration, of the Wisdom of the World being
foolishness with God, using there, the word 1 Cor. 3.19.
Craftiness) of their manner of building on his Foundation; Bidding them take
heed, how they built thereon: Indeed he does not absolutely condemn such
Builders, neither do I, but this may be said from his words to such men (for I
know not how to build upon his words, Castles in the Air, or Purgatories, as
some have done) that they had need pass through a Purgatory of Repentance in
this life, for building Wood or Hay or Stubble (instead of Gold and Silver,
etc.) upon his Foundation.

I have Charity enough to think or hope, at least, that this kind of Subtilty,
of fashioning Gods word, so, to a man's own Model, as that he may thereby best
raise his own fortune, and advancement thereon (since it never yet obtained a
Patron, and is utterly disclaimed and disowned by all men) is very rare. But
the one, and the other, of these men, the Prudent, and the Subtle, as I
distinguish them, which is but from their Reason looking different ways, have
left us some of their several Precepts, and Maxims, to walk by, if we please. I
am not much acquainted with such Writings, neither have I read, or studied
them; from that Reason I enjoy, I have ever thought, a man may become better
enabled, to walk by his own guide, than another man's, and that if any one
should collect all the sage Sayings, which ever the World afforded, and had
them ready ad unguem, as we say; he would never prove the more subtle, or
prudent person for them. They might be like Jewels in a Swines snout, perhaps
stay him a little now and then from extravagantly wrooting in the Earth, but
never further him toward the acquiring Food, or what his Affections would prey
upon; nor afford him luster to walk by, with any such decorum or comeliness, as
if they were his own proper ornaments, or extracted from himself.

The chief and principal Cornerstone, for the subtle man's Building, is, we
know (though we desire not to know all) deep Dissimulation, polished with Lies;
And though he may have other fine wrought Materials, and a pretty kind of
varnish't Mortar, to cement his Fabric; Yet, what great and lasting Building,
or at least pleasant Structrure, any man can raise on such Foundation; I leave
to any sober person to judge.

Indeed this very thing, Dissimulation, has engrossed the name of Wisdom to it
self, and no man is allowed the title of the one, till he first obtain a
perfect habit in the other. It has been too much esteemed, a Court-like and
Princely Virtue, or quality; and some, no mean ones, have professed to desire,
their Son and Successor should learn no other Lesson, whereby to live, and
govern prosperously and happily. If such men did but consider that they often
find, by Experience the Mistress of Fools, that there is a great number of men,
which make as little use of their very outward Sense to find them out, as their
Reason, they would never esteem this Art, for any point of Policy in
themselves; For (to take up Solomon's saying in this case, Surely Pro. 1.17.
in vain the Net is spread in the Eyes of every thing that has wings; and it
must be a very dull Eye, that at some time, or other, or upon some occasion, or
other, is not able to peep through this false network vail: which when once
men do, such catch little by it, and, if according to a common English Proverb,
they gain any thing in the Hundred, they lose more in the Shire. Men do not
naturally love masked Faces; and what true Friendship, or perfect Love can any
man expect in return from others, who puts off counterfeit Wares to all men? He
who can make it his trade, and profession, purposely to disfigure the very
Image of Truth (that is himself, the Image of God) must needs be sensible
sometimes, that he mocks himself, with his fellow Creatures; and cannot be
ignorant, that his Creator cannot be mocked. I dare appeal to any such man,
whether he has not sometimes deceived himself to scorn, if not to derision; and
so over-acted, that he has sensibly found, that his longing Affections, had
been better gratified, if his brains had been more quiet, and at rest, and that
he had obtained better trading, and quicker returns for them, if he had not
hung out so many, and various signs for them.

There are many men, who never attained what they eagerly desired, or earnestly
pursued, for this very Reason; that by utterly disowning their main intent,
have greatly puzzled, and at length caused their Friends, and followers, to
desert them, rather than always walk along with them in the dark, or in a mist.

A man may be allowed sometimes, Pro. 20.5.
dark Sayings, but not false lights; and we may admit, Ibid.
counsel in the heart of a man to be like deep Waters, but not muddy, or
discolored Waters; Such, do most commonly deceive the Authors. It is not
seldom, that these kind of men meeting together, become like two men in the
dark, and stumble together, but neither, as Solomon says well Pro. 4.19.
knows at what he stumbles. When a Cretian meets with as perfect a Cretian as
himself, he is forthwith then (if not at some other times) in a perfect maze,
and must needs confess himself a Fool, because he is justled in his old paths,
and knows not readily which way to walk, nor so much as to turn himself.

We needed not, indeed, have ranked these kind of men, under the notion, or
title of Wisdom; unless to distinguish them from those, we term Innocents, from
whom they differ in a large degree, wholly deserting the attendant of that
attribute, Innocence, if we believe David, who says, it will bring a man peace
at the last. Whatever such man esteem himself, or however he may be esteemed of
by some (and it is an evil fate, that sometimes the Fool should be applauded
for Wise, and a wise man derided for being circumvented, or overreached, as men
term it) there is no Wise man, but will conclude with Solomon, that Pro. 10.18.
He that hides hatred with lying lips, and he that utters a slander is a
fool. Nay I will be bold to go further, and say, that he who uses to gratify a
far more noble Affection, than hatred can be esteemed, with a lie; and with any
seeming approbation, or allowance of his Reason, is no better than a Fool; and
such is every one, who professes, and allows of dissimulation, as an Art.

Surely, whenever any man draws a false vail over himself, to hide himself from
others, the Devil throws another over him, to hide him from himself; Or else
his Reason would show him his folly, together with his falsehood. That Reason is
very weak in man, which shows not to the whole Soul, at some time or other,
falsehood to be a crime. If it do not, that man is a very Fool, in the
estimation of all men; and I may tell him according to my definition, he has no
conscience, that is, no consultations, whispers, or debates, amongst the
faculties of his Soul; which thing, he will take as a greater ignominy, than
the other title. If it do, and it is heard (which is the thing I call
conscience) and yet a man acts against it, in a constant course of motion, his
Reason is weak, and he can never be allowed for wise. For when his Reason
becomes subservient to Affections only latent and not up in Arms on the
sudden; It is rather deceived into a compliance, than mastered, or overcome by
force. I say not, but that the most Prudent, nay the most Wise here on Earth,
may act sometimes both foolishly, and falsely too; but then, it must be from an
Acute disease, which quickly terminates, not a Chronick and lasting one in the
Soul, not such as steals upon a man, and yet he thinks he is in health; not a
contented vassalage of Reason, but rather a constrained bondage of her for a
time. I have alleged and owned the potency, and predominancy of the Affections
in the Soul; But I think in the case of a professed Hypocrite, Reason may as
properly be said to misguide the Passions, as the Passions to mislead Reason;
and then, that man can never be endowed with Prudence, or right Reason, if at
some time or other, it will not take place, and be master.

We have little Reason to look for Happiness, or expect to find it, in that
place, where Wisdom and Prudence are discharged from the Watch; Or so much as
to think, there is any inward order, or regularity in that Soul, where the door
or entrance into it (the Tongue) is hung false, of intent and purpose. If any
do expect to build a Temple for Peace, with the materials before mentioned, he
must inquire out an able Surveyor, and a more exact Contriver, than I am like
to prove. I know it will prove a vain thing, to demand of any such kind of
person, what quiet, ease, or peace of mind, he usually finds within himself;
since that dissimulation being his chief profession, he will dissemble his
enjoyments, as well as his aims, and palliate his Wounds and Scars, as well as
his Weapons. But if we could appeal to his Conscience (of which there is some
question whether he have any) it would tell him, as well as Isaiah has told us
all, there is no Is. 48.22.
peace obtained upon any indirect course. However every man by appealing to his
own Reason, may receive information, that he who always paints, and colors his
own Actions with a false Gloss, or Varnish, must necessarily have some fear,
and a jealousy or suspicion within himself; that in all addresses, honest
intents, and innocent well meaning actions from others, there lies secretly
hid, some poison covered over with that Ps. 141.5.
precious balm, he himself makes such daily use of: And what pleasant, quiet,
peaceable Inmates, jealousy and suspicion are, I leave to the judgment of all,
who have at any time entertained them.

We will allow a number of men to have a nimble slavish Reason, whom yet we
will not allow to be endowed with right Reason, or Prudence. Whenever Reason
yields to make a breach upon the rules of Justice, or Charity, she is not
right, and straight; but bent and inclined by some evil or illset Affection. If
she do not strike at the Affections for mastery, she is a slave; If she do,
there is no peace for the present, nor till their subjection; And hereabout
will I conjecture, much of our Peace, and Happiness, and disorder, and
unhappiness in this World, depends.

I have sometimes thought, that if Reason in man, meriting the title of
Prudent, might toward any present safety, and quiet kind of the Souls
enjoyment of her self, in this life, transgress any rule of Charity, naturally
engraven in the Soul, or delivered to her by Divine Law; It were in this only
case of not believing all things; for since we hourly behold, the treachery and
falsehood of the World in general, and find withal, how all ages have derided
this credulity, and long since given to a good man, in this charitable sense,
the name of a Semperbonus homo tyro est.
fresh water Soldier, or Novice; Since we almost daily see, and read examples
of particular men, who by their too great credulity in this kind, have drawn
misery and sorrow, and imminent danger and destruction upon themselves; Why
should not Reason, that is right Reason, now and then, nay often, call for, and
place, that no beautiful nor pleasant thing, Suspicion, as a Sentinel in the
Soul?

I do believe, there is a righteous and good God in Heaven, continually
beholding all human actions, and a rewarder and punisher thereof, according to
demerit; and since I do believe so much, I may conjecture, that he would not
frame human Nature, capable of any bodily affliction, or suffering, but what by
his gift of patience, and contentedness, might be born with some kind of
pleasure or delight. The Mind, or Soul distinct, and of it self, is not
vulnerable in any part, but where it yields of it self; and I am sure, pleasure
which is the health of the Soul, will sooner arise in being deceived from a
good and innocent intent, and meaning, than in deceiving from a bad, and evil
one, and therein the deceived has the advantage; and therefore I do not, nor
dare not recommend that thought, to any one.

Wise, or Prudent, we would all be, whether we know when we are so, or not. It
is a very pleasant prospect, some have said, sitting on the side of an hill, to
behold the Errors in the vale below; but then a man had need be very well
seated, and fixed, left that through some mist arising from thence, or some
giddiness, or inadvertency in himself; he roll down into the same, or the like
Errors, he beholds. If I could espy out, or find a ground for this kind of
sedency; that it ever were or could be possibly obtained, and held, while we
remain here on Earth; I would presently grant, that man might be happy here,
whatever became of him hereafter; and that a wise man (in no other notion than
the Heathen took him) were certainly an happy man.

In case of Prudence, as I define it, I will agree with him who says, that
while she is Nullum numen abest, si sit prudentia --
present, a Deity is seldom absent, at least, there is a Deity ready at hand,
to assist and help; but I do not agree with him, that she (I mean Prudence) was
ever yet within the power of any Mortal, or at his beck or call, or that I am
able to Monstro, quod ipse tibi possis dare --
show her to any man, in such manner, as that he may lay hold on her, and
detain her. He (with others) who seems to undertake so much, has done no more,
than what Solomon had done before him, endeavored to show us the vanity of all
things; which indeed, is a prospect from Prudence, and which, most sober men
see by fits; and yet often court those things, they beheld as deceitful, and
which usually carry repentance and sorrow, as their attendants; So as, to see
vanity, does not amount to a clear sight of all things conducing to Happiness.

Prudence is a flitting companion of human Nature, if she rise with us, she may
hap not to lie down with us; and if she lie down with us, she may hap not to
rise with us. If the Spaniard had his wish, and the World should be able to
rise wise one morning, it is to be doubted, or feared, above half of it would
go to bed foolish. So much is a man apt to differ from himself, and that from
causes sometimes appearing, and sometimes not. A great and wise Statesman was
wont to say (from some experience it is like) that that was seldom, or never
good, and sound Counsel, which was given soon after dinner; and surely there
may be found, many other, and far greater obstructions to Prudence, than fumes
arising from a full stomach. The Soul is subject to many imperfections, as long
as it is subjected to work in a Body, and to become tired, as well as stifled or
blinded. If Alexander could always behold sleep, as the earnest of death; a man
of a meaner capacity, may see it and term it the emblem of folly; and find,
that his Intellect, that is the better part of his Intellect (for I do not mean
his Imagination but his Reason) is not able sometime to watch for his will, one
hour, nay one moment.

We may sometimes find Reason, or Prudence in the Soul (that is Reason in her
best native dress) and behold her as an handmaid to Happiness, and quiet, and
she may often prove no less, and so we claim and challenge her to be under our
jurisdiction, when ever we find her; but yet still, she is often out of the way
when we want her, and would have her, nay, when we have most need of her. We
may think to borrow her, or lend her, and endeavor to show her to another; but
if we do, we must lend the party our eyes too, at the same instant and season;
for he who is Prudent himself, if at any time he will take upon him to make
another so, had need be as well able to infuse his own, or some discerning
Spirit into him, as afford him his rules and documents to walk by. We are too
ignorant, and blind, I fear, in finding out, or discerning the manner of
conveyance of very human Prudence, as we call it; whence it is, and by what
ways and methods it is attained. Prescriptions or directions for Prudence in the
Soul, are good, and yet may be compared to our Physicians methodus medendi,
toward recovery or health of the Body; the method may be orderly observed, and
a man never the better, it may be somewhat worse. The best and most prudential
saying, is no otherwise to be looked upon, than a Recipe, which works on
several Subjects several Effects, and several Effects on the same Subject, at
several Times and Seasons. We may grant Solomon to be as great a Doctor as any,
in that case: but none of his precepts are so far approved, as to be
Universally infallible, and without exception. It is generally true indeed,
which he says (as for instance in this) Prove. 15.1.
A soft answer turns away wrath; but we meet sometimes, or at particular
seasons, with tempers and constitutions, where a rough, blustering, or bold
answer shall soonest work that effect. Though he generally tells us, there is a
time for all things, he could never prefix that time, to particular occasions,
or particulars to time; that must be left to every man's Prudence, or rather to
God. That may be Prudence to day, which will not prove so to morrow. For though
we are able sometimes to judge rightly of another disease, we are apt to be
deceived in the secret inclination, or sudden alteration of tempers, with
which we deal. And therefore he himself is forced to leave us at large, with
some such excellent general sayings as these, Prove. 16.1.
The preparations of the heart are in man, but the answer of the tongue is of
the Lord. v. 3.
Commit thy works unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be directed. v. 9.
The heart of man purposes his way, but the Lord directs his steps. v. 33.
The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord.
Prove. 20.24.
Man's goings are of the Lord, how can a man then understand his own way? And,
that power to a please a man's very Sense at any time, even to eat and drink,
was Eccles. 2.24.
from the hand of God. As if when all were said, that could be said, there were
a provident wise disposal of all things, beyond the reach of human capacity, to
which he referred us.

A quick discerning sight of Reason (often by the level of Justice and Charity
though Gods gracious direction) which some men have pretty ready at hand, and
in a sort fixed in the Soul; has many and great advantages here, and were to be
wished, if but for this one attendant, which St. Paul glances at, that a man
might suffer fools gladly; That is, not fret and vex himself, at the beholding
the inherent folly and madness of some men in the World. He who is at any time
endowed with this discerning gift of the Soul, ought to own it with all
thankfulness, but yet, there is no appropriating (though attributing may be
sometimes allowable and tolerable) of divine gifts to human nature, lest in
saying, Eccles. 7.23.
We will be wise, we find with Solomon, at the same instant, It is far from us.

It is sufficient to render human Nature somewhat unhappy, and incapable of any
settled tranquillity of mind; that this one seeming inherent gift, or Attendant
in the Soul, Right Reason, or Prudence, showing her self sometimes as our
Vassal, does at other times become so treacherous, as to desert and forsake us,
and leave us only light enough to have the want of her espied. It is, and will
be owned as some point of knowledge, to observe the cloudiness which sometimes
hangs over us: To discern our want of so clear a sight into very human affairs,
as others are at the same time endowed withal, or we perhaps at other times;
How often weaker eyes, in estimation, outvye us as we say, and that we are
forced as it were, to borrow, or take our light, or have our Candle lighted
from them, as I may say. Now if we do not at such time withal consider and
behold our selves, rather a subject of infused light, capable of receiving more
or less, according as it may further the good will and pleasure, or secret
purpose of some Almighty Power, than an independent light of our selves, or
shining at any time by our own proper power, or strength; Every view or espial
of such defect, which is often incident to the wisest man, must necessarily
torment, and vex us: And no man, how wise soever, is able to prevent these
billows, arising from such his often cogitations, nor able to shroud himself
from this very kind of storm, or be at rest in his mind, without recourse to
some such shelter as this, that there is some Eternal light, which lights
every man which comes into the World, according to his good will and pleasure,
and from whom every good and perfect gift descends, as from the father of
lights. And therefore I am prone to think, those Heathens so much in esteem
with us, either secretly owned all their common abilities in this kind, as
divine gifts, without assuming a self-sufficiency; or yet thinking themselves
wise by Fate (for so it is likely they called Providence) did in a manner
render up their Souls to their Donor, or Author (from whom how much further
they might be enlightened in the end, I know not) or else rather palliated a
tranquillity of mind, than really felt any. If they had any thing of Wisdom, or
foresight, as we say, they must needs espy their own defects and weakness, and
that view must necessarily beget some disease in the Soul, unless they were
able to behold or believe, a wise disposal of all things, as well as an
inevitable one. For as to any thing under no better notion than Fate, Destiny,
or Necessity, as well blind as inexorable, it would afford a man rather ground
for discontent, and sooner prompt him to curse his fate, than acquiesce in it.
But if any man will admit they beheld an irresistible, but yet all-seeing and
wise power, under any of those names, I will not quarrel, or dispute with him
about words.

Thus have my thoughts sometime rambled in relation to Happiness here, or a
desire of any thing here, to make us so. Never let us envy any man for his
outward accessions; They will do us no good if we had them; for his inward
indowments, we know not what they are, or how easy and pleasant in his Soul, or
how they would fit us if we enjoyed them, or the like. Let him who is able only
to satiate the Soul, moderate our desires here, and make us wise, only, unto
Salvation; and then are we happy (even here) whether we know it, or no.

Epist. IX. Wherein the Author maintains Divine Wisdom and Providence, ruling
in, and over the Soul of man, more especially, and more apparently (if
considered) than any work of the Creation: And that the Affections in the heart
of man seem that part of the Soul, whereon God more especially exercises his
prerogative, moulding and changing them on the sudden, to his secret purposes,
beyond, and even contrary to any foresight, conjecture, or Imagination of the
very Soul it self.
THere are already extant, no doubt, the footsteps or Monuments of many more
excellent Souls than mine, which have endeavored by their Writings, unknown to
me, to render conspicuous to the World, or to a succession of Souls after them,
a constant and continued operation of one only Eternal intellectual wise mind,
in every the most vulgar and ordinary motion, of the most common visible work
in the Creation. And surely he who has but the ordinary discerning Spirit of a
man, is either strangely fascinated, or else had need go out of this World, and
be transplanted into some other, before he can become capable to deny in his
heart the belief of such a thing, it is so obvious to sense in each particular.
Nature, as we call it, has no such certain impress upon its habitude or motion,
as that we can in any case rely thereon; for when she seems to intend one
thing, Providence draws forth another, not contrary to Nature. And upon the
most diligent search thereinto, we cannot arrive to any satisfaction, or come
to an end of our enquiries, but after all we doubt, and wonder and are
nonplus'd; Cause direct us to Cause, and all to one that is the first and
Supreme; insomuch as every Herb, according to the old saying, is sufficient to
demonstrate a God, and give some higher title to the cause of all being and
motion, than Nature.

The Soul of man, and its strange excellent faculties, has not seldom happened
to be as you may perceive, the wonderful subject of my thoughts; and therefore
I would not seem here to descend any lower than that, to find out, or maintain
a providence; nor endeavor to extract that out of a Fly, which is more
visible, and may far sooner be perceived in man himself, if he could or would
but look into himself.

That the Soul of man (or Spirit and life in man as some would) is that work,
or extract in Nature, in respect to which, all sublunary things seem at first
to have been created, and yet continue subservient, will not be denied by any,
I believe. And therefore in all likelihood, that, if any, may be esteemed a
free Agent according to Nature, and out of the Dominion, or Government, of any
superior distinct power from Nature, and so work as regularly and orderly as
any other, according to the common course of Nature. But if any the least
inspection be made into it, it will quickly be found, and observed to be more
various and strange (I might say exorbitant) in its motion, than any other work
in Nature, and more strangely stopped, and turned in its course, so as its
mutation cannot be rationally imputed to the dominion of any thing, under the
bare names of Nature, Fate, Chance, or the like, nor any other thing than some
Eternal Intellectual mind. For if it be prone by Nature to commit all those
acts we term or call evil, beyond that of any other Creature, as it too often
happens by experience: If it at any time work that which is good, above and
beyond that of other Creatures too; which is as visible; then necessarily,
there is some power visibly exerted over the Soul of man, beyond that of
Nature. Which thing I somewhat wonder, how it escapes the daily observation, or
notice of the most ordinary Intellectual mind.

Surely the Soul only passes with it self for a free Agent, while it is busy
and intent in looking outward; and not while it looks inward, by reflex upon
its past and present motions. For whatever we think we see, or know at other
times, we then suspect at least, whether, clearly and truly we see, or know at
all; or how, or to what end and purpose we act, or move; and are enforced
secretly to own our selves foolish, and miserable, until some unhappy gale of
Pride, fill or extend the Sails of our Imagination again. For certainly no man
ever looked soberly and narrowly into himself, but found himself, that is the
best part of himself, not only a prisoner, and underrestraint, but an absolute
Subject, and Vassal to some Superior Power; and so under a necessary, and legal
constraint.

If we behold the folly and madness incident to man, and seeming inherent in
our Nature, we may well admire, how we happen to live in so much order and
peace, as we do. If we look upon that Viceroy in us, Reason, to be of any
absolute restrictive power in us, and our own by Nature, we may well admire,
and wonder at our daily mad extravagant follies; And therefore we cannot
adjudge that, other, than placed as a Guard or Sentinel, and now and then as a
Monitor, or Controller in us; but of no power to command, and so must
necessarily yield such power to be in some Superintendent, over and above what
we are able to find out in Nature, or the like.

I have thought, as well as others doubtless before me, that the World is ruled
by Wisdom, but not ours; that our folly is sufficiently apparent to our selves,
and that through our folly, rightly and humbly discerned, an infinite Wisdom
shines or glimmers, somewhat to be seen; And farther, that we live in such
order as we do, is not from any inherent prudence in our Governors (the
contrary every man is too apt to espy) but a Wisdom shown through their
weakness, plainest seen, and best extracted (so it be not done with an evil
eye) from beholding their weakness. Which Wisdom, did we not sometime behold,
as well as their folly, we should never be able so much as to speak rest unto
our Soul here, or dethrone, or keep Fear from an absolute dominion in it.

We can readily grant and allow to a man, such as we term Wise, a kind of
ability to carry on his designs, and intended purposes by others, in such a
secret, close, and covert way and manner, as that, those his subservient
Agents, although they chiefly act as from him, and for him, shall imagine and
think the while, they act all along for themselves; and that there were no
other secret spring, or engine that moved them, than their own Affections, or
that light, by which their Affections moved (as some would have it) their own
proper Intellect; and to this our Wise man, we can afford the glory of the
Action, when we see the End; and pass by, as unregarded, those Instruments,
which seemed to carry the greatest stroke in the affair, while it was in
action. And it is strange, we cannot sometime move one step higher, and afford
as much to some Divine Essence, to which power is as inseparably annexed, as
Wisdom; since from our very reason we are able to affirm, it must necessarily
be such a kind of Being, that works all in all. Man cannot, as we say, make a
Mercury of any logg, but at best and utmost, conjecturally pick out, and make
use of such instrument as is fittest for his purpose; and he is a wise man, who
can do that: but to the first and principal Mover, in such necessary concurrent
action, there is absolutely requisite, such a power, as is able to fashion and
wholly to mould, and change the Souls of men, to secret intents and purposes,
rather than lead and incline them, and that is God; through whose Grace we now
and then see and behold, how those wise men of the World, who thought they had
wrought others to work pursuant to their own wills, intents, and purposes, have
all the while indiscernibly (by themselves) and ignorantly, fulfilled the wise
and secret will of the Almighty, (manifest in the sequel) rather than their own.

Some men may, at some special times, think themselves naturally Wise, and
please themselves with an imaginary conceit of self-ability, and that such and
such things, proceed from (or at least succeed according to) their foresight.
But this seldom holds or lasts longer, than their blind Affections are
gratified by it, or in some measure pleased, with a good success as we call it,
or prosperity in the World: For it is at such time chiefly, that men take their
own brains for able Contrivers, and Surveyors; and think themselves wholly
beholding to them. Let but any thing cross, or grievously wound those
Affections, and then we find the greatest Philosopher and Naturalist, at a
loss, and his Tongue becomes his own, rather than his Brain (though strictly
neither is so) and he will be prone, readily to cry out Digitus Dei, and behold
that finger in a storm, and through a cloud, which he saw not before, though it
were as apparent; he will then see and believe the greatness and glory of the
Sun, above other Bodies, by its visible Bow only; which holds no longer than
the clouds continue.

And therefore it is a great mercy to any one, to have this vail opened by
crosses or otherwise; that he may look in, and behold the slippery places, men
are set in here, and the place of rest which is otherwhere prepared. For if
there be any Sanctuary (in the ordinary notion we use the word) for the Soul to
flee unto for present ease and rest (over and above that quiet the Soul finds
in an Universal Love and Charity which it has for all Creatures) it is a firm
belief, that there is the hand of a wise God, permissively at least, in the
disposition and actions of all men. And truly I could not wish the veriest
enemy a greater displeasure, I believe, than to think otherwise; or pray
against him in worse terms, than Fabricius did at supper time, upon hearing the
Grecian Philosophy, and the opinion of Epicurus, that the immortal Gods took
their pleasure without regard of human affairs; God grant that Pyrrhus and the
Samnites be of that opinion, while they have War with us!

A Wisdom in the Deity, not for it self, but over us, and for us, is that
gracious and happy sight, which must keep us from sinking in a storm. A belief
effected through our Reason; that Ps. 93.4.
though the waves of this Sea (wherein we at present wade) are mighty, and rage
horribly, yet the Lord that dwells on high, is mightier. The Ps. 17.19.
beholding here his presence in righteousness, which when we awake we shall be
satisfied with, is some present ease and satisfaction; and he who beholds it
not, in some degree and measure, is certainly always in a deplorable, and often
in a desperate condition. Ps. 32.7.
This is the place to hide us in. Ps. 71.3.
This is that strong hold, whereunto we may always resort. This is that, by
which we must be v. 6.
holden up, and not be Ps. 37.19.
confounded in the perilous time. Indeed the whole Book of Psalms, wisely made
choice of for our daily Service, is to my apprehension, a Cordial Compound of
Prayer, and Praise, in relation to this subject, God's Providence; an
invocation, Ps. 94.1.
that he to whom vengeance belongs, would show himself, or a Magnificat for
his daily showing himself, and contains little other matter.

Ps. 46.8, 9, 10.
Hither (into this Sanctuary of Providence) must we come and behold what
destruction is made upon the Earth, who it is that makes Wars to cease, and
breaks the Bow and knappeth the Spear in sunder, etc. and from thence, Be
still then, etc. For he whose Spirit is once become thoroughly troubled, from
any outward accident, and can again be still, and at a calm, without beholding
the provident Wisdom in the Deity ruling over us, has a deeper prospect into
Nature, than ever my Reason could allow me; or else has found out some strange
imaginary cure, beyond (I think) most rational sober men. Deus refugium, the
title of the Psalm, and twice there repeated, the God of Jacob is our refuge,
must be (I think, and I doubt not but I think it rationally) Our hope and
strength, a very present help in trouble.

It may seem a needless discourse to you (since it is not like to be seen of
others) to dispute for God, and talk of Providence, when I in no wise doubt,
but that you always move with a fixed eye thither; And to think to prevail over
other men, and settle them in that opinion, may seem almost as vain a labor to
him, who maintains the Affections in the Soul of man, to be the principal
Spring in its motion, and those Affections to be at the sole disposition of an
Almighty Power, and out of the reach of human battery, which the Intellect
seems not. For every Soul is better able, even of it self, to behold truth,
than embrace or affect it, and we find it more easy to awaken men's Reason, and
inform their judgment, than either reclaim or guide their Affections. But for
that, we only deliver some grounds of our opinion to be considered, if ever
they come to be seen of others.

That in the extraordinary, at least, motion or inclination and turn of the
Affections chiefly, there needs the concurrence of a Divine power, and that
there is nothing of casualty, fate, or chance in the case; If I should allege
Scripture, it might seem to many, a begging of the question, and I should
obtain little credence, to tell them from thence, that God Ps. 33.15.
fashioneth all the hearts of men, that the Prove. 21.1.
King's heart (and so every man's) is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of
water, he turns it whither soever he will: And to produce from thence
particular instances or examples of God's changing Readiness heart, after he had
made him King, and that the band of men which went with him upon such change,
were only those whose 1 Samuel 10.9. and 26.
hearts God had touched: And that it was he only that Acts 16.14.
opened the heart of Lydia, so as she attended unto the things which were
spoken of Paul: His mollifying Laban's heart toward Jacob, Genesis 31.29.
when 'twas in the power of his hands, as he says, to do him hurt; And his
brother Esau's too, who had no less power, as might be thought, and a will too,
to do it; may seem to many the repetition of a vain story. But to allege that
strange instance of Pharaoh moving first against the light of Reason, and after
acting in despite of many signal wonders, for that God had hardened his heart,
as it is repeated several times in the story, may seem much more so. I would not
be suspected of you, or any in the least once to imagine, that any man sins by
the direct guidance of Providence (there is another power that has a recourse
to the heart, as the chief Shop or Workhouse in the Soul of man, and Joh. 13.2.
St. John tells us who it was, that put it into the heart of Judas to betray
his Master) but I think the heart is only bent and inclined to evil, when God
lets it alone to it self, or the bare light of weak Reason, and leaves us
destitute of his help; And in that very case, God so orders the event of sin
by his providence, as that it becomes serviceable, to his most Wise, most Just,
and most Holy purposes; And further that when the heart has once wedded it self
to some particular object, through the deceitfulness of sin or the like, there
is no divorce to be had or effected but by the special assistance of divine
goodness toward the Soul of man. For notwithstanding Reason may be convinced
by the arguments of another, and there may be a representation of its
conviction to the Affections, yet it holds on; Reason may, and often does beat
upon the heart, but it cannot enter, so as to obtain any possession; as if it
were to show there were a superintendent power, which shuts, and no man opens,
and opens and no man shuts, and that that part of man, were more God's peculiar
than any other. Thus we find it in the abovesaid case, where Moses and Aaron
were sufficient to convince an obstinate Pharaoh in point of Intellect, (as he
often acknowledges it) but God had the sole dominion over the heart, and
permits it now and then to be contracted and shut up, against all human light,
Romans 9.17*
That his power might be shown, and his name might be declared throughout all
the Earth, as St. Paul tells the Romans from that place.

Affection in man (as in my thoughts of the Soul I have already touched) seems
often the most disorderly, and irregular thing in the course of Nature: And
therefore could I once prevail with any man so far, as seriously to consider
the strange motion of it, in himself or others; I do think it might prove the
readiest way, to quiet it for a time, and dispel those misty clouds which are
raised in the Soul, by the very restless struggling of the Affections; and
enlighten it to behold, a constant working providence over all its faculties,
and especially to win and regain that very part of it (for what is our
understanding to our Creator, but to admire him? but our Affections are given
to embrace him) and to have our Affections become inflamed thitherward.

Sometimes our Intellect cannot but observe how strangely and suddenly the
Affections are cooled, moved, or restrained beyond its foresight or prospect.
We see, or hear, or read a thing an hundred times, and it may be then think our
Intellect clear, and discerning too, and yet not become affected with it; And
it may be these our waters, at some other times, are rapidly moved, not from
the Imagination, I shall rather choose to say, from some Angel coming down at
certain seasons; that Assistant, I mean, or Framer of the Intellect, that
spirat quo vult. Otherwise the same words could never strike so much deeper
into one only, it may be of a great Auditory; and he none of the quickest
apprehension, or naturally or usually most discerning Spirit; and that to the
subduing of an unruly Affection, equally predominant in many others of the same
Auditory.

I know there is no man, but has loved, and feared, and joyed sometimes,
without any apparent or discernible cause, to himself or any other; and if he
would or could but observe so much, he might possibly discern somewhat more
than chance in the disposition if not Creation of his Soul. Some, and not the
meanest Wits have stood at a maze at the Affections motion, especially; And
though they looked no higher than themselves, yet terminated in some occult
cause, such as the blindness, and sometimes edge, and sometimes dullness of
their Affections. It may perhaps seem to many but a mean distich of the Poet,
Non amo te Sabadi, nec possum dicere quare; Hoc tantum possum dicere, non
amote; but I must crave leave to judge otherwise of it, and that he saw by
that, as far as ordinary human Reason is able to show us; and I take his
meaning to be, that such is the condition of man, as that notwithstanding,
there be often presented to the Affections, an invitation without exception,
and sufficient ground and reason offered to them, to embrace and accept; yet
they are stubborn and decline it, and want something more than natural human
light, to bring them to compliance. There are thousands doubtless have received
all the endearments imaginable from particular persons, and thought well of
them, but never heartily affected them: And on the other side, notwithstanding
all the scorn and contempt, injuries and affronts they could receive from
others, have yet heartily and truly loved them; So as it is no wonder the
Heathen amongst all their Gods, thought only Love blind, and so represented him
to us.

Indeed upon the beholding, and consideration, of any the least Plant or
Insect, there is a glance offered, of some power wonderful and to be admired;
But that power is chiefly to be seen in ordering, ruling, and determining the
Passions and Affections of men, sometimes preventing them from breaking forth
in an Insurrection, and then suddenly quenching the fire, that the World be not
thereby in a greater flame. This does the Psalmist ascribe to him, Psalm. 76.10.
Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee, the remainder of wrath shall thou
restrain.

I do think some rational account in Nature might be given of the motion of
celestial Orbs, and no less of the Spirits of Beasts, Why there is so much, and
such apparency of gentleness, and meekness, and patience, in the Lamb, and in
the Dove; and why at all times the contrary, and so quick and ready a will of
revenge in the Be, and the Wasp; that Passion and Affection in several
Creatures should so much differ, and yet the one not exceed the other in
Intellect: But why several men sprung from one and the same stock in Nature,
should now and then resemble each Creature in point of Affection, and exceed
them either way, I know not, unless by such a wise working Power, as ordering
the result of all human Affections to its glory in the end, should permit the
sometimes mad pursuit of them; Whereof Reason as his present gift, is
sufficient to demonstrate their Error, ^^d so justly condemn them, and Grace
only to reclaim them.

That men should adventure their Lives, and Fortunes, yea their Souls too, and
hack and hew one another Bodies in pieces, to please the appetite of an
ambitious and covetous Prince, nay perhaps some less apparent Meteor, some one
or two Subjects designing either to build on the ruins of others abroad, or
divert men's eyes for a while, from looking into their own corrupt, and base
designs and practices at home, or the like. What is it? but some base rubbish
of Affection in the generality of mankind; sympathetically (as I may say)
kindled, by the heat of some ambitious desire in particular Persons, or highly
inflamed in them at least, by the Devil or some evil Spirit. I am sure there is
nothing of Reason or Prudence (nay or Nature) could lead the generality of
mankind in companies, into such design; since you may quickly and easily
convince almost every particular Person of them, that it is safer and better to
be quiet at home.

But when this fire is once thoroughly kindled in a Nation, and every ones hand
is against his Brother, he knows not why; How strangely and how suddenly do we
see this fire, (when there is apparent matter enough left) put out and
extinguished, and those scattered who delight in Wars? On the other side
notwithstanding the fierceness of man (which every way turns to Gods Praise as
the Psalmist says) how readily and easily, do we often daily see a multitude
governed by such Cobweb human Laws, as they are able at any time to break
through, and want not (the greatest part) will to their power, and yet they are
led often all their days like sheep, by the hands of weaker and worse shepherds
than Moses and Aaron; who feed them not, but rather poll, and sheer, or fleece
them without resistance. For either of which, rather than the stay of the
raging of the Sea, if any man can pierce so deep into that thing he calls
Nature, as to show me any single undeniable cause therein (nay I might say any
colorable cause) other than the Will of one single, Eternal, Wise Power, for
secret purposes only known unto it self, I will adhere to him, and relinquish
that opinion I at present hold of Providence.

EPIST. X. Of Credulity, and Incredulity, the rise of both, and that Credulity
of the two, is of more pernicious consequence. And of the Evil of imposing on
others, or creating or raising a belief on false or uncertain Principles.
SInce I have elsewhere as well disowned my abilities, as disclaimed any call
or Authority, to treat of that incomparable divine gift, Faith, in a strict and
saving Sense; And withal made some kind of confession of my own: I hope, if in
declaring here my opinion of the dangers attending Credulity, and evil
consequence of imposing on men's belief, I do by way of introduction, and making
some inquiry into the ordinary acceptance, as well as proper signification of
the word, Faith, a little touch upon it, in that gracious Sense; it may be
without scandal and offense.

The word, Faith, is often taken, for that which should be ever, the ground of
it, Truth; As when we commonly say, there is no Faith in man, we mean thereby,
there is no truth in man, or just ground for a belief; and so that saying,
Nulla fides, pietasve viris, etc. is to be understood. So the word faithful is
often meant or intended for true, as that of (...), which we render in one
place 1 Timothy 1.15.
This is a faithful saying, and in another place render the same words chapter 3.1.
This is a true saying, and such indeed as may obtain an assent and raise a
Faith in us. Thus we also conjoyn the words in the oath of fealty or de
fidelitate, and render it in the administration to be true and faithful. And
most certainly, whenever Faith or faithfulness is spoken of God, it must
necessarily be intended of his truth; as where it is said Romans 3.3. and 4.
Shall their unbelief make the Faith of God without effect? God forbid, yea let
God be true etc. So, 1 Cor. 1.9.
God is faithful by whom etc. 1 These. 5.25.
Faithful is he that calls you, who also will do it. There are, they say, who
have reckoned up above twenty several significations of the word Faith in
Scripture, but I Will not meddle therewith, or yet trouble you, if I can avoid
it, by confounding it with the bare cogitative faculty, but distinguish the one
from the other as near as I can.

Faith, or Belief, in the strict genuine Sense, and proper meaning thereof, I
take to be, a conviction or persuasion of the Intellective Faculty, to accept a
thing for true which it cannot digest into any kind of knowledge, or receive
under the colorable notion of knowledge. Or more generally thus: An assent or
persuasion of the whole mind; Because the Will, and the Affections, if any
powerful effect be wrought upon the Understanding, concur for a time therein.
This the word (...) signifies, which is derived from the word (...), persuadeo,
and therefore Joh. 3.36.
the Apostle rehearsing the saying of St. John Baptist (as we translate it) He
that believes on the Son, has everlasting life, and he that believes not the
Son, shall not see life, by way of opposition one to another, makes use of the
words (...) and (...) together; And the like may be found in other places.

Now as to Faith in the most gracious Sense (as well as conscience of which I
have already treated) I do in all humility think it to have its rise and first
work (I will not say from, but) with Reason; Nay I think that both Faith and
Conscience are Effects in and through Reason* in the one case as Reason is
passive, in the other case as it is active. Conscience being a result from
Reason's whispers in an advised active deliberation; and Faith being a result
(through God's grace) from Reason's silence in an advised yielding, upon a kind
of passive deliberation. For truly as Conscience in my opinion is no other than
an effect in the Soul wrought from the bare (seeming) stroke of Reason, so I do
believe that in the birth of Faith, such I mean as we talk of in a justifying
notion, there is some stroke upon Reason too; but withal I acknowledge there is
somewhat more viz. an insensible (though Hearing may be the instrumental means
of its coming) stroke from the Divine Power and Goodness; A lightning from
above Acts 15.9.
purifying the heart, melting the Affections, and new molding them, Ephesians. 1.19.
according to the working of his mighty power. And this is that precious
Heavenly Balm, by which we lenify and heal those wounds made by the stroke of
Reason, in some case of Conscience; and such wounds there will be now and then
occasioned by the Will's disobedience to Reason's dictates, and serving the
Affections.

Now of this strange work in the Soul, Faith, no man can certainly point to any
peculiar instant in which it is wrought (as he may to the strokes of Reason in
point of Conscience) neither can we discern any thing of the reality or truth
thereof, further than by a general propension to good and a general aversion
from evil: And which we cannot by any other way show to others, if we would
show it, than by our works. Indeed the very same may be said of Conscience; We
cannot so much as show that to others, either whether there be such a thing in
us or no, or whether it be good, or whether it be evil (if there be such a
thing moving in us) unless by the Affections embracing that which is good and
rejecting that which is evil: For from thence it may be collected (other men
having the like Reason with us) whether the Affections are obedient to Reason,
or run by Sense.

They are both blows or influences likewise upon the Affections, and there is a
kind of concurrence or meeting together of all the faculties of the Soul, as I
humbly conceive, in both cases. We are told with what other part than the
Brain, man believes unto Salvation, and therefore I do here, in the case of a
good and perfect Faith, think the word Confidence to be most proper: For though
it be a word which some by misuse have rendered of no good sound; yet St. Paul
makes use of it, in this very case, 2 Cor. 5.6, 7, 8.
Therefore are we always confident, etc. (for we walk by Faith, not by Sight)
we are confident I say, and willing etc. repeating it again. For when a
complete victory is obtained as well over the Affections (and by consequence
the Will) as over Reason, there is a confidence in the Soul, a reliance on
foreign aid, a trust. But yet certainly since there is no disputing
argumentative faculty in the Soul but Reason, neither can there be properly a
persuasion of ought else; the thing is chiefly effected in and through Reason,
though not by Reason: and if Reason at any time be quite left out in either
case, I much doubt whether there will be a good Confidence, or a good
Conscience. If men would we should behold their Faith, let us see their Reason
too attending on it, or coming after it, and permit us likewise to make use of
ours; which if they do, they may be assured we shall have an eye to their
works, and not much regard ought else.

There is ever most talk of those things, we least understand, or are able to
perceive or judge of. Whatsoever defects there are in the Soul, or whatsoever
Errors in any of the faculties happen to be committed; As when men sin against
the very plain light of Reason, if they are blamed, if there be an endeavor to
reclaim them, they are apt to talk of their faith, and their conscience, and
take them up as weapons, not only to put by the strokes of others, who wish or
would have them morally honest, but even sometimes make use of the same to
offend also. But when the one or the other is thus brought forth (I will not
say to view, I may say to ostentation) doubtless St. Paul's words in relation
to one, is no unfit reply for either, Romans 14.22.
Have thou Faith? (have thou Conscience?) have it to thy self before God. It Is
He alone can judge of the sincerity of both, but if such would approve them to
men, and show their Faith to be true and their Conscience to be good, they must
make it evident by such fruits as are proper to them and arise from them,
wherever they are; for Faith works by Love: and a good Conscience, being a
ready obedience of the Affections to the dictates of Reason, will always act in
conformity to its laws. These are by the Apostle joined together, 1 Timothy 1.19.
1 Timothy 3.9.
Having faith and a good conscience, and so we are willing to leave them, and
by no means separate them, and pray they be not only joyfully embraced by all,
but better apprehended by some. Faith, as it is a bare human persuasion in the
Soul (for from thence the word is properly derived as I have said) of the truth
or falsehood of a thing, or the good or evil, lawfulness or unlawfulness
thereof, is no more than a bare assent or consent of Reason to the one or the
other; but upon Reason's deceit (for no opinion can alter the nature of a thing
as it is in it self, but the same remains as it was, good or evil) the
Affections are set upon a very dangerous precipice, because subordinate to
Reason by a Law of Nature; if they obey, they must leap with Reason into a gulf
on the one side, and if they disobey, they fall into a miry quagg on the other
side, and make good the Apostle's saying, in that very sense of human
persuasion, whatever is not of Faith is sin.

Reason is requisite and necessary in either case to the creation of that thing
we call Faith, be it natural, or be it supernatural: for that no irrational
Creature, be it of never so quick a capacity, can be said in anycase properly
to believe, I shall make evident in the conclusion. Now though Reason in its
nature or original be as well an heroic and valiant faculty, as the most noble
and generous in the Soul, and such a faculty as will not presently yield upon
every summons, and yields only when it finds an impossibility of victory, and
there is left no cause as well as strength to defend it self against all
opposition; yet sometimes by a kind of supine negligence and want of exercise
of this most noble faculty, it becomes so degenerate, that it not only permits
the passions to rule in the Soul as they list, but becomes as it were
subordinate to that of other men's, and seems to move only according to their
directions.

This is that thing which I call or term, Credulity, sometimes a weakness, but
most commonly a laziness in the Intellective faculty; and a conformity of
Reason, or an approbation or allowance thereof, to whatsoever is brought before
it, without due examination and trial. This is it, which has caused so many
vulgar, as well as dangerous and pernicious Errors; and I dare say, were it not
for it, that is a laziness of the understanding, Idolatry had never been, or at
least never took footing, as we say, in the World; For never any man was yet so
stupid and blockish, as upon consideration and due examination, or the least
resistive operation of his Intellective faculty to believe the work of his own
hands to excel himself, and be brought to fall down before it and worship it,
and think that it were a greater crime to dismember it than his brother.

Now though the contrary, Incredulity, may be thought sometimes to have its
rise from worse Principles in Nature, and to be, as it often is, the effect of
a stubborn refractory Will, or rather the Master's whom that Will serves, viz.
corrupt Affections, so that we find the Saying after a sort verified in
particular persons, Non persuadebis, etiam si persuaseris: Yet is there in
truth a persuasion, and the fault remains in the inferior faculties of the
Soul, which though they may be more violent in their course, do not usually
hold out so long; Nay sometimes the Affections (being as I have said in the
hands of God and turned as he pleases) do on the sudden unexpectedly comply
with his Vicegerent in the Soul, Reason, if that be in the right way, though
they disobey its first Summons. But if at any time the fault be in the
Intellect, by negligence and a tame compliance, they then err by a kind of
Authority, and being led by a blind Guide, such as makes not use of its own
eyes at least, they necessarily both fall into a Ditch. A man may do himself
much hurt by always keeping that inward door of the Soul, Reason, close shut
and barred, and believing nothing beyond Sense, that outward Port of it; and
such an one may be termed perverse as well as incredulous (as our Savior once
called his Disciples) but to leave it always ready open, and become like a child
Ephesians. 4.14.
tossed to and fro, with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and
cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive others, is of more
dangerous consequence. Those incredulous Disciples of our Savior, believed to
good effect at last; and some have observed of Thomas, how his Incredulity at
first, wrought a good effect at last, and proved a stronger confirmation of our
Savior's Bodily Resurrection, than the ready belief of the other.

Besides a perverse Incredulity, caused by the Affections too much addiction to
Sense, and to be led only thereby, there may be I confess and sometimes is, a
kind of Skeptical Infidelity, or Academical reservation in man. A doubting
ferment in the Soul, neither expellible by Reason or Sense for the present; But
this is rare, attending now and then the most quick and searching brain, and
does often proceed from some kind of humility in the Soul, and then likely in
the end, terminates in a clear and settled persuasion; For he who is not apt to
doubt, will scarce believe any thing with assurance or as he ought to do.

That blessed fruitful Plant in Nature, Charity, on which I have thought, and
cannot but think, every good and perfect secondary gift, is, and must be
ingrafted, seems very apt and ready, as well as powerful, to win Reason's
assent, to accept things delivered for true; and so, as St. Paul says (as of it
self) It believes all things etc. But surely there is no more meant by that,
than concerns the Fidelity of the Messenger or Relator; that is, we are thereby
inclined to think that that man verily believes the truth of those things,
which he would persuade my Reason to accept for true; And truly he who has but
the least grain of perfect Charity in him, can ordinarily do little less for
the most fantastic Dissenter or even a modest sober Turk, than thus to judge
favorably of his well-meaning (although 'twere to be wished, the Intellect did
not now and then find just ground to rebuke that good Affection in the case)
But now should I, or any man, be so charitable, as readily to believe the truth
of the thing it self; or that there is a firm indubitable ground for any human
opinion or exposition obtruded upon me, when I yet continue conscious of my own
Errors, and daily defects in point of judgment in like cases (as surely every
man is) I should have no Charity left (which men say begins at home) for my
self. And in admitting an infallibility in any other person, without consulting
my own Reason; that very infallible person, however he pleased himself with my
belief, would judge me a fit Subject for Anticyra.

It Is good for every man to consult his own Reason thoroughly by it self, before
he admit any other to take place in his Soul, and to be possessed (or
prepossessed as we say) with any another Spirit than his own. I am verily
persuaded there is no man living, let his Affections be up in Arms, and as
furious as they will, or can be, against me, for instance, but his own native
Reason (if he have any) consulted and advised barely and simply of it self,
will admonish him that he ought not to destroy me. Which thing is a blessed
curb in Nature, for the preservation of us Mortals, against the destruction of
one another, and so I have that little security in Nature besides God's daily
preventing and restraining hand. But if once Reason in man become so facile and
pliable, as to have that original engravement wiped out, and defaced, and admit
the impression of another; And another man shall become (in God's name shall I
say? No) master of his Reason, I have nothing left to trust to for my
preservation, but Gods extraordinary wonderful providence. If man can be so far
persuaded, as to think he does God service by any unjust or bloody act, or
helping to promote or further the same (which no man's own Reason of it self
ever drove him to; his passion might, and the gratifying another's passion
might induce the persuasion) certainly he is credulous, and credulity in that
case is very dangerous which we need not go so far as Greece for a sad
consequence of, and talk of Agamemnon only, when every place affords one,
though not the like.

This kind of persuasion, which some would have to be termed Faith, is chiefly
wrought through an inclination in mankind, to what we call Religion, wherein
St. Paul tells us he once lived after the strictest sect, a Pharisee, and then
persecuted, and Acts 26.5. and 9.
verily thought with himself, what our Joh, 16.2.
Savior foretold: That is, he was persuaded or belived, for I do not take the
word, thought, in either place to be meant of the bare cogitative faculty, as
sometimes it is (especially when Reason is lost, after which manner some barely
think themselves Princes, and cannot be said properly to believe they are so)
St. Paul had his Reason about him, and that Reason, yielding or consenting, is
properly, a belief. I hear of no such thoughts or belief in him afterward. And
here I must confess a little further of my own belief, or persuasion; that that
man whoever verily believed it lawful to persecute another to the death by
Reason of his dissenting from him in point of belief only, never yet believed
aright or embraced a true Faith, as he should.

Man in contemplation, cannot certainly, fall into any consideration so
abstruse and full of distraction as that of the strange variety of beliefs in
the World, in point of Religion, as we term it: How it happens or comes to
pass that the Soul of man, of one original extract, and of no great native
difference, should in this one Principle, which is the adoration of some Deity,
as its Creator and Preserver, run such various ways and courses, and embrace
such contrary tenets, and each believe they hit on the right in point of
judgment. Surely if man were generally left unto himself, and some men had not
been possessed with other Spirit than their own, the very Spirit of delusion to
assist them; A number of men of profound judgment, and subtle in the maxims
of Government, and not subject to have cheats put upon them, had never believed
of old, the uncouth dreams of their Poets, the idle tales of an old woman, nor
the wandering fancies of melancholy Hermits. There has been of ancient
invention, some soporiforous Art over man's Reason, first by laying it to sleep,
and then exhaling it into a belief; For no such victory as we read of in old
times, could ever be obtained by plain force over man's Reason. And Reason yet
continues sure, under a kind of fascinating power, or else we in these our
days, and in this corner of the World, who have one infallible foundation laid
us, and seem to agree therein, could never raise such various superstructures,
such towers of different Model and Form, and believe none truly and exactly
built, but what is done by our master Builders in select numbers and companies;
and then for want of looking down upon that Foundation aforesaid, of which
Justice was the level, and Charity the cement (and whereof our superstructures
I am afraid do not generally partake) batter each other from our several
aspiring Turrets, to the admiration and laughter of any sober Heathen.

There is no cause of these our distractions, and seeming contending about our
God, so readily at all times offers it self to my thoughts, and is so approved
of my judgment as that of Credulity; a thing though most common in the vulgar,
and men of low degree, yet very incident to human nature in general. Something
men would deify and believe above Reason, and in a lazy prosecution thereof,
believe even contrary to Reason; that is, they lay aside their own Reason to
rest, and accept another, perhaps the first comers, and so the next and the
next; especially if he bring them any new and strange matter for a belief. Yet
in this compliance, though their Reason presently submit, they usually, through
it, take the advice of their Affections, and so soonest believe that which they
have in desire, or a ready Will to; Which thing Will is ever attendant on the
Affections. Now there are very few men, but would be wise or so accounted,
wiser than their brethren, though they are not so. And thereupon if a man in
the least estimation for Wisdom, and withal reputed a sober godly man, shall
but begin to pity their Errors with a seeming sorrow, and modestly acquaint
them, how long they have been led in darkness by others, their liberty of
Conscience (for so it must be entitled) enthralled, and that it is high time to
awake, and become wiser and more discerning; and that wiser they are, or shall
be, if they will believe him; That man shall not want a favorable attention at
first, and that usually terminates in a simple credit in the end.

That the Soul of man, while it is conjoined to a body here, is a Prisoner and
in a kind of Thraldom, we all agree, who believe it to be celestial and a
substance of it self. We naturally affect liberty, and therefore upon the very
sound of that one world Libertas; Reason, which is or should be Mistress in the
Soul, and free of it self, though not so free as perhaps it might be out of the
Body, is apt to stir and move. But I wish to God it were his blessed will,
before it moved in every man, or in the beginning of its motion, it might
through his grace consider a little, this common plausible Doctrine to the
Affections, of liberty of conscience. The Affections indeed, according to my
definition of Conscience, are therein included; and it is their liberty we
would, that they should not be in subjection to Reason; but our best part we
enthral usually by this very hearkening and compliance. Our Reason, and what
proceeds from that, though we are under some clouds of the Body, is freer than
we imagine, neither can any man restrain it without our assent, and that is the
only way of slavery it is subject to in surrendering and yielding it self up to
another man's; and therefore to preach up liberty of Conscience, is to me a
strange Doctrine. I dare challenge all the Potentates or mighty men of the
World to deprive me of my liberty of Conscience, that is a free consult of my
faculties, alone and by my self, or to believe what I list, which is the result
of Reason, it self. Indeed they may, by some hard usage of my Body, hinder the
free operation of my Soul, while it is in the Body, and they may separate them
at last; but that is the utmost they can do. And they do often hinder the
gratification of our Affections, because to the gratifying of them, there is
necessarily some bodily act or motion; and that, it is to be doubted, is the
liberty most men aim at, and catching at that shadow they lose the substance,
enslave their Reason to let their Affections reign; and thus are men taken in a
snare, while they think to creep from under a net. This is that medicine for
cure of Souls which some men have found out, that, like some sort of poison,
tickles the heart till it stupify the brain, pleases the affections so far on
the sudden, as that they insensibly attract Reason's consent, make their own
Reason submit to that of others, because others have best pleased them, and so
possessed them. Thus is that excellent gift, Reason, deluded, which God has
bestowed on every particular man, in some measure, for the government of his
Affections; and which every man may, and ought to make use of alone, and apart
by it self; and is a thing that seldom leads a man right, when it moves by
consent or Sympathy, and is persuaded and stirs not, but, according to
Chancellor More's story, in company.

They who thus readily lay aside their scale of Reason, to make use of other
men's, for their Affections, may be thought to have it of so weak a make and
size, as that it would prove a fruitless endeavor, to advise them not to
receive any thing for current at any time, but what they likewise well try and
weigh alone by their own; It would break some say it is so slight, and this is
the badge of the generality of mankind under the notion of the vulgar. Well, I
do not think many men under that notion so weak but that they might very well
and very safely do it, and that it is a restiveness in Reason, and a contracted
rustiness, rather than a weakness, which a man might wipe off, and that every
man might of himself become able (God assisting him) to direct and govern
himself, and with more ease, and surer peace, work out his own salvation with
fear and trembling; At least if he made any use of his Reason, he would soon
discern the danger of this Foreign assistance toward his present peace,
especially voluntary aids without Authority of their Prince, who seldom aim so
much at others Spiritual advancement as their own temporal. But for the present
we will suppose the generality of mankind, thus weak, under the notion of the
Vulgar, and thereupon instead of advice to them, we will deliver our thoughts
by way of remonstrance to you, who seem a man of a clear discerning judgment
(out of that rank) and have taken upon you the care and cure of Souls, and that
is only; That you continue ever careful (as I verily think you are of your self
at present) not to impose on us any thing, you have not first very well
ruminated, and digested by your Reason, and besides that, you advise others of
your degree, over whom you have any influence, to use the like care.

1 Cor. 3.3
There is envying, and strife, and divisions amongst us, and we are carnal, and
shall be carnal. But that gift of Reason in us has nothing of carnality in it,
as of it self, but is able to inform us, that as God has no need of our
quarrelling or contending for, or about him, so neither can such doings please
him, or be acceptable unto him. And therefore it may be somewhat of wonder,
that Reason can assent, or be transformed into a belief, that the Deity whom we
adore, should be invocated in any such case, or made partaker or Patron on
either side. Surely when some men's Affections have once deluded their own
Reason, there follows a necessary consequence, that that Reason should allege
the tendency of such Affections toward God (who is the protector of all that
love and fear him) to delude others too, or else we could never believe at any
time, we fought for God, or persecuted any man for God's sake.

Indeed he is strangely represented to us by some men, somewhile the God of
peace, at other times the Lord of Hosts; sometimes of Unity and Concord, and
making men to be of one mind in one house, sometimes of Lu. 12.51.
division and discord, and setting the brother against the brother, according
as it suits with their several Affections. And they give him these various
Attributes and Offices at several times, as if, like the common people of Rome,
we were to be kept in ignorance of his proper name; that it should not be Ps.
48.3.4.
Well known for a sure refuge, or at least we might call on it rightly, when
the Kings of the earth are gathered and gone by together. St. James, by way of
question, informs us a very truth James 4.1.
Whence come Wars, and Fightings amongst you? come they not hence even of your
lusts? God has put desire or lust in our Natures, and has given us that divine
gift of Reason, as superintendent over it, to regulate, and rule and direct it,
and because we make not that good use of it we should, we are ready and willing
to call on him for a color in our siding and fightings, and thereby make him
as it were the Author, who as we are told, is 1 Cor. 14.33.
not the author of confusion, but of peace. Mat. 18.7.
It must needs be that (nay in St. Luke 17.1.
Luke it is impossible but) offenses will come; but there is a woe to them by
whom; and sure God permits it only to punish our inordinate desires. I may in
some measure believe there is somewhat of truth in the opinion of those
Philosophers, who held strife and contention necessary in Nature, and that were
it not for a continual opposition all things would be at a stand, and even
heavenly Bodies cease their motion; But I shall as soon believe all the Poets
fables to be real, and that in truth there was such a Goddess as Harmonia,
begotten of Mars and Venus, as that the God of Nature, and God of the
Christians, is either pleased with, or allows or approves of our contentions
for him and in his name, and that that thing is harmony to him. Neither do I
believe that right Reason in any man, whoever had it, and consulted it, ever
approved to him such a thing, as an Holy War, or an Holy Rebellion, be it
against Turk, or be it against Papist.

Me thinks the Scribes and the Learned on either side, when they help to foment
our differences, and would set us together by the ears (for I am of opinion
there never was yet a civil national division or distraction without some
Levites or pretended Levites in company) would show much more of a generous
Nature, if they would hang out the right and proper flag, and declare to us
what Aesops Fox told his Cock in the end, that they must feed on us; and I am
sure we had better labor to feed them otherwise, than under pretense of
fighting for God, fight for them; which, Reason, if it were not very weak, or
rather lazy and credulous, would soon espy we do, in most cases. I never
doubted but God has appointed and raised up for his service many good Shepherds
of our Souls, and such as strive to correct our Errors, and faithfully
endeavor to enlighten our Reason, for the well and orderly government of our
Affections; such as neither go about to court, or yet terrify our Affections,
that they may thereby enslave our Reason; But they are rare, and of such I need
ask no pardon for these my thoughts set down in writing, if they happen to be
seen of any beside your self; they will I know readily pass them by with a
charitable censure; And of others I will not ask it; but still continuing to
think, Credulity in the vulgar (or more properly a lazy Reason) to have been
the Anvil, on which the greatest mischiefs and evils in the World have been
hammered and wrought, I presume to advise every man, that he make that good use
of his Reason, as to see, it was given him to direct and guide himself chiefly,
and not to be led thereby. And to our wise men of this World, I say, It is no
difficult matter for one of an ordinary capacity, who is minded to get up and
ride (for the vulgar is often resembled to a Beast of burden) to cast a bitt
into men's mouths (that is their Affections, whereby they will yield up the rein
of their Soul (Reason) to be guided any way the Rider pleases. But he who so
does (besides the casuality of a fall here) I must tell him he incurs some
future danger; It being a Beast, which is apt to carry a man into perdition at
the last; And; in my opinion, a Beast, which seldom or rarely bears a truly
good man. If I should change my Metaphor of riding into flying, my thoughts
tend to the same effect, That popularity indeed, is a seeming present
delightful Air, which many men strive to fly, or at least to flutter in; and
some thereby have mounted very high: But if the shout be not so very great,
that, like that of Plutarch's story, it break the very air, and cause our
Eagles that spy so quick, and see so far beyond other men, to fall to the
ground sometimes here, I question much, whether it ever brought a man to any
station of happy rest in the end.

My thoughts of Faith or belief, were intentional only of looking straight
forward, and directly upon it, to behold what, and whence it was; And this kind
of reflection on it, will perhaps be esteemed by you, as very uncomely, and
unfit for a person of my condition, and therefore I will endeavor to turn my
thoughts again into their first channel. And thereupon we continue to think
Faith, at utmost, is no more than a persuasion of Reason; If that persuasion be
operated and effected barely from man, we call it an human Faith, or Belief; if
it be from above, we call it, and will allow it, divine: In either case, we
still think it is, Reason yielding, or Reason quiet and at rest. Reason is that
Forge in the Soul whereon it is wrought; at least Faith is no other than a
termination of Reason's work. Now having owned Reason in the Soul of man, to be
a special divine gift, in no wise arising, or possibly to be extracted out of
flesh and blood, according to any ordinary course of Nature, and a thing which
distinguishes us from all other Creatures; We cannot but think it here capable
of an impression from above, and so may terminate in a blessed Faith; but that
is above our reach to define how it comes to pass. The other qualities it has,
we may a little observe. It is capable I think quatenus human, to make and
receive an impression without the help of Sense, nay above and beyond sense.
When it is properly active, and makes this impress, and informs a man, for
instance, that the fulfilling of Lust is a beastly sordid act (which Sense
could never do) and puts some little stop to the Affections and to the Will; I
have called it, and do call it Conscience: When it complies, assents, or yields
to embrace a thing as good or true (which may be without any help of Sense too
in some case) I term it Belief; and do think that neither the one or the other,
can at all happen to be without Reason; for, it is Reason's assent, that
creates a belief, or gives it that denomination. If Reason be absent, it is no
more than a bare short cogitation of a thing, such as is, or may be in Beast
which is driven away by the next thought. But belief solely attending Reason,
or being the offspring of Reason, has somewhat of permanency in it; though it
be subject to change habits.

Faith, says the author to the Hebrews, is the evidence of things not seen; the
word (...) seems more full, and of a larger extent or signification, than we
can well render by that word Evidence, or any one single word in our language,
it is a (...). Opera arguunt manus.
demonstration by argument or ratiocination, which may be, I think, without the
present help of Sense; He gives us this instance, Heb. 11.3.
Through it we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so
that things which are seen, were not made of things which do appear. The latter
part of conclusion, is no more than what every ordinary Heathen might espy from
his Reason; that visibility could not be the product of visibility; that the
framer and the framed must necessarily differ in a vast degree, and therefore
conclude by way of argument from Reason, and as it were rest satisfied; that it
was no visible substance, but some eternal omnipotent invisible wise power or
mind, that created the World in this admirable visible beauty and luster as it
is. And this as we call it Faith, so it is no more than ordinary. But for the
Soul to lay hold on such a thing as Word and pierce into the depth of that
monosyllable, which Saint John with his Eagle eyes had so deep an inspect into,
It must I think necessarily be reached down from Heaven, and be an heavenly
light which first showed it unto man. The Power and strength of Reason in man,
able of it self upon consideration to raise an evidence of things not seen, is
the chief and main ground which induces me to think, that no sober wise man,
that is, no man whose Reason is in any measure clear, is an Atheist; but that
it must be the fool only, who says in his heart there is no God: And yet that
there are and may be as well rational Infidels, as Christians, since that Word
incarnate is above the reach of the clearest human Reason.

In my Treatise de Anima, after my plain way and manner, I set down the grounds
of my belief, of the immortality of an human Soul only, and that was chiefly
from its Reason; such a Reason as is able to weigh things without the help of
Sense, I know that human Reason by the delusion of Satan, and for want of good
exercise, is often captivated, and brought to accept any thing (almost) for
true and current, that is so represented and laid before it, whuch thing I call
Credulity; yet that very Credulity is to me a clear evidence of the Soul's
immortality, and therefore I mean here to speak a little of Faith or Belief, as
it is described by the Author to the Hebrews, The evidence of things not seen,
for surely by that, we may be distinguished from all other Creatures. Faith or
belief, we men alone have in us (whether by way of ratiocination or immediately
given us shall not be our present inquiry) a capacity to embrace or catch or
lay hold on things at a distance, which capacity we think is only the product
of human Reason: A capacity in the Soul of man, which though it may seem at
first view to come far short of knowledge, yet in dignity or worth far
surmounts any thing, which we call, or can properly so call. Knowledge, such as
it is in us or any Creature, is the offspring of Sense, and Faith the
offspring only of Reason. For of things unseen, or of the true Nature or
original cause of any thing, we have no knowledge at all. But that things are
so or so, and that they differ in specie one from another, we and Beasts have
both equal certain knowledge from Sense, unless they whose Sense is clearest,
may be said to exceed a little therein. Sense certainly penetrates quicker,
into the substance of things, than Reason can do into the Nature and causes of
them; and therefore the termination of one, may well be accounted knowledge,
when the other acquires only the title of Belief; And yet that belief arises
from a much deeper sight, than the other. Which kind of light in the Soul, and
such thing as may create a belief, we can in no wise discern in Brutes,
although we do discern and allow knowledge in them. Because belief in its
lowest degree, and at the least, proceeds from Reason, and such a Reason, as is
or may be separate and distinct from Sense.

I cannot but allow a kind of Reason in Beasts, concomitant and attendant upon
Sense, sufficient to determine their election and choice, or, if you please,
their will: But it is such, as vanishes with the act, and nothing from thence
can amount unto, or be said to be a belief in any case. It is stirred only by,
and vanishes with Sense, and the ground of its work being gone and past, there
might be a knowledge pro tempore, but no such thing as a belief; because there
remains no fixed footsteps or hold of its operation. But belief, ever depending
upon somewhat, and being a thing of permanency and continuance, it must
necessarily depend upon such a Reason, as subsists of it self, and is able to
work of it self; For that is it which makes a belief: Otherwise there is no
more than a cogitation (or memory the renewer of a cogitation) and such as the
coming of one usually drives away the other (as I said) both in man and Beast.
And though I cannot be said properly, between cogitation and cogitation, to
remember a thing all the while; yet I may be said to believe the same all the
while without so much as a thought of the object matter of my belief. As to
knowledge such as it is, in man or Beast, it is but a present plain
demonstration of Sense, and a thing of no permanency without the continued help
of Sense. For though I knew a man yesterday, I cannot properly say I know him,
till I see him again, and then I may, but I believe all the while I shall know
him, if I see him again; and if a man shall ask me the question whether I know
such a man, it is most proper for me to say, I believe I do, or shall when I
see him. I will give you this plain instance if you please, a little to
distinguish knowledge and belief: The wind blows, Now seeing the effects of its
motion, in the Clouds, on the Trees, etc, hearing the noise it causes upon
resistance, feeling the coolness of the air ventilated; I know it blows, or
there is such kind of motion, and so does a Beast, but this neither of us know
longer than we see, hear or feel the Effects. As concerning any such like
future motion; the cause of the Wind, whence it comes or whither it goes (which
the Text tells us we know not) that is Reason's inquiry; and it must be
Reason's eye that beholds ought thereabout; And what is from thence brought
into the Soul, is of some continuance, a thing no ways incident to Beasts, and
that which we call belief; which, whatever it be, continues the same, till
Reason be consulted again, and inform otherwise. If I believe the Wind to be
fluent air; If I believe it to be caused by some fermentation (like that in our
Bodies upon meeting of diverse humors) upon the concourse of several Atoms; If I
believe it is sent out of the caverns of the Earth, etc, my belief in each
case, continues all the while the same, till Reason frame another in my Soul.
Nay Sense shall not alter a belief, without some consult of Reason; and
therefore a belief once raised or framed does upon every touch of Sense make a
kind of resort to Reason, for its allowance, or disallowance, for its
continuance as it is, or its change. For instance, if I once believe that you
love me, or have a kindness for me; If after I hear otherwise from others, or
see a strangeness in your countenance, or feel some hard usage from you; before
the alteration of this first settled opinion or belief, there will necessarily
be some consult of Reason; whether this or that may not be, and yet your
Affection continue firm. Now if Reason do not weigh things by it self, but
listens only to the introduction of Sense, so far forth as to change my belief
without due examination, this is the thing which I call Credulity, and for
which, Reason is negligent and to blame.

Though I allow a Will in Brutes, Imagination or Cogitation, Memory, and such a
kind of Reason, as by and through Sense cooperating with those faculties,
guides them in a regular motion, and may be said to create a knowledge in them,
yet without Sense it is idle, and nothing; And can neither put a stop to the
Affections in opposition to Sense, nor create any such thing as a belief; which
is a matter effected above and beyond Sense (though not clean contrary to
Sense, as some would have us to believe) and through human Reason, and is the
consequent in such a Soul, only, as shall be able to work when the windows of
Sense shall be shut up, or Sense shall be no more. Many Beasts are quick of
Sense, and so of knowledge I grant, and may be said to be sensibly rational,
but not rationally sensible, or so much as to consider their Sense, or raise
any belief about it. And this is the utmost I am able to judge of their
capacity; for I must confess and acknowledge, that could I discern more, or
could any man discover to me, some certain indubitable sign of any such
rational motion in them at any time, as to give a check to their Affections,
which is the thing I call Conscience, or create a light in them out of the
reach of Sense, and raise an evidence of things not seen, which is the thing I
adjudge to be, Faith or Belief, and which the weakest human Soul is in some
measure capable of (and I doubt not but Divine Grace does sometimes shine upon
such beyond our inspection) It would overthrow my opinion of their
annihilation, or else much shake and batter my belief of our own Immortality.

The Fowls of the Heaven are of so quick Sense, as that thereby perceiving the
alteration of the Air, by a kind of adjunct Reason accompanying that Sense,
they know their appointed time (as it is said of the Jer. 8.7.
Stork) and move accordingly; yet being incapable to foresee, or judge of any
cause thereof, they cannot be said to believe ought thereabout, before or
after. Undoubtedly the Ox may know his Feeder from another man, as sure as the
Feeder knows the Ox from another Beast; but the Ox cannot believe any thing of
the Feeder, that he may or will hurt him upon a displeasure, as the Feeder may
of the Ox; for that must proceed from Reason's inquiry or information, above or
beyond Sense. Many Creatures when they feel pain, or are sick and sensible
thereof, have such a kind of Reason ready attendant, as often effectually works
their cure without inquiry into natural causes, and so may be said to know the
cure; but yet without an inspect into natural causes, it is impossible to
believe it, and therefore it is that rational sight only that creates a belief,
and is in no wise the sight of Sense.

Now when from Reason, there is raised in the Soul of man (especially with
concurrence of some Sense, collateral as I may say to the thing believed) a
firm and indubitable belief of any thing, we make use of the word knowledge,
and say we know, and yet in truth there is no more than a belief in the case:
For instance, I know I shall dye; Now if I had never seen man die, or heard of
death, I should by my Reason, observing my decay and waxing old as a garment,
verily believe some such thing; but withal seeing, and hearing continually of
the death of others; I rest assured I shall die, and so say, I know. But my own
death being absolutely out of the reach of Sense, I cannot properly be said to
know so much, neither does what I say therein, amount to any more than a
belief. And so it is in many like cases where we say, We know: as where Job
says, as we translate it Job 19.25.
I know that my redeemer lives, there is no more to be understood than a firm
strong Faith; the like of St. John Baptist Luke 1.77.
giving knowledge of salvation: And so I think is St. Paul to be understood in
that 1 Cor. 2.
Chapter where he mentions knowledge so often. Now a Beast neither knows or
believes any thing of his own death, for that, as the causes and symptoms of
death are out of the reach of his Reason, which only accompanies Sense and is
naught without it; So his very death is out of the reach of Sense it self, and
he cannot know it. For this reason perhaps some may think them the more happy
Creature; but if we consider it, and make good use of our Reason, we shall find
that over and above that superlative prerogative, of beholding in a manner, and
so believing future happiness, we have here a great benefit and advantage by
it, above other Creatures; and are enabled from hence to quit the Affections,
which otherwise would be disturbed by the often false alarms of Sense, to which
they are subject, and so keep our Soul from being wounded by any thing from
without.

Knowledge I say is a thing of the meaner extract, the product of Sense and in
no wise of Reason, neither is Reason the parent thereof in any case, unless in
some case of Conscience, a thing so much talked of, and which I have already
mentioned. There indeed in case of the will's deviation from Justice (which may
be said to be a peculiar Sense annexed to Reason, or which human Reason is
endowed with, and called Reason's Eye, without which it cannot properly move.)
I may truly tell any man having Reason, if he transgress the rule of Justice,
you know in your Conscience yor wrong me, or do that which is evil: In other
cases I cannot apprehend how we can be said to know, unless by common Sense.
And that surely ( viz) outward Sense, does often afford us such an infallible
demonstration, as that Reason cannot oppose it, or raise a belief against it,
though without Sense or above and beyond Sense, she may raise a belief. And
therefore in such plain cases of ocular demonstration, human Reason is ever
silent, and in a manner useless: For why should she labor and travail in vain?
Wherefore should I argue within my self, whether white and black be the same,
or whether they differ in color, when my Sense is clear to perceive they do?
How should I believe alteration of substance, when I see plainly there is none?
Though human Reason be a gift that excels Sense, and raises sometimes such an
high and lasting fabric, as Sense is not able to raise, yet it never throws
down Sense's building to do it, or opposes it self clean contrary to Sense. We
may keep our Sense and our Reason too, and make use of both; but when we happen
utterly to exclude the former, I much doubt whether we retain the latter in its
very native force. And therefore I appeal to any man of Reason, whether direct
Idolatry be not folly, or rather a phrensy and madness? I am as prone and
ready, I hope, to believe as any other man; I look upon it as the most
excellent capacity of human Nature, and therefore if a man shall go about to
persuade me such a piece of bread is flesh, whereof at first sight I might
believe otherwise, I may with some Reason retract my opinion, and believe it,
and that it might be some dried flesh, by art brought unto the likeness of
ordinary bread. But if he shall tell me, this thing I now see is Bread made of
Corn, and I believe him; and then he shall forthwith go about to persuade me
it is flesh; so long as it never was out of my sight, and my Sense tells me it
is the very same as it was without alteration, I will reply I know it is the
same, and need no assistance of Reason, to believe it the one or the other; and
without Reason, Belief is nothing, nor more than a simple cogitation as I said.
Now because we will not, or cannot deny these kind of men who thus believe (or
would have us believe) to be otherwise rational, and judicious in other
matters; And we are unwilling (and it becomes us not) to call them Fools, or
mad men; We will rather choose to term them, Good natured men; and think such
their belief proceeds from that very innocent native goodness or Charity, which
is apt to make a man believe all things, and is some excrescence or else
superfetation of Reason. By which I yet mean no other thing, than what I have
on insisted all along to be of dangerous and evil consequence in the Soul, viz.
Credulity.

As Reason is the most excellent indowment in the Soul, so it is oftnest
abused, and we may daily observe more legerdemain, and more tricks to deceive
us, put upon our Reason, than our Sense. We shall always have our best
Affection courted, if not bribed, to gain the consent of that; and if it cannot
be persuaded, or prevailed over by fair means; there shall be a thunder through
Sense, to raise some other passion in the Soul to force its consent, or at
least to keep it quiet from resistance; and we must be made afraid (if
feazible) that we may believe, and told that there is no hope of Salvation, if
we believe not as our Monitors would have us. This indeed may be called a
cunning way of application to the Affections to delude Reason rather than to
enlighten it. And thus by the false insinuation of others, and the negligence
of our selves, Reason instead of being a sure conduct, becomes as it were a
false guide, and instead of doing us good, often works us the greatest
prejudice of any thing in Nature.

Credulity, (which is Reason blindfolded by another) has doubtless led many men
into sundry pernicious Errors, and so into utter destruction at the last; and
hurried them into further mischief, than either their native passions of
themselves would have forced them, or their own Imagination could have invented
for them; and therefore it cannot seem uncharitable, though it may prove
unacceptable, to advise all men to beware of Credulity, and to become cautious
how, and what they believe. To avoid which danger, I know no readier way, than
for every man to make use of, and exercise that blessed gift God has bestowed
on him (and so I may call it) his own Reason; And therefore I might here I
think safely, if it happen to be seen, advice every one else as well as you to
keep his Reason, as well as elsewhere I did every man (from Solomon) to keep
his heart with all diligence: I do not mean, to keep his Reason a Prisoner, in
subjection to his Affections, as most men do; If he do, they will be deceived
together; but as their guide, free, and without dependence on any, but only
that good God who gave it. And if every man would singly follow this advice,
having engrafted in his heart that saying, Quod tibi fieri non vis, etc. I
doubt not but we should see and taste better fruits of men's Faith than now we
do. I know not how to separate the word Faith from Reason, or Reason from
Faith; If Reason be the ground of every ordinary belief, and I cannot possibly
find its rise elsewhere, nor that any Creature can have in his Soul an evidence
of things not seen (that is an ordinary belief) without the special gift of
Reason; Why should it be laid aside (as some would) for the introducing of that
blessed effect in the Soul, which differs only in point of the object matter,
and perhaps somewhat in degree? In either case there is no more, than a
persuasion of the mind, which can never be without rationality; For without
that, the Will and the Affections (blind as they are) necessarily follow Sense,
and cannot be persuaded or prevailed with to embrace any thing without Sense.

Without Reason, a Cogitation is the bare work of the Imagination, or it self
by it self working. It must have Reason's stamp at least (how weak or blind
soever she be) to give it the title of a Belief. And a bare Cogitation (as I
conceive) being a thing that falls short of a Belief in human Theory, must
needs do so much more in Divinity, and will scarce amount to the Faith of a
Collier: And if it should, I cannot conjecture any good it will do a man
toward future Happiness, how ere it pleases in present fancy.

Reason is a gift, which no man that has it (how sure soever he be to have it
weakened by infirmity or age) would at present part with, to gain the whole
present World: And in relation to the future, I trust, he who has bestowed that
gift on us, will not be offended with the modest use of it thereabout; since as
to this present World we find it does not so far avail the best of us as to
make us much happier than the Beasts that perish, who generally make as good
use of this present World from Sense, as we do from our Reason.

So long as we trust not in our Reason, neither suffer it to contend with, or
strike at, or batter that Faith, which it self, of it self, is not able to
raise, but let it stand by as a spectator; methinks those men who ingross and
appropriate to themselves the title of the Faithful (as others do of
Infallible) need not make declamations against it, nor go about to affright men
out of their Reason: But may allow it a Jam. 1.17.
good gift though not a perfect gift (since we own both from above) and have so
much Charity as to think (or if they please to believe) other men may be saved
with it, as well as other men believe, they may be saved without it, or at
least its strength; Provided they do not wilfully sin against it, continue to
spurn it, and colourably trample upon it, to raise themselves rather than any
saving Faith in other men.

Men look upon their Belief as a precious and tender Plant (however raised) not
to be touched; and I would offend none in seeming to do it, and therefore I
shall say no more of it: But pray God (wherein I hope I cannot offend) who has
endowed us with Reason, such a Reason as is capable to take an impress from
Heaven, as well as men, and as it were to resolve and melt into a blessed happy
and saving Faith; That of his infinite mercy he would frame in us, that Anchor
of the Soul, fure and steadfast, which may secure us against all the raging
waves of the World; And yet continue to enlighten our Reason while we travail
here; that it may be able to espy and resist all the delusions of Satan, and
our own and others Affections marching under the notion and color of Religion;
And preserve us ever from unreasonable men (whatsoever or howsoever they say
they believe) as well as those we term (and reject as) Infidels.

The Soul of man considered in its ordinary faculties is wonderful, and perhaps
a dangerous subject to treat of, but especially as it may be clothed with
graces from without; And he who searches too narrowly into it, may sooner lose
himself than benefit others: From all that I could think of it, I adjudge it
immortal, and that is the main termination of my thoughts, which I dare make
public. We may please our selves sometimes with a conceit of knowledge of, I
know not what; but all is so little and nothing, that, let go our tenure of
immortality, and cast away the thoughts thereof, we are, at best, but the
wisest Beasts that perish, and need not a comparison with them. Did I say, cast
away those thoughts? They are so united I think to our Nature, that I dare the
boldest man, who denies the subject matter of those thoughts, and would
willingly do it, to cast them away, or wholly and perpetually disburthen his
Soul of them. Such thoughts as these, to wit, of some future reward and
punishment, have been conjectured from some actions of theirs to be inherent
and arising in Mutes; whereof I my self from Sense, and with concurrence of my
Reason, stand convinced; And when I can in like manner be convinced, that such
thoughts can be made to arise in the Spirit or Soul of any, the wisest or most
intelligent Brute; I shall not then think my self much undervalued, to have
such a Beast compared to me. For unless it be, to resolve that question, What
shall I do to inherit eternal life? Mine, or any man's knowledge signifies but
very little. The resolution of that quaery belongs to your office, an office
you have solemnly taken upon you; the cure or care of no man's Soul but my own
is committed unto me. The office of King Philip's Crier might better have become
me, To tell men they are mortal (which every man owns) than to tell them, they
are immortal, which is your duty. Now having in a manner intruded my self into
your office, and yet referring my self therein to you; If you encourage me to
go on and proceed, and so, in a manner, patronize any Error by me therein
committed; the fault (as I told you at first) will lie at your door.

Now to God Eternal, and only of himself Immortal, be adscribed all Praise and
Glory. Amen.

A PRAYER of the AUTHOR'S, unto Almighty God, for the Guidance and well
government of our Souls, and the discovery and prevention of such Mistakes and
mischiefs (whether public or private) arising from thence, as in the foregoing
Tracts and Epistles are more especially discoursed of.
O God, from whom all Spirits receive their being, and who art the lover of
Souls, favorably in mercy look upon the Souls of us men, thy most apparent
image; Reform us all in that part or faculty thereof, by which we chiefly go
astray from thy truth, and do amiss; Give to every one of us such a sight and
sense of our own particular defects and offenses before those of others, as may
make us humble, not proud in Spirit; Create and raise in us such a Faith, as
may not only embrace thee in thy wonderful works of mercy, but be visible in
all our works; Moderate and rectify our Affections by our Reason, and let them
not so overpower our Imagination as to make us believe and disbelieve as may
best gratify them; Let us not suffer that Reason thou have given us, to be born
down by the strength of an elevated fancy, or the unruliness of a stubborn
Will, but what our Reason clearly dictates to us, let us readily obey. Let us
not abuse thy sacred Name and holy Word, to gratify any evil or ambitious
Affection; nor suffer us at length in these our days and in this our Island,
through our own precipitant madness and folly, to become the scorn and derision
of all that are round about us, and to fall as a prey to some of them. Grant we
may be subject for conscience sake, or rather for thy sake, since whosoever
will or endeavors disturbance and confusion, does set himself against thee the
God of order. Look down and behold in goodness our gracious Sovereign, whom
thou have already from banishment restored to his just right, and (as it were
miraculously) again placed over us; one, who retains so much, and so perfect an
Image of thee, as to be just to all men, and merciful to admiration, which is
as much as the most unreasonable of Subjects can expect or desire. What human
frailties he has been subject to, in mercy pardon. Defend and protect him
against the attempts of all his Enemies, and especially those who under color
of his safety, seek his destruction, falsely pretending the advancement of thy
Kingdom, and thy Glory. Let not our former unrepented sins of that Nature
provoke thee to bring us again into confusion and desolation; but be thou
gracious unto us, and to all the world besides, that we may all in general see
and behold, it is thou alone by whom Princes reign, it is thou alone who
bring the devices of the wicked to none effect, and it is thou alone who art
able to show us the madness and folly of our own ways and inventions: Which,
let every one of us in humility beseech thee to do, for thy Son's sake; To whom
with thee, etc.

FINIS.

