A ROYAL LOYAL POEM.

LONDON, Printed for W. Place, and are to be sold at his Shop at Grayes-Inne
Gate in Holborne, 1660.

A Royal Loyal POEM.
ALL hayle Great KING, whom Gods Almighty hand,
Has in great Streights preserved by Sea and Land;
And has kept firm thy Loyal Subjects hearts,
Rejoicing in oppressions dyrest smarts:
And that thy Foes the vast Worlds wonder cease
Their tumultuous waves, and sue for Peace:
What can eclips our joys so bright, so high,
Settled on the Basis of Divinity:
For here is no new Usurper to make good
This treasonable Claym through streams of blood:
Sparing no English Subjects to maintain
The profuse Riot in his Rebellious reign;
No heir not able to support the weight
Of Government either of Church or State:
Nay, here is no pretender to the known
Right Great Charles has to his three Kingdoms
No worthy Gentleman does envy that
Our high born Prince should have command of what Crown:
His birthright gives him, here is none thinks that he
Could rule so wisely as his Majesty;
Here Is no contention, only to outvy
Each in brave acts of liberality,
Amazing all to see, our widdowed Land
Espoused to joy so soon, by a Monks Hand.
Presents on Presents pass by faithful hearts;
Not equal to My mind nor his deserts:
And these from loyal, Royal, Souls whom guilt
Had never staind, of blood unjustly spilt.
Had Fleetwod, Baxter, Haslrig, and Vane,
Tichbourn and Ireton, with that cursed train
Disgorg d their full cram d chests unjustly got,
And then like Judas hang d themselves, 't had not.
Been half so well. No: let them dying live,
And perish by degrees: let Justice give
Them but their due: How will their concience gripe
Their perplexed Souls? And when grown ripe,
For vengeance, let tortures lead them to the Tree,
Where this accursed fruit may hanged be;
Too tedious here to read their Elegy.
Oh when to Oliver they tidings bring
Of their fallen State, and Glories of our King,
How will his hot Nose swell, and Bradshaw call,
And curse each other for each others fall?
There let them curse and howl with hideous yells,
Whilst we with Bone-fires shouts, and ringing Bells,
Heighten the hatred that their Quaking friends
Conceal, if possible, for Politic ends:
And that will damn them too, whilst safely we
May pray for Charles our King and Progeny,
And drink a hearty cup toth General,
Who bravely, justly, wisely fooled them all.
And with one word Phanatick struck them dumb,
Some simply ask d if it were Scotch, and some
Whispered is it not Spanish, some Greek, but most
Said he was mistaken and would have it crossed
Out, and put in Fantastic, Schismatic,
Or Anabaptist, Brownist, Heretic,
Shaking Sir Harry Vanes fifth Monarchy,
Or weeping Fleetwoods quaking Anarchy,
H. Martins Adamites, Independents,
Saucy Lay Elders, Super-Intendents,
Any thing or all but that one strange word.
Coined with an angry Stamp should all afford,
That Oliver or Lambert in their breast
Contained, troubles them more then all the rest,
Making their Chimaera reformation,
Ridiculous and out of fashion;
And names of Commonwealth and Nation turned
To the right style, Kingdom, which long has mournd,
Commanding reverence to Gods holy Word,
Read in the Church, by them so much abhord:
When Preached by none but Orthodox Divines,
Whose life together with the Words light shines:
Now Subjects large Estates so long detaind
From the right Owners, shall by Right be gaind:
And Universities and Innes of Court,
Englands great honor in the Worlds report,
Pestred so long with Sons of the Committee,
Excize-men, Captains, or at best some City
Heirs: shall with Knights and Squires Sons be planted,
And the Grave Benchers who long have wanted,
An Audience fit for Readings, now rejoice,
To employ their wits and wealth for th'Publick voice,
When Magna Charta, the known Laws of th'Land,
Is spoke and writ in the old Tongue and Hand,
That it would prove a good Monopoly,
To teach Masters and Clarks their
When our new coin (all that was mine is gone)
Shall bear the Kings Face and Superscription;
When noble Spain shall bring her Indies wealth
Unto our King, wishing him peace and health;
All Princes fearing our Kings potent Strength,
Shall court him to an Union: At length
I fear the Gentile and unbeleiving Jew,
To be received into our Church will sue:
And then the World will end so soon, that we
Terrene joys longer shall not live to see:
This is not Fancy: for what can seem strange,
After this great and unexpected change.
Reader your pardon, for since the King is given
A Subject for my Pen, I could reach Heaven
With numerous lines. So may your Prayers with mine
For a continuance of his Life and Line.
By Tho. Saunderson Gent.
FINIS.

