ORNITHO-LOGIE OR, The Speech of BIRDS, ALSO, The Speech of FLOVVERS Partly
Moral, Partly Mystical.

By T. Fuller Doctor in Divinity.

London, Printed for John Stafford, and are to be sold at his House in George
Yard, near Fleet-Bridge, 1662.

To my much Honored Friend, William Stafford Esquire, Merchant of Bristoll.
Worthy Sir,
IN this plundering age, wherein the studies of so many have been ransacked,
and many papers intended for private solace and content^nt have bin exposed to
public view, it ^s my fortune to light on the ensuing dis^rse: It seemed to me
pity that it should ^rangled in obscurity, as conceiving might conduce
something to the delight the Reade^* for surely no ingenuous ^rson can be so
constantly serious, yea surly and Critical, but to allow some intervalls
refreshment not only as lawful but ne^sarie.

Let such morose, yea mischievous spirits pine themselves to walking Anatomies,
who brand all refection of the mind by ^udicrous intermissious to be unl^wfull,
to spare an heavier censure (which may more resent of anger) the worst I wish
them is always to eat their meat without sauce, and let them try ^hether
their palate will be pleased with the gust thereof.

In the following discourse there is nothing presented but sweet Flowers and
herbs: I could wish it had been in the s^mmer time, when the heat of the Sun
might have improved their fragrancie to the greatest advantage and rendered them
more acceptable to the smell of the Reader: Being now sadly sensibl^ that
Autumn the Usher of winter will abate of their s^e, and present them much to
their loss.

Sure I am no bitter Colloquintida appears in this our Herball; I mean no
tart and toothed reflections on any. Dull are those wits which cannot make
some smile, except they make others cry, having no way to work* a delight and
complacency in the Reader, save only by gashing, wounding and abusing the
credits of others.

It is desired, that this discourse may but find as much candidnesse as it
brings, and be entertained according to his own innocence. I have heard a
story of an envious man, who had no other way to be revenged of his Neighbor,
who abounded with store of Bee-hives, then by poisoning all the Flowers in his
own Garden wherein his Neighbors Bees took their constant repast, which
infection caused a general mortality in all the winged cattle of his
Neighbor.

I hope none have so spleneticke a design against this my harmless Treatise,
as to invenome my flowers with pestilent and unintended interpretations, as if
any thing more then flowers were meant in the flowers, or as if they had so
deep a root under ground, that men must mine t^ understand some concealed and
profou^ mystery therein, surely this Mythologie is (...) Cabinet which needs
no key to unlock it, the lid or cover lies open.

Let me i^treate you Sir to put your hana into this Cabinet, and after therein
you find what may please or content you, the same will be as much contentment
unto

your True Friend, J. S.

To the Worshipful, ROGER LE STRANGE Esquire.
SIR,
A Most learned Dutch writer has maintained that Birds do speak and converse
one with another: nor does it follow, that they cannot speak, because we
cannot hear, or that they want language, because we want understanding. Be
this true or false, in Mythologie Birds are allowed to speak, and and to teach
Men too. We know that a man cannot read a wiser, nor a child a plainer Book
then Aesops Fables.

These Birds now come to make their nest under the Bows and Branches of your
Favor; Be you pleased Sir, to extend your shadow over them, and as they shall
receive succor from you; you may be assured you shall receive no hurt from
them: And thus Sir, I wish you all happiness, not only to converse with Birds
in the lowest Re^ion of the Air sometime styled Heaven, but that a better and
higher place may be reserved for your entertainment.

J. S.

ORNITHO-LOGIE OR THE SPEECH OF BIRDS.
THere was a Grove in Scicile, not far from Siracu^e, whrein the Greek and
Latin Potes had made many Hyperbolicall descriptions For the Wits in that
Country, being placebound, and confined to a narrow Circle of ground, sought to
improve the same by their active Wits; whereby they enlarged every Ditch into a
River; every Pond into a Lake, every Grove into a Forest, every convenient
Hill into a ^ountain. In this notion they magnified this Grove, otherwise not
above twelve Acres of ground, though well wooded, save that the tyrannical Oaks
with their constant dropping, hindered the underwoods from prospering within the
compass thereof.

There was the whole Nation of Birds living under the shadow thereof. And the
climate being indifferently moderate, and moderately middle; wherein the East,
West, North, and South of the World, wherein some kinds compounded, Birds, of
all Climates here, made their habitations. Now a Bill of complaint was
subscribed (or rather signed) with the numberless Claws (instead of hands) of
Birds; containing the many insupportable Grievances they had endured from the
intolerable cruelty of the Eagle; who making his own lust his Law, had
dominered over all the winged Nation. The Eagle appeared in answer hereunto;
(it being a general meeting of all kinds of birds) and endeavored to justify
his proceedings, and clear himself in vain, from their accusations. The truth
is, the Eagle was overgrown with Age, for he is generally reported the survivor
of all Birds: So that if one would take a Lease of Land on a birds life, he
could not put in a more advantageous name then an Eagle.

But this Eagle had its bill with long age so reflexed back again into his
mouth, that he was so far from preying on another, that he could not
swallow any Flesh though proffered unto him. Soon will the spirits fail where
the belly is not fed; in vain did his courage pretend to his wonted valor,
when there was nothing within to justify and make good the offers thereof. So
that the poor Eagle conquered rather with its own Age then outward violence,
yielded to that to which all must yield: and was forced patiently to digest all
affronts offered unto him, and glad so to escape. For although some mention was
made of killing him; yet by plurality of suffrages, that vote got the mastery
which only confined him to a neighboring wood, on condition that death
without mercy should be his penalty if exceeding the Bounds thereof.

This done, Proclamation was made three days after that the whole Species of
Birds should appear for the election of a Principal to command them. Indeed
there were many which were altogether against any Government, because they
might the more freely rove and range in their Affections. These held that all
were free by nature; and that it was an assault on the Liberty of man, and a
rape offered to his natural freedom; that any should assume authority above
another. These maintained (what certainly was not only a paradox, but a flat
falsehood) that nature at the first Creation made all the world a flat level
and Champion, and that it was by the violence of the Deluge or great Flood,
which by the partial fall or running thereof, made the inequality, by sinking
some places into humble Valleys, and swelling others into aspiring Mountains.
Prosecuting which comparison, they maintained that all men were naturally
equal; and that it was the inundation and influx of humane Tyranny which made
this disparity between them. They also defended the argument, that as the world
began, so it should with the Golden age; and that all ought to be restored to
that primitive Liberty which men had lost, partly surrendering it by their own
folly and easy nature; partly surprised into their own slavery by the cunning
and craft of others that practiced on their simplicity. But however that these
made a great noise, the opposite party prevailed, as having most of strength
and reason on their side.

For where all rule, there no rule at all will be: where every man may command,
in fine, none will obey, the dictates of his own reason, but be a very vassal
to his passion. Society cannot be twisted together where there is not a
subordination and subjection one to another; and where every one is absolute in
himself, there is an impossibility of any orderly subsistence.

Let the maintainers of the contrary, try with themselves to make a rope of
sand; where each crum therein being independent of it self, has no tendency to
a general agreement; but enjoyes it self in its own entireness.

It being now cast (by general suffrages) for a Commander over all, that at
such a time they should meet: it was also proclaimed that all antipathy should
cease between all Birds during their meeting; because being now in danger of
general ruin, for want of a head all private animosity should be broken off
and drowned in a public agreement.

According to the Proclamation, they all met together; and birds of all
feathers had a general convolancy. Then the Estridge began, in a high
commendation of himself, how he^ was the biggest of all birds, and therefore
the fittest to be their General, as of the greatest ability to support the
weight of the Massy affairs o^ State. The rest of the birds gave him the
hearing, until (...) Wren thus returned the ^r.

It may s^ (...) very unproportionable combat betwe^ the least and gr^atest of
birds that I should once o^fer to enter the list with this Giant, who frights
us all with his greatness. But sure this wise Senate never made the bulk of a
body the standard whereby to measure the perfections of the mind: and therefore
I may take to my self the confidence to examine the truth of what he has
spoken. His greatness is apparent to every eye; but as for any othereminency,
it is so secret a quality, that none as yet has discovered it; For mine own
part I conceive him rather beast then bird, and therefore not properly of our
^ind. I appeal to his Latin ^ame; Struthio-Camelus; wher^n the Camel bears
away the last and best part thereof. And are we put to such a straight, that we
must elect an Hermophrodite, a rudiment, which is a measuring case between
Beast and Fowl: Does he not more trust, unto his Legs to Flee, then unto his
Wings to fly, and what I pray is the remarkable virtue, which commends him to
public notice; has he any melodious voice whereby to charm the attentions
of those that hear him: has he any extraordinary wit, in which he appears
above others of the same society. What if Foolish women, as light perhaps as
the Feather they wear, be pleased to advance his Tail above their heads. What
if vainglorious Captains more known by their Plumes then their performances,
deck their crests with the spoil of his wings: all these amount not to argue
any real worth in him. We live not in an age to be deluded with shows, or
cheated with shadows. It is enough that our Ancestors have suffered for their
^olly herein, with their own credulity. Real worth must ^e the attractive of
our love and respect: which being here wanting* I utterly disavow his Election
for our Sovereign.

The rest of the birds con^urred with the resolution of the Wren, highly
applauding it for the same; which durst speak that which others thought* They
plainly saw that spirit united in a small bulk, acts most vigorously: and the
contracted heat in so small a body prompted the Wren to such lively expressions
which bigger birds durst not utter.

Next stood forth the Parrot, insisting largely on it is own^ commendation,
among the res^ of his dexterous faculty, in imitating the speech of Man wherein
he exceeded all other creatures in the world. And seeing man was the Sovereign
o^ all the Creation, he conceive^ himself (which approached nex^ unto him in his
happy expressions) deservedly might claim the Regiment of all birds.

The Daw generally condemned for its loquacity, took upon him to answer the
Parrot. Indeed he began with great disadvantage, none expecting any thing of
wi^ or worth from him, because he was so common a Talker, therefore conceived
his speech not worthy their attentions, when defeating their expectations, and
deceiving them with a harmesse cheat, he thus proceeded.

You have heard the Parrot ^ake a large encomium of himself, all which must
needs be ^rue, because you have heard his own credit to avouch it: otherwise
me thinks one might justly take the liberty to examine the ground of what he
has spoken; I will not insist on the aliennesse of his extraction; we living
here in Syracus^ whilst this Parrot fetches hi^ Original from the South o^
Africa, or East of Asia. Onel^ consider with your selves ho^ unfit it is for
our freeborn spi^ rits to submit to a Forrainer assure your selves, foreign
Air will bring in foreign inclinations, he cannot but promot^ strangers as his
favorites to a places, and preferments of pr^ fit and honor, and can t^ be
digested by such as consu^ the true spirit of an ingenious Birth; For mine own
part, I shall rather submit to the tyranny of our own Country, then to the
insulting humors of strangers; as expecting that although one of our own
Country may for a time domineere over us; yet the sympathy of blood to those of
his own Land, will give a check, and at last gain a Conquest of his passion,
that he will return to a favorable reflection, on those who by vicinity of
birth and breeding are related unto him.

Now whereas the Parrot boasts that he does so exactly imitate the speech of
Man, it affects me no whit at all with admiration thereof. I have heard of a
speech of Alexander, who being invited to hear a man that sung like the
Nightingale, answered, I scorn to bear him, for I have heard the Nightingale it
self: and who would admire at the Copy, when he has the Original, I have
often heard men themselves speak, and therefore am not a whit moved to hear a
Parrot speak like a man; Let every thing appear in its own shape; Men speak
the language of Men, Birds of Birds. Hypocrisy is that which has betrayed the
world, to a general de^usion, thence to destruction, when people counterfeit
the Tongues and Tones of those from whose Hearts they dissent: how many demure
people has this age brought forth, sadly and soberly dropping forth their
words, with much affected deliberation (as if all the hearers were bound
thereby to believe them as solid, reserved and discreet in Deeds as in their
words, when they only Palliate and cloak a base and unworthy inside under the
shadow and pretense of an outward fair representation. I therefore must throw
my grains into the Negative scale, and conceive the Parrot utterly unfit for
the sovereignty of birds.

After many debates and disputes, pro and con, plurality of voices at last
pitched on the Hawk, as whose extraction was known to be honorable, valor
undoubted, providence or foresight admirable, as appeared in the quickness of
his eyes; being a Prometheus indeed, foreseeing all dangers, and his own
advantages of great distance. The Hawk returning his full and fair thanks unto
them for their free favor, accepted of their profer, and all their meeting for
the present was diminished, only two birds commanded to stay behind, the
Phoenix and the Turtle Doye, whom the Hawk severally accosted, beginning with
the former.

Sir, or Mistress Phoenix, says the Hawk; for I know not in what Gender to
address my language unto you, in whom both Sexes are jumbled together. I
desire to be informed of you, whether that be a truth, or a long lived common
Error, of the manner of your original from the Ashes of your Ancestor, if it be
a truth, I stand ready with admiration to embrace and entertain it: If an
error, I am resolved Posterity shall no longer be deluded therewith We live
in an Age of Knowledge, the Beams whereof have dispelled those mists of Error
wherewith our Forefather were cheated into the belief of many impossibilities
recommended unto them by Tradition, as if the gray Perriwigg^ of Old Age should
command so much veneration from us, that we should consign up our judgment to
the implicit belief of any thing which former Ages have related. Deal
therefore openly with me, and inform me the truth, whether your Generation be
thus by Continuation of a Miracle.

I cannot resolve you herein, says the Phoenix, of the particulars of my
Extraction, which happened long before the register of my memory: Sure I am
there are no other of my kind for me to couple with, which demonstrates the
truth of that which is generally received: I confess men make use of me rather
for a Moral and an Emblem to denote those things which are rare, and seldom
come to pass. Thus, a Court Lord who will honestly pay all his Debts, is
accounted a Phoenix: A Judge who will not suffer his Conscience to be robbed by
a bribe secretly proffered unto him, is a Phoenix: A Great man who looks
straight forward to the Public good, not bound on e^ there side with his own
interest is a Phoenix: However assur^ your self, that besides the Morality
that may be mad^ thereof, I have, as you see, real Existence in Nature, an^ if
any will take the pains t^ travel into Arabia to Mech^ he shall find my Nest
in a Tre^ hanging there almost as Artificially as does the Tomb o^ Mahomet
bribed by an invisibl^ Loadstone into that miraculous posture thereof.

But now, says the Hawk suppose I should seize on yo^ this night for my
supper, whether do you think that the loss of your life would be s^ great a
defect in Nature, that the whole Universe would fare the worse for the same?

Undoubtedly it would, says the Phoenix, for this is received for an undoubted
Maxim amongst Philosophers, that if one whole kind or species of Creatures be
destroyed, the whole world would be ruined thereby: For every kind of
Creatures are so Essential to the well being thereof, that if any one of them
be utterly destroyed, all the rest out of sympathy will decay.

I conceive not, says the Hawk, that you are such a foundation stone in
Natures building, that the taking you away will hazard the whole Architecture
thereof. However, I am resolved to put it to the trial, be it but to gain
knowledge by the experiment* I know what Plato says, That those are the
happiest Kingdoms, wherein either their Kings are Philosophers, or their
Philosophers their Kings. Seeing therefore the History of Nature is so
necessary to an accomplished Governor, I who desire all perfections in that
kind, will to satisfy my curiosity make proof thereof.

The Phoenix pleaded for her self the benefit of a Proclamation of liberty to
all for three days to come and go with safety; the Eagle smiling at her silly
plea, informing her that such grants are to be kept no farther than they are
consistent with the convenience of those that grant them. Yet for the present
the Phoenix was reprieved, because the Hawks stomach lately gorged, had not as
yet recovered his appetite to his supper.

Then the Hawk approached to the Turtle-dove, demanding of her whether it was
true or no what passes for a common truth, that the Turtle if once losing
their Mate, never wed more, but pass the remainder of their doleful days in
constant widdowhood.

Most true it is, says the Turtle, which I may speak by my own sad
experience; for some three vears since, the unhappy shot of a cruel Falk oner
deprived me of my dear Husband, since which time I have sequestered my self
from all company, never appearing in public till now, forced thereunto by
command from Authority.

And surely, I conceive, all second Marriages little better than excusable
lust, for when once the heat of youth has been abated in one Match, none can
pretend Necessity of Marrying again, except it be for quenching those heates
which they themselves willingly and wilfully kindle. Besides, when one has
once really affected a Husband, or he a Wife, affections so ingrosse the whole
soul, that notwithstanding his, or her death, it can never admit another to the
same degree of dea^nesse. Especially if their love were signed and sealed with
Issue, as mine was, having three of both Sexes surviving (^end them better
success than their unhappy Father ^ad) so that in them me^hinkes I behold my
Husband ^till alive. She therefore that ^ath not the modesty to d^e ^he Relict
of one man, will charge through a whole Arm^ of Husbands, if occasion were
offered, before her love will meet with a full stop there of.

You are too rigid and s^ vere, says the Hawk, to mak^ your personal temper
and pr^ vate practice the rule to me^ sure all other by, unacquainte^ with the
Necessities of other in this kind. But to co^ closer to the matter, I desi^
satisfaction in another thing namely, whether you be wit^ out a Gall as is
commonly r^ ported.

I know there is a twofo^ knowledge, one by the fru^ and the effects which
Schol^ call a posteriore, and this is the more fallible and uncertain, the
other a priore from the Causes, and this as more demonstrative may safely be
relied on, I will embrace the latter course, and to assure my self whether you
have a Gall or no, I mean to make you a living Anatomy, and instantly to
insect you. Ocular inspection is the best direction, and I will presently pry
into your intrails for my better information, to see with what curiosity Nature
has contrived the things therein, and how many ^ittle engines there are to
move the wheel of life within you.

Then began the Eagle to dispose himself, for Supper, intending the
Turtle-dove for the first Course to begin with, and the Phoenix (as the finer
flesh) to close his stomach therewith. In preparation whereunto he plumed the
Dove of some of her upper Feathers.

Just in the instant as he began his prey, who should come in, but he was
little expected, and less welcome to the Hawk than the old Eagle, and we must
a while dwell upon the cause and manner of his enlargement.

This Eagle was, as aforesaid, confined to a Grove, where he was temperate
against his will, as not able to feed on any Foul. Nature had hung such a
Lock upon his Bill, for the Redundancie thereof was such, that he was capable
of no food, save drink, which he plentifully powered in; thus for some months
drink was all the meat he took, which served to support his life, though
not to ^ncrease his strength; yet could he not be a good fellow in his Cups, as
being solitary by himself, having none to keep him company.

At last he descryed a sharp Rock, wherein one place white in color, more
prominent than the rest, had a shining hardness therein; to this the Eagle
applies his Bill, and never left off rubbing, grating, and whetting his Beak
thereon, until at last he quite whetted off the superfluous, yea hurtful
Excrescencie of his Bill, which now reduced to a moderate proportion, was as
useful to all purposes as ever before. Thus enabled to get his prey in few
weeks, he recruited his strength, so that what the Poets tell of Medea, that
with her enchanted Baths made her Father-in-law young again, here truly came
to pass: And now the New old Eagle hearing in what Quarters the Hawke kept his
constant residence, thought on a sudden to have surprised him, had not the
other discovered his approach, and made a seasonable escape, whereby both
Turtle and Phoenix obtained their liberty, and securely returned unto their
own Nests.

The Hawke having made an escape, posted with all speed to the Lapwinge, which
with some difficulty he found out, and privacie being obtained, thus kindly
spoke unto him.

Friend Lapwing, I have taken notice, that you are one of the most subtilest,
and politic Bird in all our Commonwealth; you have the art so to cover your
intentions, that they are not obvious to common eyes, when your Eggs or young
ones be a mile at distance, you use to flutter with your wings, and fetch your
rounds and circles a great way off, as if you intended to broo^ that place with
your wings, or as if that were the Chest wherein your Treasure was deposited;
this makes many people to search there for your young ones, but are frustrated
of their hopes; you have insecured them far off; this lawful Simulation, I
conceive a commendable and necessary quality in every great person; it is as
necessary as breath to their well being: Should men play all above board, and
expose their actions to all Spectators, Folly and Wisdom would be both of a
rate. No, it is the hanging of such Curtains and Traverses before our Deeds
which keep up our Reputation, and enable us for great performances. Now I
request you help me a little in my extremity, the renewed Eagle is in pursuit
of me, and my safety lies much at your disposal. The Lapwing promised the
utmost of his endeavors, and desired the Hawk to proceed.

See you, says the Hawk, yonder empty Cage of great receipt, so that it might
serve for an Aviarie, for which it was first intended, though since disused,
when the Eagle flying this way enquireth after me, persuade him I am flowne
into the Cage, and leave the rest to my performance.

All was acted accordingly, the Eagle demanded what was become of the Hawk? the
Lapwing returned, Here it is, here it is, and then hovered over the Cage,
fetching so many compasses thereabouts, that one might have mistaken him for
some ^njurer, making his many Circles with intent to raise up some spirit
thereabouts: The Eagle violently flies into the Cage, whose doors stood open,
triumphing in his own happiness, that now he should be revenged on his
professed Enemy. Instantly the Hawk (who stood behind unseen in a place of
advantage) clapps an Iron Padlock on the Cage, and thus insulteth over the
Prisoner.

Me thinks, Sir Eagle, you make me call to mind the condition of Bajazet the
Great Turk, whom Tamberlan took captive, and carried him about the Country,
that all people might feed their gazing eyes upon him; such a spectacle are you
this day; I have now made an Owl of the Eagle, turned him into the ridiculous
object of laughter and contempt: Tell me, do you not want a Prometheus, to
feed upon his fruitful entrails as the Poets feign, which daily increased,
and afforded the Poets Eagle both Common and Festivals. Sir, your life shall
not be vented out at once, but you shall dye many deaths, with long lingering
torments: I will order it so that you shall feel your self to dye: There is no
Music in an Enemies death, which is not accompanied with torment; and though
no outward torture shall be inflicted upon you, yet know, that thirst and
hunger shall be your two Executioners. Now the Guiltless blood of so many
Birds and innocent Lambs, and hurtlesse Hares shall be required of you; and so
I leave you till to morrow, when I mean to make a new meal of you in scorn and
contempt.

The Eagle sadly, yet stoutly auswered, my courage shall not abate with my
condition, whose spirit is planted above the battery of Fortune, I will never
be less than my self, whatsoever befalls me. A Lion is no less a Lion,
though in a grate; Mischance, may make me miserable, it shall not make me base,
I will bear my troubles with as much cheerfulness as I may, I defy thy
spleen in triumphing over me.

After the Hawks departure, the Ostrich came in the place, whom the Eagle saw
unseen, and wishly marked his postures and motions. The Ostrich fell into a
strange passion, and would you know the reason thereof, it was as follows.

Some three days since, when he first repaired to the general meeting of the
Birds, he left his Eggs in the sand, not covering them over, such his
carelessness and incogitancie; it was in a Starre-light night, wherein he took
a mark for the finding of his Eggs by such a Sta^re, under the direct position
whereof he then hid them, and hoped to find them at his return. It happened
that the Star being turned about with the circumgyration of the heavens,
which continue in constant motion, the Ostrich lost the Star by which he
thought to find his Eggs, and though very near the place wandering up and
down, and could not light upon it, which made him break forth into this
passionate complaints.

I am the unfortunatest of all Fowls: How will all condemn me for an
unnatural Parent, who have been thus careless of mine own Issue? Yet I took
as good notice of the place as I could, all things in Earth are false, and
fading, and flitting away: I had thought there had been more faithfulness in
the Heavens, more assurance in the Skies. Let never the Indians worship Stars
again, when they are guilty of so much deceit.

How comes it to pass, that the Pole-Starre is so perfect a guide and
direction to the Mariner, that it may be termed the grand Pilot of all
Ships, by the Elevation, or Depression whereof, they infallibly collect in
the darkest nights whereabouts they steer. I say, how comes that Star to be
so true to its trust, to be so true a Conductor of wandering Saylors, and this
prove so false to me? And now will Posterity ^and me for unnaturalness, who
have exposed my Eggs to such dange^ though therein all caution was used by me
to the height of my discretion. More would she have spoken when grief
silenced her; for as those Rivers are shallow which make a noise, whilst the
deepest streams are tongue-tyed; s^ those passions which ven^ themselves in
words, discove^ their bottom of no great depth.

Mean time the Eagle looked through the species, or entervalls in the Cage,
and so excellent the sight thereof he easily discerned where the Eggs lay, the
O^rich being so near, that he almost crushed them with his own feet, wherefore
calling the Ostrich unto him, I am glad, says he, that in my misery I have the
occasion to oblige any; I can tel^ you where the Treasure is tha^ you seek for,
and presently directed him to the same.

The Ostrich was not so over-joyed with its own happiness; but that he
bethought himself how to return proportionable thanks to the Eagle, in order
whereunto he set his Bill against the Iron Padlock of the ^age, and according
to the voraciousness of his stomach quite devoured the same.

Let privy Counselors of Nature enter into this deep Discourse, how it is
possible for such a solid, and substantial thing as Iron is, to become food to
a Foul, let them, I say, beat their brains about this Question harder than
Iron, and if they find the true reason thereof, I shall prefer their
Ingenuity as stronger than the stomach of an Ostrich; mean time we will be
content to rest in the vulgar report, and are satisfied to admire what we
cannot understand in such cases wherein surely there are some hidden, and
occult qualities, too deep for men to dive into, and these betray a surly and
base disposition, which will believe nothing (though Authentically attested by
never so many witnesses) whereof they are unable to render the true reason, as
if Nature could do^ nothing but what she giv^ them an account of how she does
it.

The Eagle th^s restored to liber^y, returned hea^y thanks to ^he Ostrich. You
see, says he, there is no living in this world without bartering and
exchanging of C^tesies one to another; he that lends to day may borrow to
morrow, how happy would Mankind be, if the Wall of Envy were plucked down
betwixt them, and their parts so laid in Common, that the wealth of one might
supply the wants of another; Nature has enriched me with a quick Sight thee
with a strong Dige^n* I have restored thy Eggs to thee, you have restored me
to my self, liberty being the life of life; and this I thought fit to testify
unto thee, though hot in the pursuit of my Enemy; first to thank thee, then
punish him: I will not be guilty of so preposterous a Soul, that my Revenge
shall get the speed of my Gratitude.

This done, the Eagle in full Quest of the Hawke, discovers a company of
Birds together, being a great party whom the Peacock had assembled, with hope
to entice them to choose him their Chief; for the Hawke no where appearing,
and the enlargement of the Eagle being unknown, he thus endeavored by his
Rhethoricall slourishes to make himself popular in their affections.

I am not ignorant, that such men proclaim their own weakness, who are the
Herald of their own praise; it argues a great dearth of desert, and want of
worth, when one is large in his own commendation, however sometimes necessity
makes it law^ull, especially when what is spoken is so generally known, that it
commands the way to its own belief, and carries the credit about it, give me
leave to present my person and merits to your consideration; my bulk not so
great as the Ostrich like to be a burden to it self, yet not so little as any
way to invite neglect: A good presence is requisite in a Commander, otherwise
great parts crowded in a despicable person, no whit becomes one in Authority. I
will give you but one argument, or demonstration rather of my Worth: When the
Gods had the free choice of all the Birds which they would please to make their
Attendants in ordinary, and when Jove made choice of the Eagle, as most
Imperial, Juno, his Consort, was pleased to elect me, to be called by the name
of her Bird in all passages of Poetry. Thus am I next to the best, and but one
step removed from the Top, even by those infallible judgments.

Look, I pray, upon my Train, how it is Circular, the most capable Form, and
how it is distinguished with variety of Colors, which appears as so many
earthly Rainebowes in my Feathers. Ovid has reported, that Argus his hundred
eyes were turned into them. But know you, if you please to elect me to be your
Chief, that all those eyes shall daily and hourly watch and ward for your
good, I will have a constant oversight of your welfare.

It was conceived, that the Peacock intended a longer Oration, which would have
wearied the assembly with the Prolixity thereof, had he not casually, but
happily cast down his eyes on his black legs, the ugly hew thereof so abated his
Pride, that it put a period to his Harangue before his intent, and others
expectation. Now as the Vulture was tuning his tongue to return an answer, in
comes the Eagle, and is generally received with all joyful acclamations.

Now because Clemency is the badge of a generous nature, and those that have
most courage have least cruelty, at the mediation of some potent Birds, the
Eagle condescended, that the day of his Re-inauguration should not be stained
with blood, and therefore granted life to the Hawk, but on condition, not to
exceed the Grove in which formerly himself was imprisoned.

FINIS.
ANTHEOLOGIA, OR The Speech of Flowers.
THere was a place in Thessaly (and I am sorry to say there was a place in
Thessaly, for though the place be there still, yet it is not it self. The
bones thereof remain, not the Flesh and Color. The standards of Hills and
Rivers; not the Ornaments of Woods, Bowers, Groves and Banqueting-houses. These
long since are defaced by the Turks, whose barbarous natures wage war with
civility it self, and take a delight to make a Wilderness where before their
conquest they found a Paradise.)

This place is some five miles in length, and though the breadth be Corrivall
with the length to equallize the same, and may so seem at the first fight; yet
it falls short upon exact examimination, as extending but to four miles.
This place was by the Poets called Tempe, as the Abridgement of Earthly
happiness, showing that in short hand, which the whole world presented in a
larger character, no earthly pleasure was elsewhere afforded, but here it
mighti be found in the height thereof.

Within this Circuit of ground, there is still extant, by the rare preservation
of the owner, a small Scantlin of some three Acres, which I might call the
Tempe of Tempe, and re-epitomiz'd the delicacies of all the rest. It was
divided into a Garden, in the upper Part whereof Flowers did grow, in the
lower, Herbs, and those of all sorts and kinds. And now in Spring time earth
did put on her new clothes, though had some cun^ing Herald beheld the same, he
would have condemned her Coat to have been of no ancient bearing, it was so
overcharged with variety of Colors.

For there was yellow Marigolds, Wallflowers, Auriculusses, Gold knobs, and
abundance of other namelesse Flowers, which would pose a Nomenclator to call
them by their distinct denominations. There was White, the Days Eye, white
roses, Lillyes, etc. Blew, Violet, Irisse, Red Roses, Pionies, etc. The whole
field was vert or green, and all colors were present save sable, as too sad
and doleful for so merry a meeting. All the Children of Flora being summone^
there, to make their appearance at a great solemnity.

Nor was the lower part of the ground less stored with herbs, and those so
various, that if Gerard himself had bin in the place, upon the beholding
thereof, he must have been forced to a re-edition of his Herball, to add the
recruit of those Plants, which formerly were unseen by him, or unknown unto him.

In this solemn Randevouz of Flowers and Herbs, the Rose stood forth, and made
an Oration to this effect.

It is not unknown to you, how I have the precedence of all Flowers, confirmed
unto me under the Patent of a double Sense, Sight, smell. What more curious
Colors? how do all Diers blush when they behold my blushing, as conscious to
themselves, that their Art cannot imitate that tincture, which Nature has
stamped upon me. Smell, it is not lusciously offensive, nor dangerously Faint,
but comfort with a delight, and delights with the comfort thereof: Yea,
when Dead, I am more Sovereign then Living: What Cordials are made of my
Syrups? how many corrupted Lungs (those Fans of Nature) sore wasted with
consumption, that they seem utterly unable any longer to cool the heat of the
Heart, with their ventilation, are with Conserves made of my stamped Leaves,
restored to their former soundness again: More would I say in mine own cause,
but that happily I may be taxed of pride, and self. flattery, who speak much
in mine own behalf, and therefore I leave the rest to the judgment of such as
hear me, and pass from this discourse to my just complaint.

There is lately a Flower (shall I call it so? in courtesy I will term it so,
though it deserve not the appellation) a Toolip, which has ingrafted the love
and affections of most people unto it; and what is this Toolip? a well
complexion'd stink, an ill savor wrapped up in pleasant colors: As for the use
thereof in Physic, no Physician has honored it yet with the mention, nor
with a Greek, or Latin name, so inconsiderable has it hitherto been accounted;
and yet this is that which fills all Gardens, hundred of pounds being given
for the root thereof, whilst I the Rose, am neglected and contemned, and
conceived beneath the honor of noble hands, and fit only to grow in the
gardens of Yeomen. I trust the remainder to your apprehensions, to make out
that, which grief for such undeserved injuries will not suffer me to express.

Hereat the Rose wept, and the dropping of her white tears down her red cheeks,
so well becomed her, that if ever sorrow was lovely, it then appeared so, which
moved the beholders to much compassion, her Tears speaking more then her
tongue, in her own behalf.

The Tool p stood up insolently, as rather challenging then craving respect
from the Commonwealth of Flower^ there present, and thus vaunted it self.

I am not solicitous what to return to the complaint of this Rose, whose own
demerit has justly outed it self of that respect, which the mistaken world
formerly bestowed upon it, and which men's eyes, now opened, justly reassume,
and confer on those who better deserve the same. To say that I am not more
worthy then the Rose, what is it, but to condemn mankind, and to arraign the
most Gentle and knowing among men of ignorance, for misplacing their
affections: Surely Vegetables must not presame to mount above Rationable
creatures, or to think that men are not the most competent judges of the worth
and value of Flowers. I confess there is yet no known sovereign virtue in my
leaves, but it is injurious to infer that I have none, because as yet not
taken notice of. If we should examine all, by their intrinsic valews, how many
contemptible things in Nature would take the upper-hand of those which are most
valued; by this argument a Flint-stone would be better then a Diamond, as
containing that spark of fire therein, whence men with combustible matter may
heat themselves in the coldest season: and clear it is, that the Lodestone,
(that grand Pilot to the North, which finds the way there in the darkest
night) is to be preferred before the most orient Pearl in the world: But they
will generally be condemned for unwise, who prize things according to this
proportion.

Seeing therefore in stones and minerals, that those things are not most
valued, which have most virtue, but that men according to their eyes and
fancies raise the reputation thereof, let it not be interpreted to my
disadvantage, that I am not eminently known for any cordial operation;
perchance the discovery hereof is reserved for the next age, to find out the
latent virtue which lurketh in me: And this I am confident of, that Nature
would never have hung out so gorgious a sign, if some guest of quality had not
been lodged therein; surely my leaves, had never been feathered with such
variety of colors, (which has proclaimed me the King of all Lillies) had not
some strange virtue, whereof the world is yet ignorant, been treasured up
therein.

As for the Rose, let her thank her self, if she be sensible of any decay in
esteem, I have not ambitiously affected superiority above her, nor have I
fraudulently endeavored to supplant her: only I should have been wanting to my
self, had I refused those favors from Ladies, which their importunity has
pressed upon me: And may the Rose remember, how she out of causeless
jealousy, makes all hands to be her enemies that gather her; what need is
there that she should garrison her self within her prickles? why must she set
so many Thorns to lie constant perdue, that none must gather her, but such as
suddenly surprise her; and do not all that crop her, run the hazard of hurting
their fingers: This is that which has weaned the world from her love, whilst
my smooth stalk exposing Ladies to no such perils, has made them by exchange
to fix their removed affections upon me.

At this stood up the Violet, and all prepared themselves with respectfull
attention, honoring the Violet for the Age thereof, for the Prim Rose alone
excepted, it is Seignior to all the Flowers in the year, and was highly
regarded for the reputation of the experience thereof that durst encounter the
cold, and had past many bitter blasts, whereby it had gained much wispome, and
had procured a venerable respect, both to his ^erson and Counsel.

The case (says the Violet) is not of particular concernment, but extends it
self to the life and liberty of all the society of Flowers; the complaint of
the Rose we must all acknowledge to be just and true, and ever since I could
remember, we have paid the Rose a just tribute of Fealty as our Prime and
principal. As for this Toolip, it has not been in being in our Garden above
these sixty years: Our Fathers never knew that such a Flower would be, and
perhaps our children may never know it ever was; what traveller brought it
hither, I know not; they say it is of a Syrian extraction, but sure there it
grew wild in the open fields, and is not beheld otherwise, then a gentler sort
of weed: But we may observe that allforraign vices are made virtues in this
country, foreign drunkenness is Grecian Mirth (thence the proverb, The merry
Greek) foreign pride, Grecian good behavior; foreign lust, Grecian love;
foreign laziness, Grecian harmelessnesse; foreign weeds, Grecian Flowers. My
judgment therefore is, that if we do not speedily eradicate this intruder
(this Toolip) in process of time will out us all of our just possessions,
seeing no Flower can pretend a cleerer title then the Rose ^ath; and let us
every one make the case to be his own.

The gravity of the Violet so prevailed with the Senate of Flowers, that all
concurred with his judgment herein; and such who had not the faculty of the
sluentnesse of their tongues to express themselves in large Orations, thought
that the well managing of a yea, or nay, spoke them as well wishing to the
general good, as the expressing themselves in large Harrangues; and these
soberly concluded, that the Toolip should be rooted out of the Garden, and cast
on the dunghill, as one who had justly invaded a place not due thereunto, and
this accordingly was performed.

Whilst this was passing in the upper house of the Flowers, no less were the
transactions in the lower house of the herbs; where there was a general
acclamation against Wormwood, the generality condemning it, as fitter to grow
in a ditch then in a Garden: Wormwood hardly ^eneived leave to make its own
defense, pleading in this manner for its innocence.

I would gladly know whom I have offended in this commonwealth of Herbs, that
there should be so general a conspiracy against me? only two things can be
charged on me, commonnesse and bitterness; if commonnesse pass for a fault,
you may arraign Nature it self, and condemn the best Jewel^ thereof, the light
of the Sun, the benefit of the Air, the community of the Water, are not these
staple commodities of mankind, without which no being or subsistence: if
therefore it be my charity to stoop so low, as to tender my self to every
place for the public service, shall that for which I deserve, if not praise,
I need no pardon, be charged upon me as an offense.

As for my bitterness, it is not a malicious and mischievous bitterness to do
hurt, but a helpful and medicinal bitterness, whereby many cures are
effected. How many have surteited on honey? how many have dig'd their gravs in
a Sugar Loaf? how many diseases have bin caused by the dulcor of many luscious
sweetmeats? then am I sent for Physician to these patients, and with my
brother Cardus (whom you behold with a loving eye, I speak not this to endanger
him, but to defend my self) restore them (if temperate in any degree, and
persuaded by their friends to taste of us) unto their former health. I say no
more, but were all my patients now my pleaders, were all those who have gained
health by me, present to intercede for me, I doubt not but to be reinstated in
your good opinions.

True it is, I am condemned for over-hot, and too passionate in my operation;
but are not the best natures subject to this distemper? is it not observed that
the most witty are the most choleric? a little overdoing is pardonable, I will
not say necessary in this kind, nor let me be condemned as destructive to the
fight, having such good opening, and abstergent qualities, that moderately
taken, especially in a Vorning, I am both food and Physic for a forenoon.

It is strange to see how passion and selfe-interest sway in many things, more
then the justice and merit of a cause; it was verily expected that Wormwood
should have been acquitted, and readmitted a member in the society of Herbs:
But what will not a Faction carry; Worme-woods friends were cafually absent
that very day, making merry at an entertainment; her enemies (let not that Sex
be angry for making Wormwood feminine) appeared in a full body, and made so
great a noise, as if some mouths had two tongues in them, and though some
engaged very zealously in Wormwoods defense, yet overcharged with the Tyranny
of Number, it was carried in the Negative, that Wormwood, alias absynthium,
should be plucked up root and branch from the Garden, and thrown upon the
Dunghill, which was done accordingly, where it had the woeful society of the
Toolip, in this happy, that being equally miserable, they might be a comfort
the one to the other, and spent many hours in mutual recounting their
several calamities, thinking each to exceed the other in the relation thereof.

Let us now amidst much sadness interweave something of more mirth and
pleasantness in the Garden. There were two Roses growing upon one Bush, the
one pale and wan with age, ready to drop off, as useful only for a Still: the
other a young Bud, newly loosened from its green swaddling clothes, and peeping
on the rising Sun, it seemed by its orient color to be died by the reflection
thereof.

Of these, the aged Rose thus began.

Sister Bud, learn wit by my woe, and cheaply enjoy the free and full benefit
of that purchase which cost me dear and bitter experience: Once I was like your
self, young and pretty, straightly laced in my green-Girdle, not swollen to that
breadth and corpulency which now you behold in me, every hand which passed by
me courted me, and persons of all sorts were ambitious to gather me: How many
fair fingers of curious Ladies tendered themselves to remove me from the place
of my abode; but in those days I was coy, and to tell you plainly foolish, I
stood on mine own defense, summoned my lifeguard about me, commanded every
pickle as so many Halberdeers, to stand to their Arms, de^ie those that durst
touch me, protested my self a votary of constant virginity; frighted hereat,
passengers desisted from their intentions to crop me, and left me to enjoy the
sullen humor of my own reservednesse.

Afterward the Sun beams wrought powerfully upon me, (especialy about
noon-time) to this my present extent, the Orient color which blushed so
beautiful in me at the first, was much abated, with an overmixture of Wa^ness
and palemess therewith, so that the Green (or white sickness rather, the
common penance for over-kept virginity began to infect me, and that fragrant
sent of mine, began to remit and lessen the sweetness thereof, and I daily
decayed in my natural perfume; thus seeing I daily lessened in the repute of
all eyes and nostrills, I began too late to repent my self of my former
frowardness, and sought that my diligence by an after-game; should recover
what my folly had lost; I pranked up my self to my best advantage, summoned
all my sweetness to appear in the height thereof, recruited my decayed Color,
by blushing for my own folly, and wooed every hand that passed by me, to remove
me.

I confess in some sort it offers rape to a Maiden modesty, if forgetting
their sex, they that should be all Ears, turn mouths, they that should expect,
offer; when we women, who only should be the passive Counterparts of Love, and
receive impression from others, boldly presume to stamp them on others, and by
an inverted method of nature, turn pleaders unto men, and woo them for their
affections. For all this there is but one excuse, and that is absolute
necessity which as it breaks through stonewalls, so ^o wonder if in this case
it alters and transposes the Sexes, making women to m^n it in case of
extremity, when men are wanting to tender their affections unto them.

All was but in vain, I was entertained with scorn and neglect, the hardened
hands of daily Laborers, brawned with continual work, the bluck hands of
Moors, which always carry Night in their (...), slighted and contemned me;
yea, now behold my last hope is but to deck and adom houses, and to be laid as
a property in windows, till at last I die in the Hospital of ^ome still,
where when useless for any thing else, we are generally admitted. And now my
^ery leaves begin to leave me, and I to be deserted and forsaken of my sel^.

O how happy are those Roses, who are preferred in their youths; to be warm in
the hands and breasts of fair Ladies, who are joined together with other
flowers of several kinds in a Posie, wh^re the general result of sweetness
from them all, ravisheth the Smell by an intermixture of various colors, all
united by their stalks within the same (...) that binds them together.

Therefore Sister Bud grow wise by my folly, and know it is far greater
happiness to lose thy Virginity in a good hand, then to wither on the stalk
whereon thou growest: accept of thy first and best tender, lest afterward in
vain thou courtest the reversion of fragments of that feast of love, which
first was freely tendered unto thee.

Leave we them in their dis^ourse, and proceed to the relation of the Toolip
and Wormwood, now in a most pitiful condition, as they were lying on the
Dunghill; behold a vast Gi^nt Boar comes unto them; that which Hercules was
said to kill, and which was accounted by some the foreman of the jury of his
L^ours, was but a Pygmie, or rather but a Pig, in comparison of this; and with
his Tusks wherewith Nature had armed him to be his sword as his shoulders are
his shield, he began to rend and tear the Toolip and Wormwood, who exclaimed
unto him as follows.

SIR,

Pity uses always to be an attendant of a generous mind, and valiant spirit,
for which I have heard you much commended. Cruelty is commonly observed to keep
company with Cowardlinesse, and base minds, to triumph in cruel actions,
behold we are the objects rather of your pity, whose ^fferings may rather
render us to the commiseration of any that justly consider our case. I the
Too^ip by a faction of flowers, was outed of the Garden, where I have as good a
right and title to abide as any other: and this Wormwood, notwithstanding her
just and long plea, how useful and cordial she was, was by a conspiracy of
Herbs excluded the Garden, and both of us ignominiously confined to this place,
where we must without all hopes quickly expire: Our humble request unto you is
not to ^orten those few minutes of our lives which are left unto us, seeing
such prejudice was done to our Vitals (when our roots were mangled by that
cruel eradication) that there is an impossibility of our long continuance: Let
us therefore sairly breath out our last breath, and antidate not our misery,
but let us have the favor of a quiet close and conclusion.

But if so be that you are af^ected with the destruction of flowers and herbs,
know the pleasure and contentment therein must be far greater to root out those
which are fairly flourishing in their prime, whereof pl^ty are in this Garden
afforded, and if it please you to follow our directions, we will make you
Master of a Pass, which without any difficulty shall convey you into the
Garden, for though the same on all sides almost is either walled or paled
about, yet in one place it is fenced with a Hedge only, wherein, through the
neglect of the Gardener, (whose care it ought to be to secure the same) there
is a hole left in such capacity; as will yield you an easy entrance thereinto:
There may you glut your self, and satiate your soul with variety of Flowers
and herb^, so that an Epicure might have cause to complain of the plenty
thereof.

The Boar apprehends the motion, is sencible it was advantageous for him, and
following their directions, he makes himself Master of his own desire. O the
spitefulness of some Natures! how do they wreck their their anger on all
persons: It was revenge for the Toolip and Wormwood, unless they had
spitefully wronged the whole Corporation of Flowers, out of which they were
ejected as useless and dangerous Members: And now consider how these two pride
themselves in their own vindicative thoughts? how do they in their forcrunning
fancy antidate the death of all Herbs and Flowers. What is sweeter then
revenge? how do they please themselves to see what are hot and cold in the
first, second, third, and fourth degree, (which borders on poison) how all
these different in their several Tempers, will be made friends in universal
misery, and compounded in a general destruction.

Little did either Flowers or Herbs think of the Boares approaching, who were
solacing themselves with merry and pleasant discourse; and it will not be amiss
to deceive time, by inserting the Courtship of Thrift a flower-Herb, unto the
Marygold, thus accosting her, just as the Boar entered into the Garden.

Mistress, Of all Flowers that grow on Earth, give me leave to profess my
fincerest affections to you: Complements have so infected men's tongues (and
grown an Epidemicall fault, or as others esteem it, a fashionable
accomplishment) that we know not when they speak truth, having made dissembling
their language, by a constant usage thereof: But believe me Mistress my heart
never entertained any other interpreter then my Tongue; and if there be a vein
(which Anatomists have generally avouched, carrying intelligence from the heart
to the lips) assure your self that vein acts now in my discourse.

I have taken signal notice of your accomplishments, and among many other rare
qualities, particularly of this, your loyalty and faithfulness to the Sun,
Sovereign to all Vegetables, to whose warming Beams, we owe our being and
increase: such your love thereunto, that you attend his rising, and therewith
open, and at his setting shut your windows: True it is, that Helitropium ( to
turner with the Sun) has a long time been attributed to the Sun-flower, a
voluminous Giant like Flower, of no virtue or worth as yet discovered therein,
but we all know the many and Sovereign virtues in your leaves, the Herb
general in all pottage: Nor do you as Herb John stand newter, and as too many
now adays in our Commonwealth do, neither good nor ill (expecting to be acted
on by the impression of the prevailent party) and otherwise warily engage not
themselves; but you really appear sovereign and operative in your wholesome
effects: The consideration hereof, and no other by reflection, has moved me to
the tender of my affections, which if it be heartily resented, as it is
sincerely offered, I doubt not but it may conduce to the mutual happiness of
us both.

Besides know (though I am the unproperest person to trumpet forth my own
praise) my name is Thrift, and my nature answers thereunto; I do not
prodigally wast those Lands in a moment, which the industry and frugality of my
Ancestors has in a long time advanced; I am no gamster to shake away with a
quaking hand, what a more fixed hand did gain and acquire: I am none of those
who in variety of clothes, bury my quick e^ate as in a winding sheet; nor am I
one of those who by cheats and deceits improve my self on the losses of
others; no Widows have wept, no Orphans have cried for what I have offered
unto them (this is not Thrift but rather Felony) nor owe I any thing to my own
body; I fear not to be arrested upon the action of my own carcaffe, as if my
creditors should cunningly compact therewith, and quit scores, resigning their
Bill and Bond unto mine own body, whilst that in requital surrendereth all
obligations for food and clothes thereunto: Nor do I undertake to buy out Bonds
in controversies for almost nothing, that so running a small hazard, I may gain
great advantage, if my bargain therein prove successful. No, I am plain and
honest Thrist, which none ever did, or will speak against, save such prodigal
spend-thrifts, who in their reduced thoughts, will speak more against
themselves.

And now it is in your power to accept or refuse what I have offered, which is
the privilege which nature has allotted for your feminine sex, which we men
perchance may grudg and repine at, but it being past our power to amend it, we
must permit our selves as well as we may to the constant custom prevailing
herein.

The Marigold demurely hung down her head, as not overfond of the motion, and
kept silence so long as it might stand with the rule of manners, but atlast
brake forth into the following return.

I am tempted to have a good opinion of my self, to which all people are
prone, and we women most of all, if we may believe your -- of us, which herein
I am afraid are too true: But Sir, I conceive my self too wise to be deceived
by your commendations of me, especially in so large a way, and on so general
an account, that other Flowers not only share with me, but exceeed me therein:
May not the Daies-eye not only be corrivall with me; but superior to me in that
quality, wherein so much you praise me; my vig^ancy starteth only from the Suns
rising, hers bears date from the dawning of the morning, and out-runs my speed
by many degrees: my virtue in portage which you so highly commend, impute it
not to my Modesty, but to my Guiltiness, if I cannot give it entertainment;
for how many hundred Herbs which you have neglected exceed me therein.

But the plain truth is, your love not me for my self, but for your advantage:
It is Gold on the arrear of my name which makes Thrift to be my Suitor: how
often, and how unworthily have you tendered your affections, even to
Penny-royall, it self, had she not scorned to be courted by you.

But I commend the Girl that she knew her own worth, though it was but a
Penny, yet it is a Royal one, and therefore not a fit match for every base
Suitor, but knew how to value her self, and give me leave to tell you, that
Matches founded on Covetousness never succeed* Profit is the Lodestone of
your affections, Wealth, the attractive of your Love, Money the mover of your
desire; how many hundreds have engaged themselves on these principles, and
afterward have bemoaned themselves for the same? But oh the uncertainty of
wealth? how unable is it to expleate and satisfy the mind of man: Such as cast
Ancho^ thereat, ^eldome find fast ground, but are tossed about with the
Tempests of many disturbances; these Wive^ for convenience of profit and
pleasure (when there has been no further nor higher intent) have filled all
the world with mischief and misery. Know then sir, I return you a flat denial,
a denial that vertually contains many, yea as many as ever I shall be able to
pronounce: My tongue knows no other language to you but No; score it upon
women's dissimulation (whereof we are too guilty, and I at other times as faulty
as any) but Sir, read my eyes, my face, and compound all together, and know
these are the exp^essions dictated from my heart; I shall embrace a thousand
deaths sooner, then your MarriageBed.

Thus were they harmelessly discoursing, and feared no ill, when on a sudden
they were surprised with the un^outh sight of the Boar, which had entered
their Garden, following his prescribed directions, and armed with the Corslet
of his Bristles, vaunted like a triumphant Conqueror round about the Garden, as
one who would first make them suffer in their fear, before in their feeling;
how did he please himself in the variety of the fears* of the flowers, to see
how some pal^ ones looked red, and some re^ ones looked pale; leaving it to
Philosophers to dispute and decide the different effects should proceed from
the same causes; and among all Philosophers, commending the question to the
Stoics, who because they pretend an Antipathy, that they themselves would
never be angry, never be mounted above the model of a common usual Temper,
are most competent Judges, impartially to give the reason of the causes of the
anger of others.

And now it is strange to see the several ways the Flowers embraced to
provide for their own security; there is no such Teacher as extremity;
necessity has found out more Arts, then ever ingenuity invented: The
Wall-Gilly flower ran up to the top of the Wall of the Garden, where it has
grown ever since, and will never descend till it has good security for its own
safety; and being mounted thereon, he entertained the Boar with the following
discourse.

Thou basest and unworthiest of four-footed Beasts; thy Mother the Sow, passes
for the most contemptible name, that can be fixed on any She: Yea, Pliny
reports, that a Sow grown old, uses to feed on her own young; and herein I
believe that Pliny, who otherwise might be straightened for fellow-witnesses,
might find such who will attest the truth of what he has spoken. Men's
Excrements is thy element, and what more cleanly creatures do scorn and detest,
makes a feast for thee; nothing comes amiss unto thy mouth, and we know the
proverb what can make a pan-cake unto thee: Now you are gotten into the Garden
(shame light on that negligent Gardner, whose care it was to fence the same, by
whose negligence and oversight, you have gotten an entrance into this Academy
of Flowers and Herbs) let me who am your enenie give you some Counsel, and
neglect it not, because it comes from my Mouth. You see I am without the reach
of your Anger, and all your power cannot hurt me, except you be pleased to
borrow wings from some Bird, thereby to advantage your self, to reach my
habitation.

My Counsel therefore to you is this, be not Proud because you are Prosperous;
who would ever have thought, that you could have entered this place, which we
conceived was impregnable against any of your kind: Now because you have had
success as far above our expectations, as your deserts; show your own
moderation in the usage thereof; to ^aster us is easy, to Master your self is
difficult. Attempt therefore that which as it is most hard to perform, so will
it bring most honor to you when executed; and know, I speak not this in
relation to my self (sufficiently privileged from your T^sks) but as acted
with a public spirit, for the good of the Comminalty of Flowers; and if any
thing hereafter betide you, other then you expect, you will remember that I am
a ^rophet, and for^ ^ell that which too late you will credit and bel^eve.

The Boar heard the words, and entertained them with a surly silence; as
conceiving himself to be mounted above danger, sometimes he pitied the
silliness of the Wall-flower, that pittyed him, and sometimes he vowed
revenge, concluding that the stones of the Wall would not afford it sufficient
moisture, for its constant dwelling there, but that he should take it for an
advantage, when it descended for more sustenance.

It is hard to express the panick fear in the rest of the flowers, and
especially the small Prim-ro^es, begged of their Mothers that they might
retreat into the middle of them, which would only make them grow bigger and
broader, and it would grieve a pitiful heart to hear the child plead, and the
mother so often deny.

The Child began; dear Mother, she is but half a Mother that does breed and
not preserve, only to bring forth, and then to expose us to worldly ^isery,
less^ns your Love, and doubles our sufferings: See how this tyrannical Boar
threatens our instant undoing; I desire only a Sanctuary in your bosom, a
retreating place into your breast, and who fitter to come into you, then she
that came out of you; whether should we return, then from whence we came, it
will be but one happiness, or one misfortune, together we shall die, or
together be preserved; only some content and comfort will be unto me, either to
be happy or unhappy in your company.

The broader Prim-rose hearkened unto these words with a sad countenance, as
^ensible in her self, that had not the present necessity hardened her
affections, she neither would nor could return a deaf ^are to ^o equal a
motion. But now she rejoyned.

Dear Child, none can be more sensible then my self of Motherly affections, it
troubles me more for me to deny thee, then for thee to be denied; I love thy
safety where it is not necessarily included in my danger, the entertaining of
thee will be my (...) and destruction; how many Parents in this age have been
undone merely for affording house and home to such Children, whose condition
might be quarreled with as exposed to exception.

I am sure of mine own innocence, which never in the least degree have
offended this Boar, and therefore hope he will not offend me; what wrong and
injury you have done him is best known to your self; stand therefore on your
own bottom, maintain your own innocence; for my part I am resolved not to be
drowned for others hanging on me, but I will try as long as I can the strength
of my own arms and legs; excuse me good child, it is not hatred to you, but
love to my self, which makes me to understand my own interest. The younger
Prim-rose returned.

Mother, I must again appeal to your affections, despairing to find any other
Judge to Father my cause; remember I am part of your self, and have never by
any undutifulnesse disobliged your affections; I profess also mine own
integrity, that I never have offended this Boar, being more innocent therein
then your self, for alas my tender years intitles me not to any correspondency
with him, this is the first minute (and may it be the last) that ever I beheld
him; I reassume therefore my suite, supposing that your first denial proceeded
only from a desire to try my importunity, and give me occasion to enforce my
request with the greater earnestness: By your motherly bowels I conjure you
(an exorcisme which (I believe) comes not within the compass of ^uperstition)
that you tenderme in this my extremity, whose greatest ambition is to die in
those arms from whence I first fetched my original. And then she left her
tears singly to drop out the remainder, what her tongue could not express.

The Affections of Parents may sometimes he s^othered, but seldom quenched,
and meeting with the ^last or bellows from the submissive mouths of their
Children, it quickly bla^eth into a flame. Mother and daughter are like
Tallies, one exactly answers the other: The Mother Prim-rose could no longer
resist the violence of * her daughters importunity, but opens her bosom for
the present reception thereof, wherein ever since it has grown doubled unto
this day; and yet a double mischief did arise from this gemination of the
Print-ro^e, or inserting of the little one into the Bowels thereof.

First, those Prim-roses ever since grow very slowly, and lag the last among
all the Flowers of that kind; single Prim-roses beat them out of distance, and
are arrived at their M^rk a month before the other start out of their gr^en
leaves: yet it will not be hard to assign a natural cause thereof, namely, a
greater power of the Sun is acquired to the production of greater Flowers,
small degrees of heat will suffice to give a being to single Flowers, whilst
double ones groaning under the weight of their own greatness, require a
greater force of the Sunbeams to quicken them, and to spur their laziness,
to make them appear out of their roots.

But the second Mischief most concerns us, which is this, all single Flowers
are sweeter, then those that are double; and here we could wish that a Jury of
Florists were impannelled, not to eat, until such time as they were agreed in
their verdict, what is the true cause thereofSome will say that single leaves
of Flowers, being more effectually wrought on by the SunBeams, are rarefied
thereby, and so all their sweetness and perfume the more fully extracted;
whereas double Flowers who lie as it were in a lump, and heap crowded together
with its own leaves, the Sunbeams has not that advantage singly to distill
them, and to improve every particular leaf to the best advantage of sweetness:
This sure I am, that the old Primrose sencible of the abatement of her
sweetness, since she was clogged with the entertainment of her Daughter, half
repenting that she had received her, returned this complaining discourse.

Daughter, I am sencible that that the statutes of inmates, was founded on very
good and solid grounds, that many should not be multiplied within the roof of
one and the same house, finding the inconveniency thereof by lodging thee my
own Daughter within my Bosom; I will not speak how much I have lost of my
grouth, the Clock whereof is set back a whole month by receiving of you; but
that which most grieveth me, I perceive I am much abated in my sweetness (the
essence of all Flowers) and which only distinguishes them from w^ds, seeing
otherwise in Colors, weeds may contest with us in brightness and variety.

Peace Mother (replied the small Prim-rose) conceive not this to be your
particular unhappiness, which is the general accid^nt falling out daily in
common experience, namely, that the bigger and thicker people grow in their
estates, the worse and less virtuous they are in their Conversations, our age
may produce millions of these instances; I knew some ten years since many
honest men, whose converse was familiar and fair, how did they court and
desire the company of their neighbors, and mutually, how was their company
desired by them? how humble were they in their carriage, loving in their
expressions, and friendly in their behavior, drawing the love and affections
of all that were acquainted with them? But since being grown wealthy, they have
first learnt not to know themselves, and afterward none of their neighbors;
the brightness of much Gold and Silver, has with the shine and luster thereof
so perstringed and dazzled their eyes, that they have forgotten those with whom
they had formerly so familiar conversation; how proudly do they walk? how
superc^liously do they look? how disdainfully do they speak? they will not know
their own Brothers and kindred, as being a kin only to themselves.

Indeed such who have long been gaining of wealth, and have slowly proceeded by
degrees therein, whereby they have learnt to manage their minds, are not so
palpably proud as others; but those who in an instant have been surprised with
a vast estate, flowing in upon them from a fountain far above their deserts,
not being able to wield their own greatness, have been pressed under the weight
of their own estates, and have manifested that their minds never knew how to be
stewards of their wealth, by forgetting themselves in the disposing thereof.

I believe the little Prim-rose would have beee longer in her discourse, had
not the approach of the Boar put an unexpected period thereunto, and made her
break off her speech before the ending thereof.

Now whilst all other flowers were struck into a panick silence, only two, the
Violet, and the Marygold continued their discourse, which was not attributed to
their valor or hardiness above other Flowers, but that casually both of them
grew together in the declivity of a depressed Valley, so that they saw not the
Boar, nor were they sensible of their own misery, nor durst others remove their
stations to bring them intelligence thereof.

Sister Marigold (said the Violet) you and I have continued these many days in
the contest which of our two colors are the most honorable and pleasing to
the Eye, I know what you can plead for your self, that your yellowness is the
Livery of Gold, the Sovereign of most men's hearts, and esteemed the purest of
all metals; I deny not the truth hereof: But know that as far as the Sky
surpasses that which is buried in the Bowels of the Earth, so far my blew
color exceeds yours; what is oftener mentioned by the Poets then the azure
Clouds? let Heralds be made the Vmpire, and I appeal to Gerrard, whether the
azure does not carry it clear above all other colors herein; Sable or Black
affrights the beholders with the hue thereof, and minds them of the Funeral of
their last friends, whom they had interred Vert or Green I confess is a color
refreshing the sight, and wore commonly before the eyes of such who have had a
casual mischance therein, however, it is but the Livery of novelty, a young
upstart color, as green heads, and green youth do pass in common experience.
Red I confess is a noble color, but it has too much of bloodinesse therein,
and affrighteth beholders with the memory thereof: My Blew is exposed to no
cavills and exceptions, wherein black and red are moderately compounded, so
that I participate of the perfections of them both: the over* gaudinesse of the
red, which has too much light and brightness therein, is reduced and tempered
with such a mixture of black, that the red is made staved, but not sad
therewith, and the black kept from overmuch melancholy, with a proportionable
contemperation of red therein: This is the reason that in all ages the Violet
or purple color has passed for the emblem of Magistracy, and the Robes of the
ancient Roman judges always died therewith.

The Violet scarce arived at the middle of her discourse, when the approach of
the Boar put it into a terrible fear, nor was their any Herb or Flower in the
whole Garden left unsurprized with fear, save only Time and Sage, which
casually grew in an ^sland surrounded with water from the rest, and secured
with a lock-bridge from the Boars access. Sage beginning, accosted Time in
this Nature.

Most fragrant Sister, there needs no other argument to convince thy
transcendent sweetness, save only the appealing to the Bees (the most
competent judges in this kind) those little Chemists, who through their natural
Alembick, distill the sweetest and usefullest of Liquors, did not the
commonnesse and cheapnesse thereof make it less valued: Now these industrious
Bees, the emblem of a commonwealth (or Monarchy rather, if the received
traditions of a MasterBee be true) make their constant diet upon the; for
though no Flower comes amiss to their palates, yet are they observed to
prefer thee above the rest. Now Sister Time, feign would I be satisfied of
you several queries, which only Time is able to resolve. Whether or no do you
think that the State of the Turks wherein we live, (whose cruelty has
destroyed fair Tempe to the small remnant of these few Acres) whether I say,
do you think that their strength and greatness does increase, stand still, or
abate? I know Time that you are the Mother of truth, and the finder out of all
truths mysteries; be open therefore and candid with me herein, and freely speak
your mind of the case propounded.

Time very gravely casting down the eyes thereof to the earth; Sister Sage
(said she) had you propounded any question within the sphere or circuit of a
Garden, of the heat or coolness, dryness or mo^sture, virtue or operation of
flowers and Herbs, I should not have demurred to return you a speedy answer;
but this is of that dangerous cousequence, that my own safety locks up my lips,
and commands my silence therein: I know your wisdom Sage, whence you have
gotten your name and reputation, this is not an age to trust the nearest of our
relations with such an important secrecy; what ever thoughts are concealed
within the Cabinet of my own bosom, shall there be preserved in their secret
property without imparting them to any; my confessor himself shall know my
conscience, but not my judgment in affairs of State: Let us comply with the
present necessity, and lie at a close posture, knowing there be fencers even
now about us, who will set upon us if our guards lie open: general discourses
are such to which I will confine my self: It is anciently said, that the
subtle man lurks in general. But now give me leave, for honesty it self, if
desiring to be safe, to take Sanctuary therein.

Let us enjoy our own happiness, and be sensible of the favor indulged to us,
that whereas all Tempe is defaced, this Garden still surviveth in some
tolerable condition of prosperity, and we especially miled about, are fenced
from foreign foes, better then the rest; let it satisfy your soul that we
peaceably possess this happiness, and I am sorry that the luster thereof is
set forth with so true a foil, as the calamity of our neighbors.

Sage returned; Were I a blab of my mouth, whose secrecy was ever suspected,
then might you be cautious in communicating your mind unto me: But secrecy is
that I can principally boast of, it being the quality for which the
commonwealth of Flowers chose me their privy Councellor, what therefore is
told me in this nature, is deposited as securely, as those treasures which
formerly were laid up in the Temple of safety it self; and therefore with all
modest importunity, I reassume my suit, and desire your judgment of the
question, whether the Turkish Tyranny is likely to continue any longer? for
Time I know alone can give an answer to this question.

Being confident ( said Time) of your fidelity, I shall express my self in
that freeness unto you, which I never as yet expressed to any mortal: I am of
that hopeful opinion, that the period of this barbarous nations greatness
begins to approach, my first reason is drawn from the vicissitude and
mutability which attends all earthly things; Bodies arrived at the vertical
point of their strength, decay and decline. The Moon when in the fullness of
its increasing, tends to a waning; it is a pitch too high for any sublunary
thing to amount unto constantly, to proceed progressively in greatness; this
makes me to hope that this Giant-like Empire, comented with Tyranny,
supported, not so much with their own policy, as with the servility of such who
are under them, has seen its best days and highest elevation.

To this end, to come to more particulars, what was it which first made the
Turks fortunate, in so short a time to overrun all Greece, but these two
things; first, the dissentions, 2. the dissoluteness of your ancient Greeks:
Their dissentions are too well known, the Emperor of Constantinople being grown
almost but titular, such the pride and potency of many Peers under him. The
Egean is not more stored with Islands (as I think scarce such a heap or huddle
is to be found of them in all the world again) as Greece was with several
factions, the Epirots hated the Achayans, the Mesedans bandoned against the
Thracians, the Dalmatians maintained deadly feud against the Wallachians: Thus
was the conquest made easy for the Turks, beholding not so much to their own
valor, as to the Grecian discord.

Next to their dissentions, their dissoluteness did expedite their ruin;
drunkenness was so common among them, that it was a sin to be sober, so that I
may ^ay, all Greece reeled and staggered with its own intemperance when the
Turk assaulted it: What wonder then was it if they so quickly overran that
famous Empire, where vice and laziness had generally infected all conditions
of people.

But now you see the Turks themselves have divisions and dissentions among
them, their great Bashaws and holy Muftees have their several factions and
dissentions; and whereas the poor Greeks by the reason of their hard usage,
begin now to be starved into unity and temperance, they may seem to have
changed their vices with the Turks, who are now grown as factious and vicious
as the other were before. Add to all this that they are universally hated, and
the neighboring Princes raither wait a time, then want a will to be revenged
on them for their many insolences. Put all these together, and tell me if it
put not a cheerful complexion on probability, that the Turkish tyranny having
come to the mark of its own might, and utmost limits of its own greatness,
will dwindle and wither away by degrees. And assure your self, if once it come
to be but standing water, it will quickly be a low ebb with them.

Probably she had proceeded longer in her Oration, if not interrupted with the
miserable moanes and complaints of the Herbs and Flowers which the Boar was
ready to devour, when presently the Sage spoke unto the Boar in this manner.

Sir, Listen a little unto me, who shall make such a motion whereof your self
shall be the Judge (how much it tends to your advantage) and the deafest ears
will listen to their own interest.) I have no design for my self (whose
position here environed with with water, secureth me from your anger) but I
confess I sympathize with the misery of my friends and acquaintance, which in
the continent of the Garden are exposed to your cruelty; what good will it do
you to destroy so many Flowers and Herbs, which have no gust or sweetness at
all in them for your palate; follow my directions, and directly South-west as
you stand, you shall find (going forward therein) a corner in the Garden,
overgrown with Hog-weed, (through the Gardiners negligence;) Oh what Lettice
will be for your lips; you will say that Via lactea (or the milkie way) is
truly there, so white, so sweet, so plentiful a liquor is to be distilled out
of the leaves thereof, which has gotten the name of Hog-weed, because it is
the principal Bill of fare whereon creatures of your kind make their common
repast. The Boar sensible that Sage spoke to the purpose, followed his
directions, and found the same true, when feeding himself almost to surfeit on
those delicious dainties, he swelled so great, that in his return out of the
Garden, the holein the fence which gave him admittance, was too small to afford
him egress^ out thereat; when the Gardener coming in with a Guard of Dogs, so
persecuted this Tyrant, that killed on the place, he made satisfaction for the
wrong he had done, and for the terror wherewith he had affrighted so many
Innocents. I wish the Reader well feasted with some of his Brawn well cooked,
and so take our leave both of him and the Gardens.

FINIS.

