A SERMON Preached at Reading, Feb. 25. 1672. AT THE ASSIZES There holden for
the County of BERKS, Before the Right Honorable Sir EDWARD TVRNER, Knight and
Baronet, Lord Chief Baron; And Sir EDWARD THURLAND Knight, One of the Barons of
His Majesty's Court of Exchequer.

By JOSEPH SAYER, B. D. Rector of NEWBVRY.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's.
MDCLXXIII.

Romans 13. part of the 5th Verse, Wherefore ye must needs be Subject.
IT was not without great cause that the first Preachers of the Gospel, viz.
the blessed Apostles, did insist so very much upon, and did press with so much
earnestness, the Inferiors duty to his Superior. For they having preached a
liberty in Christ Jesus, some licentious Spirits began thereupon to think
themselves free from all acts of service and obedience to their Governors;
thus abusing their Christian freedom to the great scandal and reproach of the
Christian Faith, by making it a pretense for the flesh. Hence the Apostle St.
Peter gives a large Exhortation in these words: 1 Pet. 2.12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake; whether it be
to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors as unto them that are sent by him,
for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well: that
in so doing, you may have your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that
whereas they speak evil of you as of evil doers, they may by your good works
which they shall see, glorify God in the day of visitation. For so is the will
of God, that by well-doing you may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men.
As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as the
servants of God. In which words the Apostle plainly insinuates, that there is
no such inconsistency between the Magistrates Authority, and our Christian
Liberty, as some might think there was. That they might, yea and ought to
maintain the one, and yet withal submit to the other. That it were a shameful
abuse of our Liberty, and a very great dishonor to our Christian Profession,
under pretense of being Christians, to refuse to do the duty of Subjects. That
Christ meant not to erect a Kingdom that should destroy, or but disturb the
Kingdoms of this World; but to confirm them rather, by injoyning Obedience upon
stricter obligations, and severer penalties than were formerly thought of; such
as are the declared will and pleasure of Almighty God, under the penalty of his
eternal wrath and damnation. That the Liberty to which he calls the Subjects of
his spiritual Kingdom, is a Liberty like his Kingdom; it is a spiritual, not a
sensual freedom; it is a freedom to serve God, not a freedom from the service of
men. That Christians, as being all spiritual Kings, are to rule over their own
lusts, and not live according to their lusts, denying Subjection and Obedience
unto Temporal Princes; for that were to make their Liberty become a cloak for
their maliciousness, or their covetousness or licentiousness. And as the
Apostle St. Peter, so his dear Brother this most blessed Apostle St. Paul, not
only charges it on his son Titus, that he should put men in mind to be subject
to Principalities and Powers, and to obey Magistrates; Tit. 3.1.
but he does it also himself in this Chapter, Romans 13.1.
Let every soul be subject to the Higher Powers. And not only minds them of
their duty, but presses it with such variety of Arguments, that in the whole
Book of God there is scarcely any one duty that is pressed with so much instance
and importunity as this is: Which does argue, both the great necessity of the
thing, and our averseness thereunto: that by Nature, i. e. Nature corrupted, we
can brook no Government; for who is willing to be ruled? and yet bear it we
must, a necessity is laid upon us, we must needs be subject, and that for these
reasons: Because

1. If we respect the Original, Fountain, or Efficient Cause of Government, it
has God for its Author. That Is the Apostles first Argument for Subjection and
Obedience to all Humane Authority, taken from the Author, Founder, Instituter
and Ordainer of such Authority. Romans 13.1.
There is no Power but of God. The person ruling may be sometimes such a one,
as that we cannot say he is of God. God by his Prophet Hosea does complain of
some Rulers, They are set up, Hos. 8.4.
but not by me; their way of coming to the Government is by such means as God
prohibits. And the use of the Power may be as bad as the coming by it; as in
King Jeroboam, who abused his Authority in making Israel to sin, 1 Kin. 14.16
14.16. But the Power it self is always of God, and he that comes to it
lawfully is sent of God, and therefore to such we must needs be subject. For
shall not we own that Power that has God for its Author? Romans 13.4.
Magistracy is the Ordinance of God, Magistrates are the Ministers of God,
therefore it is our duty to be subject to it, and them. This is the Apostles
first Argument for Subjection and Obedience to Authority, taken from the Author
of it.

2. A second Argument is taken from the advantage and comeliness of order:
whence God himself has his Title; 1 Cor. 14.33, 40.
He is the God of order; He is the Author not of confusion, but of peace. And
he has declared it to be his will that all things be done decently and
according to order, which is the beauty of Nature, the ornament of Art, and the
harmony of the World; without which it can no more subsist, than the body can
without a due temperament of the humors. Now the Powers that be, Romans 13.1.
(...), are ordained of God. God has ordered them as they are. He has not only
ordained them, i. e. instituted and appointed them, as we commonly understand
the word; but by him they are set in order, and disposed into several ranks, as
it more properly signifies. He sets up Kings in the highest place, giving them
the Supremacy; and under them he sets up Judges, Governors, 1 Pet. 2.13.
and subordinate Officers, to facilitate that work by the assistance of many,
which would otherwise prove too heavy for any one man's undertaking.

3. A third Argument is taken from the evil of sin, that is contracted by
disobeying. Not to obey the Power, is to sin against Almighty God. It Is a
violation of the Command of the Supreme Lawgiver: Whosoever resists the
Power, Romans 13.2.
resists the Ordinance of God. In opposing the one, he rebels against the
other. He is a Rebel against God, that rises up against his Prince, or makes
any opposition to the Governors that are sent by him. The confederacy of Corah
and his Accomplices against Moses and Aaron, Number. 16.11
is called a gathering of themselves together against the Lord.

4. A fourth Argument is taken from the evil of punishment that is incurred by
disobeying: They that resist shall receive to themselves (...), Romans 13.2.
judgment, or as we render it, damnation, i. e. according to the ordinary
course of Gods Providence, they shall receive some grievous punishment here in
this World. Prove. 17.11.24.22.
A cruel Messenger shall be sent against them, and their destruction shall come
suddenly. God for the most part being more quick, and more severe in revenging
those Injuries and Indignities that are offered to his Deputies, his
Lieutenants, his Vicegerents here on earth, than those greater and more heinous
crimes that are committed more immediately against Himself. He has declared it
to be his will, Deuteronomy. 17.12, 13.
that if any man will do presumptuously, and will not hearken to the Priest and
to the Judge, that man shall die, and so evil shall be put away from Israel,
and so the people shall hear and fear, and do no more presumptuously. We now
live in an Age, when it is scarce thought to be a sin not to hearken to the
Judge or to the Priest: but you see how God accounts it, and what provision he
has made for such sinners; even temporal destruction; that man shall die, i e.
he ought to be put to death, And since God has declared it to be sin, he that
dies in it without repentance shall in the world to come suffer death
everlasting; that is the full import of the phrase, They shall receive to
themselves damnation. An instance whereof we have in Corah and his Accomplices,
who for their stubborn and seditious carriage toward Moses and Aaron, Number.
16.30 Psalm. 55.15.
went down quick into Hell.

5. A fifth Argument is taken from the end for which Magistracy was ordained;
viz. the benefit of Humane Society, the good of all Mankind, that by an equal
distribution of rewards and punishments, Peace may be preserved, Men's rights
defended, Religion protected, Virtue encouraged, and Vice suppressed. This is
what is contained in the two Verses next immediately preceding my Text Now from
all these several reasons, we have here the Apostles conclusion in my Text,
That Subjection to Authority is the Christians Duty. All these things
considered, we must needs be subject, (...), there is a necessity of being
subject.

The word (...) properly signifies to be subordinate; It extends both to the
State of Subjection, and to the exercise of the Subjects Duty, as St.
Chrysostom well observes. And as to Duty, it includes whatsoever Duty or
Service may be challenged by Superiors at the hands of Inferiors. It is
required that we observe the order wherein God has set us, and that we walk
orderly, that we keep to the station of Subjects, and that we do as does belong
to Subjects.

But to speak more distinctly; these particular Duties are included in this
general. In the first place,

1. Being a Subject to keep the rank of a Subject, to be content with our own
station, cheerfully to submit our selves to that state and condition of life to
which God in his good pleasure has designed and appointed us. Phil. 4 11.
I have learnt, says holy Paul, in whatsoever estate I am therewith to be
content. 1 Cor. 7.
And, Let every man abide in that calling wherein he is called with God, says
the same Apostle two or three times in one Chapter. The better to understand
his meaning there, you may do well to observe that the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.3.
being as yet but Carnal, as the Apostle tells them, having generally more of
the Flesh than of the Spirit, more of lgnorance and Corruption, than of Grace
and Knowledge, mistook their Christian Calling to be an exemption from the
Duties of other Callings; as if their Liberty in Christ Jesus had cancelled all
precedent Obligations, both of nature and voluntary agreement: ('It Is that which
I intimated before in the entrance of this Discourse:) The Husband would put
away his Wife, the Wife reject her Husband; Children disrespect their Parents,
Servants disregard their Masters, and themselves become too masterly. In a
word, all persons of what rank or condition soever, were apt to break the bonds
of those relations in which they stood obliged one to another, all under this
pretense, and on this ground, that Christ by the introduction of his Gospel,
and their reception of it, had made them free. Now in this passage the holy
Apostle St. Paul does designedly correct this error: principally indeed, and
as the present Argument led him, in the particular of Marriage; but with a
further and more universal extent to all states and conditions of life. The sum
of what he says is this; that they who are any way related unto others,
notwithstanding that they are Christians, must still own their relations, and
continue to perform all Offices suitable; though the persons to whom they bear
those relations, are mere Pagans, Infidels, Heathens and Unbelievers. The Wife
must be contented with the condition of a Wife, and as a Wife she must behave
her self to her Husband, though an Infidel. The Servant must content himself
with the condition of a Servant, and as a Servant must behave himself toward
his Master, though an Unbeliever. And in like manner a Subject must content
himself with the condition of a Subject, and as a Subject must behave himself
toward his Sovereign, though a Pagan, though a Tyrant, though a Persecutor;
the relation which they had to Christ being not designed to weaken, and make
void, but to strengthen those relations in which they stood obliged one to
another, whether natural, or induced by contract and agreement. The general
Rule to this purpose he conceives in form of an Exhortation: That every person
whatsoever, notwithstanding that relation which he bears to Christ, and the
freedom which he has by him, should abide in that station wherein God has
placed him, keep himself within the bounds and limits thereof, and with a quiet
and religious care, cheerfully and contentedly undergo the Duties that pertain
thereto. 1 Cor. 7.17.
In few words, As God has distributed to every man, and as he has called every
man, so let him walk. And for fear lest his Exhortation to this purpose, being
unsuitable to what they were very much inclined to, might be less heeded than
'twas necessary it should; that he might recommend it so much the more both to
their observation and practice, he does enforce it a second time, 1 Cor. 7.20.
Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he is called. And again once
more, Brethren, let every man wherein he is called therein abide with God. 1
Cor. 7.24.
This the Learned and most Judicious Dr. Sanderson has observed to be the scope
and drift of the place, and the design of all these several Instructions,
Precepts, or Exhortations. You have the like Precept from the Apostle
elsewhere, Study to be quiet, and meddle with your own business. 1 These. 4.11
Let every man attend that work to which the great Disposer of all things has
been pleased to set him. Let him carefully contain himself within the limits of
his own calling, without aiming at high things, or intermedling with that which
is the Province or concern of other men.

2. A Second special Duty included in this general, is to render all due
Honor, and that in thought, word, and deed, both to the Power, and to the
Person of our Superior: For these two, Power and Person, cannot be divided;
distinguish them we may, so we do it to better purpose than some have done it
in our days: I say, distinguish them we may, but sever them we may not. The
Power exists in the Person, and we are to honor the Person with respect to his
Power; as St. Peter teaches us, Fear God, honor the King; 1 Pet. 2.17.
not the Power abstracted from the Person, but the Person for the sake of his
Power. And so here in the seventh Verse of this Chapter, Romans 13.7.
Render unto all their dues, says the Apostle, speaking to Subjects with
respect to those that have Authority over them; particularly, Honor to whom
Honor is due. Now in the first place,

1. One part or branch of this Duty is to honor these in our thoughts, By
thinking honorably of their Persons, By judging charitably of their Actions.


1. We must have honorable thoughts of what they are. What the Apostle
sometime said to his Corinthians, with respect to himself and other Preachers
of the Word, 1 Cor. 4.1.
So account of us as of the Ministers of Christ; may be said to every Subject
with respect to Kings, and such as bear the Sword. You are to account of them
as of the Ministers of God, Romans 13.5.
for so the Scripture calls them in the Verse before my Text. You are to esteem
of them, as of those that are ordained of God for the good of Humane Society,
as in the same Verse. You must not look on them as mere men, Psalm. 82.1, 6.
but as Humane Gods, Psalm 82 1, 6. as the Deputies, Lieutenants, and
magnificent representations of the Divine Majesty; as those whom God has
entrusted, to supply his room, to represent his Person, and to execute his
Judgments, 2 Chronicles. 9.8. and again, 2. Chron. 9.8 19.6.
Chap. 19.6.

2. We must have charitable thoughts of what they do; put the best, and not the
worst construction on the Laws they make, and the execution of those Laws. If
any thing seem harsh and inconvenient in their menage of affairs, we must give
them their due honor by judging heartily and favorably of it; considering
with our selves, that they have reasons of State for what they do, whereof we
are ignorant. It Is injoined us, Eccl. 10.20.
Not to curse the King in our thoughts, i. e. neither to wish ill to him, nor
to think ill of him. This Negative does include an Affirmative, that we are
therefore to entertain good thoughts of the King and of his Government. If
every thing does not go as we would have it; If other Laws be enacted, or Laws
otherwise executed than according to our fancy or judgment, we are apt
presently in our secret thoughts to condemn our Rulers of imprudence,
insincerity, injustice, partiality, cowardice, or the like; when in the mean
time the greatness of their Authority, and our necessitated ignorance and
unacquaintance with State Affairs, should restrain our thoughts from such harsh
and hasty censures in things we do so little understand: It being as unfit for
private persons to censure their Governors, as it is for little Children, that
have newly learnt their Primer, to take upon them to correct the learned
Scholar. Let me give you but one instance, and I beseech you note it: Suppose
you had been present when King Solomon was deciding the controversy between
the two Mothers about the dead and living Child: When he called for a Sword to
have the living Child divided in two, that so each Mother might have a part;
would you not have thought him a very rash, cruel, inconsiderate Prince? Would
you not have said within your selves, What will this young King now do? Will he
cut this knotty cause in pieces, because he cannot untie it? And for as much as
there is no evidence unto which of the two Mothers the Child belongs, shall the
Child be therefore slain? and because one Murder was committed accidentally,
shall another be done purposely? What a miserable people are we like to be,
that are to live under such a Prince! Thus perhaps you would have thought;
whereas if you had staid the issue of things, you would have seen his prudence,
and admired it, and have changed your mind of him, as the Barbarians did of St.
Paul; when they saw the Viper on his hand, Act. 28.4.
they concluded that he was a Murderer, whom though he had escaped the Sea,
Vengeance would not suffer to live; but when he shook the Viper without hurt to
himself from his hand into the fire, they straight changed their mind, Acts
28.6.
and said that he was a God. The King gave order for that which he had no
desire should be done, only to find out that which could not otherwise be
discovered; as you may see at large in the third Chapter of the first Book of
King. 1 Kin. 3.16. to the end of the Chapter.
This may warn us not to entertain hard thoughts of our Governors, when at
first blush we are unable to reconcile their Actions or Expressions to the
strictest rules of Piety, Justice, Prudence or Charity. Prove. 25.3.
The Kings heart is a depth unsearcbable, Prove. 25.3. The Actions of wise
Princes are mere Riddles to vulgar apprehensions; neither is it for the shallow
capacities of the multitude to fathom the deep projects of Sovereign Authority.
And as they cannot fathom them, so they ought not to censure them. If Charity
thinks no evil, 1 Cor. 13.5, 7.
but does hope all things, even of all sorts and conditions of men; then
certainly it should most of all do so by Kings, who ministering for our good, do
deserve the greatest measure of our love.

2. A Second part or branch of this Duty, is to honor them in our words, both
when we talk to them. of them.


1. When we talk to them, our words must make it appear that we respect and
honor them: We must give them their due Titles, and we must speak to them
after a different manner from our way of speaking to other men. Take an
instance of it in holy Paul; when Festus upbraided him with madness, he did
show how much he honored him for the sake of his Authority; he did make no
unhandsom, no uncivil retort to that severe and groundless imputation, but
addressed himself thus, Acts 26.25.
with an humble reverence, I am not mad, most Noble Festus, but I speak forth
the words of soberness and truth. We have a like instance in Mephibosheth
speaking to David, 2 Samuel 19.27
My Lord the King is as an Angel of God: And it is very observable, that he
spoke this at a time and in a case wherein the King had done him little right,
and lately before had done him very great injury. But whatsoever the Kings
dealing was toward him, yet he speaks not but with great reverence and respect
to the King: 'Twas far from him to speak any thing to the Kings dishonor; to
upbraid him with inconsiderateness, with injustice, or with oppression; though
he had evident cause for it, if there could be any cause for a Subject to treat
his Prince with any irreverence.

2. When we talk of them, it must be to their honor, speaking of all the good
that is in them, and of the good that is done by them. Thus did David by King
Saul, who was his enemy, and who without any cause sought to take away his
life; even then, and so all the while he lived, it was David's style to call
him, The Anointed of the Lord. 1 Samuel 24 6, 10.26.9, 11.16.23.
When he was dead, he did likewise; nay, he mourned for him, and lamented him
in these words, Ye Daughters of Jerusalem, weep over Saul, 2 Samuel 1.14, 16, 24.
who clothed you with Scarlet, and other delights, and put ornaments of gold
upon your apparel. After the same manner did King David's Subjects speak of
him, even after he had made himself in famous by most horrible sins, and them
miserable by Gods Judgments on those sins; yet even then they past by all the
evils he had done, and they suffered, and remembered only the good they had
received by him, 2 Samuel 19.9. 2 Samuel 19.9.
The King saved us out of the hands of our Enemies, and delivered us out of the
hands of the Philistims. In which words also it is observable, that though they
had done their parts every way toward the obtaining those Victories and
Deliverances, yet they ascribe them not to themselves, but unto him. 2 Samuel
18.3.
In the Chapter immediately before, they showed what a value they had for their
King; they declared that he was worth ten thousand of themselves; 2 Samuel 21.17
and again they called him the Light of Israel. But though they showed this
esteem of David, who notwithstanding his faults, was in the main a very
excellent Prince; yet perhaps they thought and spoke of others as they
deserved. Nay, they spoke of the very worst of their Kings not without honor
and reverence: Was there a worse than Zedekiah, who filled up the measure of
Judahs iniquity, and whom God liked so ill, that he thought fit to have no more
of that Lineage? Yet even him the Church called the Breath of her Nostrils, Lam.
4.30.
and lamented that he was fallen into the Pits of her Enemies. They were
concerned, as if their Life had depended on his; as in truth it did: Not the
life of individual persons, but the life of a People or Nation, and the
well-being of all persons in it, does depend on that of their King. Though
their King be none of the best, yet better have such, than have none at all. If
there were no King, men would live as if there were no God: every man that has
strength would be a King; yea, and more than a King, he would be a Tyrant over
his weaker Neighbor; and is it not better to be subject to the lusts of one
Tyrant, than to the lusts of a thousand? Better stand in awe of one man, than
be afraid of every man? A severe and cruel Governor, though he do some
particular wrongs, yet he serves for the protection of his Kingdom in general.
Some few of his Subjects may perhaps suffer by his cruelty, but the generality
of the people are defended by his Power; are defended from the Invasion of
foreign Enemies, and from those greater cruelties, which if it were not for
him, they would one exercise over another. It Is a very true and a very
excellent expression, which I find used by a person of great Learning and
Authority, That the little Finger of Licentiousness is heavier than the Loins
of the severest Laws, and strictest Government.

3. A Third part or branch of this Duty is to honor them in our Actions; By
Yielding them all due Reverence. By Rendering them their due Maintenance. By
Affording them our best Assistance.


1. We are to honor those in Authority by yielding them all due Reverence.
They are Civil Gods, and are therefore to be worshipped with a Civil Worship. It
is said of David's Subjects, that they bowed down their heads, 1 Chronicles. 29.30.
and worshipped the Lord and the King; God with a Divine Worship, the King with
a Humane Worship: They bear rule over our body, and must therefore have the
Worship of our body. When Ahimaaz came before David, he fell down to the earth
upon his face before the King, 2 Samuel 18.28 14.33.
2 Samuel 18.28. Yea, his own Son Absalom did as much, 2 Samuel 14.33. David did
the like before Saul, 1 Samuel 28.4.
1 Samuel 28 4. Such honor must be given where it is due; and it is due to those
that are in Gods stead, to do Justice among the Children of Men.

2. We are to honor those in Authority by rendering them their due Maintenance.
We are to honor God with our substance, Prove. 3.9.
and in like manner we are to honor those that are in stead of God. Tribute
must be given where it is due, Romans 13.7.
as in Romans 13 7. and it is due to the King, as the Lord Jesus in his Gospel has
taught us, both by his Doctrine and Example; for he himself paid Tribute to
Caesar: and rather than not do it, Matthew. 17.
he wrought a Miracle to do it, that he might convince the World of the
absolute necessity of it. And observing the Tribute-money, on which Caesar's
Image and Superscription was, he thus answered those that tempted him, Matthew.
22.17, 21.
and proposed this Question to him, Is it lawful to give Tribute to Caesar or
not? Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that
are Gods. And here it is very observable, that our Savior does not say in the
case, (...), but (...); not give, but render. What we part with to the use of
our Prince, is not to be looked on as the peoples alms, but as the Princes just
due; it is not a mere gratuity, but a debt: He has a right and title to it, and
as such we ought to part with it; and not only part with it as such, but be
cheerful in our parting with it; not pay it as we would another man's debt, but
as an honest man would pay his own debt, when he has made great profit by the
money that was lent him; i. e. pay it with as great a willingness as he had
showed in borrowing it. And this difference is observed not only by the
curious, but by serious and judicious Writers, as particularly Bishop Andrews
upon the Text, between (...), a word that might have been used, and (...), the
word which our Savior rather chose to use; the one takes in whatsoever is
contained in the other, and does withal imply a readiness, a frankness, and a
cheerfulness in the Giver.

Princes are ordained of God for the good of those committed to their charge;
Romans 13.6.
they attend continually on this very thing, and for this reason pay we Tribute
to them, as in the next Verse after my Text. They defend us from Enemies
abroad, they suppress Robbers, and redress injuries at home: The administration
of Justice, the security of our Lives, the quiet and peaceable possession of
our goods, are from them under God. Men look a skew on the Incomes of Princes,
but consider not their vast Expenses: Judges, Counselors, Officers of State, a
continual Guard, sending forth Ambassadors, Rewards to the well-deserving for
universal encouragement, the maintaining of Navies by Sea, and Armies by Land,
according as need requires, and infinite the like occasions, cannot be
discharged without great Treasure, which is the ornament of Peace, and Sinews
of War.

Beside that, a King ought to be maintained as a King, and his great care does
deserve a very great reward. 'Twas an Adagial Saying among the Jews, which our
Savior brought into his Gospel, Luke 10.7. Luc. 10.7.
that The Labourer is worthy of his Hire. And to detain the Laborers Wages, to
defraud him of his Hire, has been ever reckoned as a sin of the first rank, and
of the highest degree. The Apostle St. James calls it a crying sin, Jam. 5.4.
Jam. 5.4. The Prophet Jeremy denounces a Woe against him that uses his
Neighbors service without wages, Jer. 22.13.
Jer. 22.13. Mal. 3.5.
And in Mal 3.5. God has threatened that he will be a swift witness against
those that defraud the Hireling in his wages. Custom and Tribute are the Kings
Wages for the Work he does us; they are the Hire of his service: God has
appointed him his Work, Romans 13.4.6 7.
and has assigned him his Wages also: To defraud him therefore of it, is a kind
of theft; yea, the highest degree of theft, worse than picking of Pockets, or
rifling of Houses, or robbing on the Highways; it is a theft from the whole
Kingdom, which may be, and is many times endangered by it. The Kings business
is to defend us; but if we defraud him of his due, we disable him from it. And
surely if men did but consider what are the cares and troubles, what the toils
and labors of that high and sacred Calling; how many sharp thorns are
interwoven in every Crown, they would find very little cause to envy the Prince
his due. A conscientious care ought to be taken in the levying of Taxes, that
the rich man's burden be not carelessly or wilfully laid on the weaker shoulders
of the poor: But whatsoever is their just proportion, must be paid, even by the
poor if they are able; and that out of conscience, not grudgingly or of
necessity, but of a ready mind, and with Christian cheerfulness: considering
that it is not the greediness of Princes to impose Taxes for the gratification
of their own will and pleasure, but it is the holy Ordinance of God for the
common good and safety both of Prince and People; and that it were a most
unequal and most unreasonable thing to expect the benefit of Government and
Laws, and not be willing and ready to contribute toward their maintenance.

3. We are to honor those in Authority by affording them our best assistance,
the assistance of our Prayers and Persons.

1. We must afford them the assistance of our Prayers, and those strengthened
and made effectual by a sober, just and holy conversation. It Is injoined us by
St. Paul, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2
1 Timothy 2.1, 2. that Supplications, Prayers; Intercessions, and giving Thanks,
be made for all men, but especially for Kings, and all that are in Authority,
that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.

But to what purpose is this injoined to wicked men? for we know that God
hears not the prayers of sinners, Joh. 9.31.
Joh. 9.31. And, If I regard iniquity in my heart, God will not hear my prayer,
Psalm. 66.18.
Psalm. 66.18. Yea, the Sacrifice, or Prayer, of the wicked, is an abomination
to the Lord, Prove. 15.8.
Prove. 15.8. Therefore to the fervency of our Prayer, that it may be effectual,
we must join godliness and honesty: for otherwise, while we seem to pray
devoutly for our Prince, and in the mean time live ungodly and dishonestly, our
profane and wicked lives make our Prayers of none effect: our Prayers will not
avail so much to preserve him, as such lives will be of force to undo him. It
is no unusual thing for the Subjects sin to be the Princes ruin: so the
Prophet told the Children of Israel, when God had first given them a King, 1 Samuel 12.25
If you still do wickedly, you shall be consumed both you and your King. And
they found the proof of it in the loss of the best King that ever they had; 2 Chronicles. 35.24, 28.
I mean Josiah that excellent Prince, who in the prime of his days was cut off
for those sins that were not his, but his peoples: He had brought them to their
Prayers, but those Prayers could not be heard for the cry of their sins.

2. We must afford them the assistance of our Persons. We must not think much
to expose our own Lives for the desence and preservation of theirs. We must
strive to the very utmost of our power, and with the utmost peril to our
selves, to preserve and to defend their Persons, and with their Persons all
their Rights and Royalties, all their Dignities and Prerogatives. We are not to
seek our own, 1 Cor. 10.24.
but every one another wealth; yea, to lay down our lives one for another. 1 John 3.16.
We must be ready to do this for any one, but especially for those that have
Authority over us, whose life and prosperity is of greatest moment and concern
both to our selves and to the whole Nation. Thus the people in David's time were
ready upon all occasions to stand between him and danger. In the War against
Absalom, when they drew out into the field, they engaged him by all means to
abide in the City; for, said they, Thou art worth ten thousand of us. 2 Samuel
18.3.
And when afterward in those Wars against the Philistines, King David was in
danger of being slain by Ishbibenob, who was Brother to the great Goliath of
Gath, Abishai stepped in and succored him, 2 Samuel 21.16, 17.
hazarding his own life to save the Kings; and not only so, but the whole Army
of Israel made a vow among themselves, that the King should go no more into
Battle, for fear of Quenching the Light of Israel.

3. A Third special Duty included in this general, is to yield them obedience,
and that both Active to their Precepts. Passive to their Punishments.


We are to execute their Commands with cheerfulness, and to bear with patience
what they inflict on us. In the First place,

1. We are to execute their Commands. It is our Duty to yield an active
Obedience, both in things Civil, and in things Religious: but with this
limitation, while they command us nothing that is inconsistent with our Duty
toward Almighty God, i.e. nothing that God forbids. Whatsoever they do lawfully
command, we are in conscience bound to obey it. Defense of the Cure of
Church-Divisions, p. 87.
What the Scripture does not make to be a sin, the Magistrates Command will
make to be a duty: it is Mr. Baxters expression, whose testimony in this case
should me thinks prevail with those who are least affected with this most
needful Doctrine of Obedience. And lest perhaps it should be thought, that he
took up this Opinion but very lately; to them who shall read what he has
written, it will appear to have been his constant Opinion. These. 320.
That Rulers must be obeyed in all lawful things, is one of his Theses in his
Aphorisms of Government. Nay, Kings and Magistrates must be Obeyed, These. 321.
not only in things Civil, but even about the Worship of God, in all lawful
Commands, that his next Thesis, which he presently thus explains: So much of
the Circumstances of Worship as God has left to be determined by men, we must
obey the Magistrate in, if he determine them; and much more when he does but
enforce Gods own Commandments. Page 400. to 407.
Both there, and again more largely in his Book of Church Government and
Worship, he instances in the several circumstances of Time, Place, Gesture,
Vesture, and other Modes and Forms of Worship; of all which particular
circumstances he discourses at large, and there tells us, that being left
undetermined by the Word of God, and therefore left to be determined by the
Laws of men, in all these we may be bound by the Commands of lawful Authority.

Nay, we are bound to obey the Magistrate not only in those things which we
know to be lawful, but in all those things which we do not know to be sinful.
And so we are told by the same Learned Author, as far as I can understand him,
in these words: We must obey the Magistrate, These. 323.
though we know not their Commands are lawful, so long as they are so indeed,
and we have no sufficient reason to believe them unlawful. This Doctrine he
abundantly proves, both there and in several other places, (particularly in his
Book of Church Government and Worship) by such Arguments as are not to be
answered. Page 461, 462, 484.


Gods Word commands Obedience to the Magistrate in express and downright
terms: Obey them that have the rule over you, Heb. 13.17. Heb. 13.17.
Keep the Kings Commandment, and that in regard of the Oath of God, Eccles.
8.2. Obey Magistrates, Tit. 3.1. Eccles. 8.2. Tit. 3.1.
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2.13.
1 Pet. 2.12. Tit. 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.15. Gal. 6.9. 2 These. 3.13.
1 Pet. 2.13. It does reckon such Obedience among the good works of the Gospel,
which a Christian should be always ready to perform, and calls it by the name
of well-doing, of which a Christian ought not to be weary. If now the thing
commanded by the Magistrate be not known to us to be as plainly forbidden, as
this Duty of obeying what the Magistrate is pleased to command, is well known
to be injoined by God, what excuse can be had in the least for our not obeying?
Shall our own uncertain conjectures, and but suspicions only, be of so great
weight and moment, as to prevail against a known and certain Command? Or ought
not that much rather which is doubtful give way to that which is certain? the
interposition of the Magistrates Command being of so great weight and moment,
as to render that a Duty, whereof we are not to doubt, which before we did not
know, but did suspect, or only doubt, to be a sin. Holy Paul indeed has told
us, Romans 14.23.
that Whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin, Romans 14.23. i. e. Whatsoever we
either do or forbear, without a reasonable persuasion of the lawfulness of our
so doing, or so forbearing, it is to us a sin. And so again in the former part
of that Verse, He that doubts is damned if he eat, because he eats not of
Faith. But withal we ought to know, that this Text of Scripture is to be
understood only of those things which are left to our own choice, being at
liberty as we please, either to do or to forbear them. But it speaks not of
those things wherein we are limited by the Commands of those that have
Authority over us; whom to disobey in things lawful, is sin against Almighty
God; and all sin without repentance brings damnation upon our selves. Neither
is it without great reason, that although we are to abstain from a thing
doubtful, being at our own disposal free, and unconfined as to that particular;
yet we both may and ought to do it, when Authority has injoined the doing of
it. I say not, but that if we have time to consider, and means to inform our
selves of the nature of the thing which is injoined, we ought first to
consider, and conscientiously use those means to inform our selves of the
lawfulness of the thing, ere we do what is injoined us.

But if our doubt be invincible, or the Command require so speedy an Obedience,
that we have not time, or cannot use means to resolve it, in such case the
Command of our Superior is enough to put an end to our doubting; our Superior
being Gods Deputy, authorized and commissioned by him to resolve us in such
doubtful cases: so that his Command is a clear determining of the doubt; after
which we are to doubt no more, while we continue in those forementioned
circumstances; his Command being reason enough to make us own that thing to be
our Duty, which as yet we do not certainly know, nor can absolutely conclude to
be a sin. To this purpose let it be observed what is recorded in Deuteronomy. chap. 17.
verse 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment, between blood and
blood, between plea and plea, and between stroke and stroke, being matters of
controversy within thy gates: then shall thou arise and get thee to the place
which the Lord thy God shall choose; and thou shall come unto the Priests the
Levites, and unto the Judge that shall be in those days, and enquire, and they
shall tell thee the sentence of judgment. And thou shall do according to the
sentence which they of that place (which the Lord thy God shall choose) shall
show thee; and thou shall observe to do according to all that they inform thee;
according to the sentence of the Law which they shall teach thee, and according
to the judgment which they shall tell thee, thou shall do: thou shall not
decline from the sentence which they shall show thee, to the right hand or to
the left. And the man that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken to the
Priest, (that stands there to minister before the Lord thy God) or unto the
Judge, that man shall die, and thou shall put away evil from Israel; and all
the people shall hear and fear, and do no more presumptuously.

Nay, we are not only bound to yield Obedience in all those thing which we know
to be lawful, and in all those things which we know not, but only suspect to be
sinful; but even in those things which being lawful in themselves (holy
Scripture not forbidding them) we do verily think, by reason of some mistake
and error of judgment, to be sinful. We are still under an Obligation of
obeying, though in such a case Obedience cannot be yielded without sin. We are
bound to obey, because God commands it: The mistake of our Judgment cannot
disoblige us from, nor dispense with, the sacred bond of Gods Precept. Sin can
never free from Duty. The error of our judgment is a sin, and that can never
change the nature of a sinful omission, making that which is sinful in its
self, become safe for us. Innocently impotent to his duty, it is impossible any
man should be; and yet obeying in this case, we are sure to sin against God,
because we do that which we verily take to be sinful: which does argue, that we
would have done it, had it been really such as upon mistake we apprehend it to
be; and that therefore we have no fear of God before our eyes, in as much as we
durst adventure on that, which we verily thought would be a violation of the
Divine Law, and a provocation of Gods displeasure against our selves; and
therefore it is the same thing to us as if it had been really sinful, a
transgression of the known Law of God: so that in such a case, doing or not
doing, obeying or not obeying, we are sure to sin against God: that is the great
unhappiness of an erring Conscience. And yet there is no absolute perplexity,
for there is a third thing required, and to be done, and that is deponere
erroneam conscientiam, to lay aside ones erroneous Conscience, and mistaken
Conceptions: That is the remedy in such cases; to endeavor by an humble
diligence in the use of all proper and proportionable means to be truly and
rightly informed; that so the Judgment may be purged from error, and the
Conscience thereby freed from this desperate necessity of sinning.

But what if after serious endeavors, a man cannot be convinced of the truth,
cannot shake off his erroneous and mistaken conceptions, cannot extricate
himself from the snare in which he is engaged? What is to be done in such a
case? He is to endeavor it still; having been serious in some degree already,
he must be yet more serious in his search and study after the truth. Hos. 6.3.
Hos 6.3. Then shall a man know, when he follows on to know the Lord; when he
seeks it again and again; seeks for it as for silver, and searches for it as
for hid treasure, Prove. 2.3.
Prove. 2.3. When he does persist in the use of means, is exceeding earnest in
prayer to God for it, constant and indefatigable in his endeavors after it. He
must be more willing to understand and embrace the truth, than he is willing
that what he errs in should prove true. He must lay aside all prejudice and
prepossession, and must read and hear what is written, and may be said, on the
one side as well as on the other. And if he be biassed in any thing, it must be
in an humble jealousy and mistrust of himself; and according to Saint Paul's
direction, Phil. 2.3.
in esteeming others better than himself: and then, Joh. 7.17.
according to our Saviors promise, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether it
be of God or not. God will instruct and teach him, though not by immediate
revelation, (that is not to be looked for now) yet by a particular secret and
unknown assistance. The humble man shall have grace, 1 Pet. 5.5.
1 Pet 5.5. The meek shall be guided in judgment, and shall be surely taught
Gods way, Psalm. 25.9. Psalm. 25.9.
But the man that will not take this course, his continuance in error becomes
his greater condemnation, and may be looked on as Gods judgment on him for his
pride and partiality, for his negligence, disrespect to Authority, and for his
want of care to be rightly informed.

But what if a man has bound himself by Oath to do contrary to what the Law of
his Prince Commands? Let Mr. Perkins be heard in the case: An Oath does not
bind, says he, against the wholesome Laws of the Commonwealth, Romans 13.1.
because God has commanded that every soul be subject to the Higher Powers: it
is in his Cases of Conscience concerning Oaths; this being the second of those
six Cases wherein he tells us that an Oath does not bind. An Oath ought to be
kept with all imaginable care and strictness, and that in all things whatsoever
that are not contrary to a Christians Duty; but the intervention of a Duty
supersedes the Obligation of an Oath. The voluntary Obligation which a man lays
upon himself, cannot vacate that precedent Obligation that is laid upon him by
the Lord. Surely God never meant that his Name should be made use of in an Oath
to oblige men's Consciences to a violation of his own Commands. Let this
horrible thought be once admitted, and men are at liberty to do what they list:
they may change the nature of things; and may make it lawful, yea necessary, to
break all the Commands of God, and to commit all the sins in the World. If a
man be unwilling to perform some necessary Duty, as to pay his Debts, to
relieve the Poor, to sustain and honor his Parents, to keep the Lords Day
holy, to frequent the place of Gods Public Worship, to partake of the holy
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, or the like; it is but binding himself by Oath to
the contrary, and he is discharged from what before was his Duty. And as for
the omission of Duties, so for the executing of a man's Lusts; If a man scruple
at Adultery, Incest, Theft, Murder, Sacrilege, Idolatry, Schism, Rebellion, or
the like, it is but binding himself by Oath to do these things, and their nature
being immediately changed, he is to press them upon his Conscience, as
obliging, necessary Duties. Once admit this error, and you are furnished with
an excuse for whatsoever wickedness you have a mind to commit: 'Twill instruct
you how to justify all the sins in the World, to the utter extirpation of all
Religion, Justice and Charity.

Now in all these several instances, we are obliged to yi^ld Obedience, though
secured from any penalty that might ensue upon our not obeying. The addition of
a penalty to the preceptive part of the Law, being to extort Obedience from the
careless and unconscionable, the good man needs it not. It pertains not to the
essence of a Law, that a penalty be joined with it, the form thereof consisting
not at all in the Minatory, but in the Mandatory part of the Law; it being of
equal force on the Conscience, when it comes naked, and disarmed of any
punishment to enforce Obedience, as when dressed up with all the terrors of a
most severe and grievous infliction. And he who fears the Lord, and makes
Conscience of what he does, will be obedient for Gods sake, though he stand out
of danger or fear of any punishment from man.

Lastly, As in things lawful it is our Duty to yield an active Obedience to what
the Magistrate is pleased to command, so to their punishments we are to yield a
passive Obedience. In both these we have the example of Gods ancient people in
the profession and promise of their Obedience to Joshuah: Josh. 1.16, 17, 18.
All that thou command us we will do, and whither soever thou sendest us we
will go: According as we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we hearken
unto thee. And whosoever he be that does rebel against thy Command, and will
not hearken to thy words in all that thou command him, he shall be put to
death. But for this part of passive Obedience, as the Apostle says, What glory
is it, 1 Pet. 2.20.
1 Pet. 2.20. if, when you be buffetted for your faults, ye take it patiently?
There is a higher degree of passive Obedience, in submitting to suffer for the
not doing of those things, in which we cannot with a good Conscience yield an
active Obedience. If you can find in your heart to suffer thus for a good
Conscience; and if, when you suffer thus, you take it patiently, this is
acceptable before God, says the same Apostle in the latter part of that Verse.
Thus did Christ himself, as it follows in the next Verse; 1 Pet. 2.21.
and thus all good Christians after his example; they will not only bear those
punishments which they justly suffer for their faults, but when punished
without cause, and against all rules of Justice, they will put up all such
wrongs with patience, when imposed by lawful Authority. There is one only case,
wherein the Magistrates Command ought not to be obeyed; and that is, when he
commands things contrary to what Gods Word has plainly commanded: But there is
no case wherein his Power or Person may be resisted by force of Arms, or
affronted with railing expressions. A King is one against whom there is no
rising up, Prove. 30.31.
Prove. 30.31. He may not be contradicted, not so much as with a saucy word, in
what he does to our displeasure: Eccles. 8.4. Eccles. 8.4.
Where the word of a King is, there is power; and who may say unto him, What
do thou? It Is expressly charged upon us, Not to revile the Gods, nor to curse
the Ruler of the people, Exodus 22 28
Exodus 22 28. which the Apostle in his quotation of it does thus explain, Acts.
23.5.
Act. 23 5. Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of the people. Evil ought
not to be spoken of him; no, not though he do evil. Christians ought to suffer,
as did Christ their Savior, in whose steps they ought to tread; who, when he
was reviled, he reviled not again, and when he suffered he threatened not, Pet.
2.23.
1 Pet. 2.23. Whosoever they are that shall presume to do the contrary, that
holy Apostle is so far from allowing them the glorious Title of Christians,
that he will not own them to be men: They are Monsters without Reason, as well
as void of all Religion. They that speak evil of Dignities, 2 Pet. 2.10, 12.
and despise Government, says that blessed Apostle, are natural bruit beasts,
made to be taken and destroyed, as not fit to live in any civil society. Their
doom there follows. They shall receive the reward of their unrighteousness, 2
Pet. 2.12, 13.
and shall utterly perish in their own corruption. Notwithstanding all which,
some men are never well but when they are taxing their Governors, and faulting
the Government. It is meat and drink to them to be speaking of the errors and
miscarriages of their Princes; many times finding fault when there is no fault
truly to be found; or if there be a fault, publishing it to all they meet; and
by adding aggravations of their own devising, making it seem worse than indeed
it is: this is the next step to Rebellion. He that rails at his Prince, would
resist him if he durst; and by speaking ill of his Government, he but stirs up
his fellow subjects to wish, and when occasion serves, to assist him in its
overthrow. If a Prince do that which is unjust or unbecoming, it is not for his
Subjects sawcily to upbraid him with it, or reproach him for it: said Elihu in
Job 34.18. Job 34.18.
Is it fit to say to a King, Thou art wicked; or to Princes, You are ungodly?
No, it is not fit; it is very unfit, and what deserves a very smart return of
punishment. By the Law of God, He that cursed his Father or his Mother, was to
be put to death, Exodus 21.17. Exodus 21.17.
And can he deserve less punishment, that shall dare to curse the King, who is
Pater Patriae, Father of his Country? He is much more worthy of it. Cham was
cursed by his Father, and that curse was ratified by God for uncovering his
Fathers nakedness; but blessed were Shem and Japhet for covering their Fathers
nakedness, which their Brother had discovered and derided: They had their
Fathers blessing, and the blessing of their heavenly Father; they were blessed
on Earth, and are blessed in Heaven. It Is our Duty to do the like; to conceal
that, which we cannot justify; and what we cannot conceal, to excuse, as far
as lawfully we may, without sinning against Almighty God, by denying the fact,
or defending the evil of it.

These are all plain Scripture-Rules; and they, who walk according to these
Rules, Gal. 6.16.
Peace be on them, and on the Israel of God. But whosoever they are, that shall
presume to teach or do the contrary, be they never so great, Genesis 49.6.
and seem never so good, Into their secret let not our Soul come.

FINIS.

