THE Sham-Indictment QUASHED, BEING A True Account of what passed at the
Old Bailey the 20th of May, 1681. when the Minister of Alhallows-Barkin, London,
Answered to Mr Whitaker's Indictment.
TOGETHER WITH Some Just Reflections upon a Libel, called, The Birth and
Burning of St. Michael, etc. Lately Published.
By a Lover of the Loyal Parish of Barkin.
ROMANS IV. 15. Where no Law is, there is no Transgression.


At the COURT in the Old Bailey, May 20. 1681.
THIS Day Dr. Hicks Minister of Alhallows-Barkin, London, appeared before the
Court to Answer that Idle and Frivolous Indictment which was brought in and
found against him, for Suffering a Figure, with a Trumpet in one hand, and This
Inscription upon the Breast of it, Arise ye dead and come to Judgment, to stand
and remain undefaced over the Communion Table.

Mr. Genner, the Doctors Council, told the Court, that this Figure was first
set up upon the Hand-Dial at the West end of the Church, between the Figures of
Time and Death, in the Year 1659. And that it remained there till about 6 Years
ago; when the Hand-dial upon which it stood was brought forward, and set over
the New Organ, which hindered it from being seen by the Minister and
Congregation. He also told them that it had not the shape of St. Michael, nor
was ever known or reputed to be the Image of that, or any other Saint. And
these things, which could have been proved upon Oath, being premised; he said
he conceived there was no Law (unless they meant an Ordinance of Parliament,
for destroying and prohibiting all Pictures and Images in Churches made in May
1644.) upon which to Ground this Indictment. Nor any Semblance of Law, but what
was found in 3. or 4. of Edw. VI. chap. 10. to which the Indictment seemed to
direct. And thereupon moved that the Indictment, and that Statute might both be
read.

The Sum of the Indictment was this, That he, (and the other Persons Indicted)
being Superstitiously affected, and disregarding the Laws of this Realm, did
suffer the Graven Image of St. Michael to stand and remain undestroyed over the
Communion Table, to the great danger of Introducing Idolatry and Superstitious
Worship among the Kings Liege-Subjects, against the Law in this Case provided,
and the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown, and Dignity, etc.

The Indictment being read, that part of the Statute which concerned the
Removal of Popish Images; and the Jurisdiction before whom the Offenders were
to be Tried, was also read. The Sum of which is contained in these words. And
be it further Enacted -- that if any Person or Persons -- that now have or
hereafter shall have in his, her, or their custody -- any Images -- which
heretofore have been taken out of any Church or Chapel, or yet stand in any
Church or Chapel, and do not before the last day of June next ensuing, deface
and destroy, or cause to be defaced and destroyed the same Images, and every of
them -- then, etc. -- And for the better Execution of the said Act be it
Enacted -- that as well Justices of Assize in their Circuits, as Justices of
Peace within the limits of their Commission in General Sessions, shall have
full Power and Authority to inquire of the Offenses aforesaid, and to hear and
determine the same, in such form as they may do in other such like Cases.

These Clauses being read, the Court (when Four of the Judges were present)
after demand made, if any were there to appear for the King, forthwith quashed
or nulled the Indictment. Because the matter or pretended offense contained in
it was no violation of that Law. And because that Court, before whom the Doctor
was Indicted (being a Commission of Oyer and Terminer) had no Power or
Authority to Hear and Determine Offenses against that Statute, which were to be
Tried by Justices of Assize, or Justices of the Peace.

After all Mr. Recorder told the Council, that his Motion had taken them up a
great deal of time, but (says he) if this had been moved before the Judges had
come in, I would presently have told you that there was no Law for the
Indictment, as I said before; meaning when Mr. Sherman, the Upper
Churchwarden, privily took down the Figure, and conveyed it to the Old Bailey;
where though he pleaded Guilty to this Indictment, and unawares surprizd Mr.
Hunter, a most Loyal and Honest Gentleman, into a Concurrence with him to do
the same, yet the Court would not suffer them to be Fined as that Statute
directs.

Whereas in This Relation it is said, that upon the Demand being made, no Body
appeared for the King; that it may not be thought the Doctors appearance was a
Surprise, the Reader may take notice that he appeared upon this Indictment the
Sessions before, and pleaded not Guilty, and bound himself to the King, in a
Bond of 40 l. to Traverse the Indictment at this.

This is the Sum of what then passed, and it is published for the security of
all Cathedral, Collegiate, and Parish-Churches, which might otherwise upon the
account of their Ornaments be obnoxious to the malice of those, who pretend to
abhor the very shadow of Idols and Idolatry, that they may more plausibly
commit Sacrilege, and other Iniquities, and if any such be yet desirous to
trouble the Clergy, or others, with any more such Sham-Indictments, they cannot
want occasion in most of the Parish-Churches of this City, as well as some of
his Majesty's Chapels Royal, and some Chapels of Inns-of-Court: More
particularly in Barkin Church, which at the top is so set about with Gilded
Figures called Seraphims, (which are the highest Order of Angels,) that it is
almost impossible to kneel, or bow in it, at Prayers or Sacrament, but under,
or before one or other of them; nay, there is one set up at the East end of the
Church, plum-over the Communion Table, toward which the late Upper
Churchwarden, as many of the Parish will testify, has frequently Bowed
without any Scruple of Conscience, while the Figure, miscalled St. Michael in
the Indictment, stood thereupon.

An ADVERTISEMENT.
WHereas there is lately published by Richard Janeway, a Libellous Pamphlet,
with this Title, The Birth and Burning of the Image called St. Michael;
Containing the Substance of a Narrative given into the Vestry of All Saints
Barkin, London, by Mr. Edm. Sherman, late Upper Churchwarden of the same: This
is to Certify all whom it may concern, that the said Narrative was read in the
Vestry, and that Dr. Hickes the Minister, and Mr. Hunter, the present Upper
Churchwarden, with many other Gentlemen met in the Vestry, did some or other
of them, Charge the said Mr. Sherman, from Paragraph to Paragraph, with many
Falsities, Prevarications, and unjust Aspersions, to which the said Mr. Sherman
could make little or no reply, and that after the reading of it, they declared
before his face, and ordered it to be Written down, that it might be Registered,
That it was their Opinion, that his Narrative was a Rude, Scurrilous, and
Insolent paper, and Asserted that it had very many Falsities, and
Prevarications in it, and that it highly tended to the Dishonor of the
Established Protestant Religion, and was a Libel upon the whole Parish, and
that it should be reserved for further consideration, and in the mean time
desired the Doctor to keep it.

This the Doctor, and Gentlemen of the Vestry, who know the matters of fact
contained in that Libel, declared before Mr. Shermans face, and are ready to
testify upon all occasions: And I leave it to all Impartial men, to determine,
whether Twenty men or more, all of UNBROKEN Reputations are to be believed, or
Mr. Sherman alone. And as to the Impudence, Profaneness, and Scurrility of the
Libel, let every modest and serious Reader be judge.

Zeph. 4.5. The unjust knows no shame.


LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor, 1681.


