THE Sauciness of a Seducer Rebuked OR The PRIDE and FOLLY of an Ignorant
SCRIBBLER Made Manifest In some REMARKS upon a Scurrilous LIBEL written by
JOSEPH NOT a Silly Conceited Quaker of Exon against a BOOK of the Reverend Mr.
GEORGE TROSS In VINDICATION Of the Lord's Day.

TOGETHER With a Confutation of some Errors of the QVAKERS, in a BOOK called
(by an Antiphrasis) Gospel Truths Scripturally Asserted.

Written by JOHN GANNACLIFF and JOSEPH NOT.

Ne Suitor ultra Crepidam. Profana and excitanda profecto hominum
improbissimorum Secta, cujus Religio nullam Religionem aestimare est. Hor^beek
Summa Controv. p. 39. Quakerism is a mere Flam of the Devil; a smooth Tale to
Seduce the Simple from their ^llegiance to Christ. Dr. More's Mystery of
Godliness. p. 533. London Printed for J. Salusbury at the Rising-Sun over
against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1693.

THE PREFACE.
THE hard usage which the Christian Religion meets with on all hands at this
day in England, may well fill the serious Professors of it with sorrowful
Resentments. Almighty God has highly favored us, and wonderfully appeared for
us. He has blessed us with Protestant, Religious, and Indulgent Governors. He
has caused the glorious Light of the Gospel to shine upon us, with the
greatest Splendour. Our Peace and Plenty are the Envy of some, the Wonder of all
that are about us. The great Husbandman may justly say concerning England, as
once He did concerning Israel Isa. 5.4.
What could have been done more to my Vineyard that I have not done in it? But
notwithstanding all our Enjoyments, horrid Wickedness prevails among us, and
dangerous Errors grow upon us, while the loose Debanchees, join hand in hand
with daring Atheists, to overturn all Religion, others endeavor with both
hands earnestly to subvert the Foundations of Christianity. How do the
Idolizers of Reason, with great Blasphemies and lesser Criticisms, assault the
Doctrine of the Sacred Trinity, the Deity, Incarnation, and Satisfaction of our
Redeemer. How restless are the Roman Emissaries with their forged Citations,
and Threadbare Fallacies, to lay the Authority of Scripture, and the Scepter
of Christ at the Pope's Feet. And how h^ve the eager Contentions of Protestants
among themselves facilitated the designs of these our Common Enemies. But
besides these, there is a Fanatical Sort of People, commonly called Quakers,
from their Trembling and Raving, when they told their Dreams, at their first
appearance among us; being acted in the same manner as the Heathen Sooth Sayers
of old, of whom the Poet -- Non vultus, non color unus, non comptae mansere,
comae, sed pectus anhelum, and rabie sera corda tument.

This Tribe since they felt the warmth of Toleration, swarm among us; and by
their Noise and Numbers, which alone render them considerable, begin to molest
us; buzzing the ignorant and unstable continually in the Ears, with their
unintelligible J^rgon.

It Is sca^ce worth the while to inquire into the Original of this odd, u^^red
Sect. Whether they were the Spawn of the Munster-Reformers, a By-blow of the
Juggling J^suits; or derive their Pedigree from the Irenopolitan Fathers: Or
whethe^ they be a Mung^el Race, who have licked up Socinus his Vomit, are
inspired with John a Leyden's Enthusiasms, and have sucked in Popish Perfection
and Inf llibility,; let who will exami^e.

My design is to bestow a few Animadversions on a Trifling Pamphlet I met wi h
a while ago at Exon, Written against Mr. George Tross, by Joseph Not, who is,
as I am informed a Worstead-C^mb^r, and Holder forth among the Quakers. The
known Abilities, profound Learning, and exemplary Piety of Reverend Mr. Tross,
set him far above the reach of our worshipful Penny Author's Reproaches. I
doubt not but he smiles at the Snarles, of this puny, currish Enemy. It Is
b^neath him to take any Notice of such a sorry Scribble, As to him, or any
People of ^ense; a Reply to Joseph Not, is altogether needless; therefore
expect not a Vindication of Mr. Tross. What I aim at is to ^ebuke Joseph Not,
and others of the same Bran, who leaving their Looms and Combs, their Lasts and
Awls, set up for Teachers of others, and blasphemously Entitle the Spirit of
God, to the Dreams and Whimsies of their own weak Brains: Fanatici Spiritus
quiquid somniant, volunt esse spiritum sanctum. Melaneth.
And not content to make their Meeting Houses ring with Raving, and noisy
Nonsense, they presume to load the Press with their Impertinencies. When they
industriously disperse their virulent Pamphlets, among their giddy Proselytes,
and obtrude them upon other unwary People; when they use all base Arts to bring
a Learned Gospel Ministry into contempt, and to wound the Reputation of Dead
Witness their Pamphlet against Mr. Flavel.
as well as Living Ministers; when their fulsome Pride, and rash Confidence
prompts them to Challenge, Cavil at, and write against our stoutest Champions:
it is high time to take them off, and correct their Insolence. 'Twas hoped that
the Contempt with which their Pamphlets against pious Mr. Flavel, and ingenious
Mr. Hallet, were treated, would have reclaimed them from this Scribbling Humor;
and that they would have been ashamed of their Folly, when they saw that none
thought their Trifles worth the Answering: But seeing they abuse this
Indulgence, lest they should think themselves considerable, and their Pamphlets
unanswerable, it is sit they should smart for their Folly.

I should be quite ashamed of fouling my fingers about such a dirty Fellow, or
Commenting upon his Gibberish, were it not in hopes, that by manifesting his
Folly and Ignorance, I may cure his I^^h of Scribbling, and prevent some
unthinking People from throwing away their Time and Money on such worthless
Pamphlets.

No^e I presume will blame the sharpness of my Style against him, who observe
how rudely this Illiterate Mechanic treats that Grave and Aged Divine, whom he
writes against; and how rotten and dangerous, as well as contagious, some of
his Notions are.

It Is sad to observe how unstable and uncatechiz'd people wander after the New
lights, and walk in the pernicious ways of these busy false Ap^stles. Some
follow them (and such like Eliterate Teachers, whom they heap up to themselves)
for the Novelty of their Opinions, some are gulled by their seeming honestly
and simplicity, some are pleased with their affected Cant. Others give heed to
their pretended Visions and Revelations; Some who at first go to hear them out
of Curiosity, at length suck in their Errors: It being just with God to give
them up to strong Delusions, to believe Lies, who forsake the Sound and Solid
Teaching of Learned, Ordained Ministers, and give Ear to Fables: And not a few
morose Sectaries, who place much of their Religion in finding fault with every
thing in the Liturgy and Ceremonies of the Church, who can smell Popery in the
Creed, and Idolatry in a Form of Prayer, who condemn uncovering the Head in
time of Preaching, as Carnal compliance, and bodily Reverence in Prayer as
Superstition: not a few of these I say, at length fall to down right Quakerism.
And of those who fall into this Sink of Errors, few return again to the Truth,
or take hold of the paths of Life.

If what I have written in this Treatise, be an Antidote to any against the
Infection of this spreading Evil, my labor will not be lost. That He who
neither slumbereth nor sleeps, would rouz his Wa chmen, when the Church is so
bes^t on every side; That the great Sheph^rd and Bishop of Souls, would excite
his faithful Pastors, to a more narrow oversight of the Flock, when the old
roaring Lion, and so many ravenous Wolves, lie in wait to deceive and destroy;
That the weak and ignorant may be better informed about, and confirmed in the
present Truths; That true Protestants may cease to bite and devour one another,
and having unfeign^d Love to the Truth, and one another, may contend earnestly
for the Faith, which was once delivered to the Saints; is the Desire of

One Studious to know and practice ^h^ Doctrine according to Godliness.

An Ignorant QUAKER Rebuked, Or; REMARKS upon JOSEPH NOTT's Silly Pamphlet,
Against the Reverend Mr. GEORGE TROSS.
THat I may the better deal with this huffing Champion of the Quakers, who
Goliah-like bids defiance to the Protestant Hosts, offers Violence to the Word
of God, and cast Firebrarnds, Arrows and Death at those who come near him: I
shall First, Examine his swelling Title, and show how impertinently he has
cited Scripture. Secondly, I shall consider his Preface; and Thirdly, bestow
some Notes and Reflections upon his T^eatise, that he, and his Admirers, may
see his Vanity, in meddling with that, which is far above his Capacity.

SECT. 1.
Joseph Nott's Title Page considered. The Title of his Pamphlet examined. His
impertinence in Citing Scripture repriv'd. The Texts by him quoted explained.
With a Rebuke to such Ignorant Teachers, and their giddy Hearers.

THE Title which this Trifle^ prefixes to his Pamphlet is this, Holy
Scripture-work is better than the work of the corrupt Reasoning of Fallen Man.

A great Name for such a little Brat. But prithee Jo. if thou were Godfather to
thy own Baby, tell me, How it came into thy Head to give it this Name? Does it
not look like a Compliance with the Men of the World, in that Babilonish
Ceremony, called Baptism? Thy Book would better have resembled its Author, if
it had been sent packing without Title or Preface. Thou might very honestly
have left every Read to have named it, acco ding to his own ^ight. Who would
have thought that a Man of thy Gravity, would have tricked up thy little Infant
with Ribbons and Lace, and set a high Top-Knot upon its Front? How can thou
reconcile this to the Dictates of Light within, and the Practice of the
Brethren in other Cases? Does not this smell a little Popish and
Antichristian? Joseph, if thou art breeding any more Pamphlets, be ruled by
me, turn 'em along without any of those Carnal Ornaments, in a plain
Quaking-Dress, that we may know whose they are by their Garb.

And why do thou call thy Book Work, Holy Work, yea, Holy Scripture Work?
Must writing at random pass for Work? Commend me to those that Play, or sit
still. Would fain have thy scurilous Libel Sainted? He has an Ounce of
Charity, for a Grain of Discretion, that accounts thy Writings Sacred. Unless
it were the sacred Hunger of Gold, which set thee about this Jobb of work; I do
not think there is much Holiness in the Case. And who knows but the hope of
Brass Farthings, when Trade was low, and Work scarce, refined, thy Wit, and a
craving Maw raised thy Fancy, so that in spite of Nature and Education thou
would become an Author. Thou art Flesh and Blood as well as others. And who
knows but the Belly (that Master of Arts, as one Magister Artis, Ingeniique
largitor, v^niter Pers.
calls him) might teach Joseph Not to hold forth, and write Replies, as well
as Hireling. Daws and Parrots, to prate and sing.

Thou would fain shelter thy Errors under the Word of Truth; and therefore
call'st thy bungling and botching Scripture-W^rk. We shall see in a little time
what fine Work thou make with Scripture. Thou would make us believe, that
thy Pamphlet is better than the Corrupt Reasoning of Fallen Man: But by the way
thou go to work, one would think thy Noddle were Crazed, and thy Brains
addle.

After the Title, we have four Texts of Scripture cited; which I come now to
consider. Only Reader, one word by the way. Let it not surprise thee to find
the Quaker quoting Scripture. Don't suffer thy self to be fooled into a Belief,
that it is out of Respect to the Oracles of God. No, have a little patience,
till we come to the Preface, and thou will find that he has a Spleen against
all that Profess the Scripture to be the only Rule of Faith: And directs his
Reader, not to the sure word of Prophecy, but to the Light in his own Heart. He
durst not for his Ea s, refer himself to the Evidence of Scripture. Hold his
Nose to that Grindstone, and you may do what you will with him, for all his
prancing and sprawling. If his dull Pate imagine, that any Text may serve his
turn, it shall be welcome: But if that clear ^^ght Witness against his dark and
rotten Errors, then away with the Prophets and Apostles, and make room for
Light within, to give in its Evidence. It Is no new thing to find Scripture
misapplied. In Mat. 4.6. you read of an old Sophister, that did so, long before
the Days of Joseph Not, and John Gannacliff. On which St. Ambrose, a Man of as
much Light and Honesty as either of those worthy Authors (no disparagement to
'em) has this Note. Non sequitur Haereticos esse doctos, quod multas citent
Scripturas, quas and Diabolus citavit, non ut doceret, sed ut noceret: and
citavit truncatas praeterito sensu Scripturae, ut faciunt Haeretici. It Is no
Argument that Quakers are sound or learned, because they cram their
Preachments, and stuff their Pamphlets with Quotations. Satan had a Text in his
Mouth, not to Teach, but to Tempt our Savior. Thus may Truth be abused to the
Patronage of Lies, and the Devil set the Stamp of Divine Authority, upon his
Counterfeit Coin.

Having given this Caution, let us now come to the Texts themselves. The First
is, Deuteronomy. 29.29. Secret things belong unto the Lord our God, etc.

Why this Sc ipture is quoted, I cannot imagine; If he thinks it warrants Him,
and such as he, to expound Scripture, let him peruse these following Texts,
which require Qualifications, and a Commission; neither of which he can show
us. Romans 10.15. 1 Timothy 3.2, 7. The Second Epistle to Timothy, and the Epistle
to Titus throughout. Whoever reads these Epistles with Understanding, will see
abundant cause to admire at the presumptuous Sin and Folly, of those ignorant
Intruders into that high and honorable Office of the Ministry, who as they are
neither able, nor apt to Teach; so they were never called to it, nor sent about
it. And if it be a Sin for J. N. and such as he to Preach, Can it be safe
(Reader) for thee to Hear? How durst thou by thy presence harden and encourage
them in their Sin? The Pride of their Hearts could not continue them Preachers.
Did not thou and others (it may be the more for thee) maintain them Hearers?
If thou be one who hopest to live in Heaven, take heed of countenancing and
hardening Illiterate, Vnordained Mechanics, who entangle themselves with the
Affairs of this Life, 2 Timothy 2.4.
in their proud Invasion of this Sacred Office, for which (without Repentance)
they must howl in Hell for ever.

The second Text is, 1 Cor. 1.21. For after that in the wisdom of God, the
World by Wisdom knew not God; it pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching,
to save them that believe.

From hence perhaps the Quaker concludes, that Folly and Ignorance are
necessary Qualifications for the Pulpit. And I know not, but if Joseph Not
were in Italy, where Ignorance and Vice seem the only Indelible Characters of
the Clergy, by entering into Religious Orders, he might quickly be preferred to
the Office of Confessor to some great Person, seeing few are better stored with
those Gifts, which recommend Persons to that Employment. For the great Men at
Rome, as the Bishop of Salisbury Letter from Rome.
informs us, like to have to do with a poor, ignorant Priest. Accordingly some
Celebrated Person's Confessor was a great and notorious Blockhead, head, whom
they used, because a greater could not be found; and whenever they found one
better qualified that way. if it were a Groom, or a Footman, that got into
Priest's Orders, they said, they would certainly make use of him. If J. N.
would but go to Rome, and shave his Crown, this Penny Pamphlet would quickly
get him Promotion. But the Apostle Paul, is not about to recommend real F^lly,
but to Caution the Corinthians against vain Philosophy. To this end he tells
them, that though the prejudiced Jewish Rabbis, and conceited Grecian Sophi's,
accounted the Preaching of the Cross Foolishness, and ridiculed the Christian
Teachers, for exhorting their Hearers to believe in a Crucified Savior: (as
many of Joseph Nott's Friends do at this Day) yet this was the only sound and
rational Doctrine, adapted to display the Wisdom of God, and promote the
Salvation of Souls. Those who rejected Christianity, perished in their Sins;
whereas those who believed in Christ, whom the Apostle preached, found his
Preaching the highest Reason; and that thereby (the Power of God accompanying
it) they were made wise unto Salvation. But if the Quaker's Preaching be like
their Writing, it is Foolishness indeed; which neither this, nor any other
Scriptu^e, does countenance or patronize.

The third Scripture in the Title Page is, Isa. 30.1. Woe to the Rebellious
Children, says the Lord, that take counsel, but not of me; that cover with a
Covering, but not of my Spirit.

These words are a Threatening against Israel, because they would neither ask,
nor take God's Counsel. They were about to send Ambassadors to Egypt, to desire
Succor from Pharaoh, against the King of Assyria. They distrusted the Power
and Goodness of God, and trusted in an Arm of Flesh, thinking to cover
themselves from the approaching Storm, under the Shadow of Egypt. For refusing
to use those Means, which the Spirit of God, by his Word and Prophets, had
directed them to; and using unlawful Means, to rid themselves out of Trouble;
they are called Rebellious, and this Woe is denounced against them. And what is
all this to Mr. Tross, unless to show what a woeful Case he should be reduced
unto; if J. N. and his charitable Friends, could have their will of him. If he
thought to do Execution upon him with a Text, he might have cited Rev. 8.13.
where are three Woes in one Sentence.

The last Text is, Isa. 44.24, 25. The Lord frustrateth the Tokens of the
Liars, and makes Diviners mad, turns wise Men backward, and makes their
Knowledge foolish.

In these Words, the Lord sets forth his Almighty Power, in frustrating the
Predictions of the Magicians, and Astrologers, called Diviners, because by
holding Intelligence with some evil Spirit, they foretold Things to come; and
Liars, because God would make Things fall out contrary to their
Prognostications, and so prove them Liars; notwithstanding the Light, and
Spirit within, by which they were guided. And when their Designs should be
thwarted, and their Reputation blasted, Grief and Shame would drive them to
Madness and Distraction. And now Reader, What can thou Infer less from this
Text, than that whoever does not jump with J. N. in every Opinion, is a Liar, a
Diviner, and a Mad man.

I have but one thing more to Reflect upon in the Title Page, and that is this:
Though the Author, by setting his Name to his Book, has let the World know to
whom they are obliged, for that rich Treasure of good Sense, good Reason, and
good Language, which a^e crowded into this little Volume; the Scurvy Printer
has not so much as told us his Name, or where he dwells; so that we are not
like to know, who Midwiv'd this sweet, well-favour'd Babe into the World.

SECT. II.
Remarks upon Joseph Nott's Preface. The abuse of Prefaces. Several Nonsensical
and Erroneous Passages exposed. The light within Described. Wrested and
misapplied Scriptures Explained. J. N's Chief Talents summed up.

THE use which many a Trivial Writer makes of a Preface, is to Wheedle his
Reader into a Belief of some great Matters, with which the Treatise will
entertain him; or to bribe his Judgment into a good Opinion of the Author's
Piety, Learning, or Modesty. How often are the Threadbare Stories of glowing
Zeal against the Errors, and deep Commiseration of the Follies and Vices of the
Times; together with repeated importunities of Wise and good Friends, employed
to stand as Motives, for the Publication of those Pamphlets, which hardly live
a Month to an end, before they are burnt as Sacrifices to a Pipe, or are doomed
to a more Ignominious Death in a Jakes. S^^m^ros metuentia Carmina Pers.
But whatever the Pretense be, commonly Mr. Author's good Opinion of his
Composure, was the main Spring that set the Press a going. Those whose Skuls
are like a House half Furnished, having but little Stuff themselves, are apt to
think others have less: Hence it is, that when they light on a Notion that is
new to them, they make Archimedes's Proclamation (...); and being big with some
odd Crochet, have no Rest, until the Printer has delivered them of the
ill-shapen Monster.

Our Illuminated Author, a Man born to oblige the World by his refined
Thoughts, and rare Pa^ts (as other Writers of great Note use to do) fronts his
Book with a Preface; which serves as a Bush to a Blind Alehouse, to let the
Passenger know what he may find within. He begins thus.

Joseph Not. Reader, by this thou may know, That I have seen a Book with G.
T. for George Tross's Name to it, a Preacher among the Presbyterians in Exon;
Dated 1692. And Reader, By this, compared with the Date of J. N's Pamphlet,
thou may know, that the Author sat brooding 5 or 6 Months before this Reply
was hatched. For Mr. Tross's Book was Printed in August; whereas J. N's
Scribble did not appear before Cuckoo time, this present Year.

J. N. Now this Book of G. T's was written in Answer to a Book, set forth by
Thomas Bampfield, Counselor at Law in Exon, by way of Enquiry; Whether the
Lord Jesus Christ made the World? And also by way of Vindication of the
Observation of the Seventh-Day as a Sabbath. I would have the Reader observe,
That I am not concerned to Vindicate T. B's Book. Not to insist upon the false
Spelling, and Canting Phrase of our Quaker; I shall comply wi^^ his Request,
and fix on that, which he does with so great Ceremony and Formality, desire his
Reader to observe. And what great and wonderful thing do you think it is? Why
it is no more but this; That he is not concerned to Vindicate T. B 's Book.
Alas, poor T. B. You, and your Book are left to shift for your selves, for any
assistance Joseph Not will aford you. Could you but have hooked in this Man of
mettle, for your Second, how soon would G. T. have quitted the field? If a Man
of such deep Thoughts, and profound Learning as J. N. had been profelyted to
your Opinion, and would but have deigned to write for a Saturday-Sabbath, no
doubt but you might have the Satisfaction to see the Quakers open their
Holding-f^^th-place-door, on the Seventh-Day, and their Shop-Windows on the
First. And oh what Comfort might you have taken in the good Success of your
Book; if you had seen this Doctor in the Pulpit on Saturday, and in the
Comb-Shop on Sunday. But though he has a Mind to fall out with G. T. he has
never a word in his Budget for T. B. but leaves him to stand upon his own Legs
if he can, and then proceeds.

J. N. But to the Latter I say, I am sensible that Christ the Substance is
come, and the Shadows flies away. And I am sensible, that this Sentence abounds
with palpable Nonsense. To call G. T. the latter, when he had mentioned him 3
times, in 3 Lines, before he had once named T. B. and not once since: And to
join Flies, a Verb of the Singular Number, with Shadows a Nominative Case of
the Plural, and yet bear us in hand, that he is sensible, is somewhat
unaccountable, in a Man of his Gifts. But I suppose his Talent lies in
something beside writing good Sense, or true English, or else his Noddle was a
little ^^y-blown, and he freakish when thi^ Preface gave him the Slip. But to
be serious. Joseph, thou art like to prove a hopeful Confuter, who can not
distinguish former from latter. Art thou the mighty He, who did challenge all
the Ministers in Exon, to encounter thee? Away Trifler, away to thy Trade.
Throw aside thy Pen, and handle the Tool which thou were bred up to. Never more
write Prefaces, till thou have reconciled thy self to good Sense, and can
speak true English.

But why must Mr. Tross be told, That Christ the Sabstan^^ is come, etc. Does
he ever deny it? Has He not in that Book which thou a^t Nibbling at The Lords
Day vindicated.
proved, that the Ceremonial Law was a Shadow of Christ? Does he not affirm,
Page 39. That Christ was the Substance of those Figures, the Body of those
Shadows, in the Ceremonial Law? Has he not proved from Coloss. 2.16, 17, That
the Jewish Seventh-day Sabbath, was one of those Shadows that were to vanish,
when Christ the Body was come Page 92. and seq. 11. Prove. 26.7.
? Had thou said thy Say, to T. B. who will hug the Shadow, though the Substance
be come, it had been better applied. But how odly does a Parable sound out of
the Mouth of a Fool, or vain Jangler, who knows not what he says, nor whereof
he affirms. Tim. 1.17.

J. N. But I am concerned to return a Reply to several things in G. T's Book;
for I have perused it, and have seen the great Error of the Writer, which drew
a Concern upon my Mind to write. Concern is a great word with him; you had it
once before, and now twice more in this Sentence. One would have thought he had
no great Concerns of his own; and therefore did concern himself with Mr. Tross;
had he not told us, that it was not Curiosity, but Zeal against Error drew him
on. But was it indeed to show Mr. Tross's Error, that thou have appeared in
Print; or to discover thy own invincible Courage? Mr. Tross had by clear
Scripture, and solid Reason, routed all those Arguments, which Mr. T. B. had
pressed for the Service of the Jewish-Sabbath. Upon this, out comes J. N.
swagers up and down, threatening what he would do to Mr. T. Just like Thersites,
an ill-^avour'd, and ill-humour'd Fellow, in the Grecian Army, at the Siege of
Troy; who, tho he were the greatest Coward, that ever drew Sword, yet had the
Confidence to oppose the stoutest Commanders. One day, when he concerned
himself to return a Reply to Achilles, that Hero knocked him down, and killed
him with a blow of his Fist. But Joseph, set thy Heart at rest: Mr. Tross is
too generous to lay Hands on such a Dwarf as thou. It Is beneath a Man of his
Learning and Reputation, to observe, ^r reply to thy pitiful Cavils. Thou
may sit pluming thy self, crowing, and clapping thy Wings, for Joy of thy
imaginary Victory long enough, ere he will give thee any disturbance.

J. N. For I do admire, that ever a Man professing Christianity, should appear
in Print, in such manifest Opposition to the holy Scripture; and yet of that
Number that profess the Scripture to be the only Rule of Faith, etc. But in
this we may see the great Confusion of Babel's Builders. None but such as
Joseph Not, who have read Mr. Tross's Book, would have been put into such a
fit of wondering, or would thus impudently charge him with Opposition, yea
manifest Opposition to Scripture. None but a Popish Tool would reproach a Man
for professing the Scripture to be the Rule of Faith and Life. But no wonder
that shallow Heads admire what they do not understand. No wonder that Crafty
Papists employ silly Quakers to do their work, by vilifying the sacred
Writings. No wonder that the underling Quaker is many times but the Puppet in
the Show, that serves to make a little Sport, when the subtle Jesuit stands
behind the Curtain, and manages the Wires. No wonder that a black Mouthed
Fellow, that is drunk with the Fumes of Pride and Self-conceit, should foam at
the Mouth, and revile an Embassdor of Christ, as a Babel-Builder. No wonder
that the Devil will rather play at small Game, than fit out; and when he cannot
have Men of Learning, imploys Blacksmiths, Shoemakers, and Weavers, to broach
Errors, and sow Seditions.

J. N. I desire the (1) Reader to consider what thou reads (2) And if any one
publish any Doctrine contrary to the Holy Scriptures, believe them (3) not.
More Nonsense. (1) The for Thee. (2.) Reads for Read. (3.) Them for Him. To
School, Truant, learn thy Primmer, and Con the Eight Parts of Speech, before
thou write any more Replies. Thy want of Learning makes thee bold, there is no
danger that too much of it should make thee mad.

J. N. For Christ bids us beware of false Prophets, which come in Sheeps
Clothing; who says, Ye shall know them by their Fruits. Mat. 7.15, 16. And
the Apostle Paul advises us to turn away from such as have a f^rm of
Godliness, but denies (a.) the Power, 2 Timothy 3.5. For indeed another Foundation
can no man lay, than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 3.11.
Rare sense again (a) denies for deny. Scarce a Period without false Concord.
But that is a small Matter, compared with the Gall and Venom in these words.
Joseph Not, and his Friends, are utter Enemies to Carnal Weapons; as Swords,
and Guns, and other Dead-doing Tools; But no Animals have sharper Tusks, or
longer Claws; and none more ready to fasten their Rabid Teeth, in their
Neighbor's good Name. Backbiting does not hinder 'em from attaining
perfection; but with their She-friend. Prove. 30.20. they wipe their mouth, and
say, I have done no wickedness. Just now this bold Calumniator ranked Mr. Tross
among Babel's-builders: Now (to let us see how he improves his Talent of
Railing) he basely perverts Scripture, to insinuate that he is a false Prophet,
and a Hypocrite. Yet this he who pretends to be guided by the Spirit of God.
But Reader, What Spirit is it think thou? that moves this foul Mouthed
Fellow, thus to reproach and bespatter such a Minister of the Gospel, as Mr.
Tross? A man, whose exemplary Piety, Humility, and Self-denial, diffusive
Charity and Moderation, and unwearied diligence in his Master's Work; by
Studying, Preaching, and Visiting, have procured him a good Report of all
sober, and serious Christians, of all Persuasions, in the City where he lives.
Had not Joseph Not been Master of a bold Face, and a hard Forehead, and had
not his Conversation with Boat-Men, and Oyster-Women, Cobblers, and Tinke^s,
improved his natural Confidence, to a great stock of Impudence, he would never
have attempted to fix the odious Brands of false Prophet and Hypocrite, upon so
good a Man, so faithful a Minister; who lays out his Time, his Strength, his
Estate, his All, for the Glory of God, and good of Souls. I am persuaded few
Persons in Exon, even of the Quakers themselves, are so far forsaken of their
Understandings, as to believe this Charge, upon a Brainsick Enthusiast's
say-so: If any should, we may well conclude, that they are given up to strong
Delusions to believe Lies; as a Judgment for rejecting sound Doctrine, and
giving heed to old Wives Fables 1 Timothy 4.7.
or profane, and vain Babbling. 2 Timothy 2.16.
.

J. N. And therefore, I desire the (1) Reader to keep thy Mind near to the
Light of Jesus Christ, in thy own Heart and Conscience; that so thou may
understand what thou read. After a small Blunder the (1) for thee, out comes
the rare Catholicon, with which these Quacks do greater wonders, than ever did
Puntaeus, with his Balsam, or Ointment; and that is the Light within. Reader,
if thou can but get Joseph Not, to spare thee a few Ounces of this choice
Medicine, called Light within; prize it above Aurum potabile, or the
Philosopher's Stone. But if he will not part with any of it, follow my
Directions, and thou may obtain it thy self.

Strip thy self of Lace, Ribbons, and all other Babylonish Garments; bid adieu
to good Manners, Thee, and Thou thy Betters, give a supercilious Nod; but don't
stir thy Hat from its Block, shake Hands with good Sense, forswear true
English, decry Scripture, revile Magistrates, reproach Ministers, cast off
Ordinances, gratify the Desires of thy Carnal Heart, follow the Dictates of thy
muddy Brains; whenever thy giddy Head turns round, pretend to Visions and
Revelations: and when thou art thus accounted, read the Quaker's Books, and
keep close to their silent Meetings, and thou art in a very fair way to get
this rare Secret. And if thou have a Windmill Head, a Brazen-Face, and
Leathern Lungs, get upon the Stage, which the Brethren have erected for John
Gannaclist, and Joseph Not, and thou may quickly get as much Custom, and do
as fine Feats as they.

If I have not hit upon our Author's Meaning, when he talks of the Light in the
Heart and Conscience, desire him to explain himself, and tell plainly what he
means by it. And that this Hocus-Pocus, may not gull thee by his Leger-demain,
or sob thee off with such a Banbury-Tale, as he did Mr. Hallet, in Answer to
his first Query Gospel Truths Scripturally asserted, Page 4.
where his Description of this Light leaves us in the dark; get him, if thou
can, without Quibbling or Canting, to return a plain, and direct Answer to
these few Questions.

Q. 1. Is this Light of Jesus Christ in the Heart and Conscience; God or
Creature, Finite or Infinite?

Q. 2. Is it Christ himself who was Crucified without the Walls of Jerusalem,
or something distinct from Christ? If he say it is Christ himself, inquire of
him; Whether this Light in every Man's Heart and Conscience, was born of the
Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, died upon the Cross, ascended into
Heaven, after its Resurrection, and sits at the right Hand of God? All these
things we know are true of Christ.

Q. 3. If he say it is something distinct from Christ, Ask him; Whether it be a
Body, or a Spirit? If he say it is a Body; as Bar^lay Apol. Page 94. It Is
vehiculum Dei, The Spiritual Body of Christ, the Flesh and Blood of Christ,
which came down from Heaven. Desire him to deal freely with thee as a Friend,
and inform thee, How this Flesh and Blood can be in so many 1000 Hearts and
Consciences at once, as there are Men and Women upon the face of the Earth? How
a Body can reach from Pensylvania to Exon? Whether it be Omnipresent? Whether
the Quaking-Priest have learnt of their Elder Brethren the Papists, the knack
of Transubstantiation? How a Body, though purer than Spirit of Wine rectified,
could come by Knowledge and Understanding: And how it can communicate it to a
Spirit?

Quest. 4. If he say it is a Spirit, know of him whether it be a created and
finite, or an Uncreated and Infinite Spirit? If it be a created Spirit, inquire
of what Species, whether a good Angel, a malicious Devil, or a rational Soul?
If he say, it is neither of these, but a superior sort of Spirit. Ask him when
it was created? How he came to know the time? And what Scripture he can bring
to prove that there is any other Spirit than God, Angels, Devils and rational
Souls, except it be the Spirit of a Beast Eccl. ^.21.
that he means.

If it be not a Creature, as Geo. Whitehead says, Christian Quaker, Part 2. p.
28. Desire him to reconcile Barclay, who says it is a creature, yea a Body, with
Whitehead, who says it is no creature.

Put home these Questions to him, and if he does not boggle and equivocate,
it is ten to one but he will betray gross Ignorance, or utter downright
Blasphemy.

J. N. For the great Mystery which has been hid from Ages and from Generations
is Christ within the hope of Glory, Col. 1.26, 27. In these Verses (which
Joseph Not for reasons best known to himself, has altered and curtailed,
putting Christ within, instead of Christ in you, or among you, as it is in the
Margin, and leaving out a great part of them the Apostle informs the
Colossians, that the Gospel which was a Mystery locked up in Gods own Breast
from Eternity, and hid from a great part of the World in former Ages and
Generations, being wrapped up in dark Prophecies, and covered under a Vail of
Legal Ceremonies, was now by Christ and his Apostles made manifest to the
Saints. The Wall of Partition was broken down, the Vail taken away, and the
Colossians, who were in times past Idolatrous Gentiles, alienated from God, and
enemies to God, v. 21. had this Gospel, which displays the Riches of Divine
Grace, made known to them. The next clause (...), being as St. Peter says of
some things in St. Paul's Epistles 2 Pet. 3.16.
hard to be understood, this Prefacer being unlearned and unstable has wrested
it, as he does also other Scriptures to uphold his Error. Being Ignorant of the
Original, he thinks which refers to Mystery, whereas (...) being of the
Masculine Gender has (...) and not (...) for his Antecedent. So Zanchy Qui
((...)) est Christus. And (...) is not will in but either inter vos, among you,
as it is in the Margin, or in vobis, in you.

If we follow the Ma^ginal Reading, this is the meaning, Christ preached among
you is the Riches of the glorious Mystery of Godliness. Christ is the Sum and
Substance, the Pearl and Treasure of the Gospel.

If we read Christ in you, then this is the sense: Those Saving Graces, Faith,
Love, etc. by which Christ dwells in your hearts, Ephesians. 3.17. are the Evidences
of your Title to, and the grounds of your Hope of Eternal Glory. Your hopes of
Glory are founded not only upon what you have heard of the riches of Divine
Grace through Christ, in the Gospel, but upon what Christ has wrought in your
hearts by the Gospel. It Is the Image of Christ, the Graces of Christ which he
has wrought in you, by his Word and Spirit, that confirm your hopes of Heaven.
What Christ has done and suffered for you, and what he has wrought in you;
His satisfaction for you, and your union with him, cause you to hope. Thus
Christ was in these Colossians, thus he is in every true Believer. But what is
this to the Quakers light of Christ in every man's Heart and Conscience?

J. N. Therefore to the Spirit of God in thine own heart, I do recommend thee,
as unto that which will give a true discerning, and right understanding of the
things of God, as it is hearkened unto, and obeyed.

J. N.

But I advise thee, Joseph, and as many of thy Friends as shall read these
Lines, to Search the Scriptures, and not to Trust your own hearts, until you
have examined them by the Light of God's Word. Lean not to your own
Understandings, Beware least the Light within be darkness. Believe not every
Spirit, nor every false Prophet, who pretends to the Spirit of God. For there
are unclean, lying, seducing Spirits, Spirits of Devils. To the Law, and to the
Testimony. Take heed to that sure Word of Prophecy as unto a Light that shines
in a dark place. That Word if hearkened unto and obeyed, will discover to you
what the Spirit is, which you are under the conduct and influence of. Try the
Spirit in your own hearts hereby. If it shun this Light, if it speak not
according to this Rule, it is because it is a black Spirit, and there is no Light
in it. Many grieve and quench the Holy Spirit, and provoke him to withdraw, and
then an evil Spirit enters into them, blinds their eyes, hardens their hearts,
and scars their Consciences; and when such set up for Teachers of others, The
Blind lead the Blind, and so both fall into the Ditch.

Thus I have at length wrought my way through the Preface. And by these Notes
upon the Obscure places of it, he that can see beyond the top of his Nose, may
discern what are the chief Accomplishments of this Doughty Champion of the
Quakers in the West, viz.

Gross Ignorance not only of the sense of Holy Scripture, and its Original
Languages, but even plain English, the only Tongue he has a smatterring in.

Intolerable Pride in troubling the World with his Nonsense and Impertinence.

^^^id Incharitableness in railing at, reviling and misrepresenting a Reverend
Divine, who gave him no provocation. And to name but one more; (for by these we
may take a scantling of his other good qualities.)

Abominable Profaneness in vilifying, maiming, and wresting Scripture.

Some People blame Mr. Hallet because he did not expose the Ignorance and Error
of this Joseph Not and John Gannacliff (another of the Gang) in a Pamphlet of
theirs, written in Answer to his 27 Queries. Perhaps he thought it needless,
seeing that Book is so horribly scurrilous and silly, that it carries its
confutation in its Forehead. Or else he concluded it would be lost labor,
seeing that Though thou should bray a Fool in a Mortar among Wheat with a
Pestel, yet will not his Foolishness depart from him, Prove. 27.22.

And were it not for that the Party are Cock-a-Hoop upon their new Authors, and
vaunt themselves of their Jannes and Jambres, as Men of such Courage that none
durst enter the Lists against them, I should not have commented upon their
nauseous, idle Stuff. I know it is no credit to have to do with such Fellows.
And all the return I expect from that sort of Cattle, is roaring and bellowing,
throwing dirt, and calling all the odious Names, which the Spirit who acts
them, shall put into their Mouths.

SECT. III.
Joseph Nott's Scurvy Commendation of Holy Scripture. He and John Gannacliff
elsewhere prefer the Light within before it. The Scriptures proved to be the
only supreme and sufficient Rule. The danger of setting the Light within every
Man above God's Written Word. J. N's. first Cavil against Mr. Tross. The World
created long before the Son of God became Man, or was actually Jesus Christ.
Scriptures wrested, etc.

THE Wise Man says, Prove. 3.30. Strive not with a man without cause, if he
have done thee no harm, and Prove. 25.8. Go not forth hastily to strive, lest
thou know not what to do in the end thereof, when thy Neighbor has put thee
to shame. Had Joseph Not learnt this Lesson, and held his peace, he had better
consulted his Credit, and his Quiet. But some People will be meddling, though to
their cost. It Is like some Spirit moved him, but as to its Region, Quality and
Complexion, albus an ater, it is left to the Reader's conjecture. When a furious
Storm is raised on a sudden, the Prince of the Power of the Air, is thought to
be going a Procession. When a Fire breaks out no body knows how, and threatens
to consume whatever stands in its way, we condemn some unseen Boutefeu. To see
a man that had no provocation, act like a fury, ranting and raving, quarrelling
and contending, with those who had nothing to do with him, makes all sober
People conclude that he has some invisible Driver.

But besides the External Mover, it seems his very Complexion led him on.
Choler no doubt is his predominant Humor, and he is as one said of a Goose,
Animal pugnacissimum. Hence it was that he sent abroad his Challenges in Gospel
Truths Scripturally asserted, p. 6. lin. 6. and in p. 23. Where is a Challenge
to Mr. Hallet and all the Presbyterian Preachers in the World to Answer Joseph
Not and John Gannacliff. And because neither Mr. Hallet nor any body else
accepted that Challenge, he has a mind to pick a quarrel with Mr. Tross. So
have I seen a little contentious Cur, breath forth Threats and Challenges
against a generous Racer, until a disdainful kick has cooled his Courage, and
sent him back howling. But before he thinks fit to threaten, he fawns and
flatters, for thus he begins.

J. N. We generally profess that we do believe, that the Holy Scriptures were
written for our Learning: that is Episcalian, (1) Presbyterian, Independent,
(2) Anabaptist and Quakers, etc. And that we ought to prove our Doctrine and
Principles by them: And we also do say, That if any Man do hold, or endeavor
to prove any Doctrine or Principle that is contrary to the Holy Scripture, that
we ought not to believe them (3) although they never so Orthodoxly so called, or
subt^^ endeavors to prove their Assertion, (4.) Passing by the false spelling
in the words marked, (1) and (2) the false Concord in (3) them for him, and the
Nonsense in the two last Clauses; we may observe how rudely our Paltry Author
intrudes into the company of those who never sent for him. He crowds himself
and his Brethren the Quakers in among Protestants, though I am persuaded they
will no more own this Upstart Sect than Joseph Not owns the Scriptures to be
the only Rule of Faith and Life. Yet to curry favor with them, he pretends to
commend the Word of God, but does it after such a scurvy rate, as does
sufficiently discover his kindness to it. Though he Sacrifices it to his adored
Light within, yet he fawns upon it, just as the Crocodile that weeps over his
Prey, his Tears being a sort of formal Grace before his intended Feast. The
meaning of his words seems to be this. We Quakers, etc. i. e. Ranters, Seekers,
Familists, Adamites, Muggletonians. and the like, do generally (not
universally) profess to believe (not without a reserve) that the Scriptures are
written for our Learning, as was Cambden's Britannia, and Nickram'd by J.N.
Verstgan. page 8. line 21.
Verstegan's Antiquities. And that we ought to prove our Doctrine and
Principles by them, stretching and wresting them if they will not otherwise
serve our turn: And we also do say that we ought not to believe any Doctrine or
Principle contrary to the Scriptures, as expounded by our infallible Light, by
the help of which we make a Lesbian Rule, or Nose of Wax of them, and bring
them to speak what we would have them. That this is the meaning of this insipid
Advocate for the Holy Scriptures is plain, not only from what I have formerly
Remarked in the Preface, where he scoffs at those who profess the Scripture to
be the only Rule of Faith, etc. and would fain send his Reader to the Light
within for Direction; but much more from his Book against Mr. Joseph Hallet,
where he speaks his mind more freely and tells us plainly in Answer to Mr.
Hallet's 3d Query, That He and John Gannacliff esteem the Light within as a
Rule to be preferred to and higher than the Scriptures, p. 5. lin. 20. and that
by it Thoughts, words and actions are to be tried, and by it we come to
understand those things which are written in the Holy Scriptures of Truth, and
therefore it is a higher and superior Rule, unto which we ought more
especially to attend, p. 7.

Now welfare Joseph Not and John Gannacliff, for their plain dealing, in
telling us their minds frankly and freely, as to this matter. What ever fine
stories J. N. tells us here, to insinuate his Errors and the minds of the
ignorant; you see his very heart in the forementioned Quotations. The Light
within is that great Diana, by whom these Jacks of all Trades have their
Wealth. Hence it is that these Craftsmen speak so honorably of the Idol. Great
is the Quakers Light within, it is to be preferred to the Scriptures, by this we
are to try thoughts, words and actions, by this we are to understand the
Scriptures. This is a higher and superior Rule to which we ought especially to
attend.

This is one of the Foundations on which the Damnable Errors of the Quakers are
built. In opposition to these rotten assertions, I lay down this as an
undoubted Truth.

The whole Council of God concerning all things necessary to be believed and
done by us in order to our Salvation is either expressly set down in Holy
Scripture, or may by good and necessary consequence be deduced from it; unto
which nothing at any time is to be added, whether by new Revelations of the
Spirit, or Traditions of Men.

Or in short thus: The Scriptures are the only, supreme, and sufficient Rule of
Faith and Life.

A Rule is a Measure by which the Quantity or Quality of another thing is
sufficiently tried and examined. Sometimes the word Rule is applied to sensible
and corporeal things. Thus. e. g. John Gannacliff's Last, on which he makes
his Shoes, is his Rule that he works by. Thus the Tailor, the Brick-layer, the
Carpenter and other Artificers have their Rules, which they apply to their
Work, to measure and judge of the length, height and depth, straitness or
crookedness thereof. This is a Proper Rule. Sometimes the word Rule is applied
to moral and spiritual things, to measure and determine the Qualities, Virtues
and Perfections thereof. This is a Metaphorical Rule, so called from the
Analogy and Resemblance it has in its use and end, to a material Rule. It Is in
this sense we call the Written Word a Rule of Faith and Lif^. For as a Mason in
raising a Wall, a Joiner in squaring a Piece of Timber, by applying the Level
to the Building, the Square to the Timber, come to judge of the uprightness,
straitness, and exactness of their Work: So a Christian tries and examines his
thoughts, words and actions by the Holy Scriptures. The Sacred Writings are his
Square, his Line and Level, by which he measures and judges of Opinions and
Practices. Hereby he comes to know what is right and what is wrong, what is
duty and what is sin, what is truth and what is error. All Doctrines which are
to be believed, all Duties which are to be performed, in order to our
acceptable serving of God on Earth, or eternal enjoying of God in Heaven, are
to be measured by, and conformed unto this Rule.

There are Three Rules which are eagerly contended for:

1. The Pagans Rule, The Light of Nature. This Rule is good in its kind and
place, it discovers the Being, Power, Wisdom and Goodness of God, so as to
leave them without excuse who do not walk according to it Romans 2.14.15. and
1.19, 20, 21, 32.
But it cannot discover Christ, by whom alone Sinners may be saved 1 Cor. 1.21.
and 2.13.14.


2. The Papists Rule, Unwritten Traditions. This is a Corrupt, Fallible and
False Rule. Contradictory to the Scriptures, and therefore no good Rule.

3. The Quakers Rule, the Light within, which J. N. blasphemously calls Christ
within, and the Spirit of God in the Heart. This is a very bad Rule to try or
determine matters of Faith or Practice by. God has taught us in his Written
Word, to try the Spirits by the Scripture. The Quakers teach their Proselytes,
to try the Scriptures by the Light within, 1 John 4.1, 6.
which they also call the Spirit. Whatever Spirit leads any against, or besides
the Rule of Scripture, is not the Spirit of God, but a lying Spirit. God says,
and Protestants hold, that those who Speak not according to the Word have no
Light in them, Isa. 8.20. Their pretended Light who contradict Scripture is
Darkness, Matthew. 6.23. But Quakers impudently prefer their Dreams above the
Written Word, and so declare that their Light proceeds from the Father of Lies.
That Spirit who transformeth himself into an Angel of Light, the God of this
World, whose Kingdom is full of Darkness, blinds the Eyes of these Men of
Light, so that they speak against the pure Light of Scripture, and prefer their
Ignes Fatui before it. And while they profess themselves to be wise, they
become Fools. For lo^^ they have rejected the Word of the Lord, and what Wisdom
is in them? Jer. 8.9.

Seeing therefore that the Pagans Rule, Natural Reason and Conscience is
insufficient, seeing the Popish and Quaking Rules are false, and uncertain, it
remains that the Holy Scriptures are the only Supreme, Sufficient, Perfect,
Standing Rule, to try and judge all Opinions and Practices by. For the Proof of
this, consult these following Texts. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. In this Scripture we
are informed, that the Holy Scriptures believed and obeyed, are able to make
wise unto Salvation. That all Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and is
profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, etc. That the Man of God may be perfect,
thoroughly furnished unto all good works. What plainer Proof can we desire to
evince that the Scripture does contain all Doctrines necessary to be believed,
and command all Duties necessary to be performed in order to Salvation. And if
so, it is a sufficient, complete and perfect Rule of Faith, Worship and Life.
Hence it is that we are commanded to Search the Scriptures, John 5.39. To hear
Moses and the Prophets, Luke 16.29. To take heed to this sure Word of Prophecy,
2 Pet. 1.19. To go to the Law and to the Testimony, Isa. 8.19. Hence it is we
are told, The Law of the Lord is perfect, Psalm 19.7. It Is for this cause the
Bereans are commended for Searching the Scriptures daily, Acts 17.11. Believers
are said to be built upon the Foundations of the Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians.
2.20. Ignorance of the Scriptures is the cause of Error, Matthew. 22.29.

Many more Places might be cited, but these are sufficient to any, but a Papist
or a Quaker, to prove that the Scriptures are the Supreme and only sufficient
Rule of Faith and Life, which God has given us. They are a sure and standing
Rule a complete and Perfect Rule, adequate and commensurate to the things to be
regulated or measured thereby. From which nothing can be taken away, to which
nothing can be added, but upon the Peril of all the Plagues and Curses in the
Book of God, Rev. 22.18, 19. Thus a Rule is described by Phavorinus, It Is an
infallible measure which admits of no addition or diminution (...).
. So that if the Scriptures were not a Perfect Rule to measure and try all
Opinions and Practices by, they were no Rule at all. The wrangling Quakers
think to evade the force of all these Texts, by telling us, Gospel Truths, etc.
p. 6. line 31. That Jesus Christ is the only Rule of Faith, Worship and
Manners. And l. 38. they bid us, Turn in our Minds unto the gift of Gods Spirit
in our Hearts. And p. 7. l. 20. It is the Holy Ghost that teaches People good
manners, (Quaere, What Spirit teaches the Quakers who want them?) And by the
Light within Thoughts, Words and Actions are tried. And this Light of Jesus is
a higher and superior Rule.

Rare, edifying Discourse. Christ is the only Rule. The gift of God's Spirit in
our own Hearts is the Rule. The Holy Ghost is the Rule. The Light within is the
Rule, And the Light of Jesus is the Rule. And all these are one and the same
Rule, which is in every Man. There is no difference (if you believe these acute
and subtle Doctors) between Christ, and the Spirit, and the Light within.
Christ and the Spirit are one, and are in every man's heart; and yet they
pretend to own the Doctrine of the Trinity, and though they say that Christ, and
the Spirit of Christ, are in every Man, and it is most evident that Christ is
God and Man, yet contrary to their avowed Principle, they break poor Priscian's
Head, and say thou instead of you, to every man, who has Christ and the Spirit
in him.

I grant that Christ has given us a Rule, and the Holy Spirit enables all the
People of God to walk according to it; but the Scripture or the Written Word is
the Rule, according to which we are to walk, that so Peace and Mercy may be
upon us. The Spirit is so far from being our Rule, that God has given us the
Written Word to try whether we have the Spirit thereby. And if any Spirit would
persuade us to receive any Doctrine, or do any Action, contrary to the Written
Word, we ought to abominate such a Spirit.

Besides the Confusion, there is palpable Nonsense in these Expressions,
Christ is the Rule, The Spirit is the Rule. A Person may prescribe a Rule to
another, but cannot be a Rule himself, any more than John Gannacliff is a
Last, or the French King an Edict.

Yet further we have only the Quakers word, for all that they affirm concerning
Christ's being the Rule; and nothing that looks like Proof. For those Scriptures
which they have cited to this purpose, will as well prove the Pope to be
Christ's Vicar, as Christ or the Spirit, or Light within, to be our Rule.
Therefore instead of following them any further in their impertinent citing and
misapplying Scripture, to exalt their Light within, into the Throne of Christ,
and place of Holy Scripture: I shall hint the Danger of this Opinion, That the
Light within every Man is the supreme Rule of Faith, Worship and Manners.

1. In this Opinion the Quakers join hands with the Papists, and do their Work.
By denying the Perfection of Scripture, they go about to take off People from
the use of it. They say the Light which is in all the Indians and Pagans is
sufficient without the Scriptures. No wonder then that they speak so slightly
of Scripture as sometimes they do.

2. They take the ready way to lull asleep their own Consciences, when they
alone shall be judges of their own actions. This Doctrine leaves every man to
himself, to believe and do what he pleases, for he has no Rule to try his
Spirit by, 1 John 4.1. He is a Law to himself. How does this gratify the Pride
of men's Hearts, when they think that they may do whatever they list? And how is
it possible to convince such men of their sin and folly, who think themselves
infallibly guided by the Spirit of Christ, which, as they say, is the highest
Rule, superior to the Letter? (as these Scoffers call the Written Word.) The
Papists make the Man at Rome the Infallible Judge, but every Quaker is a Pope
in his own Conceit.

3. According to this Opinion People are bound to receive the most absurd
Notions, that any Quaker shall dictate. Yea, they are bound to believe
contradictions. For the Light in one Quaker says, that the Light within is
God, but in another, that it is a Body, as I have formerly proved. Now suppose
any Enlightened Sister at Exon, should come with a Span-new-Light, and tell the
Quakers that it is neither one nor 'tother; they ought according to their own
Principles to believe her; for it is Christ, it is the Holy Spirit that speaks by
her, for ought that ever they can prove to the contrary, if they do not abandon
this Opinion.

4. This Doctrine gives up those who embrace it into the immediate hands of the
Devil, to receive his suggestions as inspirations; and to take his impulses for
the Commands of Christ, and motions of the Holy Spirit.

But to return from the Digression, leaving the Quakers with their Leaden Rule,
and Dark Lanthorn Light, Let us observe the Motions of our Author. He thus
proceeds: J. N. Now such a one as the Latter is G. T.

Prithee Joseph, adorn thy Snout with that Instrument, which the Men of the
World call a pair of Spectacles, and ken this same Passage a little. Tell me if
thou can with all thy Light, whom the word Latter does refer to? Is G. T. a
Quaker, or is he a subtle endeavor? or what is he? where were thy Wits when
this dark Expression dropped from thy Pen? In thy Preface thou could not
distinguish latter from former: Here thou talkest of a latter, where it is hard
to find any f rmer at all. Joseph, is this the way thou take to confute Mr.
Tross? Get thee gone. Brawl with a Tinker, or squabble with a Porter, but write
no more Replies. Thou tellest Reverend Mr. Hallet Gospel Truths, etc. page 12.
That working with his Hands was a thing he was never brought up unto. And thy
Pamphlet gives us to understand, that thou were never brought up to writing of
Books. If thou have not some better way to get a Maintenance, than by Printing
Penny-Books, I doubt thou will have but a cold Kitchen, or wilt be forced to be
chargeable to thy sound Brethren. This Huckstering Trade of Retailing out thy
Pamphlets, at a Penny apiece will never hold long. And perhaps thou may be
called to account for making a Merchandise of the Word, and seeking thy gain
from thy Quarter. Ibid.


J. N. For he greatly endeavors to prove, That Jesus Christ was not in the
beginning; and that the World was not made by him, which is contrary to the
holy Scripture; and he also endeavors to prove the first Day of the Week to be
the Christian-Sabbath; the which, he has no Scripture to prove, as he himself
does acknowledge. Here are the two Articles, upon which Mr. Tross's Book stands
indicted at the Quaker's Bar. 1. That he endeavors to prove that Jesus Christ
was not in the beginning, etc. 2. That the first Day of the Week is the
Christian Sabbath. It Is great pity Mr. Tross had not asked J. N's leave, before
he presumed to publish such a Book; in which are contained one Position
contrary to Scripture, and another, which he has no Scripture for; if you will
take J. N's honest word for it. And who dares question the Truth of what a Man
of Infallibity says?

J. N. I shall set down some of his words in his Book; First, Concerning Christ
Jesus, in p. 4. He says, We say, that it may be Orthodoxly denied and
asserted; That Jesus Christ did not make the World. For the World was 4000
years before ever Jesus Christ was. And in Page 5. he says; In the Old
Testament Christ is prophesied of to come; How could He then create the World?
And in Page 12 he says; We have sufficiently answered, that it was not the
Lord Christ that created the World. And in Page 10. he speaking of To help the
halting Quak. over the Style, understand the time.
before the Fall of Man, says; In which time there could not be so much as any
need or use of a Jesus, or a Christ; nor was there so much as the least hint of
him given by either Prophecy or Promise. And then he says, Much less was he
himself in Being. And in Page 1^0. he says; I think I have shown that the Lord
Christ did not make the World. See here how dexterously this new Confuter goes
to work, to prove that Mr. Tross holds, that Jesus Christ as Mediator or
God-Man did not make the World, but that it was made 4000 Years before the
Incarnation of God the Son. How industrious has he been, to skim the Book from
P. 4. to P. 130. that he may make it clear that Mr. Tross does affirm, that
Jesus Christ was not in the beginning. But hear how bravely J. N. confutes him.

J. N. Now here all that can see with a single Eye may see the darkness and
blindness of this man; yea, the gross darkness that may be felt; yea, the
blindness, the born blindness. Oh Erroneous Doctrine! Who will believe or
receive such Doctrine as is so contrary to the Holy Scriptures of Truth. Quis
tulerit Gracchos -- Reader, does it not move thy Gall, or Spleen rather, to
hear a poor Ignorant Quaker thus Tragically exclaiming against a learned, acute
Divine, as though he were about to Sap the very Foundations of Christianity?

But stay Joseph, peace Man, why art so startled? Were thou well awake, and
compos mentis, or just roused out of some frightful Vision, when thou made
that hideous Outcry? Thou yaulest like the Geese, those Roman Quakers, as though
the Enemy were at the Gates of the Capitol. What is it that makes thee thus
take on, and rave about Erroneous Doctrine, Darkness, gross Darkness,
Blindness, born-Blindness? (a fine expression of thi^e own Invention.) I doubt
thou understandest but little of what thou read. Mr. Tross having to do with
Mr. T. B. considers his Question, Whether the World was made by Jesus Christ?
To which he answers That in one sense it may be affirmed, in another sense it
may be denied. He affirms that the Godhead of Christ created the World, but
denies that Christ consisting of that Godhead, and the Humanity hypostatically
united, created it, P. 7. The Godhead or Divine Nature of Christ he grants was
throughout a beginningless Eternity, P. 6. and made Heaven and Earth. But Jesus
Christ as God and Man (in contra-distinction to the Father and the Holy Ghost)
did not make the World; for Mr. Tross proves that the Name Jesus Christ do
necessarily imply or include the Humane Nature with the Divine. He shows that
the Divine Nature formally and abstractly considered cannot be Christ, i. e.
anointed, fitted or qualified by any other for the Office of Mediation; nor
could the Divine Nature alone be our Jesus or Savior; for the Godhead can
neither obey the Law, nor bear the Curse, both which were to be done by our
Jesus. These appertain only to his Humanity, though his Divinity gives merit to
his Active and Passive Obedience. He was not actually Jesus till after his
Incarnation, till he had actually done and suffered all those things for which
all his Church are redeemed and saved.

Therefore though God the Son was in the beginning, and created the World; yet
seeing he was not actually and formally Jesus Christ until after the
Incarnation; which Incarnation of the Second Person in the Glorious Trinity,
was not till about four thousand years after the Creation of the World, it is
evident, that as Jesus Christ he could not create it, though as God he did. It Is
a great mistake to argue, that whatever God is or did, that Jesus Christ is and
did.

I grant that by reason of the near union between the Divine and Humane Nature,
in the person of our Mediator, the special Qualities of both Natures are
sometimes ascribed to the Person of Christ; yea that which is proper to one
Nature, is sometimes attributed to the Person, denominated from the other
Nature. Hence the Scripture speaks of the Blood of God, Acts 20.38. Where the
Word God is to be understood not essentially for the Divine Nature. but
Personally. The Lord Jesus, who is truly God, shed his Blood, which belongs to
him as Man. So the Lord of Glory was Crucified, 1 Cor. 2.8. Christ on Earth
said of himself, The Son of Man which is in Heaven, John 3.13. But though the
Properties of both Natures may be ascribed to the Person, yet the Properties of
one Nature, are not communicated unto, nor can they without Nonsense, yea
Blasphemy, be predicated of the other Nature. We may say God suffered, but it is
Blasphemy to say the Godehead suffered. The Man Christ Jesus is Mediator, by
him all things were made, but the Humane Nature did not, could not make all
things, for it was a creature, and so was made it self. Let Joseph Not read
and consider what Mr. Tross has said on this Argument, in 4, 5, 6, 7. of his
Book, and if he does but understand what he reads, I suppose he will as much
admire his own Dullness, as he did before exclaim against Mr. Tross's
Blindness. If he has any thing more to say against Mr. Tross, as to this
matter, let him prove, That the World was not made, until the Son of God
assumed the Humane Nature. That the World was made but 1693 years before the
year of the Date of these P^esents. That all our Chronologers, who say that the
World is near 6000 years old, are Ignorant and Blind; for J. N. has
discovered, by the help of his Light within, that the World is not full
seventeen hundred years old. If he can make this out, I shall conclude that a
pair of Quaking-Spectacles, are worth a dozen Telescopes. Mr. Tross often
affirms, that God the Son is Jehovah, and created the World. That the Godhead
of our Redeem: raised the glorious Fabric of Heaven and Earth. But all the
Scriptures alleged by Mr. T.B. would not convince him that the World was made
since the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, John 1.14. Jehovah made the
World almost 4000 years before the time that God was manifest in the flesh. Now
the Names of Jesus Christ do not belong to God the Creator, but to the only
Mediator between God and Man, who is Emmanuel, God with us. So that the Quaker
had as good have wiped up his Mouth, and kept a Silent Meeting, as have gaped
so wide, and said nothing to the purpose.

J. N. Now that this is contrary to the Holy Scriptures is easily proved: And
by the assistance of the Holy Spirit of God, I shall undertake to prove that
Jesus Christ was in the beginning, and that the World was made by him. Ay, ay,
Joseph, No doubt this is easy to such a bold Undertaker as thy mighty Self.
Only mind Mr. Tross's Distinction. Remember that he grants, that God the Son
made the World; that the Godhead of Jesus Christ was in the beginning, and
created all things. What he denies, and thou art to prove is, That this
glorious Person did not make the World until he became Man, until the time of
his Incarnation, when he was actually and formally Jesus Christ.

J. N. For Christ Jesus said to the Jews, Before Abraham was, I am, John 5.28.
Very true. And does not Mr. Tross grant as much? Does he not say that Christ as
God, or the Godhead of Jesus Christ was throughout a beginningless Eternity?
But do thou think that Christ here spoke concerning his Humane Nature? I tell
thee Joseph, that Person who is God over all blessed for ever, as concerning
the flesh Romans 9.5.
is a Jew of the Seed of Abraham. He who us God is David's Lord, as Man is
David's Son. He who is without beginning of days, as God, was born of a Virgin
in time, as Man. Thou art a Youngster at Disputing, and writing Controversies,
else thou would have seen, that it lay upon thee to prove, That the Humane
Nature was Personally united to the Son of God, before the Birth of Abraham,
yea before the Creation of Adam.

J. N. And the Apostle Paul, speaking of the Jews said, They drank of that
Spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4. These
Quakers are perilous shrewd Text-men. If J. N. can prove from these words, that
Christ as God-Man made the World, I make no Question but he will shortly prove
from it Transubstantiation, and all the Opinions in Hobbs his Leviathan.

No Texts of Scripture meet with worse usage than those whose hard hap it is to
fall into the hands of those ignorant Scribblers. Some they bring into their
Pamphlets as Mummers in a Mask, who make a fair Show, but speak not one word to
the matter in hand. Others they serve as the Soldiers did our Blessed Lord,
first blind them by their false Glosses, and then Buffet them. Others they put
into the Inquisition, where they wrest and torture them to make them confess
what they know not.

That you may see how put this Scripture is to the purpose for which it is
quoted, give me leave a little to amplify J. N's Argument from it. You may
suppose him to reason after this rate:

Now here from this Text the Friends that have the Light within, may perceive
the blindness and darkness of G. T. He says that Christ Jesus as God-Man was
not in the beginning. Oh erroneous Doctrine! Do you not see the confusion of
these Babel-Builders? Did ever Priest talk after this absurd rate? But you
shall see Friends, (if you be not stark-blind) what execution I will do upon
him. I have an Argument to let fly at him, that will strike him dead,
stone-dead, and make him as mute as a fish, so that T. B. and I will have the
last word of him. It Is an Argument against the Pack. It Is as keen as a
Chopping-Knife, as clear as Train-Oil, Flaming Charcoal it self is not
brighter. Lo beloved, here it is, The Jews drank of that Rock that followed
them, and that Rock was Christ. Therefore Christ as God-Man was in the
beginning. What do you think Friends? Will any of them them in the Pensylvanian
Dialect for the.
Presbyterians be able to avoid the force of this Argument?

This Joseph, this is the strength of thy Reason. And now judge thy self
whether thou have not made a fair Speech. Art thou so blockish as to imagine
that the hard Rock in the Wilderness, was in a proper sense Christ Jesus? Do
think that a Stone more senseless than thy self was both God and Man, the
Savior of Sinners? I take this to be the meaning of that Scripture. The Jews
in the Wilderness drank of the Rock which Moses smote with his Rod at the
Command of God, Exodus 17.6. This Rock, says the Apostle, was Christ, i. e. It
was a Type or Figure of Christ, as the Bread in the Lord's Supper when
Consecrated, is the Body of Christ, i. e. a Sign which by Divine Appointment
does exhibit and represent his Body. This Rock did in several respects Typifie
and Prefigure Christ; but it was not in a Proper Sense Christ Jesus, God-Man.
There was some Analogy or Likeness between this Rock and its Waters, which were
the Sign; and Christ and his Benefits which were signified thereby. Hear what
the Rhemists (from whom Joseph Nott's Friends have received many a precious
Doctrine) say to this. The Rock (say they) was a Figure of Christ, therein
especially, that out of Christ's side pierced on the Cross, gushed out Blood and
Water, etc.

J. N. And Christ in Prayer said; And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine
own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the World was: And he
farther said, thou lovedst me before the Foundation of the World. John 17.5.2,
4. In these words, our Lord prays, that the Father would receive his humane
Nature into Heaven, and give it a due participation of that Glory, which his
divine Nature had from Eternity. He desires that his whole Person might be
glorious; whereas his Essential Glory had been eclipsed, during his abode on
Earth. This, and the 24th Verse prove, that Christ, as to his Divine Nature,
was before the Creation of the World, which Mr. Tross does not deny; but here
is nothing to prove that Christ as God-man, was before the Creation; therefore
this Text is impertinently cited against Mr. Tross.

J. N. Quotes John 1.10. Ephesians. 3.9. Col. 1.16. Heb. 1.1, 2. All these Quotations
are borrowed from Mr. T. B. to which Mr. Tross has given such full and clear
Answers, in Page 6, and 7. of his Lord's Day Vindicated, as may satisfy any,
but such a silly wrangler as J. N., who fairly passes over all that Mr. Tross
has said for the explication of them: wisely concluding. that many would
bestow three or four Farthings to purchase, and a quarter of an Hour to read
his Pamphlet, who would neither buy nor read Mr. Tross's Answer to Mr.
Bampfield. But though these Texts prove nothing against Mr. Tross, hear how the
Fool rages, and is confident of his success.

J. N. Now here it is evident from the words of Christ and his Apostles, That
Jesus Christ was in the beginning with the Father; and that all things were
created by him A fi^^re called Ta^tology, which often occurs in classical
Quaking Author^.
m^re might be said to prove that Jesus Christ was in the beginning, and that
all things were created by him: A fi^^re called Ta^tology, which often occurs
in classical Quaking Author^.
But this being sufficient, Never beat thy Brains to say any more to this
point. 'Twas evident enough before thy Pamphlet crawl^d abroad, that Jesus
Christ as God, was in the beginning; That the Divine Nature of our Redeemer,
made the World, That God the Son, 4^00 years before his Incarnation (when he
first became actually and formally Jesus Christ) created Heaven and Earth. But
we have no proof that Jesus Christ as God-man, and actual Mediator; was in the
beginning. What ever good opinion our Author has of his Sufficiency, he will
find it a hard Task to prove that Emmanuel, God with us, created the World. And
thus much for the Quaker's first Cavil, concerning which all that he has said
appears to be a solemn piece of Impertinence.

SECT. IV.
J. N's second Cavil at the name Christian-Sabbath, a vain strife about words.
Christ, not the Christian-Sabbath. The Fathers call the first Day of the Week
the Lord's Day. Cant about an invisible and everlasting Day. Verstegan abused,
mis-nam'd, and mis-quoted. A groundless Quarrel, with Saxon Names. Advise to J.
N.

THE Quaker imagining that he had confuted Mr. Tross, as to the other
Controversy, pretends to give a general Assault to his whole Book.

J. N. I shall proceed to reply to the other part of his Book. Soft and fair,
good Joseph. This is a strange way of proceeding, to confute Books by
Wholesale. Thou art a very formidable Adversary; for though thou art not
over-laden with Wit or Learning; I find thee a very sufficient Man at Boasting,
Braving, VVondering and Railing. Thou proceedest to talk Nonsense without
blushing; thou art big with a Reply to what thou do not understand, and
passest over what thou can not answer. Thou do dictate, not argue; Nibble
and Cavil, but demonstrate nothing, besides thy own Ignorance and Impudence.

J. N. But first, I shall set down some of his own words in his Book, that the
Reader may see what it is that I do return an Answer unto. Just now thou
threatnedst the whole Book with a general Escalade; but when all comes to all,
thou do but skirmish with seven or eight Sentences.

J. N. The first words in his Book (a) are as follows. The Lord's Day
Vindicated, or the first Day of the Week, the Christian-Sabbath. (a) Anglice
the Title. But where is thy Reply? What are the Exceptions against this?

J. N. And in Page 33. He speaking of the Seventh-Day, and of Christ, says, He
designed (to wit Christ) its speedy Absolution, as the Seventh-Day, and its
Conversion into the first Day. Now this wants a proof from G. T. I find the
Reverend Author in the Page here quoted, giving several Reasons why our Lord
never particularly recommended or enjoined the Observation of the
Seventh-day Sabbath, to his Hearers. The words which J. N. carps at are the
4th. Christ was about to abolish the Jewish-Sabbath. As it was a Day of
Ceremonial Rest, The bodily Rest being required for it self, and not only for
the Scriptural works sake.
so he designed utterly to abolish it, together with the rest of the Ceremonial
Law; for the Shadows were to vanish when the Body was come, vide Page 93, 94.
As it was a Day of spiritual Rest and Worship; so he intended speedily to
change it from the Seventh-Day to the First. The Qarker says, very gravely.
Now this wants a Proof. But I say now and then, J. N. wants Eyes and Brains to
discern the many Proofs of this throughout that judicious Treatise. By how money
solid Arguments is the actual change of the Day proved? And if it were actually
changed by Christ's Apostles, according to his own Order and Instructions,
which he through the Holy Ghost, had given unto them. Acts 1.2, 3. to be sure
Christ designed the change thereof. For it is Blasphemy to say, that Christ
ordered, and through the Holy Ghost gave commandment to his Apostles, to do
that which he never designed to have done J. N. And in Page 44. He speaks of
the Change of the Seventh-Day into the First Day-Sabbath, as he calls it. And
in Page 59, and 60, he says, And we say the Seventh-Day, being cashiered, the
First Day ought to be its successor. I wonder from whence he will prove this.

Prithee Man, have a care of these same Wonderments; for they say Admiration is
the Daughter of old Ignoramus. And the VVonderer is but one remove from a Fool.
Read Page 60, 61, 62. of Mr. Tross's Book, and thou will find abundant proof of
this. And in Page 131. 132, 133. thou may find the Sum of those many
Arguments by which Mr. Tross has proved the abolition of the Jewish
Seventh-Day, and the establishment of the First Day, as the Christian-Sabbath.
I advise thee Joseph, as a Friend, to read over those few Pages, and thou will
find much more proof for this, than thou have given us, that Christ as God-man
made the World from those words, This Rock was Christ.

J. N. And in Page 85. He mentions Christ's words where it is said, The Son of
Man is Lord even of the Sabbath Day: And then he says, A Proof which we make
use of to prove our Doctrine of the First Day-Sabbath:But I say this is no
proof at all. Ipse dixit. Who durst reply to what J. N. has said. If he says
Yea let none say Nay. His bare word must pass for Argument. He has told you
it is no proof, and it shall be no proof. Well may thou Joseph hug thy own
dear Self for this rare Talent thou have got of Answering Arguments by Yea, and
by Nay. If any desire to know how these words of our Savior are improved by
Mr. Tross to strengthen his Assertion concerning the Change of the Sabbath from
the Seventh: Day to the First, let them consult Page 87. -- 90. of his Book.

J. N And in Page 114. he says. The Seventh-day Sabbath was observed in
Comemoraation of the works of Creation, until a more admirable work of God
should be accomplished; so the First Day ever after should be the Holy Rest. It
will be very hard for G. T. to prove this; and it does also manifest his great
Ignorance of the Resting Place, that the Servants of the Lord have in Chrst
Jesus. Bravely done. Thou have cleaverly confuted Mr. G. T. by telling him,
that it will be very hard for him to prove, what he has produced many
Arguments for, which thou take no Notice of. No doubt thy Name will be up for
a Dangerous Confuter. Especially when thou do so frequently talk of his
Ignorance. But Joseph, methinks thou actest like Harpaste, Seneca's VVife's
Fool, who being as blind as a Beetle, would not believe it; but cried out
against her Mistress, for putting her into a Dark-House. Seneca Epist. 50.
Thus thou criest out of others Ignorance, when thou ought to reflect upon
thy own Blockishness. Upon this Occasion, a Friend bid me mind thee of that of
the Poet.

Tecum habita and noris quam sit tibi curta supellex. But lest this should be
as bad as Heathen Greek to thee, I Will take leave to English it thus.

Consult thy self, and thou will see
Noll's Porter had more Light than thee.
What thou talkest of the Resting Place in Christ Jesus, I shall reckon with
thee for anon.

J. N. Now here the Reader may see that his great Endeavors are to prove the
First Day of the Week to be the Christian Sabbath; and yet in Page 56. he
says, we grant that the Holy Scriptures do call no other Day of the Week a
Sabbath but the Seventh: And in Page 94. he says, The First Day is never
called Sabbath in Scripture; and I say so too, and therefore he might very well
have been silent: But here all whose Understanding is open, may see how this
Man labors like a Man beating the Air, or that builds without a Foundation,
for himself does acknowledge, that he has no Scripture for a Foundation. A
heavy charge. Self-contradiction, beating the Air, building Without a
Foundation. And why so great wrath? Why, because Mr. Tross calls the First Day
of the Week the Christian-Sabbath, when the Scriptures call no other Day a
Sabbath, but the Seventh. But Joseph, what if thy charge be mere mistake. Mr.
Tross does not go about to prove that the Name Sabbath is given to the First
Day; but that the First Day since the Resurrection of Christ is the Day of Holy
Rest. And what is the difference between Rest and Sabbath, but that one is an
English, the other a Hebrew word. Mr. Tross knows better than Joseph Not, that
the Lord's Day is the Name given by the Holy Ghost to the First Day, and
principally used by the Primitive Christian VVriters; of which a late diligent
Searcher of their VVritings has given us many Instances. Enquiry into the
worship, etc. of the Primitive Church. p. 2. p. 161. 165.
He also tells us, that though the Fathers sometimes so far complied with the
Heathens, as to call it Sunday in their Phrase, that they might know what Day
they meant: Yet he did not find that the VVriters of the 3 first Centuries,
ever so far indulged the Jews, as to call it the Sabbath Day; but they
violently declaim against Sabbatizing, that is, the Judaical Obeservation of
the Seventh-Day. And a great Light of this Age has observed Baxter's Divine
Appointment of the Lords Day. Page 185.
That the word Sabbath is ever taken in Scripture for a Day of Ceremonial Rest,
as well as Spiritual Rest and Worship. That the Seventh-Day it self is never
called a Sabbath, till Moses's time, but only the sanctified and blessed Day.
That the Lord's Day is sometimes called by latter Writers by the Name of the
Christian-Sabbath, but that is only Analogically, as it resembles the
Jewish-Sabbath. Id. Page 2. See also Page 81. and 82.
And when they call it a Sabbath, they do not mean a Day of Jewish Ceremonial
Rest, for Christ has ended all such Sabbaths, as being Shadows of things to
come; but a Day separated by Christ's App^intment, for holy Assemblies and
Worship. Let but J. N. grant, that the First Day is such a Day, and then let
him call it the First Day, or Sabbath, or Lord's Day, or Sunday, as he pleases.
And if I don't greatly mistake him, he has granted the thing, though he keeps
a po^her against the Name. For he tells us, Page 6. L. 15. That the Sabbath
signifies Rest, and Page 8. L. 14. That the Quakers do cease from their outward
Labor, and assemble themselves together to wait upon God, and worship him on
the First Day of the Week. Though their squeamish Stomachs will not let the
Name Christian Sabbath go down; from hence it appears, that all which the
Quaker has said on this Argument here, and so on to the end of his B^ok, is
mere Stuff, a pitiful, putid Cavil, and his Accusation may be retorted upon
himself. For if Mr. Tross has no foundation to prove the First Day to be the
Christian-Sabbath, or Day of holy Rest; then Joseph Not, and his Quakers have
no Scripture-Warrant for their Practice, of ceasing from their outward Labor,
and assembling themselves together to wait upon God, and worship him on the
First Day of the Week. So that upon the whole it appears, that Joseph Not
might very well have kept his Breath, and spared his Paper for some better use.

J. N. But if we who in scorn are called Quakers, should bring such Doctrine as
we had no Scripture to prove, How would people cry out against us? And indeed
Reason enough too: But we bring no such Doctrine, God forbid we should; for we
are a People that have an honorable Esteem for the Holy Scriptures. No doubt
but ye are the People, and Wisdom shall die with you. Job 12.2. You have a very
honorable Esteem for the Holy Scripture, witness the Titles and Epithetes you
give it in your Writings; such as, a Carnal Letter, a Dead-Killing-Letter; the
Husk which is fit for nothing but the Swine. Nay some of you are not ashamed to
call your own Writings, the Word of the Lord, though you deny the Scriptures to
be so; and others have the face to affirm what you say to be of as great
Authority as the Scriptures and Chapters, and GREATER. See Quakers Principles
and Doctrines Reprinted. Page 3.4.

And whereas thou pretendest, that you Quakers bring no such Doctrine, as you
have no Scripture to prove, perhaps I may hereafter show the Contrary, as to
your Principal Opinions.

I am quite weary of Transcribing, and I doubt not but my Reader is of reading
J. N's Gibberish, therefore I shall in the remaining 3. Pages of his Book, only
remark some choice, observable things.

J. N. Page 6. L. 9. Now here we may see that the Sabbath Day was a Shadow; of
what may some say, why the Body is of Christ: He that can understand, let him.
The Author in these words makes use of a Trope, which Rhetoricians call
Nonsense. He proposes a Question; Of what was the Sabbath Day a Shadow? And
Answers, The Body is of Christ; adding very pertinently, He that can
understand, let him. And I say so too; but I doubt they will be hardly put to
it to understand it; for Nonsense was never Intelligible.

J.N. Line 14. Christ is the Christian-Sabbath: For as I said before, Sabbath
signifies Rest; and Christ is the Rest of his People. At this rate he may
prove that the French King is Christ. For Christ signifies Anointed. Now the
French King was anointed. Therefore the French King is Christ. So ridiculous is
his arguing.

J. N. Line 33. And they that are Sons of God do I n w this true Rest; but G.T.
does manifest his Ignorance of it, in applauding of an outward Day, and putting
of it in its room. Here is more Mystical Divinity. I hope our Author will, in
compassion to our Ignorance, explain himself in his next, about the Resting
place in Christ Jesus, and the Outward day which he talks of, as though there
were an Inward day. If he does not tell us more plainly what he means, we shall
be ready to think that his Worship does scarce understand what he has written
himself.

J. N. Lin. 35. And in Page 90. G.T. says, That St. John calls the Fi st Day
of the Week the Lord's Day: And in Page 132. he says, That the Holy Ghost does
call the Fi st Day of the Week the Lord's Day. Here G.T. has made a bold
venture, and he will find a ^^ry hard Task to prove what he has said. Why so
Bold-a-venture, Joseph? I think he has sufficiently proved, that the
Lord's Day mentioned Rev. 1.10. is the First Day of the Week, from a constant,
uninterrupted, and universal Tradition from the Days of the Apostle, to our
Days: the generality of Christians acknowledging the Lord's Day to be the First
Day. Page 82. Many of the ancient Writers have given it this appellation; as
Ignatius, who is commonly said to have been St. John* Disciple; and therefore
may be presumed to understand his Meaning, at least as well as J. N. He says
in his Epistle to the Magnesians; Let every Friend of Christ, keep holy the
Lord's Day, the Resurrection Day, the Queen of Days. To the same purpose
Dionysius of Corinth, in Eusebius. Hist. lib. 4. c. 23. Valesii Edit.
says, To day we keep the Holy Lord's Day. This Lord's Day which was the
Christians chief Festival, appears to be that Day which the Jews called the
First Day, the Heathens Sunday, in that several of the Fathers call it Sunday,
as Justin Martyr informing the Heathens of the time and manner of the
Ch^istians Assemblies, tells them, That their Meeting was on the Day called
Sunday, or the First Day of the Week, giving this as the Reason, Therefore do
we meet upon Sunday, because upon it God dispelling the Darkness, and informing
the first matter, created the World; and also so because upon that Day, Jesus
Christ our Savior rose again from the Dead. Tertullian also in his Apology, c.
16. tells the Heathens, that their Sunday was the Christians Joyful Day, and
again De Idolol. c. 14. he says, that every Eighth Day was the Ch^istians
Festival. This Day in his Book De Corona Mil. c. 3. and often else where, he
calls the Lord's Day, and says it was a Crime to Fast upon it. Others I find
cited to the same purpose; as Theophil. Antiochen. Clemens Alex. Orig.
contracels. and others. Now let J. N. write a Confutation of these Ancient
Fathers, and reprove them for their bold venture in calling the First Day of
the Week the Lord's Day.

J. N. p. 6. lin. 39. And he does also manifest his ignorance of the
Everlasting Day of God's Power, that the Saints in Light are enjoyers of. And
p. 7. lin. 5. Here is an invisible day spoken of, (viz. 1 These. 5.5 -- -8.) And
lin. 14. G.T. manifests himself to be ignorant of this invisible Day of the
Lord; and so appears not to be an Inhabitant of the holy City, new Jerusalem;
for they that are Citizens of this holy City are living Witnesses of the
Everlasting Day of God's Power, dawned and broken forth. An Everlasting Day
indeed. He that can hear, let him hear and understand. Joseph. We hear thee
right well, but must confess our selves a little at a loss about this Invisible
Day which thou talkest of. Therefore we desire thee to favor us with an
intelligible account, what thou meanest by the Everlasting Day of God's Power.
Where does the Scripture speak of an invisible Day? We know that the word day
is sometimes used in Scripture in a Proper sense, for the time in which the Sun
is above our Horizon; sometimes in a Metaphorical sense, for a time of clear
knowledge of heavenly Truths, or a state of Illumination and Conversion, in
opposition to a time, or state of Ignorance or Unbelief, called Night in
Scripture. Of such a day are those Texts by thee quoted to be understood, 1
These, 5.5. -- 8. 2 Pet. 1.9. That Text Prove. 4.18. might have led thee to this
Notion. The Path (or course of life) of a righteous man is as the shining
light. It is like unto it, and resembles it, in purity, clearness, pleasure and
the like. But the way of the wicked is as darkness, neither pleasant nor safe.
So a time of clear knowledge, when the Gospel is plainly Preached, or a state
of Grace, are like the Day: For as the light of the Sun removes the darkness
and horror of the night, bringing comfort along with it; so the saving
knowledge of God (true Grace) wrought by the Gospel, removes Ignorance and
Error, and gives joy and peace to Believers. But why do thou again charge Mr.
Tross with Ignorance, and uncharitably condemn him as one that has no title to
Heaven? Do think that thou have Monopoliz'd knowledge to thy self? Must all
the World dance after thy Pipe? Thou art like the Bernardine Monks, who thought
that the Sun darted its Beams no where but into their own Cell. And what
fulsome pride, and daring arrogance do thou manifest, when thou presumest to
judge of a very pious Divine's Eternal condition, and magisterially pronounce
that he is no Citizen of a New Jerusalem, and all because he does not
understand thy nonsensical Cant, about an Invisible Day? Whether thou meanest
by the Holy City, the New Jerusalem, the Church Militant, or the Church
Triumphant, this is a horribly wicked censure of thine. What is so pious,
strict, and charitable a Christian, so faithful and laborious a Minister as Mr.
Tross, no Member of the Church on Earth. and has no right to the Kingdom of
Heaven, and in a state of Damnation? How did thou come to know this? Was it
revealed to thee by the Accuser of the Brethren? If he be in so dreadful a
condition, what a case art thou in, who discoverest such Devilish Pride, and
monstrous uncharitableness? I advise thee, Joseph, when thou re-printest these
thy learned Works, to leave out these Accusations and Condemnations, of a
person so much better than thy self. And beg of God to cure and pardon the
pride of thine Heart, least thou fall into the condemnation of the Devil. If
self-conceit had not swollen thee up above the just Dimensions of a Man, thou
would never thus thrust thy self into the Throne of Christ, and pass sentence
(as thou have) upon his Servant. Examine whether thy Invisible Enemy did not
puff thee up with an opinion of thine abilities, whether he did not move thee
to proclaim thy folly, in pretending to answer so great a Scholar as Mr. Tross.
What Spirit, but a black one, would ever have stired thee up to treat so Grave,
so Good, and Reverend a Divine as he, with so much Rudeness, Scorn and
Contempt, as thou have? Thou taxest him Ten times over of Ignorance, Blindness,
Darkness, of opposing Scripture, and contradicting himself: This is like the
great Boaster we read of in Aul. Gell. Noct. Attic. lib. 1. cap. 2. who defamed
all the excellent Wits of Greece and Italy, on purpose to extol himself. Or
like Simon the Wizzard, Acts 8.9. who gave out that himself was some great one.
Thus do thou give out that thou art some great one, a wonder of Wit, a
Prodigy of Parts. Thou endeavourest to blacken others, that thou may blanch
thy self. Thou art wise in thine own Eyes, and others are ignorant and foolish
in thy Opinion: But I dare say thou art not thought to be over-laden with
Wisdom or Learning by many others,. And does it not manifest thy unmatchable
Pride, as well as notorious folly, for such a Fellow as thou, who can neither
write good sense, nor understand a plain English Author, who have scarce any
Books to read, or time to study, to pretend to confute a Book which thou art
never like to understand one half of? But Mr. Tross is not the first Learned
Man that has been thus treated by silly Quakers. For Mr. Baxter tells us in
his Treatise of Knowledge and Love, p. 117. that he met with the like usage.
The Quakers (says he) in their Shops, when I go along London-Streets, say,
alas! poor man, thou art yet in darkness. They have often come to me in the
Congregation, and cried out against me as a Deceiver of the People. They have
followed me home, crying out in the Streets, The day of the Lord is coming,
when thou shall perish as a Deceiver. They have stood in the Marketplace, and
under my VVindow, year after year, crying out to the People, take heed of your
Priests, they deceive your Souls. And if they saw any one wear a ^ace, or neat
Clothing, These are the fruit of thy Ministry. If they speak to me with the
greatest Nonsense or Ignorance, it was with as much Fury and Rage, as if a
bloody Heart had appeared in their Faces. Some of them went stark naked through
the Streets, and cried out over and over all the year, VVo to the Proud.
Wonderful! Wonderful! Oh the blindness of a corrupted Mind, that these poor
Souls did not perceive their intolerable Pride.

J. N. p. 7. l. 20. Now as for the days of the Week, they are called as
follows, the first day, the second day, etc. The Lords day is an everlasting
day, and the true Communicants are living Witnesses of it; for in this
everlasting day the true fellowship stands, see 1 John 1.7. Genesis 1.5. The Light
is called Day, and in the Light the true Fellowship stands. Here Is a piece of
Rosy-Crucian Divinity. After thou have made it clear and evident, that thou art
able to tell Seven or Ten, if need be, thou soarest higher, and give us such
knotty obstruse, Mysterious Sentences, as want an Oedipus to unriddle. Methinks
that passage thou do so often repeat, would have done very well here, He that
can understand, let them understand. I doubt few of thy Enlightened Brethren
will fathom this Quaking Divinity. This is much as intelligible as the words of
James Parnel, Shield of Truth. p. 113.

The ground of the Religion made manifest to us (says he) is God himself. For
God is the Fountain of all Truth, and Truth is Religion. And this Truth we
witness, made manifest by God, the life of Truth. And here is the Religion we
witness forth, and here is the ground witnessed forth from the ground. And this
Religion is pure, unspotted, and springs from the Light, which is pure, wherein
there is no deceit, neither can be; for it discovers all deceit, and leads out
of it, both within and without. Is not this most edifying Discourse? Did ever
arrant Fops waste Ink and Paper to Pen more in and out stories than these of
James Parnel and Joseph Not?

But what Scripture, what Argument have thou to prove that the Lords Day,
mentioned Rev. 1.10. is an everlasting day, and not a proper day, even the
First day of the Week? Must all that drops from thy Goose-Quill pass for
Oracles? Produce thy strong Reasons, and don't put us off with naked
Assertions. What is the everlasting day thou pratest of? Who are the true
Communicants who thou say are witnesses of this invisible Day? Where do
they dwell? What are their Names. And how does Fellowship stand in a Day? and
in the light? Does not the Quakers Fellowship end at Night, and set with the
Sun? Is it not in danger to be lost in a Mist, or interrupted by a Storm?
Explain this better in thy next, or else lay aside thy Pen, and follow thy
Trade.

J. N. p. 8 l. 4. I say it is necessary, yea needful, that one day in Seven
should be set apart for these Reasons. O cunning Elf, what a piercing Wit have
thou, that can so accurately distinguish between necessary and needful?
S^otus who has got the Name of Doctor Subtilis, was a mere Dunce to thee. But
let us hear thy Reasons.

J. N. First it is needful that Man and Beast should Rest some time from their
Labor. But why must they rest from their Labor one day in Seven, more than
one day in six, or one day in eight? I am confident thou must Rest Seven Days
from thy Labor, before thou will be able to prove this Reason to be cogent,
and concluding, for one day in seven, more than one day in seventeen, or one
hour in seven.

J. N. Secondly, Men and Women being free from their outward Labor and
Concern, they may be the more freely given up in their Hearts and Minds, to
wait upon God and worship him. I grant this is a good Reason why some time
should be set apart for Religious Worship, but I will make a bold venture for
once, and give thee Eight days to make it out from hence, that therefore, one
day in seven, no more, nor no less, should be so set apart.

J. N. Thirdly, That Servants that else might not have liberty, that they * may
have liberty to wait upon God, and worship him. * The words (that they) are
brought in by a Figure called Head und Shoulders. This Reason is no more
concluding than the former. For Servants may have liberty one day in four, or
one day in eight, as well as one day in seven, for ought that Joseph Not has
proved to the contrary.

I don't doubt but one day in seven, ought to be set apart for the Public and
Private Solemn Worship of God; and I am fully persuaded, that the Lord's Day,
commonly called Sunday, is now the day. But there are far better Arguments to
prove this, in several Treatises written on this Subject, viz. by Dr. Young,
Dr. Wallis, Dr. Owen, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Warren, and to name no more, Mr. Tross,
than those which Joseph Not has produced. But we can have no more of the Fox
than his Skin.

But let us hear the last Cavil, and that is about calling the Days of the Week
by old Saxon Names, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, etc. Concerning the occasion of
these Names, our Author (who is no doubt a great Antiquary) refers us to
Verstegan's Antiquities, and Cambden's B it. for satisfaction. As to the former
of these, he has broken his own Rule. For he has put a new Name upon him, for
which he has no command nor example, calling him Verstigan. But we'll let such
a small Litteral mistake pass, greater matters than this shall not cause any
difference among Friends. Let us therefore hear what he has to say, concerning
the Godfathers to Tuesday and Wednesday.

J. N. The next was the Idol of Planets, which was the Idol of Tuisco, who was
the first and chiefest man of that Name among the Germans, unto whom the name
of Tuesday was especially dedicated. Joseph, thou have served Verstegan a
little coursly, in changing his Name; but thou have been unmerciful to this
Sentence which thou pretendest to transcribe out of him. Thou would make us
believe, that the Idol of Planets was the Idol Tuisco, i. e. the Idol of
Planets was the Idol of a Man. How does this hang together. But this is not
all; for whereas thy Author says, that Tuisco was the first and Chiefest Man
of Name among the Germans, thou tellest us he was the chiefest Man of that
Name. Hereby making it evident, that as thou can not write true English, so
neither can thou read or understand it. If any should tell thee, that William
Pen is the only Man of Name among the Quakers, it seems this Phrase would be
above thy shallow Capacity.

J. N. The next was the Idol Wooden, whom the Saxons honored for their God of
Battle, from whence they called the Fourth day Wednesday. Where did thou find
an Idol called Wooden? I don't think there is any such Name in Cambden or
Verstegan. If thou had not been a Wooden Fellow thou would have
distinguished Woden from Wooden. But every Log will not make a Mercury.

J. N. Now it is good for all People to leave these old Pagan, Saxon, Heathen
Names, and call the days as they are called in Scripture. Never doubt Joseph,
but that all People will be ready to gratify thee in this, when they know thy
mind. And oh! what a happy Reformation would it be, if all People would call
the days by the Names of the First day, the second day, etc. What a brave time
if the Religion and Manners of Pensylvania should obtain all the World over?
Here Is precious Counsel if 'twere received. The Quaker is for a new Language,
acommodated to his new Light. He is a Man that sets a high value upon proper
words, though he makes no great scruple of Conscience about joining them
together. It Is pity but he had liberty to coin a Language to his mind, provided
the new words (and those that affect them) were sent after the Copper
Farthings. Custom has made the Names Monday, Tuesday, etc. cur^ant among us.
We use them as notes of distinction for the days of the Week. And few of those
who use these Names, intend thereby any honor to the Man in the Moon, to
Tuisco the Idol of the Planets, or Wooden the God of Battle. And though I best
approve of the name of the Lord's Day, for the first day of the Week; yet I
don't intend to bring an Action of Scandal against Justin Martyr or Tertullian,
for calling it Sunday. And let but Joseph Not give me liberty to call the
other days Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, etc. and to be quits with him, he shall
call them Second, Third, Fourth, etc. or Alpha, Beta, Gamma, Delta, or what
else he pleases for me.

I don't find that the Penmen of the Holy Scriptures were so nice and
scrupulous in things of this nature. The word (...), though an old Pagan, Greek,
Heathen name, used ( as Estius ad Romans 3.2.) apud Graecos Authors ad
significandum responsa Deorum, quae Latini Oracula vocant. To signify the
Answers of the Heathen Gods; yet the Proto-Martyr Stephen (Acts 7.38.) And the
Apostle of the Gentiles, ( Romans 3.2.) without scruple use it, applying it to
the Sacred Writings, and Revelations of the will of the only living and true
God.

Hear what the Learned and Reverend Doctor Wallis says to this frivolous Cavil,
in his Defense of the Christian Sabbath, in answer to Mr. Bampfield. p. 67.
After he has shown how little regard is to be given to the Tale of Verstegan,
he adds, But whaeever were the occasion on of the first imposing, these are now
the known Names of those Days. And we need no more scruple the use of these
Names, than to talk of Pope Pius, Clemens, Boniface and Innocent, though possibly
the persons so called, had none of those good Qualities. In like manner as we
have a Spring near Oxford, which we call Aristotle's Well; not that we think
Aristotle was ever there, or was Lord of the place, and much less that he was
wont to be there worshipped; but we so call it, as being now the proper name of
the place (imposed at pleasure) by which it is known. And so for the days of
the Week; whatever were the occasion of the first imposing, they now signify
no more than the proper distinctive names by which the days are known. And why
we may not continue so to call them I know not. We are told, Acts 17.19, 20. of
Paul's being at Areopagus, or Mars-Hill, because that was the known name of the
Place, without scrupling the reason why it was so called, (whether because Mars
had been there worshipped, or for what other reason.) And Acts 28.11. of a Ship
designed by Castor and Pollux, or (...), without scrupling the reason of that
Name, or what Relation these Stars had to Jupiter, so as to be called his Lads,
etc.

'Twas not for nothing that St. Paul cautioned Timothy to avoid profane and
vain bablings, and oppositions of Science falsely so called, 1 Timothy 6.20. (...)
de rebus inanibus clamor, inanis garrulitas quae ad aedificationem non facit.
Aret. Many such empty noisy bablers there have been in all Ages, and still are,
of whom Vincentius Lirinensis tells us, cap. 26. Audias quosdam ips rum dicere,
venite, O insipientes, and miseri, qui vulgo Catholici vocitamini and discito
fidem veram, quam praeter nos nullus intelligit, quae multis ante seculis
latuit, nuper vero revelata and ostensa est. How agreeable is this to the
Quakers style? Come you ignorant and blind Priests, come you foolish
Protestants, and learn the truth of us, that Truth which none but we
understand; which has been hid from you, but is of late revealed unto us, who
have the Spirit and the Light within. Learn of us to keep an invisible day.
Learn of us to call the days as they are called in Scripture, etc.

But let us hear the Epilogue of this Learned and Elegant Piece.

J. N. The Lord prosper his great work, and cause his Truth to spread more and
more, is the Prayer and desire of my soul; Even so. Amen.

Written by a Lover of the Lord Jesus Christ. Joseph Not.

As he began with Nonsense, so he concludes with it too. To make sense of it,
it must be That the Lord would prosper, etc. But it is fit the end should be
like the rest of the Pamphlet, that all might be of a piece. As he entitled
his Book Holy Scripture work, etc. whereas it is a profane wresting of
Scripture; so he calls himself a Lover of the Lord Jesus Christ, though he casts
off his Ordinances, vilisies his Word, and reproaches his Messengers. I think
I have made it evident, that Joseph Not is not a Lover of the Lord Jesus
Christ, but one who gives head to Seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils;
speaking Lies in Hypocrisy. 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. And I doubt not but that I may on
this occasion pray with David, Psalm. 31.18. Let the ^ing Lips be put to
silence, which speak grievous things proudly and contemptuously against the
Righteous.

Thus I have done with this Pamphlet. I have discovered the great pride and
ignornce of the Writer. I have shown his gross Mistakes, pitiful Cavils, and
notorious Errors. Ex pede Herculem. By this you may see what a fine System of
Divinity our new Professors, who are Men of all Trades, are like in time to
patch together: What monstrous Opinions may the wildness of their Brains,
assisted by that Spirit who moved Ahab's Prophets, (1 Kings 22.22.) in time
produce!

And now I dare appeal to any Man of sense, (Quakers not excepted) whether
Joseph Not has not Written against Mr. Tross without Reason, Sense, or common
Civility? While he accuses others of Ignorance and Error, he has given it
under his own hand that he is an uncharitable Wrangler, yea, a great Dunce, who
understands neither Argument nor plain English. He multiplies Scriptures only
to shelter his Errors under their Umbrage. Scit Diabolus nullam esse ad
fallendum faciliorem viam, quam ut ubi nesarii erroris subinducitur
fraudulentia, ibi divinorum verborum praetendatur auctoritas. Vinc. Lirin. c.
37.
He talks of the Spirit in his Heart when a Trepan might (perhaps) discover a
Bladder in his Brains He is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about Questions,
foolish and unlearned Questions, (about an invisible day and the like) an^
strifes of words (about naming the days of the Week ^ 1 Timothy 6.4.

Joseph, can thou review thy botching bungling work without blushing? Art
thou not ashamed to find thy folly and ignorance made manifest? Do thou not
perceive that thy Light has lead thee astray? Do thou not repent of
troubling the World with thy Impertinencies? How can thou look any ingenious
Man in the Face, after thou have thus rendered thy self ridiculous? Those who
once thought thee Head and Shoulders above the common People, now perceive that
thou art a contemptible Pigmy. But I spare thee, forbearing any further to lay
thee open, in hopes that mildness may work upon thee, though thou have deserved
a severe rebuke: And as a Friend who wishes thee well, I will give thee a few
parting Counsels.

1. Shut up thy Pack, and don't trouble us with any more of thy small wares: Be
not so unadvised as to appear any more in Print. Thy Customers will be loath to
throw away any more Farthings upon thy Toys: Meddle no more with matters above
thy Capacity, but keep to the Trade which thou were brought up to. Believe me
Joseph, thou art one of the most despicable Triflers that ever blurred Paper.
Perhaps thy Spirit and Light may move thee to reply to what I have written.
Thou art not so perfect, but that some things in this Paper may chance to stir
the Old Man in thee: And thou will it may be have recourse to the old pious
Arts of Lying, Railing, and Calling Names. I know not but thou may give me
some of those Titles, which thy Brethren have given Mr. Fald, Mr. Baxter, Dr.
Owen, and other Pious and Learned Ministers. [Such as Babylons Merchants,
ravening Wolves, Pharisees, whited Walls, Darkness it self, Reprobates,
Scarlet-colour'd Beasts, Dark Sots, Mountebank Priests, comparing them to
Lizards, Moles, Green-headed-Trumpeters, Serpents, Grinning-Dogs,
Wheel-barrows, Whirligigs, etc.) To furnish thy self with a good stock of these
read the precious Writings of G. Fox, William Penn, Edward Buroughs, and Sam.
Fisher. If thou will play the Fool again, thou will but expose thy self, to be
ridiculed and hissed at by the Boys in the Streets.

Therefore sit down quietly with the harm thou have: I wish thou may be so
wise as to take this advice. But if it should, otherwise happen, know, that
thou shall bark long enough before I will turn back to give thee a kick: I have
somewhat else to do, than to write any more remarks upon such empty Scribbles
as thine.

2. If thou write again, Commit thy self to the care of some She-friend, that
teaches Children to read, and desire her to instruct thee in the Liberal Art of
spelling and reading English.

3. Learn to distinguish sense from Nonsense, that the World may not be
puzzled with any more of thy Soloecisms and absurdities.

4. Learn some plain Catechism, that thou may no longer be ignorant of the
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ. Thou who pretendest to teach others, I
perceive thou art but a Babe in knowledge, and must have a great deal of pains
taken with thee to make thee competently knowing.

5. Converse with thy betters. Be not wise in thine own conceit, but be
sensible of thy ignorance. If thou had Humility enough to desire it, there be
many of Mr. Tross's Hearers, that would be ready to instruct thee, and lend
thee some good Expositors upon the Scriptures; by reading of which thou may
see how ignorantly and profanely thou have wrested many Texts.

6. Pray earnestly to the God of all grace for a humble and teachable Spirit:
Desire the Lord to pardon thee thy Pride and Presumption, in meddling with holy
things, and to rescue thee out of the Snare of the Devil, that thou may not
fall into the Condemnation of the Devil. I am persuaded Joseph that Thou, and
those other Mechanic Lay-Preachers, which swarm in England at this day, are
stirred up by Satan, and drive on his Design, which is first to De^a^e the
Ministry, and then to overthrow it.

That the Lord would open thine Eyes to see thy sin and danger, and give thee
repentance to the acknowledgment of the Truth, is the unfeigned desire of,

Thine to do thee any Christian Office.

FINIS.

