A SPEECH of the Right Honorable WILLIAM LORD VISCOUNT SAY AND SEAL, One of
his Majesty's most honorable privy Council, spoken in Parliament. In answer
to the Lord Archbishop of Canterburies last Speech, and concerning the
Liturgy of the Church of England.



Anno Domini, 1641.

A Speech of the Right Honorable, William, Lord Viscount Say and Seal, one of
his Majesty's most honorable privy Council. Spoken in Parliament touching the
Liturgy.
MY LORDS,
I Have waited to find you free from greater businesses, that I might crave
leave to speak of some thing that concerns my self; And this I have the more
desired since my Lord of Canterburies last speech, who expressing his troubles,
and bewayling the misery of his condition, and of the condition of the church
of England, (for he would needs join them together, which I think he may, as
the cause and effect, for the miseries of the Church have certainly risen from
him) he insisted much upon this. That these troubles had befaln him through the
malice of two parties, the Papists, and the Sectaries, and by those he said the
Church was greatly afflicted. How far this man will extend this word Sectary,
and whom he will comprehend under it, I know not, but I have some cause to
fear that I may lie under some misapprehensions in respect of matters of this
nature, which how far it concerns him your Lordships will perceive by what
I shall say. My Lord of Canterbury a man of mean birth, bred up in a
College, (and that too frequently falls out to be in a faction,) whose narrow
comprehension extended it self no farther then to carry on a side in the
College, or canvas for a Proctors place in the University, being suddenly
advanced to highest places of government in Church and State, had not his heart
enlarged, by the enlargement of his fortune, but still the maintaining of his
p^ttie was that which filled all his thoughts, which he prosecuted with so much
violence and inconsiderateness, that he had not an eye to see the consequences
thereof to the Church and State, until he had brought both into those
distractions danger and dishonor, which we now find our selves encompassed
withal; Yet to magnify his moderation, presently after the breaking of the
last Parliament he told a Lord who sits now in my sight, that if he had
been a violent man, he wanted no occasion to show it, for he observed that my
Lord Say never came to prayers, and added, that I was in his knowledge as great
a Separatist as any was in England. My Lords, how far he has spit this
venom of his against me, I am not certain; But I may well fear where it
might do me greatest prejudice; I shall therefore entreat your Lordships
favors and patience, that I may give you in these things which so nearly
concern me, a true account of my self, which I shall do with ingenuity and
clearness, and so as that if I satisfy not all men, yet I hope I shall make
it appear I am not such a one as this waspish man was willing to make the
world believe.

For the first of these that he charge upon me, it may be he was willing to
have it thought that I would not join in prayer with your Lordships, but
refused such a communion, which is altogether false, for I should most
willingly join in prayer with you. And further I will ad, that I do not
think but some set forms of prayer, by some men, in some cases, may be
lawfully used; But this is that which I am not satisfied in, that a certain
number of men should usurp an authority unto themselves to frame certain
prayers and forms of Divine service, and when that is done, under the name of
the Church to injoyne them upon all persons, in all times, and upon all
occasions to be used, and none other: and upon this ground (which makes it the
worse) because these come from the public spirit of the Church (when the
Bishop or his Chaplain shall frame them) and others proceed from the private
spirit of this or that particular man.

This injunction is an (...) of power over the Churches of Christ, and over the
gifts and graces which Christ has given unto men: which the Apostles never
exercised nor would assume, and yet they might much better have done it, and
the same reasons might then have been alleged for it, that are now; This
turns such forms in stead of being directions, into superstition.

This sets aside the gifts and graces which Christ has given and thrusts out
the exercise of them, to substitute in their places, and introduce a device of
man. This injunction of such forms upon all men, turns that which in the
beginning necessity brought in for the help of insufficiency, to be now the
continuance and maintenance of insufficiency, and a bar to the exercise of
able and sufficient gifts and graces. As if because some men had need to make
use of Crutches, all men should be prohibited the use of their legs, and
enjoined to take up such Crutches as have been prepared for those who had no
legs. This I confess I am not satisfied in, yet I will further say thus much:
here are with your Lordships some Bishops, men of great parts, able to offer up
this worship unto God; in the use of those gifts which God has endowed them
with: and certainly they ought to serve him with the best of their abilities
which they have received. Let them make use of their own gifts, nay let them
but profess that they account not themselves bound to use forms, nor to this
form they use, more then any other, but that it is free to them to conceive
prayer, or to help themselves by the use of any other form they please as well
as this prescribed. And let them practice the same indifferently, that so it
may be manifest the fault rests in the person, and not in the Service: in the
negligence of him that may offer better if he will, not in the injunction of
that which is offered. And I will not refuse to come to prayer, for I take the
sin then to be personal, and to reside in the person officiating only. I know
not whether I express my self clearly to be understood in this or not, and
it may seem to be a nice scrupulosity, give me leave therefore to endeavor to
(...) it by an instance or two. In the time of the Law, when God appointed
himself to be worshipped by offerings, and sacrifices the shadows and types
of those truths which were to come. If a poor man that had not ability to
bring a Bullock, or a Ram, or a Lamb had brought a pair of Turtle Doves, or
two young Pigeons, it would have been in him an acceptable service. But if a
man of ability who had herds and flocks, should out of negligence or
covetousness, have spared the cost of a Bullock or a Ram, and brought young
Pigeons, his service would have been rejected, and himself punished: how much
more would the Service have been abomination, if men should have taken
authority to have enjoined all to bring no other but Turtles or young Pigeons,
because some were not able to do more? In one case there might be a tolerable
and lawful use of that, which otherwise used (especially if generally
enjoined) would have been most unlawful; God will be worshipped with the fat
and the best of the inwards, the best of men's gifts and abilities, which he
that worships, or officiates in worshipping, is to do at his own peril; And if
it be left free unto him, the worship may be lawful to him that joyneth with
him therein in it self, though performed in a negligent and so in a sinful
manner by the Minister, but if that manner be enjoined, the Service itself is
to be refused.

Now in the time of the Gospel, God has appointed the foolishness of
preaching (for so the world accounts it) to be the means whereby he will save
those that believe; I conceive where there are no gifts inabling men to preach,
there might be a lawful and profitable use of reading of printed Sermons and
Homilies, and in such case they might very lawfully be heard; But if some men
upon pretense to prevent extravagant preaching, should take upon them to set
forth a book of public or common Sermons fit for all times and occasions, and
should injoyne Ministers to conform to those, and use no other preaching at
all, but the reading of these common Sermons or Homilies so devised for public
worship, this would make it utterly unlawful, and to be professed against, as
that which were the bringing in of a humane device and injunction in the place,
and in stead of Gods ordinance, to the exclusion thereof, as the Pharisees, to
establish traditions of their own, made void the commandments of God; let it
be considered what difference there can be found between these, but only
this, Use and Custom has enured us to that of Prayer, not so in this of
Preaching, and therefore the evil of it would easily appear unto us, if so
enjoined.

My Lords, let me presume upon your patience so far further as to give me
leave to speak to the other imputation laid upon me, that I am a Separatist,
and the greatest in England; and first I shall say of this word Separatist, as
that learned man Master Hales of Eaton, says in a little Manuscript of his
which I have seen.

That where it may be rightly fixed and deservedly charged, it is certainly a
great offense; But in common use now amongst us it is no other then a
Theological scar-crow, wherewith the potent and prevalent party uses to
fright and enforce those who are not of their opinions to subscribe to their
dictates, without daring to question them, or bring them to any rule or
examination either of Scripture or reason. And he observes that this was too
usual, even in ancient times as well as now.

Secondly, I say that there is a twofold separation; one from the Universal or
Catholic Church, which can no otherwise be made but by denying the faith,
(for Faith and Love are the Requisites unto that communion) the other is a
separation from this or that particular Church or congregation, and that not in
respect of difference with them in matter of faith or love, but in dislike
only of such corruptions in their external worships and Liturgies as they do
admit of, and would injoyne upon others. This is a separation not from their
persons as they are Christians, but from their corruptions in matter of
worship, as they are therewith defiled; And this separation every man that will
keep himself pure from other men's sins, and not sin against his own
conscience, must make. And I will ingenuously confess, that there are many
things in many Churches or congregations in England, practiced, and enjoined
upon all to be practiced and suffered, which I cannot practice, nor admit of,
except I should sin against the light of my conscience, until I may out of the
word of God be convinced of the lawfulness of them, which hitherto I could
never see sufficient ground for; But my Lords, this is so far from making me
the greatest separatist in England, that it cannot argue me to be any at all;
for my Lords, the Bishops do know that those whom they usually apply this
term unto are the Brownists (as they call them by another name) and they know
their tenants. The truth is, they differ with us in no fundamental point of
doctrine or saving truth, as I know.

Their failing is in this: they hold that there is no true Church in England,
no true Ministry, no true worship, which depend the one upon the other, they
say all is Antichristian: here is their error, they distinguish not between
the been esse or purity of a true Church, and the esse or true being of it,
though with many defects and gross corruptions. But conclude that because such
things are wanting, which are indeed necessary to the well being of a true
Church, and to be desired, therefore there is none at all in being. I hold no
such opinion, but do believe to the contrary, That there are in England many
true Churches, and a true Ministry which I do hear, and with which Churches,
I could join in communion, were those yokes of bondage which are laid upon
them taken off, and those corruptions removed which they do (contrary as I
think to their duty) yield unto and admit of, and this I am sure no separatist
in England holds that deserves that name. Therefore I hope your Lordships
will in that respect let me stand right in your opinions. I shall now end with
two requests.

The one that your Lordships will please to pardon me for troubling you with so
long a discourse concerning my self, I have not used it heretofore, and I am
not like to offend again in the same kind, it is but once. and your Lordships
will consider the occasion.

The second is, humbly to entreat of you, that where you know there is one and
the same God worshipped, one and the same faith embraced, one and the same
spirit working love, and causing an unblameable conversation without any
offense to the State, in your brethren, that in all these concur with. you,
you will not suffer them (for Ceremonies, and things to you indifferent, but
not to them but burdens, which without offense to the State, or prejudice to
the Churches, you may take off if you will) to be thrust out of the Land, and
cut off from their native Country, for if you thus shall wound the consciences
of your brethren, you will certainly offend, and sin against Christ.

FINIS.

