A Serious Inquiry Into the Means of an HAPPY UNION: OR, What Reformation is
Necessary to prevent Popery, and to avert God's Judgments from the Nation.

Written upon the occasion of the FAST, and humbiy offered to the Consideration
OF THE PARLIAMENT.

By WILLIAM SAYWELL, D. D. Master of Jesus College in Cambridge.

LONDON: Printed by A. G. and J. P. and are to be sold by Rand. Tailor near
Stationers Hall. 1681.

A Serious Inquiry Into the means of an Happy Union:
CHAP. I.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
YOU having made an Address to His Majesty to proclaim a Public Fast
throughout the whole Nation, all good men ought to hope your intentions are in
a Christian way to appease Gods anger that has been kindled against us, and to
pursue such Methods as may prevent those heavy Judgments that hang over our
heads; and therefore I may presume that you will readily embrace any Proposals
that shall be offered you out of Gods Word, to show the Causes and Remedies of
our Distractions.

Two things generally are designed in such Fasts: 1. An Humiliation under the
Sins that have been the cause of those Judgments under which we groan. 2. A
Supplication for Direction and Assistance to find out and pursue those means
and ways which will prevent the Punishments that God does threaten us withal.

That it is Sin that does bring confusion and desolation to a People, is plain
by the threatenings and judgments of God, that we read of throughout the Old
Testament, where are innumerable instances of Gods severe punishments inflicted
upon his own People, for their transgressing of his Commandments; and S. Paul
does tell us, 1 Cor. 10.6. These things were our examples, to the intent we
should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted. And they are written
for our admonition, ver. 11. That by avoiding the sin we may also escape the
punishment. But I need not prove this, since your desiring of a Fast is an
acknowledgment of your belief thereof.

The next thing will be to inquire what sins they are for which God does thus
show his indignation against us. Now in reckoning up these sins every Party
will follow their own inclinations, and be sure to acquit themselves, and lay
all the blame upon their Adversaries. Thus a Papist will say, all these
mischiefs come upon us, because we have forsaken the Roman Catholic Church.
The Presbyterians and Independents, because by enacting the Observation of
Ceremonies, and requiring Declarations and Subscriptions which they will not
take, we have silenced so many Godly Ministers, and scandalized other serious
Christians. An Anabaptist and a Quaker will say, it comes for persecuting the
People of God. Others again will say, and with more reason, that God is angry
with our Nation for that general Contempt of his Commandments, whether it be in
open profaneness and neglect of all Religion, or else in the licentious
profession of an erroneous Faith and Worship, to the great distracting of many
sober and well meaning People. That I may rightly state the whole matter, I
will reduce the public sins of the Nation to four heads, which I suppose will
contain the chiefest things whereby God is provoked to show his displeasure
against us; these are Heresy, Schism, Ignorance, and Profaneness. Heresy, in
denying one or more necessary Truths of the Gospel; Schism, in breaking the
Unity of Christ's Body; Ignorance, in not taking pains to come to the Knowledge
of Truth; and Profaneness, in acting contrary to their Knowledge and Profession.

CHAP. II.
THat Heresy is a crying sin, Heresy and Schism damnable sins.
that will bring Gods Judgments upon a People where it is publicly allowed, is
plain, because it is a sin that God has threatened with damnation. Gal. 5.20.
amongst other sins Heresies are reckoned, and of them all it is said, They that
do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God Titus 3.10. A man that is
an Heretic after the first and second admonition reject; knowing that such a
one is subverted and sins, being condemned of himself. And S. Peter says, 2
Pet. 2.1. There shall be false teachers, who shall privily bring in damnable
heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift destruction. We are further taught wherein this Heresy does consist, 2
John ver. 9. Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine of
Christ, has not God. And 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8, 9. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed
from heaven, with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them
that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall be punished with everlasting destruction. So that not only sinning
against the natural light of Conscience, or that Religion and Persuasion that a
man is convinced of, but transgressing the known Doctrine of Christ, and
disobeying the Gospel, is a damnable sin, and the public permission thereof
will bring destruction to a Nation.

Schism, Schism a damnable sin.
that is another damning sin, and the open allowance of it must bring Judgment
upon a Nation. Gal. 5.20. where the word is rendered Seditions, it does as
properly signify Schisms also, and then of them it is said, They which do such
things shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Again, Romans 16.17. Mark those
which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have
learned, and avoid them; for they that are such serve not the Lord Jesus
Christ, but their own bellies; and by good words and fair speeches deceive the
hearts of the simple. And S. Jude tells us of those that under the Gospel
perished in the gainsaying of Core. Jude v. 11.
And that we may know what sort of men they are, he adds ver. 19. These be they
which separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit.

I need not go about to prove that Ignorance of the Gospel and Profaneness are
damning sins, Ignorance and Profaneness damnable sins.
and consequently will bring Gods Judgments upon the Nation. Now all these four
sins follow one from another; the first is Heresy or False Persuasion,
contrary to the truth of the Gospel; that as it is damnable alone, so it will
lead men into Schisms and Divisions, and they will make men negligent and
careless, and that will necessarily keep them in ignorance, and make them
forget both God and their duty; and then the next step is to Profaneness. So
that to keep out Profaneness we must banish Ignorance, and to prevent Ignorance
we must quiet Schisms and Distractions, and to silence them we must take away
Heresies and False Opinions, by instructing men in sober knowledge of the
Truth, and keeping out all Heretical and Schismatical Seducers. The first thing
then to be set about in order to appease Gods anger, is to establish sound and
true Religion, and prevent the spreading of Heresy and False Doctrine, which
will unavoidably bring Schism, Ignorance, and Profaneness. For it is a certain
truth, that ignorant and profane persons do and will shelter themselves under
the pretense of being Dissenters, and the multitude of Divisions does make
careless people believe there is no such thing as Religion at all; which is too
too evident by the prodigious growth of Atheism and Irreligion, ever since
these Divisions have been countenanced in 41, under the color of being
favorable to Tender Consciences, and indulging to the weakness of Sober
Protestants.

CHAP. III.
Heresy and Schism being in themselves crying sins, and the causes of
Ignorance and Profaneness, we must see in the next place upon whom the charge
of these Crimes must be laid, that so we may find out the true means to redress
them.

And first because the word Protestant is so much used in the style of our
times, Anabaptists and Quakers Heretics.
I will begin with the sense of the Protestant Churches abroad, concerning some
Heresies that are preached, and openly maintained by many that are now called
Sober Protestants. And first I will begin with Baptism, which is wholly laid
aside by the Quakers, and denied to all Infants as unnecessary by the
Anabaptists, contrary to the express Word of God, John 3.5.
that says, Except any one be born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the kingdom of God; that is, either re or voto, when ordinary means are
not to be had. Hence the Augustan Confession, of greatest account and most
generally received in Protestant Churches beyond the Seas, says cap. 9. Of
Baptism they teach, that it is necessary to Salvation as a Ceremony instituted
by Christ: and that the grace of God is offered by Baptism: and that Infants
are to be baptized: and that Infants commended to God by Baptism are received
into the favor of God, and are made the Children of God, as Christ does
witness. They do condemn the Anabaptists that reject Baptism of Infants, and
that do affirm that Infants may be saved without Baptism, and out of the Church.

The French Confession, Art. 35. We acknowledge two Sacraments only common to
the whole Church, of which the first is Baptism, given us to testify our
Adoption, because by it we are engrafted into the Body of Christ, that being
washed by his Blood, we may also be renewed unto holiness of life by his
Spirit. Besides, though Baptism be a Sacrament of faith and repentance,
nevertheless since God does receive into his Church parents with their
posterity, we affirm that Infants that are born of holy parents are to be
baptized by the authority of Christ. Acts 22.16 Romans 6.3. Matthew. 3.11. Mark
16.16. Matthew. 19.

The Dutch Confession, Art. 34. We believe that every man that desires to
attain eternal life, ought to be baptized with the one Baptism, that is, once
only. Neither does this Baptism profit only in that moment when the water
remains upon us, but throughout the whole time of our life. Therefore we detest
here the error of the Anabaptists, who are not content with one only Baptism
once received, but also condemn the Baptism of Infants that are born of
faithful parents.

The Saxon Confession, Art. 14. The Son of God sitting at the right hand of his
everlasting Father is so efficatious in him, as S. Paul says to the Galatians,
As many as are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. And he affirms the
Holy Ghost is given in Baptism, when he says in Titus, By the laver of
regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost. And in John it is said, Except
any one be born again of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom
of Heaven. We teach therefore that Baptism is necessary, and we baptize none
but once only. We retain the Baptism of Infants, because it is certain the
promise of grace does also pertain unto Infants, and to them only who are
engrafted into the Church.

Now we have seen what is the sense of the Protestant Churches concerning these
Anabaptists and Quakers, that either wholly set aside Baptism as useless, or
not necessary or at all belonging to Infants; let us inquire what was the
Opinion of the Ancient and Catholic Church in this matter. That the practice
of baptizing Infants was universal throughout all Ages of the Church, is clear
from Tertullian, S. Cyprian, and Origin, and all the Fathers in the following
Ages. And when Pelagius denied the Doctrine of Original Sin, and the Necessity
of Supernatural Grace, in that sense which the Church had always received it,
he did also deny the Necessity of Baptism for Infants; which opposition of his
to the Catholic Truth caused several Councils to condemn his Heresies, and was
the occasion of S. Jeroms and S. Augustines, and many other ancient Fathers
Writings, about this subject.

Hence we have the Decree of the Council Milevis confirmed in the 77th. Canon
of the African Codex; It pleases us, that whosoever he be that does deny that
little Children, that are newly born from their Mothers womb, ought to be
baptized; or says, that they are baptized for the remission of sins, but that
they derive nothing of original sin from Adam, that ought to be cleansed by the
laver of regeneration. From whence it does follow, That the Form of Baptism for
the remission of sins is not understood to be true. but false and feigned, let
him be an Anathema: because that cannot be understood which was spoken by the
Apostle, [By one man sin came into the world, and death by sin, and so death
passed upon all forasmuch as all have sinned;] unless in that manner that it
has been understood by the Catholic Church every where spread abroad
throughout the world. And because of this rule of faith even Infants, who could
commit no sins in their own persons, are truly baptized for the remission of
sins, Vide epist. Celest. ad Episc. Gall.
that that may be cleansed through regeneration, which they derived from their
first generation.

Afterward, the Acts that were past in condemnation of this Doctrine of
Pelagius were sent to the third General Council held at Ephesus, and there
confirmed by the universal Church, Act 5. Relatio Conc. Ephesians. genesis 3. ad Celest.
act. 5.
The Commentaries of the things that were decreed and constituted by your
Piety, in the deposition of the wicked Pelagians and Celestians, of Celestius,
Pelagius, Julianus, Persidius, Florus, Marcellinus Orentius, and of those that
are of the same opinion with them, being read in the Synod, we have also judged
that they ought to remain firm and valid, and we decree the same thing with
you, and account them deposed. And that you may be more certain of this, we
have sent you the Commentaries, and the Subscriptions of the Synod.

It were easy to prove the same more largly throughout the Christian Church in
all Ages ever since; so that the Quakers and Anabaptists being Heretics by the
Word of God, as it has been generally understood by Protestant Churches, and
the Church Universal before their time, if they be openly tolerated to profess
and propagate their Heresy, it must needs bring down Gods Judgments upon our
Nation.

CHAP. IV.
NOW for Schism, Papists, Presbyterians, aend Independents Schismatics, Numb.
16.
that is a sin of that magnitude and heinous nature, that God did open the
earth and swallow up men alive for it, and sent a miraculous Fire to consume
the first Beginners of Schismatical Worship. And of the Samaritans that
worshipped God in Schism our Lord says, Ye know not what ye worship. John 4.22.
Now this Schism was in opposing the lawful Officers which God had appointed to
minister about holy things, and venturing upon the Sacred Function without any
orderly warrant to do it,

And it is as plain a case that Christ has appinted Officers and Governors in
his Church, and committed all the World to their Government in their respective
Capacities, in things relating to his Worship. John 20. As my Father sent me,
(that is, to appoint Officers, and with Authority to rule and govern my Church
all over the World) so send I you, (not Peter only) to do the like. Again,
Matthew. 28. Go make disciples in all nations; -- and lo I am with you to the end
of the world. Further, Mark 16.15. Go ye into all the world, and preach the
Gospel to every creature; he that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved;
but he that believes not shall be damned. So all the World were bound by the
command of our Savior to receive the Apostles, and such as they sent to preach
the Gospel, (for they could not speak to all men personally) and be ruled by
them according to the Gospel, or else they were to be damned. These Apostles
gave in charge also to the Bishops and Pastors, to rule and govern the Church
(...), Acts 20.28. Over which the Holy Ghost had made them Bishops. They are to
exhort and rebuke with all authority; let no man despise them, Titus 2.15. They
are to receive Accusations and examine Witnesses, 1 Timothy 5.19. and therefore
must have a Summoner to cite the Offender, and a Register to write down the
Informations and Depositions. They are to rebuke before all, that others may
fear, 1 Timothy 5.20. The People are commanded likewise to obey them that have the
rule over them, and to submit themselves, for they watch for their souls, as
they that must give account, Heb. 13.17. They are to know them that labor
among them, and are over them in the Lord, and admonish them; and to esteem
them very highly in love for their works sake; not for their Birth, or Parts,
or natural Accomplishments, but as Ministers of Christ for their works sake, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. They are in case of offense given to receive them with fear
and trembling, 2 Cor. 7.15. And lest any should despise this Authority which
our Lord has given, he has said, Matthew. 18.18. Verily I say unto you,
whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye
shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. And John 20.23. Whose soever
sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose soever sins ye retain,
they are retained.

Here is abundantly enough to demonstrate, that Christ has appointed Governors
in his Church, and commanded all men to obey them. And therefore to despise
their Office, to contemn their Authority, and withdraw from their Communion,
and to invade their Charges, is a crying sin that will bring Gods Judgment upon
a Nation.

But the Question is still, Who are the Governors that must be thus obeyed,
and who are to send and appoint them? Now it is plain that this Authority is
from Christ, and where he gave it he gave the Holy Ghost also with it; John 20.
Receive the Holy Ghost. And it is plain, the Apostles having received the Holy
Ghost, did convey it to other Pastors, who were ordained by them; Acts 20.
Govern the Church over which the Holy Ghost has made you Bishops. And When
Anamas told a Lie to S. Peter, he says, Acts 5.
Why has Satan filled thine heart to lie against the Holy Ghost? So that those
that derive Authority in an orderly way by Succession, from those who have
power given them to give the Holy Ghost for the work of a Bishop, Luther tom.
2. ep. fol. 41. Tu ex mea part explores, an vocationem suam possint probare.
Neque enim Deus unquam aliquem misit, nisi vel per hominem vocatum, vel per
signa declaratum, ne ipsum quidem filium.
those are such Governors to whom we must yield obedience; and in opposing of
them we shall oppose Christ. If any pretend to this Authority, and cannot show
they had it from them who were enabled to bestow the Holy Ghost, they must show
miracles to prove it. For it is not Knowledge alone, or the Choice of the
People, or the Appointment of the Magistrate, that can give the Holy Ghost,
that must come from Christ, or some of those that received that power by
Succession from him. And this is the Opinion of all Protestant Churches in
their Confessions, (when it may be had) and has been the constant Tradition of
the whole Church, and all the Catholic Writers in all Ages.

The Augustane Confession, Art. 14. Concerning the Ecclesiastical Order we
teach, that none ought publicly to teach or administer the Sacraments, unless
he be rightly called, as Paul does give in charge to Titus, that he should
appoint Elders in every City.

The French Confession, Art. 21. We believe that the true Church of Christ
ought to be governed by that Polity or Discipline which our Lord Jesus Christ
established, that there should be in it Pastors, Presbyters or Elders, and
Deacons. Art. 31. We believe it is not lawful for any one to invade the
government of the Church by his own Authority. We believe that this rule ought
to be followed, that all Pastors, Elders, and Deacons, ought to have a
testimony of their calling, Matthew. 28.10, 16. Mark 16.15. John 15.16. Acts
1.21. Romans 10.15. Tit. 1.5. Gal. 1.15. 1 Timothy 3.7, 8. Art. 32. We believe that
those that are chosen Governors of any Church, should take care amongst
themselves, how the whole body may be most conveniently governed; yet so as
they do not depart in any thing from the Institution of our Lord Jesus Christ.
But this does not hinder, but that there may be a peculiar Institution in all
places as shall seem most convenient, Acts 14.23, 15. and 25.28. 1 Cor. 14.40.
1 Pet. 5.

The Dutch Confession, Art. 31. We believe that Ministers, Elders, and Deacons,
ought to be called to their Functions, and promoted by the lawful election of
the Church, with serious prayer to God for that purpose; and in that order and
manner which is prescribed in the Word of God.

The Bohemian Confession, Art. 19. They teach that the Ministers of the Church,
to whom the Administration of the Word and Sacraments is committed, ought to be
rightly instituted according to the Prescription given by our Lord and his
Apostles. -- Wherefore prayer being made by the Elders, let them be confirmed
in the Congregation to this work by the laying on of hands. And they refer to
Heb. 5. to S. Paul's Epistles to Timothy and Titus, and then say, Wherefore no
man is permitted to exercise the Office of a Priest amongst us, but he that is
called and instituted according to these precepts, as it is meet.

The Canons of the Dutch Church speak more fully in this matter, Can. 5. It
pleases that exact account should be taken in Provincial Synods, and that such
order should be appointed for the good of the Church, as necessity does
require. Can. 6. It shall be lawful for none to exercise the Ministry in
private places or Hospitals, or any other place whatsoever, unless he be
admitted according to the foregoing Canons, and he shall be subject to the Laws
of the Church as well as any others.

The French Canons say the same of Ministers, La discipline des Eglise, etc.
par. Huisseau.
Can. 24. Ministers shall not wander up and down, neither shall they have
liberty to thrust themselves in by their own authority where they please. Can.
26. A Minister that shall thrust himself into a place, although he be approved
by the people, cannot be approved by the neighbor Ministers, or others; but
shall be brought to the cognizance of the Colloquy or Synod of the Province.
Can. 57. Those that shall thrust themselves into the Ministry, in Provinces and
places where the pure Ministry is already established, shall be sufficiently
admonished to desist; and in case they shall persevere, they shall be declared
Schismatics, as also they that follow them, if they do not forsake them, after
they have been admonished of the same.

The Assembly of Divines in their Confession of Faith, Chap. 30. The Lord Jesus
as King and Head of his Church has appointed a Government in the hand of
Church Officers, distinct from the Civil Magistrate. Chap. 31. For the better
Government and further Edification of the Church, there ought to be such
Assemblies as are commonly called Synods or Councils. -- It belongs to Synods
and Councils ministerially to determine Controversies of Faith and Cases of
Conscience, to set down Rules and Directions for better ordering of the public
Worship of God, and Government of his Church, to receive Complaints in cases of
male Administration, and authoritatively to determine the same; that is, by
silencing those that will not conform to them.

Let us see what Order the Universal Church made in these matters, Codex Can.
Eccl. universal.
Can. 4. which is the renowned Decree of the first General Council held at
Nice: A Bishop ought to be appointed by all the Bishops that are in the
Province; but if this be difficult by reason of some urgent necessity, or
because of the length of the way, the Ordination ought to be made by three at
least gathered together, and the rest that are absent approving what is done,
and giving their consent by their Letters. And the Confirmation of all that is
done in every Province must be by the Metropolitan. Can. 5. of the same
Council; If any man be excommunicated, whether he be a Clergyman or a Layman,
let this Sentence be observed by the Bishops in every Province, according to
the Canon, which does require, that those that are rejected by one should not
be received by another. -- And so they that have manifestly offended the
Bishop, shall be held justly excommunicated, till it shall seem good to the
Company of Bishops to decree a gentler Sentence. Can. 83. If any Bishop that is
deposed by a Synod, or any Presbyter or Deacon that is deposed by his Bishop,
shall offer to exercise any thing of his Ministry, whether he be a Bishop,
according to the custom going before, or a Priest, or a Deacon, he shall not
have any hopes of being restored in a Synod, nor be permitted to make any
Apology for himself. And let all that join in Communion with him also be cast
out, especially if they shall join with him after they know this Sentence is
pronounced against him.

Can. 84. If any Presbyter or Deacon shall despise his own Bishop, and separate
himself from the Church, and hold a Congregation, and set up an Altar, and will
not hearken to his Bishop when he calls him, nor obey nor submit to him when he
calls him once and twice, let him be wholly deposed, and that without remedy,
and with utter incapacity of receiving his Honor again; but if he persist to
make disturbance, and raise Schisms in the Church, let him be restrained as a
seditious person by the Secular Powers. Can. 91. If any Presbyter or Deacon
deposed by his own Bishop, or any Bishop deposed by a Synod, shall offer to
trouble the Emperors ears, since he ought to apply himself to a greater Synod,
and refer the right which he thinks he has to more Bishops, and wait for their
examination and judgment. But if he shall despise them and trouble the King, he
shall not be thought worthy of any pardon, nor have any place of defense, or
hopes of restitution.

Can. 165. made at the second General Council held at Constantinople; It is
manifest that it appertains to the Synod of every Province, to order all
matters within their Province, according as it is defined in the Council of
Nice.

So that as the Law of Nature does require that there should be an orderly way
in all Societies, to determine all matters relating to the Government thereof;
so Christ has appointed in his Church, that all the People should obey their
several Pastors; and because they are men like others, and die, he has
appointed a way how their Offices should be supplied to the end of the World;
and for the more peaceable ordering of that matter has said, Matthew. 18.
If any one refuse to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man
and a publican. And by his Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.32.
The spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets. And according to
these Rules not only the ancient and universal Church in all Ages, but even
the Reformed Protestant Churches, to prevent Schisms and Confusions, have
constantly decreed, that no man ought to exercise any Ecclesiastical Office in
the Church, but with the allowance of each Provincial Synod, or according to
such Laws and Canons as they did prescribe. Independents, Anabaptists, Quakers,
guilty of Schism.
And therefore all the Independents, Anabaptists, Quakers, that have no other
outward Mission but the Choice of the People, and yet pretend to be Teachers
and Governors of the Church, do like Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, that presumed
to burn Incense without Gods warrant; and that Nation may expect Gods
Judgments, that does permit such Profanation of his Holy Name and Worship, and
not take effectual care to hinder such a notorious violation of the Priestly
Office.

But yet amongst those that maintain the necessity of an outward and orderly
Mission, there are still great Disputes about the lawful Authority of those
Ecclesiastical Governors that charge men with Schism for denying Obedience,
and separating themselves from their Communion. Christ therefore having
appointed Governors in his Church, must also have left some peaceable way for
ordaining and settling of every man in his Place and Office, so as to prevent
Schisms and Confusions. And to that end the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 14.32.
The spirit of the Prophets (much more them of the Bishops, etc.) are subject
to the Prophets; and our Lord has further said, If any man refuse to hear the
Church, Matthew. 18.
let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican. According to these
Rules of the Scripture the Christian Church in all Ages did require, that
Bishops and Pastors should be ordained by Provincial Synods of lawful Bishops,
or else according to such Canons and Orders as were constituted in Provincial
and Universal Councils of Bishops. And this was the constant standing Law of
the Church for fifteen hundred years together, and in quiet times, it was
constantly observed, either by open consent or tacit approbation. But upon the
Reformation the Ancient and Apostolical Order of Episcopacy was not observed in
some places, but mere Presbyters did take upon them to ordain other Presbyters,
yet desiring the restitution of the ancient Order of Bishops if it might be,
and still maintaining that the ordaining Presbyters, and settling of all
Affairs of the Church, ought to be done by the mutual consent and appointment
of the Ecclesiastical Governors, in their several Charges and Assemblies, as
is largly to be seen by the Harmony of Confessions, and in several Canons that
have been made by Reformed Churches about this matter. In pursuance of this
Order of Christ, and the Canons and Practice of the whole Church ancient and
modern, Protestant Greek and Roman, our Bishops and Clergy here in England are
legally and rightly ordained and settled in their several Charges; and
therefore to disobey them, and separate from their Communion, or to presume
publicly to exercise the Ministerial Office against their command, is
Schismatical, and contrary to the Order of Christ, and the whole Church of God.
And all Popish Priests or Presbyterian Ministers, or whosoever they are that
hold any Meetings and Congregations besides the lawful Ministers, and without
their allowance, are formal Schismatics, and so are all their Disciples and
Communicants. So that if there be any such thing as Government in the Church,
and any such sin as Schism, as I have showed there are, the allowing men
publicly to affront Gods Ministers by Schismatical Congregations, and to live
in open contempt of their Authority, must needs bring great guilt and heavy
Judgments upon the Nation.

But against this it will be urged by the Papists, that our Bishops are no
lawful Bishops, and our Clergy no lawful Ministers of Christ, because they are
not confirmed and authorized by the Pope.

To which I answer, Papists guilty of Schism.
When they shall show any Law or Tradition of the Universal Church, to make it
necessary for the Pope to confirm our Bishops, then I will allow the Objection
to be of moment; but it is so far from that, that the Laws of the whole Church,
and of many ancient Popes, Conc. Nic. can. 4. Conc. Ant. can. 9. Vid. Did. 64.
do forbid the Pope to meddle with Ordinations in other Provinces, and expressly
say, that all Ordinations of Bishops ought to be by the Metropolitans, and
Bishops of each respective Province amongst themselves. And so long as there is
a peaceable agreement amongst all our Bishops and Clergy concerning this
matter, that is a sufficient reason to free us, and charge all Popish Priests
here in England, and all their Adherents, with the guilt of Schism, and to make
it appear that they do act contrary to the Law and Tradidition of the whole
Church of Christ.

The Presbyterians and Independents also, Presbyterians and Independents guilty
of Schism.
that had formerly Episcopal Ordination, or else Imposition of Hands from
Presbyters, which they esteem sufficient Holy Orders, are guilty of Schism, if
they keep Conventicles, or withdraw themselves and others from the Obedience
and Communion of the respective Bishops and Ministers of this Nation. For the
Bishops and Clergy being rightly constituted, and peaceably settled in their
several Charges, according to the order of Christ, by undoubted Succession from
the Apostles, and according to the Canons and Tradition of the whole Church,
and even after that manner by order of Provincial Synods, which all Reformed
Churches do practice and allow, they have Authority from the Holy Ghost, and do
rule the Church over which the Holy Ghost has made them overseers; and all in
their Charges must obey them that have the rule over them, and submit
themselves unto them, Heb. 13.17. Unless therefore they can prove, that the
whole Church in all Ages was fundamentally mistaken in this matter, and that
our Bishops and Ministers are no legal Pastors of Christ's Flock, they in
disobeying them do disobey Christ and the whole Church, and are to be accounted
as Heathens and Publicans. Matthew. 18.
And then if our Land should publicly permit, or not go about to take away
such public Offenses, we may expect that God should pour down his indignation
upon us as he did upon the Heathen, when we countenance those that make
themselves as Heathens amongst us. Matthew. 18.17.

CHAP. V. Objections of Dissenters answered.
ALL that they can say in this matter is, Object.
That the Bishops and Clergy of England are lawful Church Governors over those
that choose and receive them, but over none else; and they having never chosen
them for their Teachers and Governors, they are not so to them, and therefore
they are no Schismatics in withdrawing from their Communion, and choosing
other Governors for themselves.

It is true, Answ. People have no right to choose their Ministers.
it is required that a Clergyman should be of good behavior, and have a good
report of them which are without, 1 Timothy 3.2, 7. And consequently all
Christians have a right to except against ill manners, but I never find that
Christ or his Apostles in their practice, or that any Word of God does allow,
that the People should have any thing to do in choosing their Bishops and
Ministers, much less had a Negative to reject whom they please. Indeed the
Churches in former Ages have been moved with the nomination and earnest
instance of Kings and Princes, and by the recommendation and petition of the
People, to ordain such men Bishops and Priests as they did desire, if they
found them worthy; but it is by no Example or Tradition from Christ or his
Apostles, and they found so many inconveniences by it, that the Universal
Church did forbid it, Council. Laod. can. 13. reckoned among the Canons of the
Universal Church; It ought not to be permitted to the people to have the
election of those that are to be appointed to the sacred Ministry. And
therefore where Ministers are peaceably settled according to the public Order
of the Church, the pretense of the Peoples Negative cannot free men from
obedience, or excuse their Schism in departing from them.

But secondly, all that right the People can pretend to, is transferred to
their Representatives in Parliament, who have in their Laws confirmed all the
Bishops and Clergy now in possession by their Authority, and so they are
settled by the Peoples consent likewise; and therefore in all respects
whatsoever our Clergy are undoubted Ministers of Christ, and all within their
charge must own them for such, and submit to their Authority.

But the Parliament may alter these Laws, and give the People a Negative.

I will not dispute what they may or may not do in this matter, they having
formerly made Laws to confirm those Ministers that are already, they have
undoubted right from the Peoples consent likewise, if that does avail any
thing; and therefore as long as those Ministers live in the Orthodox Profession
of true Religion, they will be Schismatics that disobey them.

That there is an open flagrant Schism is plain, and the guilt of this must lie
somewhere; it cannot possibly be charged upon the Bishops and Clergy, and the
Church of England, for they go on upon the same Rules and Methods that they did
before 41, when there were few of these Nonconformists and separate
Congregations, and according to the order of the whole Christian Church;
therefore the Crime must wholly lie upon those who run away from their own
Ministers, and heap to themselves Teachers and Disciples, contrary to the
Command of Christ and the Law of his Church.

But they will say, They are not the Schismatics, but the Bishops and Clergy,
by imposing unlawful Ceremonies which they cannot submit to, as the use of the
Surplice, and an Aerial Cross, and therefore must keep Coventicles of their own.

Suppose the Church was mistaken in the imposing these Ceremonies, what
Authority can they have to keep Conventicles? Since they are but private men, a
private Worship in their own Families is all that they can pretend to exercise;
but that can be no Warrant for them to assemble in public Congregations, and
seduce others from their obedience to their lawful Teachers.

As for the Ceremonies, they are no other than the whole Church of God in the
purer times did observe and practice.

For the Surplice S. Jerome upon Ezekiel. Of the Surplice
42. says, The Divine Religion has one habit in the Ministry, and another in
common use and conversation. And against the Pelagians, lib. 1. c. 9. What
offense, I ask, is it against God if I wear a more pure garment? If the Bishop,
Presbyter, and Deacon, and the rest of the Ecclesiastical Order, do go with a
white garment when they administer about holy things? Take heed, O ye Clergy;
take heed, O ye that are devoted to an holy life: ye Widows and Virgins, you
are in danger, (from these Pelagian Heretics) unless the common people do
behold you in sordid and in ragged Woollen Apparel. So that they were the
Pelagian Heretics that quarrelled against the use of the Surplice of old, for
which S. Jerome does deride their folly and madness.

Council. 4. Carthag. c. 41. it is decreed that A Deacon in the time of his
oblation or reading only should wear a white garment. From whence we may very
well conclude, that Bishops and Priests likewise had a peculiar Habit in their
sacred Administrations.

Theodoret in his History, lib. 2. c. 23. does make mention of an holy Garment
given by Constantine to Macarius the Bishop, when he adorned the Church of
Jerusalem, that he should wear it at the time of the Administration of holy
Baptism. And that this holy Garment being afterward worn by a Stage Player, as
he was dancing in it he fell down and died. Which instances do further prove
there were used distinctive Habits in the Primitive Church in the time of the
sacred Administration.

And for the use of the sign of the Cross Antiquity is much more full, Of the
sign of the Cross.
that one would wonder how men can neglect, much less blame a thing, which the
godly Martyrs and ancient Fathers did so much use and glory in.

Tertull. de Coron. Mil. c. 3. At every progress and motion, etc. we sign our
foreheads with the sign of the Cross.

S. Cyprian ep. 55. Let the forehead be fortified, that the sign of God may be
kept secure.

S. Jerome upon Ezekiel. 10. In the ancient Hebrew Letters, which the Samaritans
use at this day, the letter Thau is of the figure of a Cross, which is made in
the forehead of Christians, and often signed with the hand.

S. August. tract. 11. in Joan. If we say to a Catechumen, Do you believe in
Christ? He answers, I believe, and signs himself with the Cross of Christ. He
carries it in his forehead, and is not ashamed of the Cross of Christ. And in
118. Unless the sign of the Cross be applied, whether it be to the foreheads of
the Believers, or to the water by which they are regenerated, or to the
Sacrifice, ( viz. in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper) by which they are
nourished, none of them is rightly performed.

S. Chrysostom. Hom. 54. in Matthew. All things amongst us are performed with the
sign of the Cross. If any be to be regenerated, that is baptized, the Cross is
used; if he be to be nourished with mystical food, if he be to be confirmed,
and whatever else, every where the symbol of our victory is at hand. And for
this cause we make the sign of it with a great deal of care upon our houses,
and upon our walls, and upon our doors, upon our foreheads, and upon our minds.

It were easy to bring many more instances of the primitive usage of the
Cross, but these are sufficient. But I will add some few Histories to show, how
God himself did miraculously from Heaven encourage the Christians in the use
thereof. And the first shall be that renowned representation of the Cross in
the Heavens made to Constantine before his Army, Vide Eusebius. in vita Constable. l.
1. Socr. l. 1. c. 1.
with this Inscription joined to it, (...), By this overcome; at which the
Emperor and the whole Army were astonished, and wondered what it should mean.
But while he doubted and reasoned in his mind about it, be fell asleep, and in
his dream Christ seemed to appear to him with the sign that was seen in the
Heavens, and commanded him to make a representation of the sign that appeared
to him, and to use it as a defense against the Conflicts of his Adversaries;
which when he awoke he declared to his Friends, and caused Crosses to be made
of Gold and precious stones.

Gregory Nazianzen tells another remarkable story of a miraculous appearing of
a Cross in the Heavens, Greg. Naz. orat. 2. adv. Jul.
in the days of Julian the Apostate, who encouraged the Jews to rebuild their
Temple at Jerusalem again, which they did set about with all cost and
diligence, the very Women laboring amidst the Dirt and Mortar. But there came
an Earthquake and violent Storm, and Fire proceeded out of the Temple and
consumed some of them. Neither let any disbelieve this, but such a one who may
think upon the same reason to disbelieve other miracles of God. But what is yet
more wonderful and illustrious, there stood a light in the heavens describing
the figure of a Cross. And that figure and name which was before despised by
wicked men in the earth, is now equally manifested unto all in heaven, and is
made a trophy of Gods victory over the wicked, higher than all trophies --
These were the signs in heaven and in earth; but did not the air give forth
tokens, and was not that fanctified with the signs of Christ's passion? Let them
which were the spectators, and privy to these miracles, bring forth their
garments marked with the sign of the Cross. For as soon as any of ours, or any
strangers did relate these things, or hear them related, presently he saw this
miracle on himself or him that stood by him, that he himself had the figure of
a Star upon him, or else he beheld it in the garments of another, exceeding the
art of all Women's work, or most elaborate Embroidery. Which thing did so much
amaze all the Beholders, that they all as it were with one voice at this sign
did call upon the God of the Christians, and did endeavor with many praises
and prayers to appease his anger. And many making no longer delay, went
presently to the Priests at the same time that this thing happened, and did use
much supplication to be admitted into the Church, and to be made partakers of
the more perfect dispensations, and were sanctified by holy Baptism. Socrates
in his 3d. Book and 20th. Chapter does mention this same story; and Melanchthon
a sober Protestant Writer does put it into his Chronicon.

Scultetus a grave Protestant Writer relates another Apparition of the Cross in
the Heavens, Scultet. Annal. p. 18. A. D. 1517.
Anno 1517. Frederick Elector of Saxony, and John his brother, going to prayers
on the Eve of the Nativity of our Lord with a great Attendance, see above the
Tower in a serene Sky a shining purple Cross, very great, and described with a
clear Figure. The Spectators stand awhile amazed at the sight.

Now if God Almighty had been offended with the use of the Cross, it cannot be
thought he would have made such miraculous representations thereof in the
Heavens, which must needs encourage the primitive Christians in that custom.
Neither if there had been none of these representations, can we think a thing
so universally used in the purer Ages of the Church, should be superstitious.
For certainly some of those holy Martyrs would have discovered the Error, and
found out some means to have taken it away. And therefore the use of the Cross
can be no sufficient ground to separate from the Church of England.

But the People think we can pray better and preach better than the Conformists
do, See the peaceable design.
and find they edify more under our instruction than by their own Ministers,
and therefore we may lawfully preach, and they lawfully hear us.

But the Apostle says, Heb. 13.17.
Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves; but he does not
say, Gad up and down, and hear and obey the best. So that if you should teach
them better, yet Edification does not consist only in Knowledge, but in
Obedience also; and if you do instruct them in sound knowledge, you must tell
them they ought to hear their own Ministers, and obey them and leave you; and
therefore you must leave off to preach also. But what endless confusion must
this bring into the world, if Children should refuse to be instituted and yield
obedience to their Parents, Servants to their Masters, every conceited man to
his respective Teachers and Governors, because he fancies another man will
teach and rule him better? And yet there will be as much reason for one as
another; neither is there the least color for you to say, or the People to
pretend, that your Prayers and Preaching are more for edification, but the
quite contrary, both for the Matter and Method.

1. For the Matter, all the substantial Truths in the opinion of all Churches,
that are necessary to be known in order to Salvation, are taught in our
Congregations, and repeated, and some parts of them expounded upon every Lords
Day; so that both old and young have their whole duty frequently resounding in
their ears. And our prayers are such which they must needs confess are
agreeable to Gods will, and therefore if devoutly offered up will certainly
find acceptance at the Throne of Grace.

2. And then for the Method, the very Order of our Service, and the Returns of
the Fasts and great Festivals are a perpetual Catechism, and a constant motive
to excite and quicken sober Piety and true Devotion.

Whereas in the way of their teaching it is wholly left to the discretion of
each Minister to teach what he will, and pray how he will; and what he does
preach, and what he has prayed, neither he himself can tell, nor any of the
people unless they could all write Short Hand, or had a Revelation from Heaven
to inform them; neither can they be sure in such an ex tempore way, whether the
Doctrine be sound which he does teach, or the Prayers such as are fit to be
offered up unto God. Or suppose the Prayers and Preaching should be according
to Gods Word, yet may not the Minister easily through ignorance or
forgetfulness neglect to instruct the Congregation in many duties, and to offer
up many prayers which are necessary to be done? What pretense then can there be
for greater edification? The sober Instruction that has been considered and
well approved of by the able men of the Nation, must certainly with judicious
persons be thought more tending to edification, than the ex tempore and private
Conceptions of any single man, and very often of young Students in Divinity.
Their passionate Exclamations, loud Noises, and affected Tones and Gestures,
may stir up men's Fancies, and make them Enthusiastical; but the sober
instruction and catechizing, and the well meditated prayers of the Church of
England, must make more knowing and serious Christians.

But how it comes about they cannot tell, yet they find they are more edified
and better satisfied with the Nonconformists Preaching. As for their being
satisfied, that is no more than a Jew or a Turk, or any Heretic will say, who
do deceive their own Souls. And for their edification, that will be as
groundless when it is looked into, for they will be found defective in their
Knowledge, and short in their Obedience to the Gospel; so that it will appear
to be nothing but a deluded Fancy and blind Zeal, which is much greater in
Quakers and known Enthusiasts, and not the Fruit of the Spirit, which is Love,
Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance.
True Edification does consist in Love of God and our Neighbor, Humility,
Mortification, and Self-denial; and therefore the exercise of Fasting, solemnly
commemorating and meditating upon the blessed Examples of the Martyrs, casting
off all Pride, Self-love, and overweening their own Understandings; following
the instruction, piety, and holy conversation of the primitive Fathers and
Confessors, must needs be more effectual means to Edification, than the ex
tempore and newfangled Devices of modern Schismatics, that set at naught the
Wisdom of all former Ages. Certainly they must wilfully shut their eyes, that
cannot discover the vanity of such wild pretenses of Edification; as if the
Church of God in all Ages were not better able to judge than these private men
who oppose her Practices, as I plainly have demonstrated.

The last excuse they generally make is, That they are Ministers of Christ, and
therefore necessity is laid upon them, and Woe be unto them if they preach not
the Gospel.

Well, be it so; but they must not (...), 1 Pet. 4.15.
be Busy Bodies and Bishops in another man's Charge. If they think there is
such a Duty lying upon them, they must go to some vacant places, and they will
find enough amongst the Indies; but there is no reason that they should steal
away other men's Flocks, and draw people from the obedience of their lawful
Governors. Besides, being once Ministers is not a reason sufficient that they
must always be allowed to exercise their Office; for there are some whose
mouths must be stopped, Tit. 1.11. and it is not for persons that are censured
to be Judges in their own case; there would be no peace in the world if a legal
Sentence should not take place, because the party condemned shall say the
judgment is unjust. So that all the Pleas they can make in their own defense do
rather aggravate than excuse their Schism.

CHAP. VI. Of Ignorance.
THE next public reigning sin, that will bring Judgment upon our Nation, is
Ignorance; which is a great scandal where there are so great means for to get
knowledge, and so many men able and willing to instruct the ignorant and
misguided Christians.

I will not say but that many through carelessness may be wanting to themselves;
and perhaps the Teachers in some places have not been so industrious as they
might have been; but the great cause of this Ignorance is owing to our Schisms
and Distractions; for the Ministers have been employed in driving away Wolves,
while they should feed the Lambs; and to strive with the obstinate and
perverse, while they should be catechizing the weak and ignorant. And as the
Ministers have been hindered in instructing by these Divisions, so the people
have taken occasion to run away, and refuse to hear their sober information;
and no wonder then if they continue in ignorance, and others will grow up after
them still in the like want of knowledge and unbelief, and so will be
indifferent to Popery, or any thing that is most for their advantage.

Now to suffer men to go on in this ignorance, without taking effectual care to
bring them to the knowledge of the truth, must necessarily provoke Gods
displeasure against our Nation; neither can any remedy be found, but requiring
the people both old and young diligently to attend the Public Worship of God,
and and Exposition of the Catechism and Principles of Religion, and strictly
enjoining the Ministers to examine and instruct young Children in the same,
whereby the old people also will by degrees come to understand their duty. And
how can this ever be brought to pass, but by taking away Conventicles, and
compelling all Parents and Masters to send their Children and Servants to the
Parish Churches? And because some Parishes are so large and populous, that all
the people can never receive instruction or serve God in one Church, care ought
to be taken to divide such Parishes, or to erect Chapels of Ease, that all
Christians may have room and opportunity to attend the Service of God without
distraction. But while many are favored and winked at under the notion of
having Tender Consciences, and being sober Protestants, and that they serve God
in Conventicles, others that are lazy and careless will wholly neglect all kind
of Religion, or thoughts about it. And as for those that go to Conventicles for
better instruction, they are so far from finding it there, that most of the
great Zealots are ignorant of the common Principles of Christianity, and many
of them are taught to deny weighty Truths, and to neglect and despise necessary
Duties. Unless therefore some more effectual care be taken to bring men to the
knowledge of the Saving Truth, we must expect Gods heavy vengeance on our
Nation.

CHAP. VII. Of Profaneness.
AND now I come to the last public sin of the Nation, viz. open Profaneness,
and against which our Heretics and Schismatics do much cry out, but yet have
been the great means to breed and uphold it. This is an Epidemical Distemper,
that has infected all sorts of men, as well knowing as ignorant, Orthodox as
Schismatical. When and how it sprung up is easy for considering men to find
out. All the days of Queen Elizabeth, and onward till 41, it was a Pestilence
that walked in darkness, and seldom durst peep out to see the Sun; but ever
since the Bonds of Restraint have been let loose, and the Laws taken away or
relaxed in favor of Tender Consciences, as was pretended, Atheism and
Profaneness have come in like a flood upon us, and will certainly continue and
increase till Conventicles be suppressed, and men compelled to hear sober
instruction, and frequent the Public Worship of God. For there is a natural
self-love in the best of men, which will incline them to ease and pleasure, and
that meeting with no check without, and having all the Incentives from the
Devil within, will unavoidably blind the Understanding, and lead the Will
captive to all wickedness, unless the efficacy of Gods Grace does strongly
incline and assist them to overcome such Motions. But such effectual Grace is
not to be found but in the Church, and in the use of such means as the Gospel
does direct us unto.

These are not in Conventicles, or in Taverns, or at home by the Fire side in
Private Houses, at the time of Gods Public Worship; but in the Unity and
Communion of the Church. Where two or three are gathered together in my name,
there am I in the midst of them, says Christ, Matthew. 18.20. But that is
according to his will and command, and not in Schism and Disobedience to their
lawful Governors and Instructors.

Gods Grace alone upon many tempers without punishment will not work a
Reformation, much less punishments alone without the assistance of Gods Grace;
therefore God has appointed both, and authorized Men to be instruments to apply
them. The Ministers have power to dispense the Word and Sacraments, and with
them the Graces of God, to those that devoutly receive them; but they cannot
compel any to attend upon the means. The Magistrates they can compel men to
attend upon the means, but they cannot dispense the Graces of Gods Spirit;
therefore both must concur, and all little enough to cure the Profaneness of
the Age. What influence punishment has we may learn from Gods Word, Prove.
23.13. Withhold not correction from the child, (and many profane men are worse
than Children) for thou shall beat him with the rod, and deliver his soul from
hell. And God says, Hos. 5.15.
In their affliction they will seek me early. And therefore when Governors
neglect their duty, he takes the chastisement into his own hands, Psalm. 89.32.
If they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments, I will visit their
offenses with a rod, and their sin with scourges. And what effect his
Visitation has we learn from Psalm. 78.34. When he slew them they sought him,
and turned them early and inquired after God. As yet God does but shake his rod
over the Land, and we hear of nothing but Plots, and the destroying Angel does
not execute Gods Judgment against it, but gives this fair warning, and
seasonable opportunity for Governors, who are to de a terror to evil doers,
Romans 13.3, 4. to reform these evils by their discipline and correction; but if
they do not use their power to restrain men from these licentious provocations,
I fear these threatenings are the forerunners of Gods own dreadful execution
upon us.

CHAP. VIII. Conventicles the great means to bring in Popery.
I Know it will be replied by some, these are very great Evils, and ought to be
remedied in due time; but we cannot do all things at once; we are now finding
ways to exclude Popery, and to propose other matters against Protestant
Dissenters would be thought a design wholly to hinder all effectual care to
prevent our danger from the Papists.

This I confess is often urged to put off all Debates about redressing these
crying sins of the Nation; but I see no reason in it, but the quite contrary,
for it is the only means to keep out Popery, and without it all endeavors
will come to nothing. And this is made as evident as the Sun at Noonday; for
what do the Papists labor after, or desire more, but to keep up these
Divisions? Who are more for a Toleration than they, though they themselves have
no benefit by it in their own persons? Did not Father Cummin a known Papist
first set afoot these Dissentions in England, and afterward was rewarded at
Rome for the Service he had done that Court by it? And have they not in all
Ages preached in Conventicles, and by their Learning and Cunning kept them up?
Does not the first Discoverer of the Plot inform the World upon Oath, See a
Discourse called Foxes and Firebrands.
that there were Popish Priests sent into Scotland to preach amongst the Field
Conventicles? And is it not a known thing, that Father Brown and the Lord
Forester (undoubted Papists) were thought great Zealots amongst the Scottish
Rebels? And it is as certain that Father Whitebread often preached about in
Conventicles in England. And while they thus herd together, one can never be
suppressed while the other is tolerated. And for a Test with Oaths to
distinguish them, that will never do, much less a Test without an Oath; for a
Test being but one transient act to secure their Persons and Estates, men of
design will readily leap over such an offense, and find an easy Absolution
when it is for the good of the Cause.

But why do the Papists thus join with and uphold these Conventicles? Do they
think favorably of their Opinions, or count them better Christians than
others? No, nothing less; but by that means they take men off from all settled
Principles, and lead them into confusion, and then they find they are easily
baffled out of their Profession, and wrought upon to come over to them. So that
to tolerate Dissenters, and keep up these Divisions, is to do the Papists work
for them whilst they are asleep, and with one hand to hold them up, while with
the other you go to pull them down.

But if Conventicles be taken away, and all people old and young be instructed
in the sober Principles of the sound Religion that is taught in the Church of
England, these Popish designs of unsettling people will be frustrated, and they
must necessarily fall with other Dissenters. So that in the way of Policy as
well as Religion, the only means to keep out Popery is by taking away these
open Schisms, and settling the public Worship of God in beauty and order. And
this has been hitherto thought the Wisdom of the Nation, and especially in the
times of Queen Elizabeth, when that Policy had the blessing of Honor abroad
and Peace at home.

But perhaps some may hope by force to keep out Popery, and these Dissenters
will join with them to do it. But are they stronger than God, and can they
withstand his vengeance? If these sins are so heinous as to draw down Gods
indignation, he can easily bring to naught all such devices.

And yet further, when men act upon Maxims of Policy contrary to the Rules of
Religion, how many ways are they defeated in their aim? Besides, when these
Dissenters build upon no settled Principles, their Humors change, their
Interests vary; and so may Ministers of State be altered, and the Government
put on another face, and then cunning is beyond force, and the stream of the
Multitude will be carried another way, and that Torrent which now runs against,
may be employed for the Papists. Of this we have an actual instance in the Jews
dealing with our Savior; for they that led him in triumph crying, Hosanna,
blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord; quickly changed their
Acclamations into, Crucify him, Crucify him. And there are too many examples
of profane ignorant persons, rolling from Presbyterians to Independents, then
to Anabaptists, afterward to Quakers, and at length to Papists; and many times
when the former Devil is gone out, seven worse enter in.

Therefore you my Lords and Gentlemen have taken another course, you do not
trust to human strength, or rely upon worldly policy, but by prayer and fasting
humbly fly to and implore the Divine Assistance. You must not then neglect
ordinary means and expect Miracles; or hope that God should remove his
judgments, till effectual care be taken to reform these crying sins.

I fear Popery, and with an amazing horror dread the spiritual and temporal
mischiefs thereof; but unless these sins be reformed, I fear also that is a
scourge God has provided for this Nation. Therefore as you have fasted and
prayed, so to make them prevail for mercy you must loose the bands of
wickedness, Isa. 58.6. Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings
from before Gods eyes: cease to do evil, learn to do well. If ye be willing and
obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land: but if ye refuse and rebel, ye
shall be devoured with the sword. Is a. 1.

CHAP. IX. Comprehension the certain way to greater Division.
HAving seen the Causes of our Distractions, we are to inquire after the means
of an Happy Uninion, which all ought to wish and pray for; yet how to expect it
I do not see, but by requiring strict Conformity to the Religion of the Church
of England, as it is now established, wherein ten thousand Clergymen, and most
of the Nobility and Gentry are agreed. For the Independents, Anabaptists, and
Quakers desire no Union with us, neither will their Principles admit any unless
the Church will perfectly go over to them, which can never be done. As for the
Presbyterians, they never did nor never will like the Common Prayer, as long as
they can be flattered by Enthusiastic Preachers in Conventicles, though they
can and often do join with it after their careless manner. So that all the
Union that can be hoped for by changing of the present Laws of Subscription,
Declaration, and the like, will be to bring in forty or fifty of these
Enthusiastic Preachers into the Church, and then besides the Schisms without
amongst the Fanatics, they will breed a Division also within the Church,
amongst those that will call themselves the Conformable Clergy; for their
Enthusiastical way will be only admired by the Vulgar, and all the sober
judicious Divines will be slighted as unprofitable Preachers.

Besides, having stood out twenty years in defiance of all Subscriptions and
Declarations, to testify their Approbation of the Common Prayer, and
willingness to uphold the Government in Church and State as it is now
established, they will upon the taking away these Obligations, not only think
themselves at liberty, but bound in honor and duty to endeavor the
extirpation of both; at best will keep men up and further them in contempt of
the public Prayers and Orders of the Church, and so spoil all serious Devotion.

That neglect and contempt they have brought already upon the public Prayers
and Sacraments, has been no small profanation of Gods Name, and the great
ground of all other Profaneness; so that if they gain this point, to be taken
into the Church upon their own terms, after they have cast such contempt upon
it, they can readily then tell the people what good effect their resolution and
clamours have had, and encourage them to persist in their demands; and there is
no doubt but they shall be able to take the whole Constitution of the Church
away. And if they cannot effect that, yet what a miserable case will it be,
when the public Prayers and Sacraments, Fasts and Feasts, shall be thought by
these that will call themselves the Godly Party, the Misery and Grievance of
the Nation. Those that daily see and hear how Gods public Worship is contemned
by that Party, cannot but with bleeding hearts and sorrowful groans, lament for
the sad condition of the Nation, and fear greater evils yet from that they call
Comprehension.

But these matters must be left to your Wisdom to consider of, and in all
former Ages it was the custom to advise with the Bishops and Clergy in their
Synods about settling Religion. Thus did the pious Roman Caesar's in their
times, and our Kings and Parliaments hitherto, and we cannot doubt the like
from you, who by fasting and prayer do seek to God for direction. However this
must never be forgotten, when we endeavor after a Union, we must not separate
from the whole Church of God, nor hope to keep out Popery by upholding
Ignorance and Profaneness. But if ever we expect Gods blessing and an Happy
Union, it must be by settling sound Religion and true Piety in the Nation; for
while Heresy and Schism, Ignorance and Profaneness, are suffered without
control, we must look for Plots and Conspiracies, Miseries and Confusions, to
attend us.

Having therefore showed by plain matter of fact, from the Confessions of
Protestant Churches, and also by the Tradition and Decrees of the Catholic
Church, that the Quakers and Anabaptists do teach manifest and condemned
Heresy; and that the Papists, Presbyterians, and Independents that keep
Conventicles, are undoubted Schismatics; and that Heresy and Schism are
heinous offenses in the sight of God; the first step to public Reformation and
a Happy Union is, effectually to take away all their Conventicles, and at least
make them all rest satisfied with a private Worship in their own Families.

And because under their shelter abundance of ignorant and profane persons have
grown up amongst us, at the same time the utmost endeavor must be used to
compel all the ignorant sort at least to hear sober Instruction, and by severe
penalties to restrain Blasphemy, Swearing, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, and all
manner of Vice and Wickedness. And if these things be carefully provided
against, as far as is possible by public Authority, men that are not reformed
by such means shall perish for their own sins, but God will accept our
humiliation, and hearken unto our prayers, and not only deliver our Nation
from the great danger of Popery, but from all other public evils and
calamities.

But if Quakers and Anabaptists be still permitted to propagate their Heresies,
and Presbyterians and Independents to uphold their Schismatical Conventicles,
Papists will lurk among them, Ignorance and Profaneness will more and more
increase, and so God will retain his displeasure, and be more provoked against
us; and what can we expect then from an angry God and a sinful People, but
Popery, Misery, and Desolation!

POSTSCRIPT.
SInce the writing of these Papers the Reverend and Learned Dean of S. Paul's
has published a great and elaborate Book, where he does largly prove and
further confirm what I could but briefly mention in this short Inquiry; and in
page 45. he says, Pref. p. 45.
My judgment being, that a causless breaking the peace of the Church we live
in, is really as great and as dangerous a sin as Murder, and in some respects
aggravated beyond it. And herein having the concurrence of the Divines of the
greatest reputation both ancient and modern. Would they have me represent that
as no sin which I think to be so great a one, or those as not guilty whom in my
conscience I thought to be guilty of it? Would they have had me suffered this
sin to have lain upon them, and not reproved it? Would they have had me found
all the soft and palliating considerations to have lessened their sense of it?
No, I had seen too much of this already, and a mighty prejudice done thereby to
men otherwise scrupulous and conscientious, that seem to have lost all sense of
this sin. And then after he had more seriously weighed and examined all their
reasons to justify themselves from this Guilt, he concludes his Book thus;
Although I make no such Appeals to the Day of Judgment as others do, yet I
cannot but declare to the world, as one that believes a Judgment to come, that
upon the most diligent search and careful inquiry into this matter, I cannot
find any plea sufficient to justify in point of conscience the present
Separation from the Church of England. If there be no sufficient plea to
justify the Separation, then these that by their Separation break the peace of
our Church, are guilty of a sin as great and dangerous as Murder, in the
opinion of this Reverend Person. And thence we may conclude, it will cry aloud
for vengeance in the ears of God as Blood does. But the Learned Dean out of his
abundant desire of Union, and Compassion toward Dissenters, does make some
Proposals of Accommodation with the soberest of them. The particulars are many,
and not to be considered in this short Discourse.

In general therefore I do readily agree with the Learned Doctor, Page 82.
that the use of the Sacraments in a Christian Church ought to be most free
from all exceptions, and they ought to be so administered, as rather to invite
than discourage scrupulous persons from joining in them; and therefore I would
have nothing made as a Condition of Communion, but what was most clear and
undoubted in the practice of the Ancient and Catholic Church, or evidently
deduced from the Word of God, and generally held lawful by the greatest part of
sober Divines in all Ages.

But I do not see we can agree to the taking away of the ancient Constitutions
and Ceremonies of the Primitive Catholic Church, without great scandal to many
sober Christians, and weakening of out cause, and giving great advantage to the
Adversaries of the Roman Church, which the Reverend Dean does very excellently
set forth page 4. of his Preface; It is of mighty consequeuce for preventing
the return of Popery, that men rightly understand what it is. For when they are
as much afraid of an innocent Ceremony, as of real Idolatry, and think they can
worship Images, and adore the Host, on the same grounds that they may use the
sign of the Cross, or kneel at the Communion; when they are brought to see
their mistake in one case, they will suspect themselves deceived in the other
also. For they who took that to be Popery which is not, will be apt to think
Popery it self is not so bad as it was represented; and so from want of right
understanding the differences between us, may be easily carried from one
extreme to another. For when they find the undoubted practices of the ancient
Church condemned as Popish and Antichristian by their Teachers, they must
conclude Popery to be of much greater Antiquity than really it is; and when
they can trace it so very near the Apostles times, they will soon believe it
settled by the Apostles themselves. For it will be very hard to persuade any
considering men, that the Christian Church should degenerate so soon, so
unanimously, so universally, as it must do if Episcopal Government, and the use
of some significant Ceremonies, were any parts of that Apostasy -- Which is a
matter so incredible, that those who can believe such a part of Popery could
prevail so soon in the Christian Church, may be brought to believe that many
others did. So mighty a prejudice do the Principles of our Churches enemies
bring upon the Cause of the Reformation. And those who forgo the testimony of
Antiquity, as all the Opposers of the Church of England must do, must
unavoidably run into insuperable difficulties in dealing with the Papists,
which the Principles of our Church do lead us through. For we can justly charge
Popery as an unreasonable innovation, when we allow the undoubted Practices and
Government of the ancient Church for many ages after Christ.

The use of the Cross and Surplice, and other Orders of the Church, being then
of undoubted Antiquity in the Christian Church, to take them away to satisfy
our Dissenters, who count them Popish and Superstitious, is to undervalue the
Piety of the primitive Fathers, and will expose us to the just reproaches of
the Church of Rome, and harden the Dissenters in their former belief. Whereas
if the Testimony of Antiquity be of so great moment to uphold the Authority of
our Church, we ought rather to be immovable in adhering to ancient Customs,
that we may teach the Papists, that it is Novelty not Antiquity that we reject
in them, and to root out of the minds of the Dissenters that foolish persuasion
that signficant Ceremonies are superstitious; which can never be done otherwise
than by showing, that they must condemn the Catholic Church in the purest Ages
upon the same account, and expose our Religion to the extravagant Fancies of
every conceited Humorist, and so drive away many sober men from our Communion.
To keep up then the Reverence of Antiquity, and preserve the Honor of the
Reformation, we must not take away the use of the Cross and Surplice, and other
Orders of our Church, which are of such undoubted Antiquity and universal
practice in the Catholic Church.

And as for Toleration, the same Reverend Author does say, page 79. It will be
found impossible to root out Popery where Toleration is allowed; which he does
there show with demonstrative reasons. But because some are apt to think a
limited Toleration of some sort of men may be granted without any harm. It is
to be considered, First, if Schism be such a grievous crime, as to be as great
and dangerous as Murder, how can Toleration be granted to so great a sin,
without bringing the guilt of the Blood of Souls upon our Nation? Secondly, if
Schism be a sin of so heinous a nature, what a dangerous thing will it be to
lay such a stumbling block before the common people, as to grant a Toleration
of those Preachers who are Masters of Insinuation, to seduce the weak and
ignorant into such a destructive Separation? Therefore when all is done, the
only probable way of an Happy Union, is by setting aside all thoughts of
Toleration or Comprehension, upon any other Principles than the Word of God, as
it has been interpreted by the Rules and Customs of the Ancient and Catholic
Church, and in them all sober Protestants and devout Christians, when they come
to understand them will readily agree.

For this was the principle upon which Luther and the Protestants in Germany
began the Reformation; witness the Augustane Confession, chap. 21. We do not
despise the consent of the Catholic Church, neither is it our intention to
bring into the Church any new Opinion unknown to the Holy Church; neither will
we patronize any wicked or seditious Opinions which the Catholic Church has
condemned. For we were not led to embrace this Doctrine by any evil
concupiscence, but compelled to it by the Authority of the Word of God, and of
the ancient Church.

And what these Rules are concerning our present Circumstances, the foregoing
Discourse will clearly show; but will more fully appear in my former Treatise
of The Original of all Plots in Christendom, wherein I have not only
demonstrated, that the Corruptions of the Church of Rome condemned in the
Church of England, have no foundation in the Law and Tradition of the Catholic
Church, and many of them are against both; and answered the Objections made by
the Author of The Guide in Controversy, and other Papists against our
Reformation; but also proved that the Doctrine and Government of the Church of
England, as it is now established, are according to the Laws and Tradition of
the Ancient and Catholic Church, and approved of by the greatest part of all
Christian Churches in all Ages, and even at this very day; to which Treatise I
refer the Reader for further satisfaction.

So that when we have a truly Orthodox Religion generally approved of in all
Ages established amongst us, and ten thousand Clergymen, many of them men of as
great Piety and Learning as ever were in any Age to propagate and uphold it, if
Conventicles, which distract the Common People, were effectually taken away,
the Body of the Nation would quickly embrace it, and so we should see an Happy
Union, and that would procure the blessing of God, and for ever keep out Popery
from settling in our Nation.

And since Mr. Coleman and the Lord Stafford did both confess before their
death, that their Church did hope to bring in Popery by Toleration and keeping
up Conventicles, surely we ought in all reason to conclude the taking them away
must be the readiest means to keep it out.

Thus as a Divine and hearty Welwisher to the peace and happiness of my Native
Country, I have endeavored to lay open the Causes and Remedies of our
Distractions, though with the utmost peril of my Life or Welbeing, whether I
respect the Papists or other Dissenters. Had I therefore either consulted my
advantage or my safety, I had better have spared my pains, than thus to have
provoked their hatred against me; but I thank God I had other Motives to
persuade me, than any temporal Concerns of my own, for the Honor of God, the
Peace of his Church, and the present and eternal Welfare of so many thousand
Souls do depend upon the right Settlement of Religion, which is the thing I now
propose, not out of my own Fancy, or upon any private models and conjectures,
but upon that sure immovable foundation of the Ancient and Catholic Church in
all ages, which will quiet the minds of all sober people, take a way those
heats and animosities that are stirred up amongst Christians, and certainly
secure our Nation from destruction.

I know this will be thought a vain Assertion by many, but with all serious
persons that mind Religion it is an undoubted truth, that the only way to
obtain peace and quietness, is by religious performing of our duty to God; and
since there are so many pretenders to Religion, that go about to devour and
destroy one another, till there be found some way to undeceive these erroneous
Pretenders, not only Gods commands, but the peace of Christendom will be
little regarded, and consequently we must lie exposed to perpetual Wars and
Massacres.

Now all these Divisions are kept up upon the opinion of the great Sanctity and
Authority of their several Upholders; unless therefore we can urge their
Followers with a greater Authority, and more undoubted Argument of Holiness
than they lay claim to, we can never hope to undeceive them. And these will
most certainly appear in that way which I defend the Church of England, for
what Authority can be greater than the Church of God in all ages, in opposition
to a particular Church, or a few private persons? Or who can give better
evidence of their Holiness than the Holy Catholic Church?

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 10. l. 11. dele in. p. 23. l. 14. r. c. 27. p. 25. l. 33. after figure
add as.


