A SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM, LORD Vicount SAY and
SEAL, Mr. of his Majesty's Court of Wards and Liveries, and one of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, Upon the Bill against Bishops power
in civil affairs and Courts of Judicature.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Underhill. 1641.

A Speech of the Right Honorable WILLIAM, Lord Vicount Say and Seal, one of
his Majesty's most Honorable privy Council, spoken in Parliament upon the
Bill against the Bishops.
MY LORDS,
I Shall not need to begin as high as Adam in answer to what has been drawn
down from thence by a Bishop concerning this question, The Bishop of Lincoln.
for that which is pertinent to it will only be what concerns Bishops as they
are ministers of the Gospel, what was before (being of another nature) can
give no rule to this. The question that will lie before your Lordships in
passing of this bill is not whether Episcopacie (I mean this Hierarchicall
Episcopacy which the world now holds forth to us) shall be taken away Root and
branch, but whether those exuberant and superfluous branches, which draw away
the sap from the tree, and divert it from the right and proper use whereby it
becomes unfruitful, shall be cut off, as they use to pluck up suckers from the
Root. The question will be no more but this, whether Bishops shall be reduced
to what they were in their first advancement over the presbyters (which
although it were but a humane device for the Remedy of Scisme, yet were they
in those times least offensive) or continue still with the addition of such
things, as their own ambition, and the ignorance and superstition of
succeeding times did add thereunto, and which are now continued for several
politic ends. Things heterogeneall and inconsistent with their calling and
function as they are ministers of the Gospel, and thereupon such, a ever have
been, and ever will be, hurtful to themselves, and make them hurtful to
others, in the times and places where they are continued. And these things
alone this bill takes away, that is their offices and places in Courts of
Judicature, and their employments by Obligation o^ office in civil affairs: I
shall insist upon this, and show first how these things hurt themselve, and
secondly, how they have made, and ever will make them hurtful to others; They
themselves are hurt thereby in their consciences, and in their credits; In
their consciences, by seeking or admitting things which are inconsistent with
that function and office which God has set them apart unto. They are separated
unto a special work, and men must take heed how they mis-imploy things
dedicated and set apart to the service of God; They are called to preach the
Gospel, and set apart to the work of the ministry, and the Apostle says,
who is sufficient for these things, showing that this requires the whole man,
and all is too little, therefore for them to seek, or take other offices,
which shall require and tie them to employ their time and studies in the
affairs of this world, will draw a guilt upon them, as being inconsistent with
that which God does call them and set them apart unto. In this respect our
Savior has expressly prohibited it, telling his Apostles that they should not
Lord it over their Brethren, nor exercise Jurisdiction over them, as was used
in civil governments among the Heathen: They were called gracious Lords, and
exercised Jurisdiction as Lords over others, and sure they might lawfully do
so: but to the Ministers of the Gospel our Savior gives this Rule, it shall
not be so done by you; If ye strive for greatness, he shall be the greatest
that is the greatest servant to the rest; therefore in another place he says,
He that puts his hand to the Plow and looks back to the things of this
world is not fit for the kingdom of God, that is the preaching of the Gospel,
as it is usually called. To be thus withdrawn by intangling themselves with
the affairs of this life, by the necessity and duty of an Office received from
men, from the discharge of that Office which God has called them unto, brings
a woe upon them; Woe unto me, says the Apostle, if I preach not the Gospel,
what does he mean? If I preach not once a quarter, or once a year in the
Kings Chapel? No, he himself interprets it; Preach the Word, ^e instant,
in season and out of season, rebuke, exhort, or instruct, with all long
s^ffering and doctrine: he that has an office, must attend upon his office,
especially this of the ministry. The practice of the Apostles is answerable to
the direction, and doctrine of our Savior. There never was, nor will be, men
of so great abilities and gifts as they were endued withal, yet they thought
it so inconsistent with their Callings, to take places of Judicature in civil
matters, and secular affairs and employments upon them, that they would not
admit of the care and distraction that a business far more agreeable to
their Callings, then these, would cast upon them, and they give the reason of
it, in the sixth of the Acts. It is not reason that we should leave the word of
God and serve Tables. And again, when they had appointed them to choose men
fit for that business, they institute an office rather for taking care of the
poor, then they by it would be distracted from the principal work of their
Calling, and then show how they ought to employ themselves; But we (said they)
will give our selves continually to prayer, and to the ministry of the Word;
Did the Apostles, men of extraordinary gifts, think it unreasonable for them
to be hindered from giving themselves continually to preaching the Word and
prayer, by taking care for the tables of the poor Widows, and can the Bishops
now think it reasonable or lawful for them to contend for sitting at Council
Tables to govern States, to turn Statesmen in stead of Churchmen, to sit in
the highest Courts of Judicature, and to be employed in making laws for
civil polities and government? If they shall be thought fit to sit in such
places, and will undertake such employments, they must not sit there as
ignorant men, but must be knowing men in businesses of State, and understand
the Rules and Laws of government, and thereby both their time and studies must
be necessarily diverted from that which God has called them unto; And this
sure is much more unlawful for them to admit of, then that which the Apostles
rejected as a distraction unreasonable for them to be interrupted by. The
doctrine of the Apostles is agreeable to their practice herein, for Paul when
he instructs Timothy for the work of the ministry presses this argument
from the example of a good soldier, no man that warreth intangleth himself
with the affairs of the world: So that I conclude, That which by the
commandment of our Savior, by the practice and doctrine of the Apostles, and
I may add by the Canons of ancient Councels, grounded thereupon, is prohibited
to the Ministers of the Gospel, and showed to be such a distraction unto them
from their Callings and function, as will bring a woe upon them, and is not
reasonable for them to admit of; If they shall notwithstanding entangle
themselves withal, and enter into, it will bring a guilt upon their souls,
and hurt them in respect of their consciences.

In the next place it does blemish them, and strike them in their credit, so
far from truth is that position which they desire to possess the world
withal, that unless they may have these outward trappings of worldly pomp
added to the ministry, that Calling will grow into contempt, and be despised.
The truth is, these things cast contempt upon them in the eyes of men. They
gain them cappe and courtesy, but they have cast them out of the consciences
of men; and the reason is this, every thing is esteemed as it is eminent in its
own proper excellency; the eye in seeing, not in hearing; the ear in
hearing, not in speaking; The one would be rather monstrous then comely, the
other is ever acceptable being proper; so is it with them, their proper
excellency is spiritual, the denial of the world with the pomp and
preferments, and employments thereof, this they should teach and practice, but
when they contrary hereunto seek after a worldly excellency like the great men
of the world, and to rule and dominere as they do contrary to our Saviors
precept, Vos autem non sic, but it shall not be so amongst you, in stead of
honor and esteem, they have brought upon themselves in the hearts of the
people that contempt and odium which they now lie under, and that justly and
necessarily, because the world sees that they prefer a worldly excellency,
and run after it, and contend for it, before their own, which being
spiritual is far more excellent, and which being proper to the Ministry is
that alone which will put a value and esteem upon them that are of that
Calling. As these things hurt themselves in their consciences and credit, so
have they, and, if they be continued, still will make them hurtful to others;
The reason is, because they break out of their own orb, and move
irregularly, there is a curse upon their leaving of their own place. The
heavenly bodies while they keep within their own spheres give light and
comfort to the world, But if they should break out, and fall from their
regular and proper motions, they would set the world on sire: so have these
done while they kept themselves to the work of their ministry alone, and gave
themselves to prayer, and the ministry of the Word, according to the example of
the Apostles, the world received the greatest benefits by them, they were the
light, and life thereof; But when their ambition cast them down like stars
from heaven to earth, and they did grow once to be advanced above their
brethren, I do appeal to all who have been versed in the ancient
Ecclesiastical stories, or modern Histories, whether they have not been the
common incendiaries of the Christian world, never ceasing from contention one
with another about the precedence of their Sees, and Churches, Excommunicating
one another, drawing Princes to be parties with them, and thereby casting them
into bloody wars. Their ambition, and intermedling with secular affairs and
State business, has been the cause of shedding more Christian blood then any
thing else in the Christian world, and this no man can deny that is versed in
History; But we need not go out of our own Kingdom for examples of their
insolency and cruelty; when they had a dependency upon the Pope, and any
footing thereby out of the Land, there were never any that carried themselves
with so much scorn and insolency toward the Princes of this Kingdom, as
they have done. Lincoln.
Two of them the Bishop that last spoke has named, but instances of many more
may be given whereof there would be no end. Although the Pope be cast off,
yet now there is another inconvenience no less prejudicial to the Kingdom by
their sitting in this House, and that is, they have such an absolute dependency
upon the King, that they sit not here as freemen. That which is requisite to
freedom, is to be void of hopes and fears; He that can lay down these is a
freeman, and will be so in this house; But for the Bishops as the case stands
with them, it is not likely they will lay aside their hopes, greater
Bishoprics being still in expectancy: and for their fears they cannot lay
them down, since their places and seats in Parliament are not invested in them
by blood, and so hereditary, but by annexation of a Barony to their office, and
depending upon that office, so that they may be deprived of their office, and
thereby of their places, at the Kings pleasure, they do not so much as sit
here dum been se gesserint, as the Judges now by your Lordships petition to the
King have their places granted them, but at will and pleasure, and therefore as
they were all excluded by Edw. the first as long as he pleased, and Laws made
excluso Clero, so may they be by any King at his pleasure in like manner, they
must needs therefore be in an absolute dependencie upon the Crown, and
thereby at devotion for their votes, which how prejudicial it has been, and
will be, to this house I need not say.

I have now showed your Lordships how hurtful to themselves and others these
things which the bill would take away have been, I will only answer some
Objections which I have met withal, and then crave your pardon for troubling
you so long.

Object. 1. It will be said that they have been very ancient.

2. That they are established by law.

3. That it may be an infringement to the privileges of the House of Peers,
for the house of Commons to send up a Bill to take away some of their members.

To these three objections the answer will be easy.

1. To the first, Antiquity is no good plea, for that which is by experience
found to be hurtful, the longer it has done hurt the more cause there is now
to remove it, that it may do no more, besides other irregularities are as
ancient which have been thought fit to be redressed, and this is not so
ancient, but that it may truly be said, Non fuit sic ab initio.

2. For being established by Law, the lawmakers have the same power, and the
same charge, to alter old laws inconvenient, as to make new that are necessary.

3. For privilege of the House it can be no breach of it, for either estate
may propose to other by way of bill what they conceive to be for public
good, and they have power respectively of accepting or refusing.

There are two other Objections which may seem to have more force, but they
will receive satisfactory answers.

The one is, that if they may remove Bishops, they may as well next time remove
Barons and Earls: for answer.

The Reason is not the same, the one sitting by an Honor invested in their
blood, and hereditary, which though it be in the King to grant alone, yet being
once granted he cannot take away; the other sitting by a Barony depending upon
an Office which may be taken away, for if they be deprived of their office
they sit not.

2. Their sitting is not so essential, for Laws have been, and may be made,
they being all excluded, but it can never be showed, that ever there were Laws
made by the King, and them, the Lords and Earls excluded.





2. Secondly, I say this is not fundamental to this House, for it has stood
without them, and done all that appertains to the power thereof without them,
yea, they being wholly excluded, and that which has been done for a time at
the Kings pleasure may be done with as little danger for a longer time, and
when it appears to be fit and for public good, not only may, but ought to be
done altogether by the supreme Power.

FINIS.

