A NEW POEM On the Late Illustrious Congress AT THE HAGUE.

-- Fortuna
Tibi Numen incruenta submittit suum,
Et dedit habenas Imperii facili manu;
Nutuque Terras, Maria, subjecit suo.
Invidia Tristis victa consensu pio
Cessit; Senatus, Equitis accensus favor,
Plebisque votum, atque Judicium Patrum est:
Tu pacis Author, Generis humani Arbiter
Electus, Orbem tu sacra specie regis,
Patriae Parens, quod Nomen ut serves, petit.
Senecae Traged. Octavia. LONDON Printed, and are to be sold by the Booksellers
of London, 1691.

To the Right Honorable Charles Lord Viscount Lansdown, Count of the Sacred
Roman Empire, Baron Granville of Kilkhampton, Lord Lieutenant of the Counties
of Devon and Cornwall, and Governor of the Royal Citadel and Town of Plymouth,
etc.
MY LORD,
WERE the vicissitudes of Fortune, or the danger of an Enemy the worst
Inconveniences, the Great and Brave were exposed to by their Station and
Virtue, and same Virtue which raised them thither, would be sufficient to
defend them. But there is one thing, it is impossible either for them or Heaven
it self to avoid, I mean the importunate Addresses of the World below, to both
which the Temples and your Lordships Gates are ever open.

So high a Generosity is a dangerous Virtue, and it is as impossible for signal
Merit to steal through the World without a Crowd of Dedications, as a noted
Beauty without as many Adorers. The true witty Men choose such Persons as Your
Lordship for their Patrons out of judgment, and those who would be thought
such, or think themselves so, for that very Reason follow their Example; And
though I am not ambitious of one of those Characters, nor can pretend to the
other, I must own that 'twas not merely the Crowd of your Lordships Addresses
hurfy'd me hither, since a distinguishing Virtue drew me almost irresistibly;
ror even a Blind-man can perceive some glimmering of the Sun, if he turns his
Face toward it, though a small Star or any lesser Light would not come behind
'em, to have Wit and Virtue, and Bravery and Honor, that is, to be a true
Englishman; as they are not Glories which many can aspire to, so it is not
possible they should long remain obscure to the World: Without any Reflection
on our English Nobility, I hope I may be permitted to wish there were more of
'em like your Lordship, as equally fit to preside in a Council, or lead an Army.

Your Lordship's unblemished and unbiast Loyalty to your Royal Master and
Mistress at home, remarkably visible, when the French Fleet, not without
Invitation hovered on our Coast the last Summer, can be Rivaled by nothing but
your Lordship's Valor abroad; which neither the Turks nor the Germans can
forget, as long as either Tradition or Annals remain amongst 'em. The
Christians have given you a Noble Testimony of their Acknowledgment and
Gratitude, and all the World knows it must not be a vulgar Merit which can
raise a Man to be Count of the Sacred Roman Empire. The Infidels have reason to
remember your Lordship while they reflect either on Vienna, Barcan, or Gran,
they saw you there covered with Laurels and Blood, and found their Fate written
legibly enough in your Lordships Forehead, whatever 'twas in their own: But
Providence had reserved for Your Lordship a much more great and inestimable
Happiness to allay and sweeten your Lordships Martial Toils, I mean a Branch of
the Illustrious Family of the Overkirks. It Is love as well as Victory that
Crowns the Hero; And if ever Heaven studied to make the Honorable happy,
'twas when it presented your Lordship with the best of Women, who is as much
the Ornament of her Sex as your Lordship is the Envy of your own.

But I must repress that fervor which would carry me beyond the Bounds of
Time, tho not of Justice, lest I should be thought a Poet too soon, tho I
advance nothing but the most sacred and evident Truths. All that I shall add,
is, that there is a greater Infidel to be pulled down than him your Lordship has
already engaged, and a much more dangerous Enemy to the Liberty and Peace of
Christendom; it is obvious that I mean the French King: For the humbling whose
Pride, and putting speedy Bounds to the Ocean of his Ambition before it has
overwhelmed all the World, The Illustrious Congress at the Hague were lately
Assembled, where such Measures were concerted, that it is beyond either his
Policy or his Force to break 'em; and this Congress it is, which is the Subject
of this present Poem, as well as of the Expectations of Europe. It has little I
own to recommend it, any more than its Author, who if he desired to boast of
any thing, it should be of his Loyalty to Their Majesty's, and Love to his
Country; which Character, if he might ever wear in your Lordships Esteem, he
should never court Fortune for any other Favor, unless that of having the
Honor to subscribe himself,

MY LORD, Your Lordships most faithful humble Servant RICHARD SAVLT.

A NEW POEM On the Late Illustrious Congress AT THE HAGUE.
LONG did the Gallick Statesmen reconcile
Their Monarchs Grandeur with the Subjects spoil.
Long had they drained the deep unwilling store,
Till the concealing Fund would yield no more;
Which fatal Crisis Richlieu first assigned
TO Exalt his own vain Prince, and Plague Mankind.
The Charm prevailed, and quickly did engage
Proud Charles the Seventh that Monster of his Age
To quit his fruitless Agents in a Rage:
He taught the Tyrant to dispose, and treat
His Subjects Lives, and Goods, as he thought sit:
Him each succeeding Prince admired, and strove
Which should the Exuberant Darling most improve;
But as the watchful Sentinels of Night
Disown their Pride, and lose their borrowed Light,
When the more fierce and burning Eye of Day
Chases the dark and sullen Shades away;
So shackl'd France, thy present glaring Sun,
The Worlds dire Comet rather has outdone
And cleared the Stage of each preceding Name
That claimed a Title in Despotick Fame.
Witness his Subjects Groans, his Neighbors Fears,
Wronged Innocence, and unappealing Tears,
The daily Lecture now to Europes Ears.
If Interest for Destruction mark a State,
No Means to him are Illegitimate,
To act his powerful Will, that new decreeing Fate.
Repeated breach of Faith, rapes Fire and Sword,
And barbarous Massacres obey his Word,
And yet all is just when his Command is given:
His Stamp and Privilege out-rival Heaven.
Have we not seen a lofty Cedar spread
It Is leavy Branches, and erect it is Head
Among the Clouds, until it does impart
A proper Choice for the Mechanics Art?
And when his Aid some Neighboring Place calls,
Beneath the axes sounding stroke it falls.
Thus that Ambitious Monarchs boasted Power
Affects a lofty rise to fall the lower;
At last the pitying Tutelary Fates
Espouse the Interest of his Neighbour-States,
Who long have groaned beneath unequal Weights,
And choose an Instrument to set 'em free,
Great Nassau's Sword, that Scourge of Tyranny,
That Sword, whose Force they have already tried,
To ease three Crowns of War and Tyrants Pride.
Glad of his Fame, the abused States send over
Their faithful Envoys to the British Shore,
Congratulate his spreading, great Success,
Renew their League of Amity and Peace,
Appoint a Royal Congress, and entreat
His Presence there to fill the chiefest Seat;
His graver Counsels, and his Guardian Arm,
Those to instruct, and this protect from Harm:
Glad of the Charge, and willing to relieve,
He gives, and they his Patronage receive.
Back they retire in their Embassy blessed
With Preparations for their Royal Guest;
Whilst he sets out, and leaves his Peaceful own
To state new Measures with an angry Crown.
Hark! how the wounded Air complains aloud,
Torn with the Acclamations of the Crowd,
And Peals of Cannon which with joyful Pride
Welcome Great NASSAV to the Oceans side.
But see, the Winds and Earth conspire to keep
The mighty Prize from the impatient Deep;
And he returns again, till they agree
To lend him for a moment to the Sea.
And now the Billows dance in state, and swell,
Proud of the burden of the Royal Keel,
Whilst He reads over the Volumes of the Fates,
And smooths the blackest Lines that fear creates.
See how the laboring, Rival Winds waft over
The happy Pinnace for the happier Shore;
See how they strive; see how they emulate,
Which soonest shall perform the charge of Fate;
Which most advance the mighty Work that lies
Upon the Atlas of the Belgic Skies.
And is He then with cruel Horror gone?
Our Islands Genius, our Life, our Sun?
Must a confused Darkness seize us now,
And we unguarded under Ruins bow?
Cease needless Fear; the Partner of his Fate
Has undertook the Mighty Bulk of State;
She Will with like Vigor, yet more softly move,
And Temper Might with Sweet Commanding Love.
Peace, Happy Isle -- farewell, I must away,
The Belgic Shore proclaims an Holy Day;
That now the Hemisphere wherein the Sun
Of Albions Peace, and yet not hers alone
Arises, to dispel that angry Cloud
Which threatens Europe with new Showers of Blood.
Hail happy Climate! see the mournful Tide
Runs back again, to try if it can hide
The deep Resentments of it is ravished Pride.
The very Stars forsake their Native Course,
Conspire new Aspects full of happy force,
Propitious Omens fill the wondering Sky
To influence the great Solemnity;
Great, greater yet by far than e're was known,
Since Babylon was filled with subject Crowns,
Until it groaned beneath that Royal Load,
Led there in Triumph by the Conquering God.
When the proud Titans had usurpt the World,
And Towering Pelion upon Ossa hurled,
Pileing stupendous Aetna upon these,
And War proclaimed against the Deities.
Jove called a Council of the Gods, and sat
Chief President at the August Debate,
Then casts his direful Thunderbolts at those
Presumptive Monsters dared his Arms oppose;
So here the British Monarch does preside
Amongst these Earthly Gods, to curb the Gallick Pride;
Saxony and Bavaria's Princely Line,
Great Brandenburgh, and all that near the Rhine,
Like Stars in this fair Constellation shine.
See how they move in Stately Majesty,
Laden with Indian Spoils and Tyrian Dye;
Mountains of Sand cut through, and paved with Stone,
TO accommodate the Great Procession;
The best of Europes Ingineers inspire
Machines, and Pyramids of Artful Fire:
Whilst Piles of Mortals glut their wondering Eyes
With the bright view of sportive Prodigies,
Entering the great Consistory of Fate,
To cull the deepest Politics o^ State.
Methinks (the Muse steps on;) methinks I hear --
Presumptive Sacrilegious Wretch forbear:
Those Secrets are too greeat to be expressed,
Their only Cabinet, a Princes Breast;
Gaze not within the Ark, nor fondly try
To guess the Orac'lous Thoughts of Majesty,
Without a deep and Reverent Extacy?
Enough; Enough is thought, consulted, done,
For deepest Monuments of lasting Stone,
Or faithful Records safe Repository,
Too much for one succeeding Ages Glory.
But see, the Generous Youth in Crowds appear,
To fan their Noble Warmth, and strike new fear;
Strike from their thundering Arms, and Lightning Eyes,
Amidst their proud insulting Enemies.
And thus begin, -- Shall this bright Congress meet
To trample stubborn France beneath our Feet;
TO adjust the Grand Intreagues of War and State,
And make proud Lewis his Destruction Date?
Shall our great Patriots consult the way,
Lay down the Scheme? And shall we disobey,
Or slight the Practick that would set us free
From the Allarms of Gallick Slavery?
No: Rather let the fatal Engines fly,
And Clouds of Sulphurous Smoke eclipse the Sky;
Our dying Groans shall drown the Conquering Noise,
And louder Cannon ring our Obsequies:
The Verdant Plains shall first be conver'd over
With mangled Holocausts and Crimson Gore,
E're the insulting Tyrant shall proclaim
The UNIVERSAL MONARCHS NAME.
Turn to the other sides, -- methinks I see
France busy in her mock Divinity;
Methinks I see her in a black Despair,
Toward her hallowed Altars make repair,
To which they prostrate Fall, and deeply load,
With missal Vows, tiring their Maiden God.
See how the weary Beads are mumbled over
In stinted Repetitions, whilst some poor
Deluded Fools more charitable given,
And full as wise, light Tapers up to Heaven:
But most of all, the loud Emphatic Sighs
Of solfter Masculines in Nuns disguise,
That sleep and revel in Religious Cells,
Till the devoted Pious Virgin swells,
Or turns a Convert to the Hospitals.
Malignant Stars (say they) alas that we
Must forfeit now at length our Liberty!
Must leave these sacred Rapes, this private State,
These sweeter Thefts to our Revenging Fate.
Nor less, is their Great Master terrified
At this new prospect of his tottering Pride:
Complaining thus --
That fatal Aspect! That unhappy Star
That influenced us to denounce a WAR
Against the mighty; floating Belgic Wood,
And the more bravely Valiant English Blood!
Are there not Chronicles enough that show,
What that proud Nation for our Crown could do?
Speak Bulloigne, and those Towns which heretofore
Were Tributary to the English Shore;
Speak Ireland, speak our Troops, how fierce they join,
And mingle Blood, with the Triumphant Boyne.
What humble Rites, and hasty Funerals,
Are found about despairing Lymerick's Walls?
And those whose lengthning slower Fates denies
The honor of a Soldiers Obsequies,
Without their Officers, see how they come
Tossed throught the Rage of angry Billows home,
Complaining of their Balls that would not harm
The British Prince, but kissed his Conquering Arm:
Whilst he as bold as a robbed Lion, led
His animated Army at the Head.
Thus far we bear -- but ah! what shall we do
When Paris and her Pride begins to bow,
When she expands her Gates, and spreads the Fame
Of Nassau's Laurels, and Triumphing Name?
Thus that Great Prince -- whilst sometimes Englands Heir,
The Royal Abdicate let fall a Tear.
And thus --
Farewell lost Diadem, -- Time was when I
Was vested with Imperial Majesty;
Farewell misguided Might; Farewell that Throne
I yet had filled, had I but Reigned alone:
Once Monarch great enough, and ruled the Ball,
Till Romes black Emissaries wrought my Fall.
Ah cursed See! in thee my Ruin stood;
Had thou not been, I had been Great and Good.
Now, as in Storms the angry Winds engage,
And toss the leaking Pinnace with such Rage,
That all the hardy Seamens Toil, and Care,
Is lost, and overborn with cold Despair.
Thus am I tossed about, and never can find
A place of calm Repose to ease my mind.
Unhappy Rule! No more to be enjoyed;
With me the STVARTS Fame and Crowned Pride
Is lost, for ever lost. --
Thus that unhappy Prince gave over, and sighed;
And thus continued his Italian BRIDE,
Shall I consult my Honor or my Fear,
Whether a Crown should raise a Childish Tear?
No; Break, reluctant, struggling Heart, before
I should betray an Action mean and poor,
Before I should in Female Weakness pine,
That had the greatest share of Masculine.
Go Wretches, Slaves, Fools, Villains, Infidels,
Is this the product of your Conclave Spells?
Where are your Subjects now of Dispensation,
Passive-Obedience, Non-Resisting-Nation?
Dull Idiots, home again, and learn anew
What Homage from the English State is due;
Whilst I (thanks to my Guides) am torn away
From State, to meet a black Inglorious Day.
Thrice happy Priamus, could thou bequeath
Thy Fate to me, with what a scorn I Would leave
My Orphan Titles, and my Grief deceive?
Thrice happy Priamus, thou fell'st too Great,
Thy Life and Kingdoms had an equal Date:
Had I my choice, just so would I expire,
My Palace Flames should be my Funeral Fire;
There, as the Noble Phaenix would I burn,
A glorious Death! and make my Throne my Vrn.
But hold! the great Constantinople shakes
The mighty Turk's a Party, and partakes
An equal share in this vast Turn of Fate,
With his Allye the Gallick Potentate:
And thus complains, --
Great Mahomet! have thou forgot to hear
That thus the daring Enemy draws near?
Wither, ah wither tends the Toil and Pain,
The small Successes of our last Campaign?
What if we all our Losses should regain?
Often, through the Fields, the bold incensed Ram
Retreats (as we conceive) through Fear or Shame,
But straight returns with reinforced Shock,
And puts to flight the Rival of his Flock.
Just so our Foes; Oh that they would refrain!
Share half my Scepters, and sit down again;
Or upon any Terms conclude a Peace,
Great Alla, grant these Wars at length may cease.
Methinks I see the ruined Sacrifice
Of War and Fire out of its Ashes rise,
And mount their Newborn Turrets to the Skies;
Fairer by such a Fall, as was the Great,
The Famous Metropholitan and Seat
Of British Kings, when hotter Rome had given
Light to the General Pile that frightened Heaven.
Desist, Bellona, sheath that angry Blade
That did an Universal Peace invade;
The Shades of Death are full, and Envy falls
A Victim to her Victims Funerals.
Enough -- Go meet the Royal Keel again,
Riding in Triumph through the Raging Main;
From Rock to Rock the News glad Echo beats,
And in deep Quavers the Return repeats:
A little more, and then the listening Spheres
Will leave undone their soft harmonious Airs,
To learn Great WILLIAMS everlasting Name,
And join in Consort with his lower Frame.
Mountains of Flaming Piles and Artful Fire
Are Victims to the Loyal warm Desire;
The joyful Bells in various changes Ring
A welcome Entertainment to their KING:
And flowing Bowls run round, till on our Knees
Warmly inspired, we drink such Healths as these.
A Health unto the Worlds great Referee,
The Arbitrator both of Land and Sea,
To Him whose closer Conduct, Counsel, Arms,
Were fated to compose Europes Alarms,
And settle Peace in all its Native Charms.
Health to the Royal Pair, and may we see
Their Portraitures in a long Progeny:
Oh that indulgent Heaven would engage
A living Image for the following Age!
A Pattern of this bright, this glorious Sun,
Before Deaths dark and dismal Night draws on.
Has Nature drawn a Work of such extent,
That all her chief Materials are spent,
Her Store exhausted by so great a Worth,
Or else forgot to bring another forth?
No: Drown this Fear, as yet it is not too late,
We Will Drink, and Wish, and leave the rest to Fate.
FINIS.

