THE REFORMATION OF THE Church of England

Justified, according to the Canons of the Council of Nice, and other General
Councils, and the Tradition of the Catholic Church.

BEING AN ANSWER to a Paper reprinted at Oxford, called [the SCHISM of the
Church of England] Demonstrated in four ARGUMENTS, formerly Proposed to Dr.
Gunning and Dr. Pearson the late Bishops of Ely and Chester, by two Catholic
Disputants, in a celebrated Conference upon that Point.

In which Answer the unworthy and false dealings of the PAPISTS are showed, and
the Charge of SCHISM returned upon them, and the CHURCH of ENGLAND proved truly
Catholic and Apostolic in her Doctrine and Constitution.

By Dr. Saywell.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Hayes, Printer to the University: For Edward Hall
Bookseller there. And are to be sold by Luke Meredith at the Angel in
Amen-Corner. London. 1688.

TO THE READER.
READER,
THOU had not now been troubled with the following Papers, if a Relation of
part of a pretended Conference with Bishop Gunning, late Lord Bishop of Ely,
and Bishop Pearson, late Lord Bishop of Chester, had not been afresh Reprinted
at Oxford, and sent abroad into the World as a piece unanswerable by these two
Eminent Prelates of our Church. In which, though there be nothing new, and which
has not been long ago answered, yet to satisfy the World about the Truth of
that Matter, and to remove any prejudice that some might otherwise conceive
concerning these Learned and Pious Bishops, I will give a short account, as
near as I can, at this distance of time of the Matter of Fact, and then proceed
to a particular Answer to the several Arguments in order as they lie. The
Conference was managed in writing about 30 Years ago, and by mutual agreement
nothing was to be made Public without the allowance and consent of both
Parties: But such was the disingenuity and unworthiness of one of the Romish
Disputants, that contrary to the Faith and Promise he had made, he sets forth a
Book, and pretends it to be an account of the Conference with Bishop Gunning,
and Bishop Pearson, when he had left out, changed, and misplaced Matters as he
pleased himself; insomuch that his Partner was very much ashamed of his
dishonest and unfaithful Dealing, and did utterly condemn him for what he had
done, and renounced his having been engaged in approving or consenting to such
a hase and disingenuous Proceeding, and did openly own and acknowledge so much
to the Persons concerned. An account whereof was given to the World by Mr.
Thomas Smith of Christ-College in Cambridge, in a little Book called a Gagg for
the Quakers, with an Answer to Mr. Denn's Quaker no Papist. Land. Printed for
J. C. and are to be sold near the North-door of St. Paul's Churchyard, 1659.
-- That which follows in your Book about Mr. Gunning and Mr. Pearson, who
disputed against the Romanists, all who know these Ministers, know to be
superfluous and frivolous. However I think fit to tell you, the Romanist who
put forth an Edition [of that Dispute] has so changed, transposed, added,
diminished, and made of it what he list, that I believe it will be as soon
owned for your (I mean not J. S. but H. D's) Conference, as Mr. Pearson's or
Mr. Gunning's. I must now tell you further (what you have been often enough told)
that that Relation cannot expect to be regarded by Mr. P. or any sober Person
which is disclaimed and disowned by Three of the Four who were Disputants, viz.
by both the Protestants, and half the Papists. But chiefly I must entreat you
to consider whether the inserting above 200 Lines at a time as a part of the
Conference, which never was part of it, (besides all professed Additions)
secondly, whether the leaving out whole Sheets of the Protestants, which the
Papists thought too hard to answer, and thirdly, the scarce suffering any one
Argument and Answer of both to come together, but casting usually parts of the
same Paper of Mr. G. many score Leaves asunder one from another, be not a
scandal that any Christian would desire might be covered with silence? And I
would gladly know from any Ingenuous Person, whether this might not be Answer
enough to a Book put out at the charge of the Romanist's own Purse and
Conscience. A Discourse, by being mangled, rendered so unintelligible, that
scarce any Man ever read it over or will. -- Reverend Mr. William Moor the
deceased Library Keeper, was persuaded by J. S. to read one Leaf, but professed
before many Witnesses he would not read another if you would give him the whole
Impression, because it was so unintelligible for the Causes abovementioned.

This account was thought sufficient to satisfy the World, that the Relation
of that Conference ought not to be regarded, and that it needed no other Answer.

But perhaps some will demand why was not the Conference then Printed whole and
entire? Now, the reason of that was, because the Popish Adversary did run all
the Dispute into obscure and metaphysical Niceties, that few could understand,
and fewer would take the pains to read it, and so it was not thought fit, and a
needless charge to trouble the World with it. Besides, both the Bishops did
tell their Friends, when they discoursed with them about a fuller Answer, that
they thought it altogether unnecessary, because though the Dispute were mangled
and misrepresented, yet that which they had Printed was still unanswered by
them, and unanswerable by any of their Party; and they were persuaded that all
Men who would carefully read the Book, would be of the same mind. And as for
this Paper that is added, at the end of the pretended Conference, and now
Reprinted at Oxford, the Author does not so much as say, that it was part of
their Dispute, but a pure Addition of his own, wherein they were no more
concerned than other Divines, and they did not think they were bound to answer
whatsoever he should afterward write and publish to the World; and yet this
Oxford Paper would without any ground, or the least color, impose upon the
World, that this is a part of that forementioned Conference. Neither did the
Cause it self, or the state of Affairs then require any particular Discourse
upon that subject, the Books of Bishop Fern, Archbishop Bramhall, Dr. Hammond,
and Dr. Heylin, being then in every Bodies hands, wherein they had fully
vindicated the Church of England from any imputation of Schism; and the learned
Men of that time were so well satisfied with what they had written, that it was
needless to trouble the World upon that account. But now it is expected every
thing that peeps out should receive a due Answer, I have therefore endeavored
to prove from truly Catholic Principles (such as our Adversaries themselves
cannot gainsay) that not only the Doctrine and Constitution of our Church is
most sound and Catholic, but even the Order of our Succession, and the Method
of our Reformation was truly Regular and Canonical, and that all the Author's
own Arguments do return upon his own Head, and evidently prove himself, and
other English Papists, guilty of Schism.

An ANSWER to a Paper called the Schism of the CHURCH of ENGLAND demonstrated,
etc.
IT has been the constant Profession of the Church of England, that the Word of
God, interpreted by Catholic Tradition and a truly Ecumenical Council, (not a
Patriarchal, one of a few Italians in the West) ought to be hearkened to in
Matters that concern the Peace and Unity of the Church. Concionatores imprimis
videbunt ne quid unquam doceant pro concione quod a populo religiose teneri and
credi velint nisi quod fit consentanen^ doctrinae Peteris and Novi Testamenti,
quodque ex illa ipsa doctrina Catholici patres and veteres Episcopi
collegerint. Now their sense does no where appear more undoubted than in the
decrees of General Councils, and in the Practice and Tradition that was
generally allowed in the Primitive Church. Synod. Land. A. 1571. C.
Concionatores. Firmil. Ep. ad Cypr. inter Ep. Cypr. n. 75. Contra Ep. Step.
Papae. Eos qui Romae sunt non ea in omnibus observare quae sunt ab origin
tr^adita, and frustra Apostolorum auctoritatem pretendere. Vide Council. Trull.
Can. 13. and can. 55. Where the Church of Rome is commanded by name to amend
some Errors which yet she has never done; so the Church did not think the
Bishop of Rome had authority to give Laws to her, but was himself bound to
submit to the Canons, and the Order of the Church.
And it has been also frequently and learnedly proved by our English Bishops
and Divines, that the Points in difference between the Church of England and
the Church of Rome, are so far from being Matters of Faith, that they are
modern Errors imposed upon the Christian World, besides and contrary to the
Determinations of General Councils and Catholic Tradition; so that our dissent
about them, from the Roman Church can be by no means accounted Heretical or
Schismatical, but all these Arguments urged by the Oxford Paper, will evidently
prove that those Bishops, Priests, and Laymen that set up Altar against Altar,
and hold separate Congregations in Opposition to the Church of England, do
break the order of Catholic Communion, and are guilty of Schism.

But before I apply my self to return an Answer to the several Arguments, it
will be requisite to give a short account of the Reformation.

In the Reign of Hen. 8. See the Subscription to a Book called the Institution
of a Christian Man.
there was an Assembly held, the Determinations whereof are now extant, and to
be seen, wherein the Archbishops and Bishops, Bishop Bonner, and Gardner,
Voysey, Heath, Tunstall, amongst the rest, did declare that the Bishop of Rome
ought to have no jurisdiction here in England, but the Archbishops and Bishops
and the National Church had Power to order all Matters within themselves
without the concurrence of the Pope, so as they did keep to the Faith and Unity
of the Catholic Church; and for this they alleged the Authority of the
Council of Nice, and other General Councils.

And as for the bishop of Rome, it was many hundredth years after Christ,
before he could acquire or get any primacy or governance above any other
bishops, out of his province in Italy. Institut. of a Christian Man. Londini
in aedibus Thomae Bertleti Regii impressoris A. 1537. p. 47, 48. Acts and Mon.
v. 2. p. 346. dedicated to the King H. 8. by Thomas Archbishop of Canter. and
Edward Archbishop of York, and all other Bishops, and Prelates, and
Archdeacons of this Realm.
Sith the which time he has ever usurped more and more. And though some
part of his power was gyven unto him by the consent of the emperors, kings,
and princis, and by the consent also of the clergy in generalle councelles
assembled: yet surely he atteyned the most part thereof by meruaylous
subtlety and craft, and specially by colludynge with greatte kings and
princis, sometime trayninge them into his devotion, by pretense and color of
holiness and sanctimonie, and some time constraining them by force and tyranny.
Whereby the said bishops of Rome aspired and arose at length unto such
greatness in strength and authority: that they presumed, and took upon them to
be heddes, and to put laws by their own authority, not only unto al other
bishops within Christendom, but also unto themperours, kings, and other the
princis and lords of the world, and that under the pretense of the authority
committed unto them by the gospel. Wherein the said bishops of Rome do not
only abuse, and peruerte the true sense and meaning of Christis word: but
they do also clean contrary to the use and custom of the primitive church.
and also do manyfestly violate as well the holy canons, made in the church
immediately after the time of the apostels, as also the decrees and
constitutions made in that behalf, Can. Apost. 34.
by the holy fathers of the catholic church, assembled in the first general
councels, Council. Nicen. c. 4. 6.
and finally they do transgress their own profession, made in their creation.
For all the bishops of Rome always, Council, Antioch. c. 9.
when they be consecrated and made bishops of that see, do make a solemn
profession, and vow, that they shall inuiolably observe and keep all the
ordinances, Con. Constable. p. 1. c. 2.
made in the eight first general councels, among the which it is specially
provided and enacted, Con. Ephesians. c. 8.
that all causes shall be fynished and determined within the province, Con.
Calced. c. 28.
where the same be begone, and that by the bishops of the same province, and
that no bishop shall exercise any jurisdiction out of his own diocese or
province. See the Popes Oath, did. 16. c. 8. sancta octo, etc.
and dyverse such other canons were then made and confyrmed by the said
councels, to repress and take away out of the church, al such primacy and
jurisdiction over kings and bishops, as the bishops of Rome pretend now to
have over the same.

In the Reign of King Edward 6. See Dr. Heylin's Reform. Vindic. Dr. Burnet's
Hist. of the Reform. part. 2. book 1. p. 195. Coll. of Record. page 209. n. 55.
The Bishops and Clergy having free Liberty to meet and debate of Matters of
Religion without the Pope; did find other Abuses and Corruptions besides that
of the Pope's Usurpation over the Governors of the Church, and did in the
Convocation 1552. establish Articles of Religion, a public Liturgy, and Book
of Ordination, the same in substance with those that are now in use amongst us,
and the Archbishops and a far major part of the Bishops were consenting
thereunto, not above 5 or 6 were displaced for their disorderly behavior and
dissent from their Brethren, and others by the Metropolitan and Bishops of the
Province ordained and settled in their Bishoprics according to the usual
custom of that time, as all Historians, and our very Adversaries are forced to
confess.

The Church of England, being thus regularly settled, was never from that time
to this very day regularly changed by any Canonical Authority, but has
oftentimes been confirmed since, both by the Authority of the Convocation, and
of our Kings and Parliaments, and consequently the present Bishops are Lawful
Pastors without any guilt of Heresy or Schism, and all within their several
charges are bound by the Council of Nice, and other general Councils, to live
in their Communion, and to submit to them as those that are appointed by the
Holy Ghost to direct and govern them in Matters of Religion, and all Neighbor
Churches are obliged to allow us the Communion of Coordinate Churches, and to
own us as true Members of Christ's mystical Body The Holy Catholic Church.

The only Objection, of any Moment, that is made against this Regular
Succession, is from the interruption it met with in the short Reign of Queen
Mary: But when the Matter of Fact is looked into, it will appear that nothing
which was done in her Reign will be any prejudice to our Succession, nor can by
any means take off the Regular Settlement of the Church of England by the
Convocation in King Edward's Reign, but that the Acts thereof are still in
force, except in some particulars which have been changed by Convocations
afterward. For the Synods which were held, and the Ordinations that were made
in Queen Mary's days were not carried on in a Regular Manner by the Archbishops
and Bishops of the Province, but by the Authority of the Pope and those Bishops
which were justly deposed and set aside, and so had no jurisdiction nor any
right or title to exercise their Authority in this Realm, and therefore could
give no right to the Bishops, or Authority to the Decrees they ordained; and
though all the Art and Cruelty imaginable was used, to cut off a future
Succession, by burning, imprisoning, and banishing the Lawful Bishops; yet it
pleased God so to order it, that the major Part of the Lawful undoubted
Bishops, who were made in King Edward's Reign, and which lived till Queen
Elizabeth's days, joined again in continuing the Succession of Bishops, and
restoring the Reformation settled in Convocation, which has been preserved,
without Interruption, to this very Day. And those Bishops that were set aside
in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, were either justly deposed in King Edward's Days,
and never rightly restored, or else were ordained by them who had no Authority
to give them Jurisdiction in this Nation, and so had no further right, than the
Civil Magistrate could give, which the same Power had again taken away. So that
the Ordination of Archbishop Parker was so far from being irregular, that it
was made by those, who only had proper Right and Title to ordain: For the rest
of King Edward's Bishops being Dead, the sole Authority did Regularly devolve
on the few that were left. And the Queen, the Nobility, and Gentry, the Clergy,
and the Main Body of the Nation, were so well satisfied of the unlawful
Authority of those Bishops that were set aside, and the undoubted Right of
those who ordained Archbishop Parker, that of about 9400 Clergy, above 9200 did
with great Joy receive the Bishops, and the Reformation; Qui undecennium primum
meminerunt Reginae Elizabethae haud quicquam eomitius vel romissius fuisse
praedicabunt. Decimo tertio demum anno biennio scilicet post quam Pius 5.
Bullam hu^ sua^^ parum piam misisset atque ex ea boreales illae turbae
extitissent; paulo tum facta commotior, ut par erat statuere cepit contra
bullas and tabellarios, sed praeterquam in eos nihil superstitionis vestrae
causa sancitum est durius, etc. -- audi Philopatrum ipsum Jesuitam Reginam de
regni sui initiis sic alloquentem. Dum initio Regni tui mitius aliquanto cum
Catholicis ageres, dum nullum adhuc vehementissime urgeres, nullum admodum
premeres, vel ad sectae tuae participationem, vel Fidei antiquae abnegationem,
omnia sane tranquilliore cursu incedere videbantur, nec audiebantur magnae
querelae, nec insignis aliqua dissensio aut repugnantia cernebatur nec deerant
(quanquam male) qui Ecclesias vestras ut vobis placeant ac gratificarentur
corpore saltem, etsi non animo frequentabant, legi^ hic Jesuitico atramento
depicta, -- puta minus hic dici, plus intelligi. Bishop Andrew's Tortura Torti,
p. 148, 149.

Ita religio in Anglia mutata, orb Christiano mirante quod tam facile and sine
(...) Cambden. Elizab. p. 36, 39.

Ex hac religionis mutatjone ut observarunt politici Anglia facta est omnium
reguorum in orb Christiano liberrima -- and oputentior quam secrdis
superioribus. p. 40.


and the rest of the Nation, even those that were formerly zealous for the
Church of Rome, did join with them in Prayers and Sacraments, and there was an
Universal Agreement and Concurrence in the Communion of the Church of England,
for 10 or 11 Years together; so that there was no other Penal Law, but that of
12 d. a Sunday, to stir up lazy People to mind their Duty, and we might have
continued so till this Day, in that happy Concord, had not the Pope
excommunicated and deposed the Queen, and prohibited all her Subjects, under
Pain of an Anathema, to own her Sovereignty, and submit to the Bishops of the
Church of England. Upon which many separated from our Communion, and have
disturbed our Government ever since. Vid. Bull. Pontif. apud Combd. p. 179.
So that it is plain, the Schism is on the side of the Papists, who upon
pretense of Papal Authority, did withdraw themselves from the Communion of
their own Bishops, and make a formal division in the Church, which was before
united in Peace and Truth.

But suppose there was some circumstantial defect in the Succession of some of
our first Bishops, as to matter of Form, in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, after so many of their Predecessors, had been unjustly turned out, and
destroyed in Queen Mary's Days, their Misfortunes do not at all concern, the
present Bishops of the Church of England; for if the Matter of our Reformation,
and the Constitution of our Church be Sound and Catholic, (as it is beyond all
possible Contradiction) and the Consecration of our Bishops was Valid, as to
the matter of Order, there being no Regular Succession of Bishops continued on
by those, who were set aside in Queen Elizabeth's Reign (because they knew it
was in vain, when they saw the Kingdom so well settled, and the People so
unanimously joining with the Reformed Bishops) after all those Popish Bishops
were Dead, there could be nothing required in Reason, to give the Protestants a
full Right and Authority, but the Reception of the Queen, and the whole
Kingdom, and that they had long before, and all the Bishops for many
Successions since that Time, came into vacant Places, and the Bishops that now
are, were none of them Born, and come into none but void Places, and so are as
Firmly and Canonically settled, as any Bishops in the World.

This being the true Account of the Reformation of the Church of England, I
proceed now to consider the Argument, in the pretended Conference with Bishop
Gunning, and Bishop Pearson, so many Years ago, and lately Reprinted by Henry
Cruttenden at Oxon.

And first it begins, with a Definition of Schism, in this Manner. Schism is a
Voluntary Separation of one Part from the whole, true, visible [Hierarchical]
Church of Christ: And then he goes on to a Syllogism in this manner.

Whoever make a Voluntary Separation of themselves, from the whole, true,
visible Church of Christ, are Schismatics.

But all those of the English Protestant Party, make a Voluntary Separation of
themselves, from the whole, true, visible Church of Christ.

Therefore all those of the English Protestant Party, are Schismatics.

He goes about to prove, that we separate from the visible Church; because, we
separate from the Roman and Greek Churches, and all others in Communion with
them, and this seems to be the full Substance and Design of the first Argument.

Now to avoid all doubt, and entering into Disputes about Foreign Churches,
whose Case is in some Regard, much different from ours of the Church of
England; I shall therefore, instead of the Protestant Party, proceed to Answer,
for the Protestants of the Church of England.

I will not go to examine, the definition of Schism, any one that desires
further Satisfaction about it, may look into the Conference it self, as it is
printed, where it is learnedly and acutely examined, by the Bishops themselves.

In Answer therefore to the major Proposition, it is so far from being true,
that we separate from the visible Church of Christ, that we separate from no
true Church or Society of Christians in the World. Synod. Land. An. 1603. c.
30. Tantum aberat ut Ecclesia Anglicana ab Italiae, Galliae, Hispaniae,
Germaniae, aliisve similibus Ecclesiis voluerit per omnia recedere, quic quid
eas sciret tenere aut observare ut (quod Ecclosiae Anglicanae Apologia
profitetur.) cenemonias illas cum Reverentia susciperet quae utra Ecclesiae
incommodum and hominum sobriorum offensionem retinere posse senserat, and in
iis tantum articulis a praedictis Ecclesiis dissentiret in quibus eadem ipsae
tum a pristina sua integritate prius desciverant, tum etiam ab Ecclesiis
Apostolicis a quibus proseminatae sunt. That is, we only separate from and
reform their Errors, but do not separate from their Persons and Communion.
But to the better stating of this Matter, we must consider, that there is a
twofold Communion, one of Coordination, and another of Subordination. Churches
Coordinate, i. e. of several Provinces, several Nations, and Countries, owe no
Obedience one to another, and are not bound to observe the same Rites and
Customs, and to agree in all School-disputes and Niceties, concerning
Theological Opinions; no more than several Kingdoms are bound, to have the same
Laws and Constitutions. This is acknowledged by all sober Divines, in all Ages.
Accordingly several Churches and Countries, have had their peculiar Rules and
Orders, See how the Church of England does Communicate with all Churches in the
Vindication of Bishop Gunning the late Lord Bishop of Ely, by Dr. Saywell, in
his Evangelical and Catholic Unity, page 302, etc. Guide in Controversy dis.
3. c. 8. n. 84. B. Churches Coordinate may without Schism or fault differ from
one another, or one of them from all the rest in several Doctrines and
Opinions, etc. Thus he vindicates the Church of Rome wherein it differs from
the Greek and other Churches, and by the same Reason other Churches may differ
from her without Schism or Fault.
still living in Peace and Unity, and so might it be at this Day, did not the
Church of Rome by Force and Subtilty, go about to enslave all Mankind to their
private Errors and Impositions. As therefore several Kingdoms do maintain Peace
one with another, and give all friendly Assistance if there be Occasion, for
their mutual Happiness and Defense, yet keep to their own Laws and Customs in
other Matters; so though we differ in some Opinions and Practices from Rome and
other Churches, yet we retain that Christian Charity and Respect for them,
which one Coordinate Church or Kingdom ought to have for another, and so there
is no Schism made at all by us, nor so much as any Separation, but what
distance of Place and difference of Circumstances do necessarily make. Neither
do we send Emissaries Abroad, to withdraw their People from their Obedience,
and set up Altar against Altar in a Schismatical manner, and I wish they could
say as much, that they did not go about to disturb our Peace and Communion.

But secondly, there is a Communion of Subordination, that which all Bishops,
Priests, and all others owe, of submission to the Archbishops and Bishops, etc.
and to the Canons and Constitutions of each Province and Nation, in all Lawful
things; and this is heartily done by all true Members of the Church of England;
herein we follow the command of God, Heb. 13. 17. Firmil. inter Ep. Cypr. 75.
de Stephano Epis. Romano ait peccatum vero quam magnum tibi exaggerasti, quando
te a tot gregibus scidisti, excidisti. n. teipsum: noli te fallere. Siquidem
ille est vere Schismaticus qui se a Communione Ecclesiasticae unitatis
apostatam fecerit, dum n. putas omnes a te abstinere posse, solum te ab omnibus
abstinuisti. S. Cyprian did join with Fermilian in the same Cause, and it was
thought by them in those early Days that there was no Obligation to adhere to
the Bishop of Rome, and if he did Excommunicate any upon such Account; he did
cut himself off from the Unity of the Catholic Church. Unless in such Matters,
wherein the whole Church did agree, with the Bishop of Rome; and yet though St.
Cyprian lived and died, in Opposition to the Bishop o^ Rome, as much as we do
now, he is more Honored, and of greater Renown in the Church, than Pope
Stephen himself. Vide Ep. Jo. Launoii. Jacob. Bevilaqu. Tom. 8.
Obey them that have the rule over you; the command of the Council of Nice and
other General Councils, the Laws Ecclesiastical and Civil of this Church and
Nation. But those that call themselves Roman Catholics are plainly guilty of
Schism, for they separate from the Communion of all Coordinate Churches, which
will not embrace their Errors, and be subject to their Authority, they send
Emissaries abroad all over Christendom, to withdraw Persons from their
Obedience to their own Bishops, and set up Altar against Altar, Communion
against Communion, contrary to the constant Order of the Catholic Church. So
that the Disorders, Tumults, Conventicles, which he complains of in England are
Chargeable upon them. But the Protestants of the Church of England are in
Doctrine most Pure, in Charity most Catholic, and in their Practice and
Public Service most conformable to the Primitive and Catholic Church of any
in the World.

The second Argument.
WHoever adhere, to Schismatical Pastors (as Schismatical is understood in our
Definition) are Schismatics. But all English Protestants adhere to
Schismatical Pastors, as Schismatical is understood in our Definition,
therefore all English Protestants are Schismatics.

He goes about to prove that we adhere to Schismatical Pastors, because we
derive our Succession from those that Ordained Archbishop Parker, and others,
in Opposition to the major Part of the English Bishops, who were then alive,
and into the Places of many of them while they were alive, and never Lawfully
Deprived. This is the Substance of the second Argument.

In Answer to which, I deny that the Bishops set aside in Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, were Lawful Bishops of the Church of England, because they were
violently and uncanonically thrust in, or rather they invaded those Bishoprics
in Queen Mary's Days. So that the Bishops which Ordained Archbishop Parker and
others, and those that held Communion with them, were the only Lawful Regular
Bishops of the Church of England at that time, they being Regularly constituted
in King Edward's Days, and never legally Deprived. All the other of King
Edward's Bishops which complied, except Thirlby and Kitchen, were dead, and so
the full Authority must remain with the rest that survived, and they all but
Thirlby did concur in the Ordination of Archbishop Parker, and others, or
Communicated with them. Compare our English Form with the ancient Forms in
Morinus de Ordinationibus, and you will find nothing wanting that is essential.
Neither was Archbishop Parker, and many others, consecrated into other Men's
Places while they were alive, for Cardinal Poole the Archbishop of Canterbury,
and about nine or ten Bishops more were Dead, and Archbishop Parker, and
others, were elected, confirmed, and consecrated into vacant Places in due
Order, according to the usage of this Kingdom for many Ages (except in the Form
of the Ordinal) in which there was nothing wanting to the Essence and Validity
of their Consecration. So that Archbishop Parker's Authority, and many others,
is beyond Dispute, also by the tacit consent of the rest, who ought to have
opposed it at their Confirmation, when they were summoned to that purpose, if
they had any Legal Exception to make against their being made Bishops, which
being not done, and the Consecration proceeding, they are in all Reason and
Justice shut out from any further Opposition, and they ought to be concluded to
have given their tacit Consent; which we may the rather believe, because many
of them agreed to the Reformations in King H. 8. and King Edw. 6. Days, and
seem more now for Political than Ecclesiastical Reasons to refuse to comply,
because they had made themselves Obnoxious to all Parties already, by their
former Changes and Cruelty. So they thought it better to regain their Credit
with the Romanists by their standing out, than to be looked upon as
Time-servers, and little regarded by the People. But then this Argument does
demonstratively return upon the Author himself, and the Popish Bishops in Queen
Mary's Days, as will appear by the following Catalogue.

Bishops justly Deposed in King Edward's Days, for not obeying the Laws, and
their Deposition consented to, and approved by the Bishops, as appears by their
Ordaining others into their Places.
Bishop Bonner of London. Bishop Gardner of Winchester. Bishop Day of
Chichester. Bishop Heath of Worcester. Bishop Voysey of Exeter. Some say he
resigned. Bishop Tunstall of Durham. Who is said to have resigned. See the
Protector's Letter to Bishop Gardner quoted below.

Bishops rightly Consecrated, and in actual Possession at King Edward's Death.
Archbishop Cranmer of Canterbury Consecr. Hen. 8. Bishop Ridley of London.
Edw. 6. Bishop Poynet of Winchester. Edw. 6. Bishop Goodrick of Ely. Hen. 8.
Bishop Salscot alias Capon of Salisbury. Hen. 8. Bishop Chambers of Peterburgh.
Hen. 8. Bishop King of Oxford. Hen. 8. Bishop Bulkley of Bangor, Hen. 8. Bishop
Parfew alias Wharton of St. Asaph. Hen. 8. Bishop Samson of Lich. and Coventry.
Hen. 8. Bishop Kitchen of Landaffe. Hen. 8. Bishop Bush of Bristol. Hen. 8.
Bishop Bartow of Bath and Wells. Hen. 8. Bishop Ferrar of St. David's. Edw. 6.
Bishop Scory of Chichester. Edw. 6. Bishop Hooper of Worcester and Gloucester.
Edw. 6. Bishop Coverdale of Exeter. Edw. 6. Bishop Tailor of Lincoln. Edw. 6.
Bishop Harley alias Harvey of Hereford. Edw. 6. Rochester void.
In the Province of York.
Archbishop Holgate of York Consecrated. Hen. 8. Bishop Aldrich of Carlisle.
Hen. 8. Bishop Bird of Chester. Hen. 8. Durham void.
Of these in the Province of Canterbury.
Archbishop Cranmer, Bishop Ridley, Poynot, Scory, Coverdale, Tailor, Harvey
alias Harley, Bush, Hooper, Ferrar, and Barlow were removed, A. D. 1554 as Dr.
Burnet relates: Burn. Hist. part. 2. page 276.
Bishop Goodrick died about that Time, and all the rest that complied, except
Bishop Thirlby and Bishop Kitchen, either before or about the Time of Queen
Mary's Death. And it does not appear, they were at all Active in turning our
their Brethren.
In the Province of York.
Archbishop Holgate, Bishop Bird, turned out.
In the Province of Canterbury (Rochester being void, and Worcester and
Gloucester united) there could be but Twenty in all, and we find here Eleven, i.
e. the Archbishop, and Major Part of the Bishops unjustly and uncanonically
turned out.

In the Province of York, Durham was void, so Archbishop Holgate, and Bishop
Bird were the Major Part, unjustly turned out.

Now let me take up our Author's Argument. Whosoever possess the Sees and
Offices of Lawful Bishops (those Lawful Bishops yet living) or unite themselves
to such as possess them, are such Schismatical Pastors.

This is our Author's Major Proposition; to which I add this Minor. But the
Popish Bishops that were set aside in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, did possess the
Places of Lawful Bishops yet living, or united themselves to such as did
possess them, therefore they were Schismatical, and no Lawful Bishops of the
Church of England: For as soon as these Lawful Bishops were turned out, others
were put into their Places, and not only so, but contrary to all Rule and
ordorly Government in the Church. For, the most certain Fundamental
Constitution of the Church in all Ages; and the constant Order of all Societies
(which is always tacitly supposed, though not formally observed) is, that while
particular Churches keep to the Faith and Unity of the Catholic Church, as
ours had done, all things ought to be managed by the Archbishop and Bishops of
the Province, and so by the Chief Governors and main Body of the Society, or
else things cannot be Regularly done; Vid. Pet. de Marca. de Concord.
Sacerdotii and Imper. lib. 8. and alibi. Jo. Launoi. Ep. Hen. Gondrino sen.
Arch. T. 8. Out of Archbishop Parker.
but here the Archbishop and the Major Part of the Bishops are set aside, and
others put into their Places while they were yet alive, and Dr. Burnet adds
that of the inferior Clergy, who were Sixteen Thousand, Twelve Thousand were
likewise turned out, so there could be nothing Regularly done by the
Convocation, either in the Upper or Lower House. And further, they were not
content with the present Possession, but secretly said in their Minds, These
are the Heirs come let us kill them, and their Inheritance shall be ours;
therefore, after they had bereaved them of their Bishoprics and their Livings,
they quickly took away many of their Lives. And are not all these Men
Schismatics with a Witness, and all those that were Ordained by them into
other Men's Places and Government? It matters not to our business to pursue all
the Successions and Changes in Queen Mary's Days, I will rather proceed to
consider the State of the Bishoprics after Queen Mary's Death, when Queen
Elizabeth restored the Church to that Regular Constitution which was settled
before, by the undoubted Lawful Archbishops and Bishops in King Edward's Days.

Bishoprics void by Death.
Archbishop Poole of Canterbury. Bishop King of Oxford. Bishop Capon of
Salisbury. Bishop Parfew of Hereford. Bishop Holyman of Bristol. Bishop Glin of
Bangor. Bishop Brooks of Gloucester. Bishop (...) Norwich void. Rochester void.
Bishops in Possession of the other Bishoprics but uncanonically for the
Reasons above named.
Bishop Bonner of London. Bishop Thirlby of Ely. Bishop White of Winchester.
Bishop Watson of Lincoln. Bishop Pool of Peterburgh. Bishop Bourne of Bath and
Wells. Bishop Turbervill of Exeter. Bishop Bayne of Lichfield and Coventry.
Bishop Christophorson of Chichester. Bishop Pates of Wonchester. Bishop
Goldwell of St. Asaph. Bishop Kitchen of Landaffe. Who conformed.
In the Province of York.
Archbishop Heath of York. Bishop Tunstall of Durham. Bishop Scot of Chester.
Bishop Oglethorp of Carlisle.
It Is confessed that 14 or 15 were turned out or went away in Queen Elizabeth's
Days, but according to our Author's own Argument, they were Schismatics and no
Lawful Bishops, because they came into the Places of Lawful Bishops while they
were alive, or else were ordained by and communicated with such Schismatics. I
add, they usurped their Places by turning out the Metropolitans and Major Part
of the Bishops of each Province, and so could have no Lawful Authority or
Jurisdiction. Queen Elizabeth therefore set them aside, and so removed this
Violence and Usurpation. And being willing to restore all things as they were
settled in King Edward's Reign, she calls back the Bishops that were still
alive, which were only Five in number. Bishop Barlow, Scory, Coverdale,
Kitchen, and Thirlby. And all but Thirlby concurred in settling the
Reformation; so we had still the Major Part of the Lawful Bishops to renew the
Succession, and they did Ordain Archbishop Parker and others, and it has been
Regularly continued ever since. Thus the Authority of our present Bishops as to
Order and Jurisdiction is beyond dispute.

One Objection was insisted upon by Queen Mary and others, to justify the
Deprivation of the Protestant Bishops, and others of the Clergy, because some
of them were married Men, and perhaps they married after Orders, which was
threatened with Deposition by many ancient Canons.

To which I Answer, that living in a Married Estate is not by Divine Authority
inconsistent with the Exercise of the Priesthood, but was always allowed in the
Church, and ever practiced in the Greek Church till this Day, and has been
oftentimes dispensed withal in the Roman Church for secular Ends. So that the
allowing Marriage before or after Orders, is a Circumstance that depends upon
the Discretion of the Church; and if for some Reasons Clergymen were
heretofore prohibited to marry after Orders, yet in this long Interval of
General Councils, upon the great Experience of the Mischiefs and Inconveniences
that came by forbidding it, particular Churches may dispense with that Rigor;
accordingly this Provincial and National Church, and the Law of the Land, which
had much better Authority than the Pope, had left every body to their Liberty
to marry or not to marry, as they saw good, and so they that did marry offended
against no Law of God and Man, and therefore were unjustly Deposed from their
Bishoprics upon that Account.

But then our Author says, that they in Queen Mary's Days were Lawful Bishops,
and he proves it from the Confession of Protestants, who grant that the Church
of Rome, and all those of her Communion are true Churches of Christ.

Now as to the first Part of the Argument, I Answer, In time of great Schism
and tumultuous Proceedings, there may be so far the Remains of a true Church,
that many Pious Christians, who are not at all, or else ignorantly engaged in
the Schism, may be saved; but we have no Reason to say that the Popish Bishops
in Queen Mary's Days were Lawful Bishops, or the governing Part were then the
National Church of England; the true Right and Authority of the Church was in
those Lawful Bishops that were made in King Edward's Days, and that was the
true Church of England which did adhere to them and their Constitutions.

But then the Author does Object, that Protestants do grant that the Church of
Rome and all those of her Communion, are true Churches of Christ.

Never was People's Charity more abused than ours of the Church of England has
been in this kind, to justify the Errors and Schism of the Church of Rome, and
all upon a mere and generally wilful Mistake. In short therefore it is true, and
we do acknowledge, that the Substance of the Christian Religion is professed by
the Church of Rome, though mingled with Errors. And so many that honestly and
sincerely serve God in her Communion, may be saved; but yet many may be damned
for too pertinaciously maintaining and propagating the Errors of the Church of
Rome, especially those that desert and refuse Obedience to the Bishops of the
Church of England, setting up Altar against Altar, and so keeping up a Schism
amongst us, where they have such plentiful Means of being better informed, and
all the Opportunities of serving God, according to the highest Perfection of
the Apostolic and Primitive Church.

Come we now to the second Part of the Argument; where the Author goes to
prove, that the Popish Bishops did nothing whereby they became unlawful
Bishops, for if they did, it ought to be supposed it was that, for which they
were deprived, and then he says, all the Reasons for which they were deprived,
were resisting the pretended Reformation, and refusing the Oath of Supremacy;
and that was but proceeding in Practice according to the common Tenets, the
holding whereof made them not unlawful Bishops. Again, whilst they were lawful
Bishops in Queen Mary's Days, they held it a common necessary Point of Religion
to resist the Reformation, and refuse the Oath of Supremacy.

In answer to all which I say, That according to the Author's own Argument,
they were no lawful Bishops, because they either did Schismatically invade the
Places of the lawful Bishops, or else were willingly Consecrated, and did join
in Communion with those Schismatical Bishops. When the Queen therefore did set
them aside, she did but dispossess Men who had no just Right, and remove those
by her Civil Authority, who had no Power, but what they had from Force and the
secular Constitution.

But perhaps it may be objected, that though their Title were at first
defective, and they did Schismatically usurp those Bishoprics, yet when their
Predecessors were dead, that Defect might be overlooked, and by the Reception
of the Kingdom, their Title might be made good, and they very well confirmed in
their Possession. It would have, I confess, been happy, if there had been such
a Catholic Disposition in those Bishops, that they would have willingly
repented and forsaken their former Errors, that so the Kingdom might have
confirmed their Authority by the Universal Reception. But there were many
Reasons why they did refuse, and could not own and receive them as lawful
Catholic Bishops.

1. Many of them had been guilty of shedding much Innocent Blood, Exodus 21. 14.
and the rest had been consecrated and joined in Communion with them, and so in
some measure were Partakers of their Guilt; 1 Chronicles. 22. 8.
and it was not fit such polluted Hands, should be permitted to Minister at
God's Holy Altar. For though there was a Law brought in by the Corruption of
later Times, whereby Heretics might be put to Death, yet it was a great Abuse
of that Law, to condemn their Spiritual Fathers and better Catholics than
themselves, for Heretics: Did. 50. c. 8. siquis viduam, etc. decret. lib. 5.
de homicid. Voluntar.
It being contrary to the Divine and Canon Law, that such Men should be allowed
to exercise the Episcopal Function, the Kingdom had great Reason to set them
aside. 2. It is a known Doctrine in the Canon Law and Roman Schools, and a
frequent Practice of Roman Catholics to depose Princes and absolve their
Subjects from their Allegiance, 15. Q. 6. c. 3, 4. 5. Decret. lib. 5. de
Haeret. c. 13. sext. Decret. lib. 2. Tit. 14. c. 2. ad Apostolicam Tit. Papa
Imperatorem deponere porest. Thomas. 2. 2dae q. 12. Art. 2.
and endeavor to exterminate those they call Heretics, under which Pretense
many Princes have been destroyed, many Rebellions and Tumults have been
fomented, much Innocent Blood has been spilt, and Christendom has been a
miserable Theater of War and Confusion. These Bishops therefore who formerly
had consented to most Parts of the Reformation, now growing such Zealots all of
a sudden, and refusing to Crown the Queen, and to give the Kingdom Security of
their peaceable Conformity to the Government, See Acts and Mon. vol. 2. p. 337.
etc. Tortur. Tort. p. 150. nihil ab iit quesitum ut facerent quam quid his jam
anto fecerant sub. Hen. scit. 8. and Ed. 6. Heathus, Bonnerus. Tonstallus,
Thurlbeius tum Episcopl; Baynus, Burnus, reliqui, nondum Episcopi -- aliis
quoque ut praestarent Authors fuere etiam idorum quidam libris scriptis
defenderent quid hic iniqui si de eodem iterum compellentur.
by taking the Oath which they had formerly taken, and had nothing to except
against, gave just Reason to suspect they were guilty of the Heretical Doctrine
of deposing Princes, and stirring up Rebellion, to exterminate the Nobility and
Gentry that would not Comply with them. And these are sufficient Reasons, why
they could not allow them to have Care of the People's Souls, which might have
been to the utter Destruction of the Queen and Kingdom. For it is notorious
there were many Attempts made, and by some of them to that purpose, and the
Pope some Years after did actually Excommunicate and Depose the Queen, and
charge all Men under an Anathema to withdraw from her Obedience and Communion,
and that was the Foundation of the present Schism of English Papists, and many
Rebellions and Treasons amongst us. 3. If there had been none of these
Exceptions against the Persons of these Bishops, yet the Public Service which
they did impose, will justify all Men before God and the Catholic Church, for
not joining in Communion with them. Because 1. All People were in common
Account obliged to Worship that which is in the Priest's Hand, Vid. Bull Pii 5.
apud Cambd. p. 179. Tortur.Tort. p. 148. audet Apologia Author asserere neminem
[Pontificiorum] Religionis causa in judicium vocasse [Reginam scil.] neminem ad
supplicium condemnasse quamdiu scili cet rem religionisagerent, nec cum
religione Rebellionis semina permiscerent, neque priusquam Pius Papa per Bullas
suas hic in Angliam, per copias vero and cohortes suas ibi etiam in Hiberniam
impetum and impressionem fecisset. hic plumbo ibi ferro, in Anglia clavibus in
Hibernia gladiis rem gessisset. Conf. Aug. c. 10. Chem. exam. Ger. de coena
Dom. Call. l. 4. instit. c. 17.. 19. John 6. 53. Card. Bona Rer. Lit. l. 2. c.
18. semper and ubique ab Ecclesiae primordiis usque adseculum XII
subspeciepanis and vini, etc.
and in the Pix, with Divine Honor, as God himself, when we have Reason,
Scripture, and the Authority of Catholic Tradition to persuade us to believe
it to be Bread and Wine, and therefore they could not Worship it without the
guilt of Idolatry, while they were of that mind. For though it be the general
Belief of most Christians Ancient and Modern, that the Body and Blood of Christ
are verily and indeed taken and received by the faithful in the Lord's Supper,
yet there is no Reason to believe the Body of Christ is in the Hand of the
Priest, or in the Pix; for our Savior says only take eat this my Body, and
many Churches and Divines say it is the Body of Christ vescentibus and
sumentibus. But none but the Church of Rome does teach it is upon the Altar,
and in the Hand of the Priest, and that what is there is to be adored. 2. Our
Savior says, except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood ye
have no life in you. And the Church of God did partake of the Holy Communion in
both Kinds for above twelve hundred Years together, and all other Churches, but
the Roman, do receive it in both Kinds at this time. The Niceties therefore of
the Council of Trent, and the Roman Schools cannot justify our Disobedience to
the Command of Christ, and the constant Tradition of the Catholic Church. 3.
They would allow no other Public Service but in Latin, which People generally
did not, nor never were likely to understand. Contrary to the plain Word of
God, 1 Cor. 14.

These were sufficient Reasons to omit many others, why the Queen and Kingdom
should refuse to receive and to confirm those Popish Bishops; and consequently
the Schism that was made was wholly at their Door. And the Protestants in
joining with the Reformed Bishops, did nothing but that they had warrant to do
from the Word of God, and the Catholic Church, and all other Churches ought to
endeavor in a Christian and Peaceable manner, to reform these and other Abuses
as we have done.



The third Argument.
THat Archbishop Parker, and all his Associates, and consequently all who
adhered to him, or adhere to their Successors, were and are Schismatics,
separate from the whole true visible Church of Christ, because they were
consecrated by Barlow, who was intruded into the Place of Christophorson Bishop
of Chichester. Scory was put by King Edward 6th into Day's Place, then being
Bishop of Chichester. Coverdale into Vesey's Place, Hodgkins was only a
Suffragan, but communicated with these three in the Consecration, and therefore
became a Schismatic.

As our Author does only in this Argument vary in Form and Circumstance from
his former Arguments, so I must apply the same Answer for Substance to his
Assertions. Coll. of Record. part 2. p. 155. This is our express Pleasure's --
where there is a full consent of others the Bishops and Learned Men in a truth,
not to suffer you, or a few others with wilful headiness to dissuade all the
rest.
Day and Veysey were justly set aside in King Edward's Days, for not consenting
to the Decree of the major part of the Bishops, as appears by the Protector's
Letter to Bishop Gardner in Dr. Burnet's Collection; and Bishop Scory and
Coverdale were by the consent of the Archbishop and Bishops Regularly settled
in their Places, in peaceable Times wherein no Cruelties were exercised, no Man
was put to Death for his Religion, and only that Discipline was used, to turn
out those that would not quietly submit to the Determinations of the major part
of the Bishops of the Province; and as for Bishop Barlow, he was Consecrated a
Bishop of this Church near 'twenty Years before, in King Henry the Eighth's
Days, and so was Bishop Hodgkins Suffragan at Bedford. So that we have the Four
Consecrators of Archbishop Parker duly consecrated in quiet Times, by the
Archbishop and Bishops of the Province, and therefore endued with the undoubted
Power both of Order and Jurisdiction beyond all Dispute. Therefore unless any
can show a better Title, not only the Power of Order which they did Confer, but
of Jurisdiction also, must be unquestionable, and consequently the whole
Succession of English Bishops ever since, is exactly Regular and Canonical.
About the beginning of the Queen's Reign Bishop Jewel's Defense of the Apol. 2.
part. Ed. 1567. p. 130. Our Bishops are made in Form and Order as they have
been ever by free Election of the Chapter, by Consecration of the Archbishop
and other three Bishops. -- p. 131. To be short, We succeed the Bishops that
have been before our days. We are Elected, Consecrated, Confirmed, as they were.
The only Pretenders to a better Title, were those fourteen Popish Bishops set
aside by Queen Elizabeth: But these four Men's Title is more Firm and Ancient
than theirs, for the Popish Bishops were either such as were legally Deposed;
and thrust themselves afterward in the Places of the Lawful Bishops, and then
put many of them to Death, or all else but Bishop Thirlby, were ordained by, or
communicated with them during their Schism and Usurpation, and therefore,
neither the Ordainers nor Ordained had any Right or Jurisdiction in the Church
of England; so that Bishop Barlow, Bishop Scory, Bishop Coverdale, being
undoubted Regular Bishops of the Church of England at King Edward's Death, and
all that was done in Queen Mary's Days being acted by Bishops that had no
Lawful Jurisdiction, the Regular Authority of Ordaining and Conferring
Jurisdiction, as well as Order, was devolved to them, and they might take
Bishop Hodgkins into their Assistance to add the greater Solemnity to their
Ordination, so that those Fourteen, were so far from being Regular Bishops of
the Church of England, that they will not be able to clear themselves of
Schism, Murder, and the damnable Heresy of the Deposing Doctrine. It Is very
unreasonable therefore that the Bishops of the Church of England should be
charged with Schism, That they concurred in Consecrating Archbishop Parker,
etc. See Mr. Mason de Minister. Angl. p. 353. out of the Regist. Cambd. Eliz.
p. 38. Bishop Godwin de presulib. Angl. in Vita Parkeri. Archbishop Bramhall.
The Consecration and Succession of the Protestant Bishops justified, and many
others.
for declining their Authority, so long as they have a Regular Succession, from
the undoubted Lawful Bishops, who were free from any such foul Guilt or
Suspicion, Cambd. Elix. p. 36.
and the Clergy were so well satisfied with their Authority, that of 9400,
above 9200 did really submit to it, and heartily embrace the Reformation; and
the Queen, Nobility, Gentry, and the whole Kingdom, as I said before, did
willingly and joyfully adhere to their Communion, and for ten or eleven Years
lived in Peace and Unity; till the Pope by his Bull of Excommunication and
Deposition made a Disturbance. See Cambd. Elix. p. 179.


The fourth Argument.
WHosoever Subject themselves unto these as their Lawful Pastors, who have no
Jurisdiction over them, are Schismatics. But English Protestants ever since
Queen Elizabeth's Time, have Subjected themselves to these as their Lawful
Pastors, who have no Jurisdiction over them? Therefore, etc. are Schismatics.

The second Proposition he proves, because we had no Regular Succession at
home, nor derived none from abroad, and could have none from Rome,
Constantinople, or any other Church.

But all this is founded upon a false and groundless Supposition. Whereas we
had Four True, Lawful, Regular Bishops with full Power of Order and
Jurisdiction, from whom we derive our Succession (and might have had many more,
had not they unjustly put them to Death) and so needed not any Assistance from
Rome or Constantinople, or any Place else.

And as for the Coustitution of our Church, it is established by Divine Right,
committed to us by Succession from Christ and his Apostles, and we Act by the
Power we received from the Holy Ghost, Acts 20.
for the Pastoral Charge, the Care of Souls, the Right and Power of Baptizing
and Consecrating the Eucharist, the Power of binding and loosing, the Power of
Ordination, etc. are all Spiritual Offices received from God. Neither do we
derive them from any secular Magistrates; Artic of the Church of Engl. 37.
but from the Bishops of the Province The Book of Ordination, receive the Holy
Ghost for the Office and Work of a Bishop in the Church of God, now committed
unto thee by the Imposition of our hands. Ignat. Ep. ad Smyrn. and Trall.
Tertull. de Bapt. c. 17.
according to the constant Tradition of the Church, which St. Cyprian Cypr. Ep.
68.
says, did descend down from Divine Tradition and Apostolical Observation, and
the Council of Nice, and other General Councils Approve and Confirm the same:
And as for many of the Formalities that are used in the first Nomination,
Election, and Confirmation of Bishops, they were not observed by Christ and his
Apostles, nor commanded by the Church, and so are accidental Ceremonies
Appointed by the State to testify their good liking of the Person, that as the
Church does think him well qualified and fit to be Preferred to such a Sacred
Office, so the State is well satisfied, that he is a Man that will be Useful
and Faithful to the Temporal Government; which is agreeable to the Apostles
Direction, 1 Timothy 3. 7.
that he should have a good report of them that are without. But still that
which is Essential, and the Authority and Power to execute the Sacred Office of
a Bishop or Priest in their respective Charges, is derived from the Bishops of
the Province; and after great Violence and Disorder, from as many, or the major
part of them which survive. And this Method is established and allowed by the
Catholic Church, as long as Provincial and National Churches keep to her Faith
and Unity, as Ours has done. So that every Bishop and Priest orderly
constituted in his Place, does act by the Power and Appointment of the
Catholic Church, and they contemn the Catholic Church, that desert and
disturb them in the Performance of their Office. Hence we may understand our
Savior's meaning, Matt. 18. 17.
when he says, if he neglect to hear the Church let him be unto thee as an
heathen man, and a publican. Which in the first Place, does require us to hear
our own particular Parish Priest and Bishop, while they are Constituted, and
live in the Unity of the Church, but principally if does oblige us to hearken
to the Catholic Church. So that if our own Pastors turn Heretics, or set
themselves up by undue means, and not according to the Order of the Church,
they are not to be hearkened to, but we must according to our Savior's Command
here the Church, and not those Pastors that will not themselves hear and obey
the Church, as the Pope and his Adherents in England do not.

So that though Archbishop Parker and others, Can. Apost. 1. Council. Nicen.
Can. 4.
were Ordained but by Four Bishops (which is more then the Canons do require to
be present) yet it was according to the Constitution and Order of the Catholic
Church, and so all Catholic Bishops must allow and approve of what was done:
And they and their Successors are established by Christ, according to that
Command and Authority which he gave to his Apostles, Matt. 28. 19. 20.
to whom, as he gave Authority over the whole World, so he has promised to be
with them and their Successors to the end of the World.

And none have better asserted and maintained the Divine and Apostolical Right
of Episcopal Government, as well against the Pope and Jesuits, See what
opposition was made by the Pope and Jesuits to the Divine Right of Episcopacy
in the Council of Trent, in the Hist. of Father Paul and Card. Pallavicini:
as the Presbyterians and Erastians, than the Bishops Bp. Andrews, Bp. Bilson,
Bp. Dounham, Bp. Hall, Bp. Tailor, Dr. Hammond, Dr. Heylin, etc.
and Divines of the Church of England. Our Author therefore does take wrong
Measures, and seems not to be acquainted with the State of our Affairs, when he
does Object to us, the deriving our Spiritual Authority from secular
Magistrates: For no Church in the World has more heartily defended the
Episcopal Primitive Church Government, in Opposition to the Pope Petrus de
Marca. de concordia Regni and Sacerdotii lib. 3. c. 5. n. 1. Antiquo juri
universalis Ecclesiae assensu roborato successit jus novum quod anno Domini
836. publicari cepit adnitente Nicolao primo and allis Pontificibus, etc.
Voell. in Praefat. ad Codic. Can, justell. page 1. jus novum veteri successit
circa annum Christi 836 and paulatim invaluit in occidente, etc. This New Law
was the Pope's usurping the Power of Choosing and Confirming of Bishops and
receiving the last Appeals from all Churches, which before did belong to the
Archbishops and Bishops of the Province, as the General Councils do show, and
de Mayca, and others, have learnedly, proved, and so acknowledge that
Usurpation which we charge upon the Pope.
and other Innovators, than ours has done.

And now we have been Governed by many Successions of Archbishops and Bishops,
according to that Divine Tradition and Apostolical Observation; and are at this
Day settled under the Conduct of as Learned, and Pious Bishops and Clergy, as
perhaps ever has been in any Age, since the first Founding of the Christian
Church, and heartily United in the Profession of, and Conformity to, the truly
Ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic Faith and Discipline, See our Articles,
Liturgy, and Canons; besides, We retain great part of the Ancient Canon Law,
though We reject the jus novum, brought in by the Pope 836 Years after Christ.
which is Established in the Church of England, in Provincial and National
Synods, and likewise by the Law of the Land, neither are there any that pretend
any Succession derived down in Opposition to ours, much less a Regular and
Orderly Jurisdiction over us; and if the Popish Bishops in the beginning had a
pretended Claim, yet they being all long since Dead, and none continued to
succeed in their Places, all Pretense is now wholly out of Doors, and the
Present Bishops are guilty of no Schism, their Order is undoubted, and their
Succession uninterrupted, and so their Title and Authority is as firm and
unquestionable as any upon Earth; and they must be Schismatics before God and
the Catholic Church, that do not submit to them, and join in their Communion
in all Lawful Things, as the Service of our Church is in all its Offices and
Administrations beyond Dispute; and to join in them is all that is required of
any Lay-person to be a Member of our Communion.

And now I have vindicated the justness of the Authority of the Church of
England, let us consider with what a different Spirit and Temper the Reformers
did proceed, from that of the Papists; on the side of the Reformers nothing but
Love, See B. Andrews Tortur. Tort. from p. 144. to 152. largely showing the
Treasons and Cruelties of the Papists, and the Mercy and the Clemency of the
Reformers, besides what does appear in Acts and Monuments, and other Histories
of those times.
Kindness and Charity; on the Part of the Papists, nothing but Cruelty, Murder,
and Destruction. For they did not only uncanonically Depose their Spiritual
Fathers, the Lawful. Bishops in Queen Mary's Days, but Archbishop Cranmer of
Canterbury, Bishop Ridley of London, Bishop Latimer, Bishop Hooper, and Bishop
Ferrar, were burnt to Death, with many other Priests and Lay-persons, and
others were forced to fly their Country to avoid the like Destruction.

Now come we to consider how these Bishops that had been the cause of all this
Cruelty, and Bloodshed in Queen Mary's Days, and were wrongfully thrust into
the Places of the True and Lawful Bishops whom they Murdered, or forced to fly
their Country, were treated themselves by the Reformed Bishops when the Tide
was turned another way, as it was in the Days of Queen Elizabeth. And one would
think, that the Nation being thus exasperated against them, by the cruel Usage
they showed to others, they would meditate the like Revenge, and retaliate upon
them with the like Severity, but it is quite contrary to the meek Spirit of
Orthodox Christians, thus to imbrue their Hands in Blood upon the Account of
Religion, or to seek to Revenge themselves in the like manner. They committed
their cause to God, in whom they did put their trust, and left it to him to
plead it with their Adversaries. But they themselves did render nothing but
Good for Evil, Mercy for Cruelty: And though they did remove the Bishops from
those Sees to which they had no just Title, because they were Men of Blood, and
would not conform to the Public Order settled in King Edward's Days, and give
such Security to pay due Allegiance to her Majesty, as in justice they ought to
have done, Bp. Andrews Tortur. Torti page 146.
yet they were treated with all Civility. Archbishop Heath was suffered to
abide in one of his own purchased Houses, never restrained to any Place, and
died in great Favor with the Queen, who bestowed many Gracious Visits on him
during his Retirement. Tunstall Bishop of Durham spent the remainder of his
time with Archbishop Parker, by whom he was kindly entertained and honorably
Buried; Cambr. Eliz. p. 28. adeo indignati sunt Lincolnsensis and Wintoniensis
[Watsonus and Whitus] ut Regina and ^iljus ab Ecclesiae Romana defectionis
Authoris excommunicationis censura feriendos censuerunt qui ab hanc causam
incarcerati. Prudentiores a. Pontifici Romano hanc potius committendam esse
statuerunt. Acts and Mon. vol. 3. p. 988.
the like Civility was showed to Thirlby Bishop of Ely in the same House, and
to Bourn Bishop of Wells by the Dean of Exon, in which two Houses they Died
about ten or eleven Years after. White Bishop of Winchester, though at first
imprisoned for his Insolences, after some time was suffered to enjoy his
Liberty, and to Retire himself to what Friend he pleased. The like Favor was
showed to Turbervile Bishop of Exeter, who being a Gentleman by Birth of an
Ancient Family, could not want Friends to give him Entertainment. Watson Bishop
of Lincoln having endured a short Restraint, spent the remainder of his Time
with the Bishops of Ely and Rochester, till being found practicing against the
State, he was finally shut up in Wisbich Castle, where at last he Died.
Oglethorp, Bishop of Carlisle Died soon after his Deprivation, of an Apoplexy.
Bayne Bishop of Lichfield of the Stone; and Morgan Bishop of St. David's of some
other Disease the December following his Deprivation, but all of them in their
Beds and at perfect Liberty. The rest disposed of themselves as they pleased,
but no Restraint was laid upon them, and were perfectly out of all Fear or
Danger of hard Usage, so far were the Reformers from putting them to Death upon
the Account of Religion. Only Bishop Bonner was kept in the Tower for his own
Security, to preserve him from the Outrage of the Multitude, which he had
highly exasperated against him by his former Cruelties; But so gentle was his
Usage, and so answerable in all Respects to his Character; that one would have
looked on it rather as a chosen Retirement, than a Restraint.

This clear Account being given of the Lawful Authority, and undoubted
Succession of the Bishops in Queen Elizabeth's Days, by whom the Reformation
was continued, which was happily begun in King Edward the sixth's Reign; come
we now to consider the state of the inferior Clergy at that Change, as we have
set it down by Mr. Cambden, Camb. Eliz. p. 36.
who wrote the Annals of those Times. The Account that he gives us is this,
that the Number of Ecclesiastical Promotions was 9400, of all which, only 80
Rectors of Churches, 50 Prebendaries, 15 Presidents of Colleges, 12
Archdeacons, 12 Deans, and six Abbots were turned out, in all 175, most, if not
all of them very likely put in unjustly in Queen Mary's Days, or else chosen
out particularly for their known Obstinacy and Humor, in contending for the
Errors of the Church of Rome. And yet what a poor handful they were to the
rest, which were above 9200, who did Return to Lawful Settlement of the Church
in King Edward's Days, and the true Canonical Bishops then remaining, who
concurred in Ordaining Archbishop Parker and other Bishops, restoring and
settling the Reformation.

God Almighty in his due Time, put an end to all those immoderate Heats and
Contentions; and inspire Papists and other Dissenters with that Charitable and
Peaceable Temper, which always eminently appeared in the true Catholics of the
Church of England: And let all those that heartily desire the Advancement of
Religion, and the Salvation of Mankind, consider, that the way to promote the
Glory of God, and the Peace and Unity of the Church, is not to carry on secular
Designs, to impose the private Opinions of the Council of Trent and Roman
Schools, nor yet the Fanatical Devices of some Modern Reformers, but by
maintaining the truly Ancient and Apostolic Faith, Devotion and Discipline,
delivered and recommended to us by the Word of God, and Example and Authority
of the Primitive and Catholic Church, which is, and can be observed no where
in greater Perfection, than in the Church of England, as is Established by Law.

THE END.

