THE Faithful Soldier's Reward: Or, a Glimpse of the SAINTS HAPPINESS;
Discovered in two SERMONS, occasioned by the Death of that truly Virtuous and
Religious Gentlewoman, Mrs. Katherine Disney. The former Preached at Kirkstead,
the Place of her last abode here upon Earth, on the 18th Day of May, 1690,
being the Lord's Day. And the latter at Swinderby, near Lincoln, where she was
Interred the Tuesday following.

By William Scoffin.

Rev. 21.7. He that overcomes shall inherit all things, and I will be his God,
and he shall be my Son.

Rev. 2.10. -- Be thou faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown of
Life.

LONDON, Printed for J. Robinson, at the Golden Lion in S. Paul's Churchyard,
MDCXCII.

2 TIMOTHY 4.7, 8. I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my Course, I have
kept the Faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness,
which the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give me at that Day: and not to me
only, but unto all them also that love his Appearing.


THE deceased Gentlewoman, and our honored Friend, whose Death has occasioned
our present Meeting, did some Years ago make choice of this Scripture, to be
preached upon at her Funeral; and therefore it was recommended to me by her
most affectionate (and now sorrowful) surviving Husband. And had I been left
unto my own choice, I could not have pitched upon a more suitable Subject;
considering the Temptations and Conflicts she had, more than many other
Christians do ever meet with.

The Life of every sincere Christian is a continual Warfare, yet some are
exercised with sharper Combats than many others ever are; amongst whom may be
reckoned our deceased Friend; being one that was assaulted with many
Temptations, yet through the Captain of her Salvation, she did conquer and
overcome. So that well might she apply this Scripture to her self, and (in
Humility) say with the Apostle St. Paul;

I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith:
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, etc.

In which Scripture, the holy Apostle asserteth these two Particulars.

1. His Faithfulness in his Duty. 2. The Reward of his Faithfulness.
The First for Timothy's Imitation; the Second for his Encouragement.

I shall speak chiefly to the Latter of these; but will first consider the
Context, and the Meaning of the Words; and then come to that Point of Doctrine,
which I purpose to build my present Discourse upon.

In the three first Chapters of this Epistle, the Apostle directs Timothy to
several Duties, and excites him to the faithful Discharge of the same; giving
him also to understand what perilous Times there should come; and how that
Troubles and Persecutions were to be expected; and hereupon he further
exhorts him to Constancy in his Duty, chap. 3.1, -- 14. Minding him also of
his early Knowledge in the holy Scriptures, and showing the Excellency and
Profitableness of them, ver. 15, -- 17.

And lest Timothy should be discouraged, and grow remiss in his Duty, from the
Opposition and Persecutions he should meet with from Men; the Apostle most
earnestly charge him, as in the Presence of the Allseeing God, and as he will
answer it to Christ at the great Day of Judgment, that he be faithful, serious
and diligent, in the great Work and Duties of the Ministry, chap. 4.1, 2.

And for the further pressing this Charge upon him, he lays before him the
necessity of it, with respect to the Church's Welfare; For the time will come
(says he) when they will not endure sound Doctrine, but after their own Lust
shall they heap to themselves Teachers, having itching Ears: And they shall
turn away their Ears from the Truth, and shall be turned unto Fables, ver. 3,
4. And seeing it shall be so, therefore preach the Word, be instant in Season,
and out of Season; i. e. Lay hold of all Opportunities for the bringing Persons
to the Truth, and establishing them in it. Reprove, rebuke, and exhort with all
long-Suffering and Doctrine; q. d. Suit thy self and Discourse to every one's
Case and Condition; reprove such as are faulty, rebuke gross Sinners, and
exhort all Men, with unwearied Long-suffering and sound Doctrine; bearing with
their Peevishness, Stubbornness, etc.

And in ver. 5. he renews his Charge, or Exhortation, to Timothy; saying, Watch
thou in all things, etc. q. d. Seeing there will be such a sad Defection, as I
have showed thee there shall certainly be; therefore be thou the more vigilant
and watchful, both over thy Self and Flock; and endure Affliction and Hardness,
as a good Soldier of Christ. Do the Work of an Evangelist, Chap. 2.3.
in gathering and confirming Churches: make full proof of thy Ministry; i. e.
perform it thoroughly in all the parts of it, so as fully to approve thy self to
be a faithful Minister of Christ. And then he backs his Exhortation with a
second Reason, and that is, the Nearness of his own Dissolution. Ver. 6. For I
am now ready to be offered, and the time of my Departure is at hand; q. d.
Within a while I shall suffer Martyrdom, and seal the Truths which I have
preached, with my own Blood; Psalm. 116.15.
and shall thereby become an acceptable Sacrifice to God. Whether Paul came to
know the Nearness of his Death, by the Carriage of Nero the Roman Emperor,
under whom he suffered, or whether he had it by Revelation from God, is
uncertain to us; but certain it is, that he did know it: And thereupon, lays it
before Timothy as an Argument to enforce his Exhortation upon him: q. d.
Forasmuch, as within a while, the Church will be deprived of my Help, therefore
it will need thy greater Care and Diligence: And as to thy self, while I am
with thee, thou have the help of my Instructions and Exhortations, and the
Benefit of my Example: but seeing I shall shortly be taken from thee, therefore
thou ought to give the more earnest Heed to what I now write unto thee. So
much as to the Context.

And now I come to my Text; wherein the Apostle does further excite, and
encourage Timothy to his Duty.

1. By declaring unto him what his own Practice had been: I have fought a good
Fight, etc. Showing hereby, that there was no Duty, which he had been exhorting
Timothy unto, but what he had constantly practiced himself; and that with the
greatest Diligence and Faithfulness.

2. By his showing the Reward of his great Faithfulness and Diligence:
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, etc. q. d.
Consider well what my Practice has been; and that I have not fought in vain,
run in vain, nor labored in vain; but shall have an eternal and inconceivable
Reward conferred upon me: And let the Consideration of this, encourage thee to
the greater Faithfulness and Diligence in Duty.

The Apostle seems to allude unto the Grecian Games, when he speaks of his
fighting, running, and his being crowned.

I have fought a good Fight; q. d. My Life has been a military Life, even a
continual Warfare; yet have I not fought the evil Fights of ambitious or
quarrelsom Men: but the Fight which I have fought, is the good Fight of Faith:
I have stoutly opposed the Enemies of my Salvation, and through Christ (my
Captain and Leader) have conquered and overcome.

The Life of a Christian is often is Scripture compared unto a Warfare, because
of those spiritual Enemies which are continually Warring against us. There are
three great Enemies, which every Christian has to grapple with. As,

1. The Devil, which is a very subtle, watchful and powerful Enemy, 2 Cor.
11.3, 14. He has many Devices, Wiles and Stratagems, 2 Cor. 2.11. Ephesians. 6.11.
He Is a malicious and enraged Enemy, 1 Pet. 5.8. Who roveth about with unwearied
Diligence, seeking whom he may devour. He has his fiery Darts to molest those,
whom he cannot entice by his ensnaring Wiles; Ephesians. 6.16. Yea, we have not
only this great Adversary, the Prince of Devils, to grapple with, but whole
Legions of Devils, even all the Powers of Darkness, Ephesians. 6.12.

2. Another Enemy of our Souls, is this evil World. There are two ways by which
the World overcomes Multitudes.

(1.) By its Smiles and Allurements, 1 John 2.16. (2.) By its Frowns and
Threats, Joh. 15.19, 20.
Thousands are drawn from God, and eternally ruined, by the Smiles and
Allurements of this evil World. Some are taken with Pleasures, some with
Riches, and some with Honors: These are Satan's Baits, whereby he catches
Multitudes, and keeps them in his Power, Luke 14.16, -- 20. Mar. 4.18, 19. 1 Timothy 6.9, -- 12. Mat. 19.16, -- 22.

Again; Many who have in some measure escaped the World's Allurements, have
been conquered and overcome by its Frowns and Threats, Mat. 13.20, 21. Joh.
12.42. Yea, such an Enemy is this evil World, that none can overcome it, but
such as are spiritual; they who are Believers indeed, and are born from above,
1 John 5.4, 5.

3. Another Enemy that Christians have to grapple with, is Carnalself, Gal.
5.17.
or our unmortified Corruptions: I find a Law in my Members, warring against
the Law of my Mind, and bringing me into Captivity to the Law of Sin, (says
the Apostle, Romans 7.21, 23.) Now the Flesh, or Carnal-self, is a very dangerous
and deceitful Enemy; Jer. 17.9. The Heart is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked, who can know it? It Is an old saying, (and in this respect a
true one) that a Man has need of no worse an Enemy than he brings from home.
For sure I am, there is no Man has a more dangerous Enemy than Carnal-self.
Our Enemies without could never hurt us, if it were not for this Enemy within.
For, look as when an House is beset, then one Enemy within is much more
dangerous than many without: So this homebred and indwelling Enemy,
Carnal-self, lets in the Devil and the World, to the spoiling and undoing of
the poor Soul. No wonder then, that the first Lesson which Christ teaches his
Disciples, is a Lesson of Self-denial, ( Mat. 16.24.) If any Man will come
after me, let him deny himself, etc. Keep down Self, and we conquer all; but if
Carnal-self get the upperhand, the Devil and the World will easily overcome us.
It is safe Advice therefore, which the Apostle gives, 1 Pet. 2.11. I beseech
you as Strangers and Pilgrims, (says he) abstain from fleshly Lusts, which war
against the Soul.

These are the dangerous Enemies that Christians have to grapple with; and none
can overcome them, but through Faith in Christ Jesus.

Now some may ask, why this Fight of Faith is called a good Fight?

Unto which I answer, It may be so called upon several accounts; As,

1. Because they that are engaged in this Warfare, do fight for a good Cause,
the best that ever Soldiers fought for; they being God's Enemies as well as
theirs, whom they fight against; and his Glory as well as their own Salvation,
is that which is contended for. 2. They have a good Captain, the best that ever
Soldiers fought under; for the Lord Jesus Christ is their Captain and Leader,
Heb. 2.10. 3. They are furnished with the best Armor and Weapons, that ever
Soldiers made use of. The Christian Armor lis Armor of proof; and their
Weapons are spiritual, and mighty through God, for the pulling down the strong
Holds of Sin, Ephesians. 6.10, -- 17. 2 Cor. 10.3, 4, 5. 4. Their Wages are the
best that ever Soldiers received; He that overcomes, shall inherit all
things; and I will be his God, and he shall be my Son, Rev. 21.7. So chap. 2.7,
10, 11, 17. chap. 3.5, 12, 21.
There is good reason you see, why the Life of a Christian may be compared to a
Warfare; and why this spiritual Combat, or Fight of Faith, may be said to be a
good Fight. Let us all then be persuaded to fight this good Fight of Faith.
Never had Soldiers greater Encouragement to fight, than we have under Christ's
Banner; and never had Soldiers more need to fight than we; for we must either
fight or die; fight courageously, or perish eternally. And if we will resolve
upon this, we must see that our Faith be true and saving; for such as want a
true Faith, cannot possibly fight the Fight of Faith; therefore labor we for a
lively Faith, and then live we in the lively Exercise of it.

Thus you see what is meant by the first Words in my Text, I have fought a good
Fight. I proceed now to the next Words.

I have finished my Course; q. d. God appointed me a Race to run, both as a
Christian, and also as an Apostle and Minister of Christ; the which Race I have
now finished, and am come to the End and Period of my Days, Act. 20.22, -- 24.

The Life of a Christian is often (in Scripture) compared to a Race, as well as
to a Warfare, 1 Cor. 9.24, -- 27. Heb. 12.1.

Well then, let us lay aside every Weight, and the Sin which does so easily
beset us, and let us run with Patience the Race that is set before us. Let us
press forward toward the Mark, as this great Apostle did, Phil. 3.13, 14. He
ran the Christian Race with an holy Activity and Vigor, till he got to the
Goal, and won the Prize: Let us so run, that we may obtain.

What a blessed Condition is that Person in, who can think of his Dissolution
with Joy and Comfort, and can say with an holy Triumph, I have finished my
Course? Such a Condition was this holy Apostle in, when he writ this Epistle to
Timothy; he knew, Phil. 1.21.
that to die was his gain: having fought a good Fight, and through Christ
overcome: Having run the Race that was set before him, and kept the Faith unto
the end: i. e. adhered constantly in Judgment and Practice, to the Faith he
professed, and preached to others; he could therefore say, with the fullest
assurance,

Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, etc.

Heaven is expressed in Scripture by several Metaphorical Names; as sometimes
it is called Paradise, 2 Cor. 12, 2, 4.

Sometimes it is called an House, Joh. 14.2. sometimes it is called a City,
Heb. 11.16. sometimes it is called a Kingdom, Luke 12.32. And sometimes it is
called a Crown, as here in my Text.

For the Pleasantness of it, it is called Paradise; to note our Abode and Rest
in it, it is called an House; for the Amplitude of it, it is called a City; and
for the Splendour of it, a Kingdom. And to show the exceeding Height of Glory
that Believers are advanced to, it is called a Crown. Sometimes a Crown of
Life, Jam. 1.12. sometimes a Crown of Glory, 1 Pet. 5.4. And here in my Text, a
Crown of Righteousness.

Why is it called a Crown of Righteousness?

Answ. It may be so called on several accounts.

1. Because it is the Purchase of Christ's Righteousness, Ephesians. 1.14. Heb.
9.12. Romans 5.18. 2. Because it is given as a free Reward, to such as lead a
righteous Life, Romans 2.7, 10. chap. 6.23. Isa. 3.10. 3. Because the Righteous
God has promised it, and therefore will bestow it, Jam. 1.12. Heb. 6.10.
Now the whole Verse may be thus paraphrased, [ Henceforth, or as to what
remains, there is appointed, prepared, and in safe keeping for me, eternal Life
and Happiness, an immortal Crown of Glory; which the Righteous God has
promised, and therefore will bestow it; a Crown which is the Purchase of
Christ's Righteousness, and ample Reward of mine, though I have no ways merited
or deserved it. Another kind of Crown is this, than what the Conquerors used to
have in the Grecian Games, even a great and most excellent Reward; a Glory with
which my whole Man shall be encompassed, as a Man's Head is with a Crown.

Such a Crown of Righteousness will the Lord the righteous Judge give me at the
Day of Judgment; Mat. 16.27. Romans 2.6, 10.
(when all shall be rewarded according to their Works:) and not to me only
shall this Crown be given as my particular Reward; but whosoever shall truly
believe in Christ, and shall so lead their Lives in this World, as that they
can desire, wait for, and be well pleased, with the Thoughts and Hopes of his
coming to Judgment, unto them will he give the same Reward also.

Thus much shall suffice for Explication.

I come now to the Doctrine. And that which I shall build my present Discourse
upon, and which naturally arises from the Words of my Text, is as follows.

Doct. There is eternal Life and Happiness, an immortal Crown of Glory, yea,
the highest Felicity that the Heart of Man can wish or desire, appointed,
purchased, and prepared for every believing Soul, who overcomes in the
spiritual Warfare, and continues faithful unto the Death.

Jam. 1.12. Blessed is the Man that endures Temptation; for when he is tried,
he shall receive the Crown of Life, which the Lord has promised to them that
love him.

Rev. 21.7. He that overcomes shall inherit all things, and I will be his God,
and he shall be my Son.

1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the
Heart of Man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him.

The Eye may have seen much, and the Ear may have heard of more; but the Heart
may conceive of a far greater Happiness than either Eye has seen, or Ear has
heard of; yet all comes infinitely short of that Happiness, which God has
prepared for his faithful People.

Mat. 13.43. Then shall the Righteous shine forth as the Sun, in the Kingdom of
their Father.

Rev. 2.10. Be thou faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life.

Many more Scriptures might be brought for the proof of the Point laid down;
but these which I have mentioned, are sufficient to evidence the Truth thereof.

Now the Method which I shall observe in speaking to this Doctrine, will be to
show you, (so far as the Lord shall enable me)

1. When Believers shall come to the Enjoyment of this Happiness. 2. Wherein it
will chiefly consist. 3. Upon what account the Lord will confer it upon them.
And, 4. Make Application.
When shall Believers come to the Enjoyment of this Happiness?

I answer, They shall enjoy it in part at their Death, but fully at the
Resurrection. For,

1. At Death, the Souls of the Faithful do immediately pass into Heaven, and
their Bodies lie asleep in their Graves, as in Beds of Rest. (Isa. 57.2.) They
shall enter into Peace, they shall rest in their Beds.

The Death of the Righteous is a sweet Sleep, out of which they shall be
awaked; and their Graves in like manner, are Beds of Rest, out of which they
shall rise again.

That the Bodies of the Saints do thus rest in their Graves till the general
Resurrection, I know none that will deny; but that their Souls (the mean while)
are in the actual Enjoyment of Happiness with Christ, is denied by some: though
I know not the least Grounds they have to deny it. And it has often been a
wonder to me, (as it may be to any who considerately reads the Scriptures) that
ever so plain a Truth as this is, should be so much as questioned by any. Yet
some (professing the Christian Religion) do positively deny it; affirming that
the Soul does sleep with the Body till the general Resurrection. But surely St.
Paul would never have been in a Strait, (as he expressed himself to be, Phil.
1.23.) if he were to be reduced upon his Dissolution into a Condition of stupid
Sleep, without any Capacity of glorifying or enjoying God: See Dr. Manton on 2
Cor. 5. v. 8. p. 67.
I am in a Strait betwixt two (says he) having a Desire to depart, and to be
with Christ, which is far better.

To be with Christ, is to be in Heaven, for there Christ is at the Right Hand
of God, ( Col. 3.1.) Now the Apostle speaks not this in regard of his Body,
but in regard of his Soul; for his Body could not be with Christ presently upon
his Dissolution, till it was raised up at the Last-day: but he knew that his
Soul should, and that it would be in a far better State than the estate it
enjoyed here.

But is it not better (you will say) to remain here, and serve God, than to
depart hence?

It were so, if the Soul was in a State wherein we neither know, nor love
Christ? Yea it would certainly be far worse for Paul, to have his Body rotting
in the Grave, and his Soul without all Fruition of God, if this were true.

But he well knew, that if once his Soul was separated from the Body, he should
enjoy a far greater Happiness than he was capable of enjoying whilst he was
here.

Many more Scriptures might be brought for the proof of this Truth; I shall
name a few.

Luke 16.22. And it came to pass, that the Beggar died, and was carried by the
Angels into Abraham 's Bosom. By the Bosom of Abraham is meant Heaven, and Hell
is opposed to it; and it is explained, ver. 25. He is comforted, but thou art
tormented. Heaven is a Place of Comfort, and Hell is a Place of Torment: No
sooner did Lazarus die, but he was carried by the Angels into Heaven: No sooner
did the rich Man die, but he was dragged by the Devils into Hell. ( Ver. 23,
24.) And in Hell he lift up his Eyes being in Torment, and sees Abraham afar
off, and Lazarus in his Bosom. Therefore I argue, not only from Lazarus his
being in Abraham's Bosom, but also from the rich Man's being in Hell; for God
is not more prone to punish, than he is to reward. If the Wicked be in Torment
as soon as they die, then the Saints are in their Happiness presently upon
their Dissolution.

Another Place is Luke 16.9. And I say unto you, make to your selves Friends of
the Mammon of Unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may receive you into
everlasting Habitations. i. e. Do good with your worldly Riches, and thereby
evidence your Faith to be true, and so consequently make God your Friend; that
when you come to die, he may receive you into Heaven, 1 Timothy 6.17, -- 19. Luke
19.8. Act. 10.4. Mat. 25.34, -- 36.

When ye fail; What is that time failing? It cannot be meant of Condemnation in
the Judgment, for there is no escaping or reversing that Sentence; therefore
it is meant of the Hour of Death; then are Believers received into everlasting
Habitations, and their everlasting Habitation is in Heaven.

Another Argument which proves this Truth, is that with which Christ silenced
the Sadduces, Mat. 22.31, 32. Have ye not read that which was spoken unto you
by God, saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob; God is not the God of the Dead, but of the Living. The Sadduces denied
the Immortality of the Soul, as well as the Resurrection of the Body; and
Christ disproveth both by this Argument: I am the God of Abraham, and the God
of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. Exodus 3.6.
These words were spoken by God unto Moses long after the Decease of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob; and it is not said, I was, but I am the God of Abraham, etc.
Now says Christ, God is not the God of the Dead, but of the Living: therefore
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob (though long ago deceased) are yet alive: So the Souls
of all the Faithful departed out of this World, do live to God in Heaven, Luke
20.38.

Another Scripture which clearly proves this Truth, is Luke 23.43. The penitent
Thief had desired Christ to remember him, when he came into his Kingdom: And
Christ answered him again, and said, Verily I say unto thee, To day shall thou
be with me in Paradise. Christ shows, that he would not defer his Hope, but
his Desire should be accomplished that Day; it is not adjourned to many Days,
Months or Years, but to Day, says Christ; q. d. Thou shall immediately enjoy
thy Desire. Now what Christ promised to him, he promised it to him as a
penitent Believer; and what belongs to one Believer, belongs to all in a
like Case. Therefore if his Soul in the very Day of his Death was translated to
Paradise, the Souls of other Believers will be so in like manner. Rev. 2.7. To
him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the Tree of Life, which is in the
midst of the Paradise of God. No doubt but by Paradise is meant Heaven, and so
the Apostle explaineth it, 2 Cor. 12.2, 4. Thither the penitent Thief went
immediately after his Death, and so does every believing Soul.

Another Scripture that proves this Truth, and the last that I shall name, is 2
Cor. 5.8. We are confident, I say, and willing, rather to be absent from the
Body, and to be present with the Lord.

This is so plain a Text for the proof of this Truth, that if we had no other
Scripture to prove it by, even this alone were sufficient: For we know (says
the Apostle) that whilst we are at home in the Body, we are absent from the
Lord, ver. 6. But are will, rather to be absent from the Body, and to be
present with the Lord, ver. 8. So that as soon as the Souls of the Faithful are
separated from the Body, they are taken immediately into the Presence of the
Lord; in whose Presence there is Fullness of Joy, Psa. 16.11.
and at whose Right Hand there are Pleasures for evermore.

And thus I have sufficiently proved, that the Souls of the Faithful at Death,
do immediately pass into Heaven, and their Bodies lie asleep in their Graves,
as in Beds of Rest. Now,

2. At the general Resurrection, when Christ shall come to Judgment, the Bodies
of the Saints shall be raised in Glory, and reunited unto their Souls, even
these very self same Bodies which now we have. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. For the Lord
himself shall descend from Heaven with a Shout, with the Voice of the
Archangel, and with the Trump of God, and the Dead in Christ shall rise first.
So Joh. 5.28, 29. Marvel not at this, (says Christ) for the hour is coming, in
the which all that are in the Graves, shall hear his Voice, and shall come
forth; they that have done good, unto the Resurrection of Life, and they that
have done evil, unto the Resurrection of Damnation.

This will be a joyful Day to every believing Soul, but a Day of Terror and
Amazement to the Wicked; When the Lord Jesus Christ shall be thus revealed from
Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming Fire, taking Vongeance on then that
know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall
be punished with everlasting Destruction, from the Presence of the Lord, and
from the Glory of his Power: When he shall come to be glorified in his Saints,
and to be admired in all them that believe, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, -- 10.

The Thoughts of this most Blessed Day (which Job foresaw by Faith) did much
refresh his Soul, under his heavy Afflictions.

Job 19.25, 26, 27. I know (says he) that my Redeemer lives, and that he
shall stand at the latter Day upon the Earth: And though after my Skin Worms
destroy this Body, yet in my Flesh shall I see God; whom I shall see for my
self, and mine Eyes shall behold, and not another, though my Reins be consumed
within me. Job was well assured, that the self-same Body which had suffered so
much in the World, and which should not in the Earth, and be eaten with Worms,
should be raised again at the last Day.

Yet this we must know, that tho the same Body shall be raised again, yet a
very great Change shall pass upon it. 1 Cor. 15.42, -- 44. It is sown in
Corruption, it is raised in Incorruption; it is sown in Dishonor, it is raised
in Glory: it is sown in Weakness, it is raised in Power: It is sown a natural
Body, it is raised a spiritual Body. So Phil. 3.20, 21. Our Conversation is in
Heaven, (says the Apostle there) from whence also we look for the Savior the
Lord Jesus Christ; who shall change our vile Body, that it may be fashioned
like unto his Glorious Body, according to the Working whereby he is able even
to subdue all things unto himself.

O blessed Change indeed! They shall be fashioned like unto his glorious Body!
Now the Bodies of the Saints are vile, but then they shall be glorious. For
Christ's Body now glorified in Heaven, is surely a glorious Body indeed Rev. 1,
13, -- 16. Mat. 17.1, 2.
: And the Bodies of the Saints shall be like his.

O how joyfully will the Soul reunite with the Body, when this glorious Change
is passed upon it! And what a blessed Union will this be, nevermore to be
broken! O then will the Saints be in a Capacity of enjoying the highest
Felicity.

3. Their Bodies and Souls thus reunited, shall be received into Mansions of
Bliss and Glory, where they shall for ever be with the Lord, and be perfectly
happy to all Eternity. And O how should the Thoughts of this cheer our Hearts,
and fortify us under all our Trials. Let not your Hearts be troubled, Joh.
14.1, 2, 3.
(says Christ) ye believe in God, believe also in me. In my Father's House are
many Mansions; if it were not so, I would have told you; I go to prepare a
Place for you: And if I go and prepare a Place for you, I will come again, and
receive you unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also. O comfortable
Words indeed! Yea, and Christ has left them for our Comfort: Wherefore comfort
one another with these Words, 1 Thessalonians. 4.18.
(says the Apostle.) With what words? Why that Jesus Christ will come in the
Clouds, Ver. 16, 17.
and meet Believers in the Air, and they shall for ever be with the Lord.

O blessed and glorious Day, when Christ shall pronounce that blessed Sentence
to such as have been his faithful Followers! Mat. 25.34
Come ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
Foundation of the World.

The Members of Christ are now looked upon by the World, as a Company of
Hypocrites and vile Miscreants, even such as are unfit to live in a
Commonwealth; but Christ pronounces them Blessed. The World says, Act. 22.22,
Away with such Fellows from the Earth, for it is not fit that they should
live; but Christ says, Mat. 25.34
Come ye Blessed.

And Christ calls them the Blessed of his Father; showing thereby the Orignal
Cause and Fountain of all our Happiness. The beginning of our Salvation was
from an higher Cause than our own Holiness; yea, than Christ's Merit; even from
the free Grace and Favor of God the Father, He is the principal efficient
Cause of the Saints Blessedness. Christ as Mediator, is but the way to the
Father, ( Joh. 14.6.) It is the Father that appointed Christ, and gave him to
Sinners, ( Joh. 3.16.) And in time brings them to close with him, ( Joh. 6.44.)
It is the Father that prepared this Kingdom for them before the Foundation of
the World. They are not less beloved and blessed by the Father, than by the Son
who redeemed them; but whosoever is dear unto the Son, is dear also unto the
Father.

O what Soul-enravishing Joys will the Saints be filled with, when Christ shall
pronounce this blessed Sentence, Come ye Blessed of my Father!

To the Wicked he will say, Depart, but to the Saints, Come: as the
Quintessence of all Misery lies in the one, so the Consummation of all
Blessedness lies in the other.

We see here, what the Sentence will be at the Great Day; the reason of this
Sentence follows;

For, I was an hungered, and ye gave me Meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me
Drink; I was a Stranger, and ye took me in; Naked, and ye clothed me; I was
sick, and ye visited me; I was in Prison, and ye came unto me; (Mat. 25.35,
36.) These good Works are mentioned by Christ, and given as a Reason of the
Sentence, (not as if Heaven was merited by them, but) as the undoubted
Evidences and Fruits of a true and saving Faith.

And that a true Faith is implied in the Works here mentioned, is very clear
and evident;

1. From the Expression it self, For I was an hungered, and ye gave me Meat,
(says Christ;) 'twas Christ they respected in his Members.

Now it requires Faith to see Christ in a poor needy Person, or Prisoner; to
love Christ in them above our worldly Goods; and to part with our Wealth for
their Relief, because they belong to Christ. This is a great Piece of
Self-denial, and doubbless the Fruit of a saving Faith; for it is not merely the
relieving the Poor, but the doing of it, as in, and to Christ.

2. Faith and good Works are very nearly linked together; for Faith is not
sound and saving, unless it produce these good Works; and these Works are not
acceptable, unless they proceed from Faith, and are done in Faith, ( Heb. 11.6.
1 Timothy 1.5.)

Where there is true Faith, there will also be good Works, as the genuine
Effects and Fruits of it; yet certain it is, that the best of those Works do no
ways deserve Heaven, ( Luke 17.10. Ephesians. 2.8, 9.) And the Saints will be so
far from pleading their Works, in a way of Desert or Merit, that they will
rather altogether disown them; being sensible of their many and great
Imperfections, and how far short they came of their Duty.

Then shall the Righteous answer him, saying, Mat. 25.37.
Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, and fed thee; or thirsty, and gave thee
Drink? Ver. 38.
When saw we thee a Stranger, and took thee in; or naked, and clothed thee? Or
when saw we thee sick, Ver. 39.
or in Prison, and came unto thee?

And the King shall answer, and say unto them, Ver. 40.
Verily, I say unto you, in as much as ye have done it unto one of the least of
these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me.

By the way, we may observe these three or four Particulars;

1. The wonderful Love and Humility of the Lord Jesus Christ, the King of
Glory, in owning the poorest, Joh. 20.17. Heb. 2.11, 12.
and least of his Members for his Brethren.

-- In as much as ye have done it (says he) unto one of the least of these my
Brethren, ye have done it unto me. O wonderful condescending Love! that the
great God should take such poor Worms as we, into so near a Relation unto
himself.

2. Observe, that Christ takes that which is done to his Members, as done to
himself: I was an hugred (says he) and ye gave me Meat; I was thirsty, and ye
gave me Drink; I was a Stranger, and ye took me in; Naked, and ye clothed me; I
was sick, and ye visited me; I was in Prison, and ye came unto me: -- For in as
much as ye have done it to one of the least of these my Brethren, ye have done
it unto me.

So that we see, whatever Favors are showed to Christ's poor Members, Mat.
10.40, 41, 42.
whatever Acts of Mercy and Charity are exercised toward them; Christ takes
all as done to himself.

And on the other hand, whatsoever is done against the Members of Christ,
whatsoever Unmercifulness, or Acts of Cruelty are exercised toward them,
Christ takes it all as done against himself. When ever they are slighted and
neglected, he looks upon himself as concerned therein.

I was an hungered, Mat. 25 42
(will he say) and ye gave me no Meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no Drink;
Ver. 43.
I was a Stranger, and ye took me not in; naked, and ye clothed me not; sick,
and in Prison, and ye visited me not.

-- For in as much as ye did it not to one of the least of these my poor
Members, Ver. 45.
ye did it not to me.

So Act. 9.4, 5. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? (says Christ); And Saul
said, Who art thou, Lord? And the Lord answered him, and said, I am Jesus, whom
thou persecutest.

Why, the Lord Jesus was in Heaven, quite above Readiness reach; How the could
Saul persecute him? It was in his Members. For Saul had been persecuting the
poor Members of Christ, and was now going to Damascus on the same Design; and
Christ took all those Acts of Cruelty which were exercised toward his Members,
as if they had been done to his own Person.

Thus also says the Prophet to the People of the Lord, Zech. 2.8. -- He that
touches you, touches the Apple of my Eye.

This speaks Comfort to the Members of Christ, who are hated, and persecuted
for Righteousness sake; but sure it speaks Terror to their Enemies. Isa. 34.8.
For the Day is coming when the Lord will vindicate his own Cause, and will
call all such to a Reckoning. And then they will assuredly find it hard, to
have kicked against the Pricks, Act. 9.5.

3. We may further observe, how very acceptable unto the Lord the Works of
Mercy and Charity are. These are the only Works which are mentioned in the
Description of the Last Judgment.

The Lord takes delight in nothing more than he does in showing of Mercy; no
wonder then, Luke 6.36.
that Acts of Mercy are so very acceptable unto him.

Jam. 1.27. Pure Religion and undefiled before God and the Father, is this, to
visit the Fatherless and Widows in their Afflictions, and to keep himself
unspotted from the World.

And on the other hand, as God is well pleased with Acts of Mercy; so he is
greatly provoked with Unmercifulness, and Acts of Cruelty. As he will say to
the Righteous and Merciful, Come, ye Blessed; So he will say to the Wicked and
Unmerciful, Depart, ye Cursed. He shall have Judgment without Mercy, that has
showed no Mercy, Jam. 2.13.

4. Observe the different Tempers of the Righteous and Wicked in Judgment. The
Righteous who have done many good Works, will be ashamed to hear any of them
mentioned by Christ, so sensible are they of their great Imperfections: Lord,
when saw we thee an hungered, and fed thee? etc. (will they say.) But the Wicked
who have done little or no good at all, will be ready to excuse and justify
themselves; saying, When saw we thee an hungered, Matthew. 25.44.
or a thirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in Prison, and did not
minister unto thee? But their vain Excuses will do them no good; For these
shall go into everlasting Punishment; Ver. 46.
but the Righteous unto Life Eternal.

which is to show you (as the Lord shall enable me) wherein the Happiness of
Believers (in the other World) will chiefly consist.

And I humbly conceive, it will chiefly consist in these two Particulars
following.

1. In a perfect freedom from all that is really Evil. 2. In the full enjoyment
of all that is truly Good.
There is no Tongue indeed can possibly express the greatness of the Saints
Happiness. Yet so much may we conceive thereof, by seriously considering these
two Particulars, as might fill our Souls with breathing Desires after the
Enjoyment of it; and with admiration of God's wonderful Love, in providing such
an Happiness for us.

Quest. What then are those Evils that Believers shall be freed from at Death?

Why, Heb. 12.23 1 Cor. 13.10. Ephesians. 5.27.
1. They Will be freed from all their Sins, Infirmities, Weaknesses, and
Imperfections. And O what an Happiness will this be, to be perfectly freed from
Sin! You that groan under the burden of Sin, can set your Seal to this Truth,
that a perfect Freedom from all our Corruptions will make us happy indeed.
Cheer up then, believing Soul, whose Infirmities and Weaknesses are thy
greatest Burden; for a time of Refreshment will shortly come. Yet a little
while, and thou shall sin no more, nor sorrow any more. Thou art now troubled
for thy Unbelief, thy hardness of Heart, and deadness of Spirit; and that thy
Affections are so flat and low, thy Corruptions so strong, and thy Failings so
many; and that thou walk'st on so heavily in the Ways of God, and can not do
the good thou would: but Death will knock off all these Fetters, and set thee
free within a while.

O that I might never sin more against my good and gracious God! Romans 7.24.
(says a poor gracious Soul.) Why, I tell thee, poor Soul, (and take it for thy
comfort) that it is but a little while, and thou shall sin no more, nor sorrow
any more, nor dishonor thy gracious God any more; which is now the chief cause
of thy greatest Sorrow.

There is no Comfort arises from hence, to such as are in Love and in League
with Sin: but to those whose Sin is their great Grief and Burden, it affords
matter of very great Comfort.

2. Believers shall likewise be freed from all their Temptations and Enemies. 2
Cor 7.5.
Now they are troubled on every side, and molested with many Temptations; but
Death (within a while) will set them free. For if the time will come, when
God's People here on Earth shall obtain Freedom from their Enemies in a very
great measure, how much more when they come to Heaven? (See Isa. 11.9. and
chap. 65.17, -- 25. Rev. 20.1, 2, 3.) Cheer up, then Believing Soul, who art
here surrounded with many Temptations; for there is no Tempter in Heaven,
either to entice thee to Sin, or to trouble and molest thee: there are no
Snares there to entangle thee; no Enemy there, that shall in any-wise hurt
thee. No, no, thou wilt have none but Friends in Heaven, and the best of Friends.

There Triumph over Sin is won,
The Devil and Death defaced,
The Kingdom of the Just begun,
And there in Glory placed.
There Tyrants nothing have to do,
Nor Rack, nor Rope is known:
Tormentors all, and Satan too,
Are fully overthrown.
As one thus expresses it in Meter.

3. Believers shall be perfectly freed from all their Sicknesses, Pains and
Sorrows. Rev. 7.16, 17. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more,
neither shall the Sun light on them, nor any heat. For the Lamb which is in the
midst of the Throne, shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living Fountains
of Water: and God shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes. So chap. 14.13.
Blessed are the Dead that die in the Lord, from henceforth: Yea, says the
Spirit, that they may rest from their Labors. And again, chap. 21.4. God shall
wipe away all Tears from their Eyes; and there shall be no more Death, neither
Sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the former things
are passed away.

O how sweet is Health, after a long pining Sickness! How sweet is Ease, after
racking Pains! How sweet is Peace, after great Troubles! And how sweet is Rest,
after hard Labors! Why, in Heaven there will be perfect Health, and perfect
Ease, and perfect Peace, and Rest, and Happiness, and that for evermore.

Cheer up then, Believing Soul, who art here exercised with pining Sickness, or
with racking Pains; whose Sufferings and Sorrows are many, and great: for yet a
little while, and all Tears shall be wiped from thine Eyes; and thou shall be
sick no more, nor in pain any more; but shall shortly take an eternal Farewell
of all thy Sufferings, Pains and Sorrows.

4. Believers shall be freed from Hell, and from all Fears of Damnation. Joh.
5.24. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that hears my Words, and believes on
him that sent me, John 3.16, 18.
has everlasting Life, and shall not come into Condemnation, but is passed
from Death unto Life. So Romans 8.1. There is no Condemnation to them which are
in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. O what
would the Damned in Hell give, to purchase such a Freedom! Mat. 8.36, 37.
What shall it profit a Man (says Christ) if he shall gain the whole World,
and lose his own Soul? or what shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul? Why,
no doubt but the Damned in Hell would give ten thousand Worlds (if they had
them) to have their Souls freed from that State of Misery. But alas, it must
not be, if they had Millions of Worlds to give for it. O dreadful will be the
condition of those that must be eternally separated from God, and lie under his
heavy Wrath for ever! Who knows the Power of thy Wrath? (says the Psalmist,
Psalm. 90.11.) There is none can express it; no, nor any conceive it, but the
Damned in Hell that lie under it. Do those then know what they do, who are
running headlong to that State of Misery? And that cannot endure to be
controlled, or stopped in their Course thither? O what Pains do many take to
undo themselves! And what haste do they make to their own Perdition? As if they
could not be in Hell too soon: or else do imagine it to be but a Fancy. How
many are there in these our Days, that can dare the Great God to damn them? As
if they would have the World to know, that they have Courage enough to be
Damned. O dreadful! what do these Persons think? Their Damnation sure will come
soon enough, without their so often calling for it. And O it will be very sad
indeed, Rev. 21.8. Mar. 9.43, -- 48. Mat. 13.41, 42. Isa. 65.14.
to lie in a Lake of Fire and Brimstone! where the Worm dies not, and the Fire
shall never be quenched! And where will be nothing but howling, and yelling,
weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of Teeth! No Heart can conceive what Horror
and Anguish will seize the Souls of the Damned in Hell, and even fill them with
Rage, and everlasting Desparation. Oh! how will they roar, and tear themselves,
both from the Sense of their Loss and Pain?

Surely, then to escape Hell deserves our uttermost Care and Diligence. No
Labors should be thought too much, no Pains accounted too great, for the
obtaining Freedom from such Miseries.

O happy Souls most sure are they, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10.
whom the Lord shall save from the Wrath to come. Chap. 5.9.
Yea, these are the Persons that are happy indeed. And who are they? Why, all
that truly believe in Christ, and that overcome in the Spiritual Warfare.

Cheer up then, Believing Soul, whom the Lord will free from Hell and
Damnation, for thou art the Person that have cause to be cheerful. Heb. 2.14,
15.
Now it may be, thou art full of Fears, lest Hell should be thine eternal
Portion; Joh. 6.40.
but Death (within a while) will put all out of doubt, and free thee from all
thy Fears of Damnation.

John 10.27, -- 29. My Sheep hear my Voice, (says Christ) and I know them, and
they follow me: And I give unto them eternal Life, and they shall never perish;
neither shall any Man pluck them out of my Hand. My Father which gave them me,
is greater than all; and none can pluck them out of my Father's Hand. Well
then, every believing Soul is safe, 1 Pet. 1.5.
(though now it may be they have many Doubts) for the Lord will make good his
Promifes to them, and will set them far above the reach of Danger.

5. At the general Resurrection, when Christ comes to Judgment, the Bodies of
the Faithful shall be freed from Corruption, and be raised again most Glorious
Bodies. 1 Cor. 15.43, 53, 54.
For this Corruptible must put on Incorruption, and this Mortal must put on
Immortality. And Christ shall change our vile Body, Phil. 3.21.
that it may be fashioned like unto his Glorious Body. And then will it be
fitted for the nearest Union, with a pure, immortal, and glorified Soul. And
the Body and Soul thus reunited, will be capable of enjoying the highest Good.

Which is the next thing in order to be enquired into, under this Second
General Head.

Quest. 2. What then is that Good, or that Blessedness, which Believers shall
enjoy in Heaven? Why,

1. Their Graces shall there be perfected, and the Image of God restored in
them. They have here but some small Resemblances thereof; but in Heaven they will
be thoroughly renewed to it. Their Holiness, Knowledge, and Love to God, will
there be perfect and complete. Their Graces (alas) are now but weak; but then
they shall be strong. Here they enjoy but a small Measure; but there they shall
enjoy a Fullness. They now greatly long, and breath after Holiness, and after
the Knowledge and Love of God; and there they shall have their Desires fulfilled.

Cheer up then, Believing, Soul, who do now much bewail thy great
Imperfections; and art often (with Sighs and Groans) breathing forth such
longing Desires as these; O that I was more Holy, and more truly Gracious! that
I knew God better, and could love him more! Phil. 5.8, -- 14.
O that I could attain to a State of Perfection! How happy then should I be?
Why, the Time is drawing on a-pace, when thou shall be Holy, 1 Cor. 13.9, --
12. 1 John 3.2, 3.
as God is Holy; and Know, as thou art Known; and Love, as thou art Beloved of
Him.

O Blessed Condition indeed! With what raised Affections will the Faithful
serve God, when once they arrive to this State of Perfection? How will they
contemplate his incomparable Excellencies? And how joyfully then will they sing
forth his Praises? They Will never cease to love, and admire, and therefore never
cease to praise their God. Their Hearts will be there eternally enflamed, and
their Mouths eternally opened to glorify him. But with the highest Veneration
they will adore his Goodness, and sing aloud of his Mercy. Psalm. 59.16.
I will sing of thy Power, O Lord, (says David) yea, I will sing aloud of thy
Mercy. And again, (says he in another Place) I will sing of the Mercies of the
Lord for ever. Psalm. 89.1.
It Is certain that the glorified Saints in Heaven, will have such a Sense of
God's Mercy and Love, as shall fill their Mouths with Eternal Praises. Ezekiel.
16.6, 8. Joh. 3.16. chap. 6.44. Jer. 31.3.
O how will they admire and adore that Love, that pitied them in their lost
Estate, when no Eye pitied them! That Love that provided a Redeemer for them,
and in time brought them to close with him! That Love, that in such an
admirable manner conducted them through the World, and ordered all things here
below to their Spiritual and Eternal Advantage! Yea, and they will always be under
the Beams of his Love, which will be vigorously reflected in their joyful
Praises. It will there be the highest Felicity, to contemplate his most
excellent Perfections; their greatest Pleasure to love and please him; and
their highest Honor to glorify him. They Will there be employed in the noblest
Work, and excited by the highest Motives.

I will speak of the glorious Honor of thy Majesty, and of thy wondrous Works,
(says David, Psalm. 145.5.) And again, They shall abundantly utter the memory
of thy great Goodness, and shall sing of thy Righteousness, Ver. 7. Now if the
Saints while here on Earth, do thus love, and praise, and adore the Lord; how
much more when they come into Heaven? Their affectionate Praises will there be
renewed, without any let or intermission, because the Divine Favors are there
renewed every Moment. O Blessed and Glorious Employment indeed! Who would not
strive to be thus employed?

All thy Works shall praise thee, Psalm. 145.10, 11.
O Lord; and thy Saints shall bless thee. They shall speak of the Glory of thy
Kingdom; and talk of thy Power. Ver. 13.
Thy Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom; and thy Dominion endures throughout
all Generations. O help us to love and praise thee now, that we may be more
fitted for Eternal Praises!

2. The glorified Saints and Angels will be a Believer's everlasting
Companions. And what a blessed Society will this be, and how much will it add
to our Happiness? It Is comfortable to meet with the Saints of God now, though
it be but in a Mourning-Duty: but most sure it is, their Communion there will
be quite another thing. For then they will be perfectly and eternally freed from
all their Infirmities and Weaknesses. Heb. 12.23
Now alas! their many Infirmities do much hinder the pleasure of their Society:
but most delightful then will their Company be. Here their Affections are flat
and low, and they are often dull, and out of frame; but in Heaven it will be
otherwise. There we shall have the most raised Affections, and shall always be
in a serious Frame. And this will indear us to one another, and will make our
Communion most pleasing and delightful.

David esteemed the Saints of God the most excellent Persons upon Earth; Psalm.
16.3. and 119.63. Psalm. 15.4. 1 John 3.14.
and declared, that in the Society of them, he took the greatest Delight. And
this indeed is the true Character of a Heaven-born Citizen of Zion; He is one
that greatly loves (and delights in) the Company and Society of the Saints.

The Wicked desire not their Society, and shall therefore be eternally
separated from it; but the Faithful do greatly love and value it, and therefore
shall eternally enjoy it.

3. The Faithful shall then see the Face, and enjoy the Presence of their
Glorious Redeemer. Joh. 17.24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have
given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my Glory which thou have
given me: for thou lovedst me before the Foundation of the World. Phil. 1.23.
The Souls of the Faithful shall be with Christ, immediately after Death; and
both Body and Soul shall be with him, at the General Resurrection.

Joh. 14.2, 3. In my Father's House are many Mansions; if it were not so, I
would have told you: I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a
place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto my self, that where I
am, there ye may be also.

At Death, Luke 16.22.
Christ sends his Angels to conduct the Soul to Heaven. But at the general
Resurrection, he will come himself in Person, and will fetch us thither in
State; which will make our Access to Heaven the more glorious. He will then
come to lead his Flock to their everlasting Fold; to present his Bride unto
God, Ephesians. 5.27.
decked and apparelled with Glory. And O what a glorious Sight will it be, to
see Christ and his Followers with Crowns on their Heads! To see their
triumphant Entrance into those everlasting Mansions; and the Angels welcoming
them with Shouts of Joy! And then to see Christ on his Throne of Glory, and
they themselves placed round about him; beholding him there with open Face, in
his greatest Splendor and Dignity! What a Soul-enravishing Sight will this be?

Happy are thy Men, 2 Chronicles. 9.7.
and happy are these thy Servants, which stand continually before thee, and
hear thy Wisdom, (said the Queen of Sheba to King Solomon.) But O how much more
happy will they be, who shall stand before Christ, and see his Glory! Why thus
shall his Faithful Servants do. Joh. 12.26. If any Man serve me, let him follow
me; and where I am, there shall also my Servant be: if any Man serve me, him
will my Father honor. It will be an Honor, and Happiness indeed, to be ever
in the Presence of their glorious Redeemer, and there to be glorified with him.

What Comfort and Encouragement does this afford to the Faithful Soldiers of
Christ?

To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I
also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne. Rev. 3.21.

O how should this animate and encourage us against the Spiritual Enemies of
our Souls? If we now fight courageously under Christ's Banner, we shall one Day
be crowned with Glory and Honor. And this assuredly will make amends for all
that we can do, or suffer for him. Moses was well assured of it; and therefore
esteemed Reproaches for Christ, Heb. 11.26.
above all the Treasures in Egypt: for he had respect ('it is said) unto the
recompense of the Reward. He knew that to be for ever with Christ, to behold
his Glory, and to be glorified with him; to sit on his Throne, and to reign
with him, Romans 8.18.
would beyond comparison make amends, for all that he could do, or suffer for
his sake.

Christ is now the Desire of the Saints, and in Heaven he will be their
everlasting Delight. O how will the glorified Saints then rejoice, in the view
of the surprising Wonders of his Love! From Everlasting he loved them; and to
Everlasting they will love him again. There will no Love be lost betwixt Christ
and his Members, when once they get to Heaven: for their Love to him there,
will be a correspondent Affection, according to their utmost Capacity. All
those Affections that were scattered here below, will there be concentred in
him for ever. And most sure, he infinitely deserves their Love; having ransomed
them from the worst of Miseries, and purchased an everlasting Inheritance for
them; and all this with the dearest Price of his own most Precious Blood.

O love the Lord, all ye his Saints, who has loved you at so dear a rate; and
who will give you yet greater Discoveries of his Love, when he takes you into
his glorious Presence.

4. The Faithful shall then enjoy the clearest Sense of God's Love unto them;
and shall also have their Souls enflamed with the most ardent Love to him. And
O what Soul-ravishing Comforts will this afford unto them!

There is nothing which does now more trouble the Saints, than the great
coldness of their Love to God, and the want of a Sense of God's Love to them.

Psalm. 30.5, 7. -- In his Favor is Life: weeping may endure for a Night, but
Joy comes in the Morning. Lord, by thy Favor thou have made my Mountain to
stand strong: but thou did hide thy Face, and I was troubled. If God hides
his Face but never so little, and withholds but the Sense of his Love from the
Saints; how are their Souls overwhelmed with Trouble? But a Sense of his
Favor, Psalm. 4.6, 7,
and the Light of his Countenance, does soon fill the Soul with enravishing
Comforts; and make all Troubles vanish, and quite disappear. What unspeakable
Joys and Comforts then will the Souls of the Saints be filled with when they
come to enjoy the most feeling Sense of God's dearest Love unto them?

5. They shall then enjoy God fully, and shall see him Face to Face; and the
Beatifical Vision will be unto them, 1. A Transforming 2. A Soul-satisfying
Vision, Ps. 17.15.

1. It will be unto the Saints a Transforming Vision. The sight which we have
of the Lord in the Gospel, transformeth us in some measure, 2 Cor. 3.18. For we
all with open Face, beholding as in a Glass the Glory of the Lord, are changed
into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. If
by looking upon the Lord through the Light of the Spirit, we are made like him
in some measure; then surely in Glory, when we see him Face to Face, we shall
be more like him. 1 John 3.2. We know, that when he shall appear, we shall be
like him; for we shall see him as he is. The Apostle gives this as a Reason,
why the Saints in Glory shall be like the Lord; because they shall see him as
he is. To see the Lord as he is, will be a transforming Sight.

For look as in a Glass held up against the Sun, has the Image and Brightness
of the Sun reflected upon it: So the more clearly we behold the Lord of Glory,
the more of his Image shall we bear upon us. And O what a blessed thing will it
be, for us poor Creatures to be made like unto the Lord!

Now this Likeness and Conformity makes way for Love; and Love makes way for
Delight; and Delight makes way for Fruition: For the more we love God, the more
shall we delight in him; and the more we delight in God, the more will God
delight in us; and will give us the actual Fruition of himself, for our highest
Felicity and Blessedness.

2. Therefore the Beatifical Vision will be unto the Saints (as a transforming,
so also) a Soul-satisfying Vision: For herein the Soul will fully enjoy God.
And then will God be unto every Saint an overflowing Fountain of all Felicity.
Here a Believer's Joy and Comfort admits of increase, and decrease: but there
the Soul will be so filled with Joy, that it can receive no more.

Psalm. 16.11. In thy Presence is fullness of Joy, and at thy right Hand there
are Pleasures for evermore.

The Fruition of God's immediate Presence is not like the Joys of the World,
which can neither fill nor satisfy a Man: But in our seeing and enjoying him,
we shall have full content, and complete Felicity. The fullness of Joy is
suspended till then, that we may desire (and long for) that Day; and it will be
a joyful Day indeed unto every Believing Soul.

Ye now have Sorrow, (says Christ) but your Heart shall rejoice, and your Joy
no Man takes from you. John 16.21.

Believers (while under deep Troubles here) do rejoice in hopes of the Glory of
God: Romans 5.2.
Yea, their Hearts are sometimes so filled with Joy, as that they can scarcely
contain themselves. 1 Pet. 1.8. Whom having not seen, ye love: in whom though
now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with Joy unspeakable, and full of
Glory. Now if the hopes of this blessed and glorious Estate, breeds such Joy,
what will Fruition do? If a Glimpse or Taste be so sweet, what will the full
Enjoyment be?

Psalm. 17.15. I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy Likeness. This is that
which will yield the fullest Satisfaction to the Soul; to see God, and to be
like him, and to enjoy him to all Eternity. Oh the greatness, the exceeding
greatness of the Saints Blessedness in Heaven! There is no Tongue can express
it, 1 Cor 2.9.
no Heart can conceive it. And in this Blessedness they shall abide for ever.

Mat. 25.46. These shall go away into everlasting Punishment: but the Righteous
into Life Eternal.

As the Punishment of the Wicked, so the Happiness of the Saints, will endure
for ever and ever. And the Thoughts of this, will greatly increase the Saints
Joy, and the Damneds Misery.

The Day of Doom, page 76.
Eternity! Eternity!
Thou make hard Hearts to bleed;
The Thoughts of thee in Misery,
Will make Men wail indeed!
For the Damned thus to think with themselves, What, must I never have Ease
again? Must I never obtain the least Freedom from these racking
(Soul-tormenting) Pains? No, never! never! O most grievous, and insupportable
Miseries! An Eternal Toothache, an Eternal Headache, an Eternal pain of the
Stone or Gout, or an Eternal Burning-Feaver, would be very sad and grievous.
But what (alas!) are all these to the Eternal Torments of Hell?

When any of us are under some racking Pains of Body, then the Hopes of a
Freedom from such Pains, gives some Ease and Refreshment.

But supposing a Person should have ground to fear, that he must endure some
such racking Pains (without the least Ease or Intermission) for an hundred
Years together, the Thoughts of this would even double his Misery. How then
will the Thoughts of a miserable Eternity, torment and tear the Hearts of the
Damned? This will make them roar out in the Bitterness of their Spirits, O
miserable! miserable! miserable! Yea, it will exceedingly heighten their
Miseries to think, that when thousands, and ten thousand times ten thousands of
Years are at an end, their Torments and Miseries will not be ended.

But now on the contrary: This is it, which will increase and complete the
Happiness of the Saints in Heaven; to be fully assured that it shall never have
an end: and without this they could never be happy.

As the forecited Poet has well expressed it.

Eternity! Eternity! Page 74.

Oh, were it not for thee,
The Saints in Bliss and Happiness
Could never happy be!
If there were the least ground to fear, that their Happiness would have an
end; the Thoughts of this, would put a damp upon their Comforts, and make them
even miserable in the midst of their Enjoyments. But so long as the Lord Jefus
Christ lives, so long shall their Happiness last; and that shall be for ever
and ever.

John 14.19. Because I live, ye shall live also. He tasted Death for them, and
swallowed it up in Victory: and thereby obtained Eternal Redemption for them,
Heb. 9.12. The Felicity above is durable; it is an abiding Happiness. The Lord
of Life will uphold the Saints in that blessed State for ever. I am he that
lives, and was dead; and behold I am alive for evermore, Rev. 1.18. And
because I live, Joh. 14.19
ye shall live also. Comfortable Words indeed!

The Happiness of the Saints would be incomplete, if it were not everlasting:
Yea, the least fear of losing it, would disturb their peaceful Fruition. For as
hope in Misery allays Sorrow, so fear in Happiness lessens Joy.

The Apprehension of losing such an Happiness, would cause Torment: but the
full assurance of its Perpetuity, will fill them with unexpressible Joy.

That which will terrify the Damned in Hell, will afford Joy and Comfort to the
Saints in Bliss; and that is the Thoughts of Eternity. The Thoughts of this
will transport the Saints, and will fill them with Songs of Joy and Triumph. O
who would not strive, and labor, and pray, for a blessed and happy Eternity?

which is to show you upon what account, this Happiness is conferred on
Believers. And

1. Then, it is not conferred upon them, on the account of any Worthiness of
theirs; nor do they merit, or deserve such an Happiness either in whole or in
part. No, though we should serve God a thousand Years, we could not metit to be
one Day in Heaven. The Happiness is too great to be merited by Man, though the
Works of the Saints were more perfect: For Finite Things carry no proportion to
an Infinite and Eternal Happiness. And besides, alas, the Works of the best are
so many ways imperfect, that they may rather expect Punishment for them, than
any (the least) Reward. Believers do fight the good Fight of Faith, but they do
not merit Heaven thereby; nor is an Immortal Crown of Glory conferred upon them
on that account. It is true, God will reward their Faithfulness; but their
Faithfulness does not deserve that Reward. The Heavenly Happiness most sure is
such, as is not, nor can it be earned by the Saints. But,

2. It is partly the free Gift of God, and partly the Purchase of Christ. As to
any thing therefore that we have done, or can do, it is altogether free.

1. It is freely given us of God, and by him was prepared for us. 'Twas his own
Love and most Free Grace, that inwardly moved him to do this for us. Luke
12.32. Fear not, little Flock; for it is your Father's good Pleasure to give you
the Kingdom. So 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have
entered into the Heart of Man, the Things which God has prepared for them that
love him. Heb. 11.16 Mat. 20.23
And again, Mat. 25.34. Come, ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you from the Foundation of the World. This was the Preparation of
God's Decree. He loved his People from the Foundation of the World, so as that
he decreed to give his only Son for them; Ephesians. 1.3, -- 11. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19, 20.
Gal. 4.4, 7
that by his precious Blood, and meritorious Death, he might purchase for them
an Everlasting Inheritance. And in the Fullness of Time (as he had decreed) he
sent his Beloved Son into the World; Joh. 3.16.
and most freely bound himself by his Covenant and Promise, to confer this
Inheritance upon all true Believers.

2. Christ by his precious Blood, has purchased this Eternal Inheritance for
us. 1 Pet. 1.19
Heb. 9.12, 15. By his own Blood, he entered once into the Holy Place, having
obtained Eternal Redemption for us. And for this cause he is the Mediator of
the New Testament, that by means of Death, for the Redemption of the
Transgressions that were under the First Testament, they which are called,
might receive the Promise of Eternal Inheritance. Christ having purchased it by
his Death, and God the Father having graciously promised it; therefore all they
that are effectually called, shall have it conferred upon them. Heb. 6.20.
For Christ is ascended up into Heaven, to take Possession of it in our Name. I
go (says he) to prepare a Place for you, Heb 10.14 Chap. 9.24 and 7.25.
John 14.2. By his Death he purchased for us a Right and Title to Heaven; and
by his Intercession he prosecuteth and applies that Right. The merit of his
Sacrifice pleads for Believers, that the Blessedness of Heaven may be conferred
upon them.

Now as Christ has purchased Heaven for the Saints, and the Father will freely
bestow it upon them; so he freely gives them his Holy Spirit, to fit and
prepare them for the Enjoyment of it. And without this all the rest would be of
none effect. For certainly 'twould not avail us any thing, to have Heaven
prepared for us, unless we be also prepared for Heaven. An unrenewed, unholy
Soul, would find little satisfaction in that Holy Place, supposing such might
be admitted into it: But there is no unclean Thing shall enter there. Rev.
21.27.


The Divine Life is no way suitable to the Nature of an Unregenerate Person.
Alas! such cannot love God here, nor do him any acceptable Service; but do
loath that which he most loves, and love that which he abhors. They are
altogether incapable of that imperfect Communion with him, which Regerate
Persons do here partake of. How then can they live in that perfect Love of him,
Delight in him, and Communion with him, 2 Cor. 6.14
which is the Blessedness of Heaven?

It is the Holy Spirit must make us meet to be Partakers of the Heavenly
Inheritance. Col. 1.12.
Except a Man be born from above, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
Joh. 3.3, 5.

It is God (by his Spirit) that draws Sinners unto Christ, Joh. 6.44.
and powerfully works true Faith in their Souls; giving them thereby a Title
to Heaven: Joh. 1.12, 13.
and then by renewing and sanctifying their Natures, does fit and prepare them
for the enjoyment of it. It is certainly therefore of God's Free Grace, that
any of us are prepared for Heaven; as well as that Heaven is prepared for us.
Ephesians. 2.8. By Grace ye are saved, through Faith, and that not of your selves;
it is the Gift of God. Faith (as well as Salvation) is God's Free Gift. Romans
9.23.
Believers are said to be Vessels of Mercy, which God has aforehand prepared
unto Glory. And again, He that has wrought us for the self-same Thing is God;
who also has given to us the earnest of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 5.5. It is not
therefore on the account of any thing that the Saints have done, or can do,
that Heaven is prepared for them, or that they are prepared for Heaven; but all
is of Free Grace. Tit. 3.5, 6, 7. Not by Works of Righteousness which we have
done, but according to his Mercy he saved us, by the washing of Regeneration,
and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus
Christ our Savior. That being justified by his Grace, we should be made Heirs,
according to the hope of Eternal Life.

Objection.

But does not God command us to work out our own Salvation; and promise to
reward us according to our Works? Phil. 2.12. Mat. 16.27. Rev. 22.12. chap.
20.12.

Answer.

Yes, he does so: But yet these Scriptures do no ways imply, that the best of
our Works are meritorious.

And as to the First, where we are commanded to work out our own Salvation; it
presently follows, that it is God which works in us, both to will and to do of
his good Pleasure, Phil. 2.13.

We must indeed be diligent, and serious in the Work and Service of the Lord;
and must yield sincere and constant Obedience to all his Holy Commands;
striving to put forth that Power to the utmost, that he has already given us;
and must wait upon him in the use of means, that we may obtain more.

And without thus doing, we cannot be saved; Heb. 5.9.
neither for thus doing shall any be saved. There is a great difference,
between our being rewarded [according] to our Works, and our being rewarded
[for] our good Works. It Is true, there are none can obtain Heaven without
Regeneration and Holiness: Joh. 3.3. Heb. 12.14.
And it is also as true, that none shall obtain it upon the account of their
Holiness. Good Works are therefore necessary to Salvation, but they are not
meritorious. No, if we could do all those Things which are commanded us, we
must say, Luke 17.10.
we are unprofitable Servants.

1. Because we shall have done no more, than what was our Duty to do, Luke
17.10. We are many ways bound to obey God's Commands, though the Heavenly
Happiness had never been promised. God has an absolute Right to all that we
are, or have, or can do.

First, By Creation, Prove. 16.4.
and as he is the Supreme Sovereign of the World.

Secondly, By Preservation, Lev. 22.31 Act. 17.24, 28.
or as he is our Maintainer, and Upholder; on whose Goodness and Bounty we
daily live.

Thirdly, By Redemption, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. 2 Cor. 5.15.
he having laid down a Price of inestimable value for us.

Now on all these accounts, the best that we can do is absolutely due unto God.
And a Servant that has done no more than his Duty, yea, that comes very far
short of his Duty, can plead nothing of Merit.

2. Because the best of our Works can add nothing at all unto God. Psalm. 16.2.
Thou art my Lord (says David) my Goodness extends not to thee. So Job 22.2.
Can a Man be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be profitable unto
himself? If thou be Righteous, what give thou him? or what receives he of
thine Hands? Chap. 35.7, 8. The more we abound in Works of Righteousness, the
better it will be for our selves: But no Profit or Advantage will accrue unto
God, by any thing that we can do. And therefore we can merit nothing at his
Hands.

3. Because It is God that works in us, Ephesians. 2.10. Luke 19.16, 18.
both to will and to do of his good Pleasure. Phil. 2.13. By the Grace of God
we are what we are, as to any Good that is in us: and by his Grace it is that
we do what we do, 2 Cor. 3.5.
as to any Good that is done by us. 1 Cor. 15.10. Heb. 13.20, 21.
I can do all Things (says the Apostle) but how? why, through Christ which
strengthens me, Phil. 4.13. Yea, and without me (says Christ) ye can do
nothing, John 15.5. i. e. Nothing in a way of Fruitfulness: Yea, further,
nothing that is truly good and acceptable in the Sight of God.

Now can we do nothing that is truly Good, but what would have been our Duty to
do, though no Reward had been promised? Can we do nothing that is any ways
profitable or advantageous to God? Yea, Can we do nothing that he will accept
of, but what we do by the help of his Grace? Then surely when we shall have
done our best, we may say, we are unprofitable Servants. Nay, I may further
add, that the best Works of the Saints are so full of Imperfections, that they
rather need a Pardon, than deserve the least Reward.

It is not therefore upon the account of any good Works which the Saints have
done, that the Heavenly Glory is conferred upon them; Rom 6.23. Heb. 9.12, 15.
but it is freely given unto them of God, Christ having by his Death obtained
it for them.

We must therefore take heed (as we love our own Souls) of thinking to merit
Heaven by our Works. Romans 9.30, -- 33. Chap. 10. 1, 2, 3.
It Is a Popish Principle; yea, and that indeed which all Men naturally are
inclined to. And for certain it is a most dangerous Principle, and has been the
undoing of many.

A Saving Faith will produce good Works, Jam. 2.26.
as the genuine Effects and Fruits of it. Such Persons therefore as are
destitute thereof, 1 John 3.3.
can have no ground to hope for Salvation. We must press after Holiness with
all our Might, 2 Cor. 7.1.
and endeavor to be Fruitful in every good Work: but yet we must beware, that
we do not think of meriting Heaven thereby.

We may indeed assure our selves, Rev. 22.12 1 Cor. 15.58.
and that upon good Grounds; that in doing well, we shall fare well: for so
has God promised for our Encouragement. Isa. 3.10, 11. Say ye to the
Righteous, that it shall be well with him: for they shall eat the Fruit of
their doing. But woe unto the Wicked, it shall be ill with him: for the Reward
of his Hands shall be given him. It Is not said of the Righteous, that they
shall have what they have earned; but they shall eat the Fruit of their doings;
i. e. They have done well, and they shall fare well. But now as to the Wicked,
they shall have their due desert; the Reward of his Hands shall be given him.
Death is the just Wages of Sin: Romans 6.23.
but Eternal Life is God's Free Gift, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

And now I come to apply the Doctrine, and what has been spoken from it.

Use I.
And the First Use may be for our Information, in these two or three
Particulars.

As, 1. We may see how vastly different the State of Believers and Unbelievers
will be, when they come to die. God deals with them now in a different manner,
but then the Difference will be most apparent. See Isa. 65.13, 14. Behold,
(says the Lord) my Servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry: behold, my
Servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty: behold, my Servants shall
rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed: Behold, my Servants shall sing for Joy of
Heart, but ye shall cry for Sorrow of Heart, and shall howl for Vexation of
Spirit. Now if God deals thus differently with the Righteous and the Wicked,
even here in this World, (as he oftentimes does) how much more in the World to
come? It Is true, the Wicked are often exempted from those Sufferings which the
Righteous do meet with in the World; and hereupon (for want of a right Sense of
Things) do conclude, that themselves are the happier Persons. But Death will
make them of another Mind; and show them the Folly of their Self-flattering
Conceits: For then shall Believers immediately go to God, and Unbelievers shall
go to the Devil; the one pass into Eternal Glory, and the other into Misery and
everlasting Punishment.

They have now (while they are here) very different Natures, and hereafter they
shall have as different Rewards. The Righteous Man has his worst things here,
Luke 16.25.
and his best he shall have hereafter. Isa. 3.10, 11.
And the Wicked (on the contrary) has his best Things here, and his worst he
shall have hereafter. The Conclusion will assuredly be dreadful to these, but
exceeding comfortable to the Righteous; for everlasting Misery will be the
Portion of the one, and everlasting Happiness the Portion of the other.
Eternity is affixed to both: Mat. 25.46. These shall go away into everlasting
Punishment: but the Righteous into Life Eternal. The Happiness of the Saints
will endure for ever, and so will the Miseries of the Damned; yea, when
thousands and thousands of Years are at an end, they will both be as fresh as
at the very first Moment.

O how great is that Happiness which the Damned will lose? and how great are
those Miseries which the Saints will escape? How great are the Torments which
the Damned shall endure? and how great are the Joys of which the Saints shall
partake?

Perhaps now, Sirs, you see little difference between the State to Believers
and of Unbelievers, but the Time will certainly (yea and shortly) come, when
you shall see Things in another manner.

Now it may be, ye account the proud happy, and think there is little profit in
serving the Lord: but then shall ye discern between the Righteous and the
Wicked, between him that serves God, and him that serves him not. Mal. 3.14,
-- 18.

2. From what has been said, we may see God's wonderful Love to Believers, in
preparing for them such a glorious Inheritance, and so freely conferring it on
them.

What a Miracle of Mercy and Loving Kindness is this, 1 John 3.1, 2.
(and even that which might fill us with Admiration) that the infinitely
Blessed and Glorious God should take notice of such Wretches as we? O wonderful
Love indeed! that such Rebels and Traitors (as we have been) should have
admittance into his glorious Presence, and be made Companions of the Holy
Angels! That such Clods of Earth, such despicable Worms, should be lifted up to
the highest Heaven; Mat. 13.43
that we might shine as Stars there, yea, as the Sun in the Kingdom of our
Father! And that this blessed State should be so freely provided, and we taken
into it on such gracious Terms. Admirable Love indeed! The Terms are Faith, and
not Merit, which the Gracious God does stand upon. That Is the Tenor of the New
Covenant, Believe, and live, not do, and live. Good Works are an Evidence of
the Truth of our Faith, and of our Interest in that Blessedness; but they do
not any way merit or deserve it, either in whole or in part. No, but it is
freely given to those that believe. John 3.36. He that believes on the Son of
God, has everlasting Life. He has it as sure as if he was in actual
Possession of it. The Gracious God will exclude none but such as exclude
themselves by their Unbelief. Yea, so merciful is he unto poor lost Sinners,
that he sends his Ambassadors up and down the World, to offer Salvation unto
them, 2 Cor. 5.20
and to pray and beseech them in the Name of Christ to accept thereof, on the
most equitable Terms. Nothing does the Lord require but this, that Sinners lay
down their Rebellious Arms, and be reconciled unto him; that they accept of
Christ for their Lord and Sovereign, and be true to his Cause and Interest for
the future. O wonderful condescending Love! How should we admire it! That the
infinite Majesty of Heaven and Earth, should beseech vile Rebels to be
reconciled to him! Job 4.9. Ps. 18.13, -- 15. Mat. 10.28
when as he is able to dash them in pieces, and even throw them into Hell with
one Blast of his Mouth! Should we cry Day and Night unto God to be reconciled
unto us, there would be nothing of wonder in it; but that the offended God
should beseech Offenders to lay by their Enmity, and be at Peace with him; sure
this is matter of Wonder and Astonishment! And yet how (alas) is his great Love
abused, and his rich Offers slighted and disregarded by the most? As if the
offered Salvation was merely fictitious, or the Heavenly Happiness were not
worth the accepting? O base Ingratitude and astonishing Madness, to slight and
neglect so great Salvation!

3. From what has been said, we may see the great Folly of Men in refusing
such an Happiness. Prove. 1.22, -- 33.
What is it but Happiness that all Men seek after? And for this they run, they
labor and toil; and yet the most (alas, like the Dog in the Fable) while they
catch at the Shadow, do lose the Substance. How eager are Men in pursuit of
that which they imagine will make them happy? And what Cost and Pains will the
most be at, for the obtaining a little of the World's Felicity? Whenas all
worldly Pleasures, Riches and Honors, cannot possibly satisfy the Mind of Man:
As one has in Meter well expressed it.

All Earthly Things Man's cravings answer not,
Whose little Heart would all the World contain,
(If all the World should fall to one Man's Lot)
And notwithstanding empty still remain.
And supposing these Things could yield some Satisfaction, Job 14.1, 2 Psalm.
49.10, -- 13. Luke 12.16, -- 21. Prove. 8.18, -- 21.
yet how soon must we take our eternal leave of them? Yet a little while, and
all these Things will be unto us as if they had never been. But the Happiness
above is substantial, and it is an abiding Happiness. What Folly and Madness is
it then to prefer Toys and Trifles before such an Happiness? What powerful
Charm is it that obstructs our true judging of Things? What Spirit of Error
has possessed us? Can there possibly be a desire in Man of enjoying an
Happiness beyond what is Eternal, yea, and Soul-satisfying and Infinite? O the
wonderful Stupidity and Sottishness of Men, so careless of Everlasting
Felicity! Eternal Things (alas) are quite out of sight, 1 Cor. 2.12, 14.
and therefore are they slighted by the unbelieving World. And they look upon
those who live by Faith, as the veriest Fools imaginable; when they see them
pressing on toward the Mark, Phil. 3.14.
for the Prize that is set before them, and exposing themselves unto Sufferings
for Christ, Heb. 10.32, -- 34. chap. 11. 24, -- 26.
and in hopes of the promised Glory.

But we must become Fools in the World's esteem, 1 Cor. 3.18.
if we will become wise to Salvation. And within a while shall the Wicked
perceive whether Believers or themselves were the greater Fools.

As the Author of that Apocryphal Book which is called the Wisdom of Solomon,
Wisd. chapter 5
has well expressed it, saying,

Then shall the Righteous Man stand in great boldness, before the Face of such
as have afflicted him, and made no account of his Labors. When they see it,
they shall be troubled with terrible Fear, and shall be amazed at the
strangeness of his Salvation, so far beyond all that they looked for. And they
repenting and groaning for anguish of Spirit, shall say within themselves, This
was he whom we had sometimes in Derision, and a Proverb of Reproach. WE FOOLS
accounted his Life Madness, and his End to be without Honor. But how is he
numbered among the Children of God, and his Lot is among the Saints? Therefore
have we erred from the way of Truth; and the Light of Righteousness has not
shined unto us, and the Sun of Righteousness rose not upon us. Jer. 9.5.
We wearied our selves in the way of Wickedness and Destruction; but as for the
way of the Lord, we have not known it. What has Pride profited us? 1 John 2.17
Or what good has Riches with our vaunting brought us? All those Things are
passed away like a Shadow, and as a Post that hasted by.

-- But the Righteous live for evermore, their Reward also is with the Lord:
Jam. 1.12.
-- Therefore shall they receive a Glorious Kingdom, and a beautiful Crown from
the Lord's Hand.

Use II.
For Excitation. A Second Use may be for the stirring us up to use our utmost
Care and Diligence, for the getting and exercising a lively Faith, in order to
our obtaining the Heavenly Blessedness. And,

1. Let me turn my Discourse unto those that are yet in a State of Impenitency.
Sure what has been spoken, should excite all such to lay hold on the Hope that
is set before them; and to strive and labor with all their Might, to make sure
of an Interest in Jesus Christ: for without this we must never hope to partake
of Eternal Blessedness. He that believes not, shall not see Life; but the
Wrath of God abides on him, Joh. 3.36. O what should we strive and labor for,
if not for Eternal Happiness? And what should we strive to escape, Mat. 3.7.
and flee from, if not from the Wrath to come? Why, Faith and Repentance are
absolutely necessary, both for obtaining the one and escaping the other. He
that believes not, Mar. 16.16 Luke 13.3, -- 5.
shall be damned (says Christ.) And except ye repent, ye shall all perish.
Well, what is it then that you are now resolved for? And what are the chief
Desires of your Souls? Are you for Everlasting Glory, or for the Pleasures of
Sin for a Season?

Are you for accepting of Christ for your Sovereign; Joh. 8.34. 2 Timothy 2.26. 2
Pet. 2.19
or for continuing still to be the Servants of Sin? Are you for sighting the
good Fight of Faith; or for being the captivated Slaves of the Devil? What is
it you resolve upon? for one of these must be your Choice. Are your Desires
after God and Heaven? Or can that be your Blessedness which you do not desire?
Deceive not your selves (I beseech you) with vain Conceits, but consider these
Things, and show your selves Men. Do you think that God will ever receive any
such into his blessed and glorious Presence as are not at all desirous of it,
or unto whom it shall be a Burden? No, no, God sets not so small a value upon
it, as to force it upon those that desire it not.

Mistake not then the Notion of Heaven, Psa. 17.15. See Mr. How Is Blessedness
of the Righteous. Psalm. 63.1, -- 8. Psalm. 73.24, -- 28.
or the Nature of a Soulsatisfying Blessedness. Do not you render it unto your
selves a Composition of Sensual Enjoyments; but look upon it, as chiefly
consisting in perfect Holiness and Communion with God. And then you cannot
judge of your own Right to it, by a surer Rule than this, that the Blessedness
of Heaven shall be certainly theirs, whose Hearts are bent and directed toward
it. Mat. 5.6, 8. Heb. 12.14. Phil. 3.8, -- 14. Repent therefore, and believe
the Gospel, and sleep not in the Bonds of Iniquity. Isa. 55.1, 2. Joh. 3.16.
Ez. 33.11.
You are earnestly called and invited to come and accept of Eternal Happiness;
and the Lord is pleased to expostulate with you, saying, Sinners, Why will ye
die?

Consider how dreadful your Condition will be, if Death should find you in your
Unbelief. Joh. 3.19.
It had been better for you never to have heard of a Savior, than to live and
die without an Interest in him. O! what will you have to say for your selves,
when Christ as your Judge shall plead the Case with you? And say, Sinners,
Prove. 1.24, -- 31.
I sentence you to Hell and Damnation; for this is the fruit of your own
foolish Choice: No Invitations, Persuasions or Warnings could keep you from
running into it. I offered unto you Eternal Happiness, but you did not regard
either Me, or my Offers. Job 21.14, 15.
You could love the most vain and foolish Trifles, but you loved not Me, nor
cared for my Presence. Psalm. 10.4.
You had Thoughts enough and to spare for vain Things, but how seldom did you
think of Me, because your Hearts were not with Me. I banish you therefore that
Presence which you never loved; I deny you that Vision which you did always
shun, Joh. 3.19, 20.
and the Impressions of my Likeness which you did ever hate. I eternally
abandon you to the grossest Darkness, seeing Darkness was so grateful to you.
Depart from Me, Luke 13.27, 28.
and from the Happiness you slighted, into endless and easeless Miseries and
Torments.

O! what will impenitent Sinners have to say when the Righteous Judge shall
plead the Case with them, and shall pass the irrevocable Sentence upon them?
All Mouths (assuredly) will then be stopped, and their Conscience will tell
them that the Sentence is just. Think of this therefore, Heb. 3.15, 18.
and consider it seriously, while a Door of Hope is yet open unto you. And if
the Heavenly Happiness will not invite you, 2 Cor. 5.11.
let the Terrors of Hell affright you from your Sins. For it is certain, if you
slight the Glory that is offered, you will bring upon your selves Everlasting
Confusion.

Flee therefore unto Christ as your only Refuge, Josh. 20. with Heb. 6.18.
that he may deliver you from avenging Justice, and from the wrathful
Displeasure of a provoked God. Psalm. 2.12.

And O! let him not still have fresh cause to complain, Joh. 5.40.
Ye will not come to me, that ye might have Life.

2. It should also excite Believers to greater Diligence in the Service of God.
2 Pet. 1.5, -- 11.
For so an entrance shall be ministered unto us, into the everlasting Kingdom of
our Lord Jesus Christ. If the Hopes and Fore thoughts of the Happiness above,
will not excite and quicken us to our Duty, what will?

Let us then be convinced that there is such an Happiness; and when we believe,
let us look for it, and long for it, and live in the hopeful expectation of it.

Looking for that Blessed Hope, and the Glorious Appearing of the Great God, 1
Pet. 1.13
Tit. 2.13, 14. Now this Hope should put us upon serious Diligence, and earnest
Pursuit after such a Blessedness. Phil. 3.20.
Let us therefore endeavor to live Heavenly Lives, as we hope to partake of
the Heavenly Blessedness. There is nothing should influence our Hearts below,
but that which does suit Christ's Heart above. 1 John 3.2.
All must be like the Lord, that are to live with him. And if we do hope to be
like him hereafter, then sure we should strive to resemble him here. Ver. 3.
Yea, And every Man (says the Apostle) that has this Hope in him, purifieth
himself, even as he is pure, i. e. as Christ is pure. Yea, certain it is, if we
do not desire further degrees of Holiness, we cannot be said to desire Heaven;
for Heaven is the persection of Holiness. A lively Hope therefore of our
Conformity to Christ, in Glory and Blessedness hereafter, will assuredly put us
upon a vigorous pursuit of Conformity to him in Holiness here. O! were but our
Hopes more strong and lively, they would give us a Taste of the Blessedness
above; and this Taste would set us upon earnest longing after the Enjoyment of
it. Romans 5.2. Chap. 8.19, 23.


2 Cor. 5.2. For in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with
our House which is from Heaven.

So ver. 8. We are willing rather to be absent from the Body, and to be present
with the Lord.

Wherefore we labor, that whether present or absent, we may be accepted of
him, ver. 9.

Let us labor then, Heb. 11.1.
by a lively Faith, to realize the Happiness of Heaven to our Souls; as also to
get a well-grounded Hope of our Interest in this Happiness: That so our most
frequent and serious Thoughts, and delightful Meditations may be of it. For
it is impossible a Man can hope for any Thing, but he will be thinking of it.
And the more we think of the Happiness Above, the more we shall long for it.
And where there are longing Desires and Breathings after the Enjoyment of such
an Happiness, Heb. 4.1.
there will also be a heedful and cautelous Fear, lest we should miscarry, or
fall short of it; and this accompanied with a diligent Care and most earnest
Endeavor to make sure. 1 Cor. 9. 24, -- 27.


Well then, Phil. 3. 10, -- 14. Ver. 17, 20 Mat. 11.12 Romans 8.25. Heb. 10.32,
-- 36.
Let us make it appear, that our Faith is true, and our Hopes lively, by a more
Holy Activity, Vigor, and Diligence in the Ways and Service of God. 1 Timothy
6.12. And let us wait with Patience for the expected Happiness, against all
Oppositions and Discouragements; For in due season we shall reap, if we faint
not. Gal. 6.9.

I shall conclude this Use, with the Apostle's Exhortation, 1 Cor. 15.58.
Therefore, my Beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in
the Work of the Lord, forasmuch as you know that your Labor is not in vain in
the Lord. Now,

Use III.
For Consolation. The Last Use may be for Consolation to Believers, against
Wants, Troubles, and Death it self. And,

1. It administers Comfort to Believers against all their Wants and
Necessities. It may be now you are very poor, Prove. 8.18, 21.1 Pet. 1.4.
but there is durable Riches provided for you; even a full, incorruptible and
glorious Inheritance. Let the Fore-Thoughts of this support and comfort you
under all your Straits and Necessities, Luke 16.25.
for your best Days are yet to come. Consider, It is but a very little while
that we shall have need of these outward Enjoyments: And while we do need them,
Psalm. 34.9, 10. Psalm. 8.11.
we have good ground to hope for such a measure thereof as is convenient for us.

Whosoever he be that does seek God's Kingdom and Righteousness above all other
Things, Mat. 6.31, -- 33.
and that waits upon God in a diligent use of those Means that he has
appointed, shall certainly enjoy so much of these Things as the All-wise God
sees requisite for him. Romans 8.32.
And what can we desire more?

How soon (alas!) should we ruin our selves, Deuteronomy. 32.15.
if God should leave us to be our own Carvers; or should give us whatsoever we
desire in the World? Psalm. 37.3, -- 9. Ver. 16. Romans 8.28.
But it is well for us that we are under the care of so Wise and Gracious a
Father, who will give us nothing but what is really good for us; nor deny us any
thing here in the World, but that which he sees would be hurtful to us.

We are often desirous of several Things which are good in themselves, and good
for some Persons, and which we apprehend may be good for us also; and yet God
does (in Mercy) deny us such Things as knowing them not for our good. And shall
we not trust his infinite Wisdom before our own shallow and dark
Understandings? Pro. 3.5, 6.
Yes surely.

We need not therefore to trouble our selves with distracting Thoughts, and
with carking Cares, Phil. 4.6.
who have such a wise Father to care for us here, 1 Pet. 5.7.
and provides so well for us hereafter. Psalm. 17.14, 15.1 Pet. 1.3, -- 5.
We have not yet received our Portion, but it is laid up, and in safe keeping
for us; and within a while we shall come to enjoy it. Fear not little Flock
(says Christ) it is your Father's good Pleasure to give you the Kingdom. Luke
12.32.

Sure you that are adopted the Children of God, Joh. 1.12, 13. Romans 8.17. Gal.
4.4,-7
and have thereby a Right to the Heavenly Inheritance, may well be content with
your Condition in this World; you being so much better provided for in the
World to come. What if your Earthly Estate be sequestered, or any ways taken
from you, Joh. 14.2.
so long as you have a better Estate in Heaven that none can deprive you of,
even Eternal Mansions of Bliss and Glory?

Let the Foresight (by Faith) of this Glorious Estate wean you from all
inordinate Affections to Humane and Earthly Things. 1 John 2.15, 16, 17.
What are all the Pleasures, and Riches, and Honors in the World, in
comparison of those that are Spiritual and Heavenly? These will not satisfy but
increase our Desires, but those will afford us the fullest Satisfaction. These
are Temporal, and but for a Moment; but those are Eternal, and shall last us
for ever. The greatest Things that are here upon the Earth, will appear to be
(what they are indeed) but very small and trivial Things, to those that can
look beyond them with an Eye of Faith, and take a view of the Heavenly
Blessedness.

What is Earthly Majesty, and all Earthly Glories (if put together) to the
beholding the Lord Jesus Christ in all his Majesty and Glory? Joh. 17.24
What are costly Garments, and the most rich Attire, to those Robes of
Righteousness, and Garments of Salvation, Isa. 61.10. Rev. 19.7, 8.
wherewith the Saints shall be clothed in the great Day of the Marriage of the
Lamb? What are the most stately Palaces here on Earth, compared with Heaven the
Palace of God, Joh. 14.2.
and the Mansions of Blessed Spirits? And what are all the Pleasures in the
World, Psalm. 36.8. and 16.11.
to those Rivers of Pleasures which are at God's Right Hand? Or all the Riches
and Inheritances in the World, Col. 1.12.
to that Glorious Inheritance of the Saints in Light? Whatsoever we want (as to
outward Enjoyments) we may comfort our selves in the Hopes of Heaven; where all
our Wants will be abundantly supplied with Spiritual, Celestial, and much
better Enjoyments.

2. It administers Comfort to Believers, against all their Afflictions and
Troubles. It may be now you lie groaning under Bodily Weaknesses, as pining
Sickness, or racking Pains; rouling your self to and fro on your Bed, as a Door
rouleth upon its Hinges; getting but very little Rest or Refreshment, through
the anguish of your Pains, and the weariness of your Flesh.

But in Heaven there will assuredly be perfect Ease, and perfect Health, and
Rest, and Refreshment, and that for evermore.

We are very apprehensive of present Pain, and present Grievances, but not of
the Ease, Refreshment and Glory that shall succeed. But remember, and consider
well with your selves, that though the Pains be sharp, the Sickness lingering,
and hangs long upon you, yet present Time is quickly past, but Eternity will
have no end. For which cause we faint not, 2 Cor. 4.16, 17, 18.
(says the Apostle) but though our outward Man perish, yet the inward Man is
renewed Day by Day. For our light Afflictions which are but for a Moment, work
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. While we look not at
the Things which are seen, but at Things which are not seen: for the things
which are seen, are Temporal; but the Things which are not seen, are Eternal.

We pitch too much (alas!) upon a carnal Hope, but do not enough look after the
Glory of the everlasting State: and this makes our Afflictions seem heavy and
grievous. Whereas, a wellgrounded and lively Hope of the Heavenly Happiness and
Glory, would make our greatest Afflictions to become light, and turn our Pains
into Pleasure, yea, and Death it self into Life. But now let me apply it to
those especially that suffer for Righteousness Sake.

Shall any of us shrink at Sufferings for Christ, Romans 8.17.
who shall be in Glory with him for ever? How short is the Suffering? how long
the Reward? How light the Affliction? how weighty the Glory?

If we had but Wisdom to reckon aright, and would weigh these Things in the
Balance of the Sanctuary, we should quickly see whether present Sufferings, or
the future Glory would turn the Scales. Romans 8.18. For I reckon that the
Sufferings of this present Time, are not worthy to be compared with the Glory
which shall be revealed in us.

There are few that have met with greater Sufferings than this great Apostle
was exercised with, 2 Cor. 11.23, -- 33.
and yet he looks upon them as next to nothing, when compared with the future
Glory. I reckon (says he.) And most surely he had learned to reckon aright,
and this much refreshed him under all his Trials. So it is said of the believing
Hebrews also, Heb. 10.32, -- 36.
that they took joyfully the spoiling of their Goods, as knowing in themselves,
that they had in Heaven a better and an enduring Substance.

And Moses esteemed Reproaches for Christ, Heb. 11.25, 26, 27.
greater Riches than the Treasures in Egypt: for he had respect ('it is said) to
the recompense of the Reward. He did not only bear his Sufferings with
Patience, but did also esteem very highly of them, as knowing that Heaven would
make amends for all.

This is it that chears the Hearts of God's Faithful People, in all their
Troubles. I had fainted, Psalm. 27.13.
(says David) unless I had believed to see the Goodness of the Lord in the
Land of the Living.

Having Hopes of enjoying so great a Good, beyond all Time, 2 Cor. 4.17.
to Eternity; we may well endure a far lesser Evil, when so short, even but for
a Moment.

If we be reproached for the Name of Christ, we have reason to rejoice, 1 Pet.
4.12, -- 19. Chap. 3.14, -- 17. and 2.20, -- 25.
and not to be ashamed: For on our Enemies part God is evil spoken of, but on
our part he is glorified. And if we glorify God here, by our patient
continuance in well-doing, Joh. 12.26 Rev. 3.21.
he will also glorify us hereafter with Christ, in Eternal Glory. If we suffer,
we shall also reign with him; but if we deny him, he will also deny us. 2 Timothy
2.12.

Have any of us lost the love of Men, Isa. 66.5.
for our Sincerity and Faithfulness? Why what is this to the Love of God, Romans
8.33, -- 39.
which we shall enjoy for ever? Are we (by our Enemies) cast into Prison? We
shall shortly be in our Father's House, Joh. 14.2.
where there are Mansions of Bliss and Glory.

The worst that our Enemies can do us here, Mat. 10.28
is only to kill the Body, and this they cannot do neither without the
permission of God; and when God permits them to injure our Bodies, Romans 8.28.
he thereby designs us good to our Souls. So that our Enemies are very
unskilful, whatsoever Evil they design unto us; for when they impair the
outward Man, they thereby better the inward Man: 2 Cor. 4.16
And if they root us out of the Earth, they do but send us the sooner to Heaven.

Yea, Mat. 5.10, 11, 12.
and the greater our Sufferings are here in the World, the greater will be our
Happiness hereafter. 'Twas a Saying of one of the Ancient Fathers, when
vilified by his Enemies.

He that willingly takes from my good Name, unwillingly adds to my Reward.

Surely then, the Hopes of Heaven should cheer our Hearts under all our Trials.

3. It administers Comfort to Believers, even against Death it self. These
Earthly Tabernacles must be dissolved, 2 Cor. 5.1.
but what then? We have a Building of God, an House not made with Hands,
Eternal in the Heavens. We shall but leave a poor tottering Cottage, to live in
a Princely Palace; and forsake an unquiet and troublesome World, for a place of
everlasting Repose. Isa. 57.2. Rev. 14.13.1 These. 4.13, 14, 15.
Death to Believers is but a sweet Sleep, and the Grave but a Chamber of Rest;
where the Body does quietly repose it self till the general Resurrection: And
then it shall certainly awake from its Sleep, and be raised again a most
Glorious Body, Phil. 3.21. And while the Body does thus quietly rest in the
Grave, the Soul is in actual Joy and Felicity. It does not sleep in the Grave
with the Body, 2 Cor. 5.8. Phil. 1.23.
(as some do foolishly imagine) but is present with the Lord, and in a State of
Activity. Death is to the Soul of every Believer an immediate Passage into
Glory. Believers may therefore look Death in the Face with a great deal of Joy
and Comfort, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57.
for its Sting is taken away by Christ, and it is unto them a Translation.
Their Life is not taken away, but changed; it is changed from a miserable and
corruptible Life, to that which is Blessed and Eternal. There Is a Glorious
State provided for Believers in the World to come, and Death is the ready
Passage into it.

Wherefore comfort one another with these Words, 1 Thessalonians. 4.18.
(says the Apostle.) With what Words? Why, that Jesus Christ shall come in the
Clouds, Ver. 16, 17.
and take Believers unto himself; and so shall we for ever be with the Lord.

Lastly, The Doctrine affords matter of Comfort, to the Dear Relations of our
Deceased Friend; who has fought a good Fight, and has finished her Course,
and is now gone to receive the Crown which the Lord has prepared for her.

She was one that was assaulted with many Temptations, but through the Captain
of her Salvation she did conquer and overcome; Jam. 1.12. Rev. 2.10.
and is now enjoying (as we have ground to hope) the Reward of a Faithful
Soldier of Christ; even an immortal Crown of Life and Glory; yea, the highest
Felicity she is capable of receiving, till her Body and Soul be again reunited;
and then will her Happiness be full and complete.

Ever since I knew her, I looked upon her to be one that desired to make
Religion her Business, or the chief concern of her Life.

She had very low and mean Thoughts of her self; and was greatly afraid of
being mistaken, and of thinking her Condition to be better than it was. She has
often (in my hearing) lamented and bewailed her Distractions of Mind in Duty; and
would tell me she found it a very difficult thing to keep her Heart close unto
God. And where is there a Christian indeed, that does not experience this?

It was her practice every Day to read a considerable Portion of the Holy
Scriptures, and to meditate and pray in secret; besides her constant joining in
Family Duties. She would say that she found those two Soul-enriching Duties of
Meditation, and Self-examination, very hard and difficult to perform them
aright.

She had a very hearty Love (I believe) to all God's Faithful People; 1 John
3.14
not only those that were of the same Judgment with her, but also to those that
differed from her in some Circumstantials of Religion.

She was far from that factious and narrow Spirit (which too many have
discovered in these our Days) that has no hearty Love for any but those that
are of their own Persuasion. No, wheresoever she saw any thing of the Image of
God, Psalm. 15.4. Psalm. 16.2, 3.
in Rich or Poor, or any Person that differed from her in Judgment, such
Persons were always welcome to her; and she ever expressed an high esteem of
them. Psalm. 119.63.
She delighted most in the Society of those who truly feared the Lord.

She would speak her Mind freely, and with very great Zeal, in vindicating
God's Faithful Servants, when she heard any of them spoken against, or
reflected on by others.

Her Humility was very conspicuous and apparent to all that conversed much with
her. And you of her Neighbors who knew her well, can give your Attestation to
what I say. How free was she always in her Converse with you? And how familiar
would she be with the poorest of you? The Poor was as welcome to her as the
Rich; and more especially such as feared the Lord. She would visit the poorest
of her Neighbors with delight, when she could have any hopes of doing them
good, or of administering any Relief to them.

She went very modestly in her Apparel, (ever since I knew her) choosing rather
to go below her Quality, than in the least to exceed. She could not endure
those ridiculous Fashions which are now so much followed by many; those foolish
and fantastical Dresses which abundance do please themselves with. And for my
part, I verily believe that a great many Persons amongst us, do please but a
very few with their Dress, besides the Devil and themselves. And I wish the
Lord may not bring upon these, what he brought upon the haughty Daughters of
Zion, Isa. 3.16, -- 26. Jer. 15.9. chap. 14.1, -- 18. and 52.1, -- 27. Many
there are which seem not to approve of these foolish, fantastical Fashions, and
yet, forsooth, they must follow the same, lest they make themselves ridiculous.
But our honored Friend, the deceased Gentlewoman, was not of their Mind; for
she rather chose to be accounted ridiculous by proud and foolish Sinners, than
to make her self so indeed, in the Sight of the All-seeing God. She spent
little time in dressing her self, and as little she spent in Idleness.

She would constantly be employed in one honest Business or other, as knowing
it sinful (either in Poor or in Rich) to trifle and idle away precious Time.

She had indeed her Infirmities and Weaknesses (which none are free from while
here in the World,) but these (I believe) were her great Grief and Burden.
Naturally she seemed to be inclined to Passion, the which I have heard her
lament and bewail; and I hope, through Grace, she did very much conquer it.

Some of her Servants have told me, that when she has been most angry, her Back
was no sooner turned but all her Passion was gone, and she would then be as
mild and well pleased again, as if she had never been angry.

She was a very Tender and Affectionate Wife, and as suitable (I believe) as
ever Husband enjoyed. Sure never did two live more comfortably together than
these two Persons did. Their greatest Strife seemed always to be which should
exceed in their Love to each other.

She was a very careful and indulgent Mother, and had a very tender love to her
Children, yet would never indulge them in any thing that was bad.

Her nearest and dearest Relations and Friends, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13, -- 18.
have cause to lament and bewail their own Loss; but to rejoice and take
comfort in the hopes of her Gain.

Her Expressions and Carriage in her last Sickness, and the Morning before she
was taken ill, were very remarkable and affecting: For immediately before her
last Sickness seized her, she renewed her Resolutions of praising God more; and
told her Affectionate (and now Sorrowful) Husband, that they would join
together in singing God's Praises. And she also discoursed then with him of
Death, and of the great Concerns of their Souls, and this with greater
Affection and Freedom than usually she had done. And she further expressed her
willingness to die, if she had but more hopes of her fitness for it. And all
this the same Morning before her Sickness seized her, which was therefore the
more remarkable. And after she was taken Ill, and her Pains were very great
upon her, she would justify God, and be speaking good of his Name; saying, Mic.
7.9.
I will bear the Indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him.
Well, (would she say) God is still Good and Gracious, O! that I could love so
Good a God more!

It is very affecting to hear a poor Soul (who is even ready to breath out her
last) still breathing forth earnest Desires after God, and after a more ardent
Love unto him. She desired to love him more while she was here: and O now she
loves, even as she is beloved!

She renewed her Resolutions of praising God more, and now she is gone to sing
everlasting Allelujahs.

Let this therefore comfort her dearest Relations, and every one of us who
truly loved her; Phil. 1.21. Heb. 12.23.
that though her Death be a Loss unto us, yet it is far more gainful to her. We
have ground to hope that her Soul is gone to the Spirits of the Just made
perfect; where she shall sin no more, nor sorrow any more; Rev. 21.4.
but all Tears shall be wiped from her Eyes: and there shall be no more Death,
neither Sickness, nor Pain; for the former Things are passed away.

Now the Use that we should make of what has been spoken in the Praise and
Commendation of our deceased Friend, is to follow and imitate her Example, in
whatsoever was excellent and imitable in her.

She was much in reading the Word of God, in Meditation and Secret Prayer, and
in that necessary (and too much neglected) Duty of Self-Examination.

Let us endeavor therefore to be much in the practice of these necessary and
most profitable Duties, that we may live comfortably, and die happily, as we
hope this deceased Gentlewoman did.

I am by no means for commending the Dead any further than may be for the good
of the Living, and for the Praise and Glory of God. Yea, I look upon it as a
very great Sin, to commend the deceased without good ground for it; for in so
doing God's People are grieved, and the Wicked more hardened in their
Impenitency. And yet this (alas!) is a practice too common.

But I hope I have said nothing of our deceased Friend but what may be attested
by many, and that which may be of good use to us all, if we be not wanting to
our selves. Whatsoever Failings therefore we might see in her, let us labor to
shun and avoid the like; and whereinsoever she did excel, let us labor to
imitate her. Phil. 4.8, 9. Heb. 6.12.
And let us always endeavor to be Followers of those, who through Faith and
Patience inherit the Promises.

Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, Jude, ver. 24, and 25.
and to present you faultless before the Presence of his Glory with exceeding
Joy, To the only-Wise God our Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and
Power, both now and ever. Amen.

An EPITAPH.
POor Mortals! how can you once cast an Eye
Upon this Stone, and Grave wherein I lie?
And not consider, that your Bodies must
Within a while also be laid in Dust.
But that is not all, your Souls must then ascend
To God's Tribunal; where your final End
Shall be determined; and you doomed to
A Place of everlasting Weal, or Woe.
And O! how happy they that shall obtain
A Portion in those Mansions, which remain
To all Eternity; where they shall sing
Triumphant Allelujahs to their King!
But Woe, woe, woe, ten thousand Woes to those
Who God forgot, and sinful Pleasures chose:
For they in everlasting Flames must lie,
And be tormented to Eternity.
Memento Mori. Learn this Lesson well:
Think on the Joys of Heaven, and Pains of Hell:
Rouse from thy sinful Sloth, cast off thy Chains;
Believe, Repent, and work while Time remains.
FINIS.

