I am the man! who made a prey, to grief.
Do in her very janres, find out releife.
The Cynic, and the Stoic, could receive
The unkindness of Fortune, and not grieve,
Rejoice and sport with misery! there is none
Could ever yet, but Comicall Scarron!


Monsieur Scarron's LETTERS, TO Persons of the greatest Eminency and Quality.

Rendered into English BY JOHN DAVIES, of Kidwelley.

LONDON: Printed for George Dawes, and are to be Sold at his Shop in
Chancery Lane, against Lincoln's-Inn-Gate. 1677.

TO THE Worthily Honored, WILLIAM HAMMOND, Esquire
AMidst the great depravation of Morality, wherewith the present Age is
chargeable, it is some comfort, that there is a certain improvement of
Gratitude, of which there are, at least, so many Demonstrations, as we find
Dedicatories. You have many times very seasonably surpised me with your
Kindnesses, and this is the first Opportunity I have had, to make a Public
Acknowledgment thereof.

In the primitive fervor of Christian Discipline, men were content to undergo
public penances, in order to the expiation of secret miscarriages. Why
therefore may not a private act of Generosity lay an obligation upon the
Receiver, to make an open celebration thereof, if there be a concurrence and
combination of circumstances to enforce it?

The former productions of this Comical and Burlesque Author, of my publishing
in English, that is to say, his Novels, were addressed to the Patronage of the
worthily - worshipful* Thomas Stanley, Esquire, and I am very apt to attribute
the kind reception they met withal in the World to the sacredness of that
Dedication. The present Collection of Letters is the close of all that is to be
expected of his in Prose: And it is my presumption, that, being recommended to
the public, under a name so nearly related to him, they will meet with a
success answerable to that of the others.

But whatever entertainment they may have, I make this advantage, of this
publication, that I have made a Manifesto of my respects, where I am so much
engaged to do it, and consequently, how much I am,

Honored Sir, Your most humble, and much obliged Servant, J. DAVIES.

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
IN the Year 1670, I Published the last Novel I could meet withal of Monsieur
Scarron's, under the Title of The Unexpected Choice, Printed for Mr. John
Martyn at the Bell in St. Paul's Churchyard. In the Address to the Reader
before that Piece, I made him a promise of some other, of the same Author's,
which being then upon the Stocks was in a very fair way to be launched within a
short time. The Work then intended, and indeed wherein some short Progress had
been made, is this present Collection of his Letters, which had it not been
mislay'd, and so given over for lost, might have appeared long ere this,
possibly, to the great satisfaction of those who were not dissatisfied with his
other Productions. What success, and kind reception they have found, the
frequent Editions of them do sufficiently testify. It Is presumed, his Letters
may be as divertive to some as his Novels, that is, to those who are Judges of
Wit; for an Artist must needs be injured, if he be tried by any, but his Peers.
There was also a design, of making some Additionals to this little Collection,
out of other French Authors, but, upon mature consideration, it is adjourned to
the next Edition of it, which the Bookseller is in great hope to see, soon
after this next long Vacation.

J. D:

THE CONTENTS.
A Letter from Monsieur De Balzac, to Monsieur Costar, concerning the Works of
Monsieur Scarron. Page 1. Letter I. To the Queen of Sweden. 7 Letter II. To the
Queen Regent of France. 11 Letter III. To his Highness the Prince of Conde. 12
Letter IV. To the Countess of Brienne. 14 Letter V. To the same Countess. 16
Letter VI. To Monsieur Sarrazin. 18 Letter VII. To Mademoiselle D'Aubigne. 23
Letter VIII. To Madam de Savigney, the Widow. 25 Letter IX. To Madam
Villarceaux. 28 Letter X. To the Marquess of Villarceaux. 29 Letter XI. To the
Queen of Sweden. 32 Letter XII. To (...). 34 Letter XIII. To (...). 35 Letter
XIV. To (...). 39 Letter XV. To the Lord Bishop of Man's. 41 Letter XVI. To his
Eminency the Cardinal de Retz. 44 Letter XVII. To the Duke de Retz. 45 Letter
XVIII. To the Count de Vivonne 48 Letter XIX. To Monsieur Marigny 51 Letter XX.
To the same Monsieur Marigny 54 Letter XXI. To the same 56 Letter XXII. To the
Marshall D'Albret 59 Letter XXIII. To the same 62 Letter XXIV. To the same 69
Letter XXV. To the same 71 Letter XXVI. To (...) 73 Letter XXVII. To Monsieur
the Procurator-General, and Surintendant of the Finances 74 Letter XXVIII. To
the same 76 Letter XXIX. To the same 77 Letter XXX. To the same 81 Letter XXXI.
To the same 83 Letter XXXII. To the same 84 Letter XXXIII. To the same 87
Letter XXXIV. To the same 88 Letter XXXV. To the same 89 Letter XXXVI. To the
same 91 Letter XXXVII. To the same 93 Letter XXXVIII. To the same 95 Letter
XXXIX. To the same 100 Letter XL. To Monsieur Pelisson 102 Letter XLI. To (...)
104 Letter XLII. To (...) 105 Letter XLIII. To (...) 107 Letter XLIV. To (...)
108 Letter XLV. To (...) 112 Letter XLVI. To (...) 114 Letter XLVII. To (...)
116 Letter XLVIII. To (...) 118 Letter XLIX. To (...) 119 Letter L. To (...)
120 Letter LI. To (...) 122 Letter LII. To (...) 123 Letter LIII. To (...) 125
Letter LIVE. To (...) 127 Letter LV. To (...) 129 Letter LVI. To Monsieur de
Segrais 130 Letter LVII. To the Duke d'Elboeuf 133 Letter LVIII. To Monsieur de
Villette 135 Letter LIX. To the Count de Vivonne 139
Licensed,

Roger L'Estrange.

Monsieur Scarron's LETTERS.
A LETTER From Monsieur De BALZAC, to Monsieur COSTAR, concerning the Works of
Monsieur SCARRON.
SIR,
THE Book you were pleased to send me from Monsieur Scarron is a Present, which
I am extremely obliged to value. Upon the first perusal, it proved an effectual
remedy, and eased me of an oppression of the Spleen, which might happily have put
a period to my breathing, had it not been for that seasonable relief. I am in
hopes, it may yet do some further Cure, if I use it oftener. It is not
impossible, but, by the help of it, I may be recovered out of that
Philosophical Melancholy, and indivertive seriousness, which I am too much
subject to. Nay, probably, I may thereby learn to put Chancery-Bills and
Legends into rhyme, and become jocund and cheerful by contagion. This certainly
is the most admirable indisposed person that ever was heard of; there is
something in him which transcends health it self, I mean that health which we
may call stupid and material: for you know, that the Arabians, speaking of
alacrity, affirm it to be the flower and spirit of a lively and stirring
health. Since you are desirous to know what different reflections I have made
on this indisposed person, and expect I should digest my thoughts of him into a
particular Chapter; I am, in the first place, to give you this character of
him, That, of all the men I ever conversed with, he must be guilty of either
the greatest dissimulation, or the greatest constancy. I say, that he shall
rise up in Judgment against the delicacy and blandishments whereto humane
Nature is so much inclined, or that Pain, and all its afflictive retinue treat
him more gently than they do other men. I say, there is some probability, that
the common Executioner punishes the Patient with some kind of lenity and
remorse. When I see him laughing, as he does, in the midst of his torments, I
must confess my self apt to be of an opinion, That his pain comes not up to
that degree we commonly assign it, to be such, and amounts only to a certain
titillation. In fine, I stick not to affirm, that the Prometheus, the Hercules,
the Philoctetes, mentioned in the Fables, not to say any thing of Job, the
truth of whose story we doubt not of, say very great and remarkable things in
the violence of their torments; but they are far from speaking such as are
pleasant, and divertive. I must acknowledge, that, in many places of Antiquity,
I have met with Griefs, from which, such as endured them, acquired the
reputation, some of Constancy; some of Modesty; some of Prudence, nay, some of
Eloquence; but of any remarkable for a perpetual intermixture of Alacrity, this
is the only Example: No, I could never meet there with any mention of a Mind,
soprincipled by the dictates of any Sect, as that it could dance and be
frolicksom, in a Body, where the Palsy had taken up its Quarters. So
observable a Prodigy deserves to come under the consideration of Philosophers,
employed upon the quest of things requiring the greatest curiosity. 'Twere an
omission in History to forget him; and if I were in an humor to be an
Historian, as I am an Historiographer, I should not account it the least
Miracle of our Time, which has produced so many such. It is not my design to
detract ought from the reputation of the Dead, with whom I must acknowledge my
self to have had a friendship: But there are different degrees of Reputation,
and though the quality of an Apostle, be a Title of no small Account in a
Christian Family, yet is it to be confessed, that the Martyrdom of the Son is
somewhat that is more rare than the Apostolical employment of the Father. What
think you, would be the sentiments of your Seneca upon this occasion, that
Seneca, who heretofore took so great a pleasure in Treating of such matters,
and who so often has sought the occasions of doing it? Will it not be found
true, that that disdainful and insolent Virtue, so much celebrated by him,
which brags of its being at ease and undisturbed in Phalaris's Bull, and could
say, that it was pleasant being there, was but the simple figure of this Virtue
so accompanied by Meekness and Humility, as that it knows how to put in
practice the Paradoxes of the other, and that without the least ostentation?
Let us then conclude, to the honor of him, who calls himself the most humble,
most Obedient, most Obliged, and most Indisposed Servant and Subject to a great
Queen, that there is either Ecstasie and Enthusiasm in his Indisposition, and
that the Soul executes her functions apart, without being any way immersed in
Matter; or that there is an extraordinary constancy and vigor in it, and that
the Soul, in its struglings with the Body, has all the advantage, that a
stronger person has over a weaker.

Aut coeleste aliquid, Costarde, astrisque propinquum,
Morbus hic est, superoq, trahit de lumine lucem,
Aut servant immota suum Bona vera serenum,
^atque super proprias Virtus illaesa ruinas.
P^^ tot saecla igitur, tandem, gens Stoica, Reg^^,
Cerne ^uum! Fasces tenero submittite vati,
Sublim^ tragicique Sophi, Zenonia proles;
Nec pudeat decreta humili postponere socco
Grandia, and ampullas verborum and nomen honesti
Magnificum, ac veras audire in carmine voces.
SCARRO aeger, SCARRO, infando data praeda dolori,
Non fatum crudele, Jovem non clamat iniquum;
Iratis parcit superis, sortique malignae,
Et patitur saevos invicta mente dolores,
Jucundumque effert dira inter spicula vultum.
Nec simulata gerit personam indutus honestam,
Vel mista ridet, veluti Mezentius, ira,
Sed purum, sine fraud and laxis ridet habenis.
Dic iterum, neque sat semel est dixisse triumphos,
Qui laeta, ingeniosa, aegro de pectore promit,
Qui ludit Deum and Enceladum, vastumque Typhoea
Terrigenasque alios, festivo carmine fratres;
Qui sedeat licet aeternum, mirabile dictu,
Perpetuas agitat Pindi per amoena choreas,
Proximus ille polo, fortunaque altior omni,
SCARRO meus, mihi namque tuum, Costarde dedisti,
Magnus erit Rex ille sui, quem prisca coron^
Porticus, and rigidi vox imperiosa Cleanth^^
Ni saeclo invideat nostro rigidusque Clear^nes,
Priscaque dijs, divumque patri se Por^cus aequans.
I know not whether the Chequer-work of this Chapter will please you; but out
of a fear the length of it may displease you, I close it, and remain,

Your, etc. De BALZAC.

LETTER I.
To the Queen of Sweden.
Madam,
I Presume to send your Majesty some Productions of mine, which possibly you
have not seen. If you find any thing in them that may please you, the
satisfaction I shall conceive thereat will be as great as I am capable of, who
having once had the Honor to see you, must now look on my self as reduced to
that unhappy condition as ^ever to expect it again. To complete the m^asure of
my ill Fortune, and the miseries of (...) Life, it seems there wanted only the
afflic^^on of being at so great a distance from your ^^jesty, and at the same
time to envy those (...) are near you. I know not whether those fortunate
persons are fully sensible of their Happiness; but, if they have not for your
Majesty somewhat that transcends admiration and respect, I shall make no
difficulty to rank them amongst the most stupid of all undiscerning Animals.
For my part, were I in their place, and in a condition to run about the Fields,
I should soon act the part of a little Rolando for your sake. True it is, I
think I should not fell down, at one single stroke with a Sword, as great Trees
as he in Ariosto, and that I should not commit so much waste; and yet my
extravagances might occasion more divertisement than his, though they were not
so much to be feared; nay happily they would raise no less compassion. You see,
Madam, that I make sufficient advantages of the permission your Majesty has
been pleased to give me, as an unregarded Gallant, to make that Courtship to
the greatest Queen that ever was, which that Skipping-Master did to a Queen
that never was. 'Twas prudently done of your Majesty to give it me, since (...)
was resolved to have taken it my self, an in case you had denied it me, you
would have found your self disobeyed by a Perso^who would not do it in any
thing else, ^^ough it cost him his life. But, devesting (...) of your Majesty,
Madam, you are an admirable person. In all places wherever you come, your Eyes
make you more Subjects than a great Kingdom had given you; and if they do of
themselves all we have seen done by them, without your taking the trouble of
giving them any instructions, it must be acknowledged, that the World affords
not any that are more beautiful and more attractive, but withal more dangerous.
Hence it comes, that, in all the Persons who visit me, I observe a certain
Rivalship in the expressions they make of your Empire over them; but the
particular Miracle your Majesty has wrought is upon the Ladies, who though
naturally inclined to envy all others, conspire in an unanimous acknowledgment
of your perfections. Madam, I should dread being too free with your Majesty,
were I not assured, that you know better than any person in the World, how
great a dose of Icarus, and Ixion goes into the composition of a Poet, and that
the History of those two temerarious attempters, though the close of it be not
much to the advantage of those poor Merchants of Immortality, is that, of all
the Fables, which best pleases them, and is of most use to them. There is not
any much applauded Poet, but would prefer the reputation of being a Modern
Ixion, before that of turning a stanza well, and an Heroic Confidence (so they
call their Platonic and Contemplative Love) before Laurel, or Money, or both.
But, Madam, possibly I play the wanton with the Command your Majesty has laid
on me to write to you, if I have not already done it. I am therefore to beg
this favor, if your Majesty be pleased to afford me the continuance of this
Honor, that I may know, to what degree of freedom my Letters may aspire, that
I may not presume so far on the privilege you have given me, as to transgress
the limits of that respect which is due to you, from Persons infinitely
transcending,

Madam, Your Majesty's most humble, most Obedient, and most respectful Servant,
SCARRON.

LETTER II.
To the Queen Regent of France.
Madam,
IT was too Noble an adventure, for the most unfortunate of all Men, to be
known to your Majesty, and to be the particular object of your Compassion and
your Charity. It is to be attributed, not so much to his fault, as his
unhappiness, that he is so soon discarded after so favorable a hand of good
Fortune. He is out of favor with the greatest Queen in the World, his
Benefactress; whereof what can be the effect, but that he must submit to the
Tyranny of that affliction, which before, with the assistance of such a
Patroness, he was in some measure able to struggle with? Can nothing excite a
pity in your Majesty toward so disconsolate a wretch; and, while you are
liberal of Peace to all the World, can you not shed a little of it into a
Breast, full of troubles and distractions, through the loss of your Favor? He
is not so far besotted, as to beg any new one of your Majesty; but the sum of
his humble Suit is, that you will at length give a check to your indignation,
that he may complete the small remainder of his life, with the Satisfaction of
telling the World that he is,

Madam, Your Majesty's most humble, most obedient, and most respectful Servant.
S.

LETTER III.
To his Highness the Prince of Conde.
May it please your Highness,
DOes it not argue an excess of Joy in me, to presume writing to your Highness
upon your happy return? I must confess, it is so great, that it proves my
torment, when, to check it into some moderation, I am guilty of any endeavor
to suppress it. And when I permit the discoveries of it, men look on it as a
Prodigy, that an unhappy wretch who finds it work enough, to support his own
particular misfortune, should be so highly concerned in the Public Felicity,
as the most happy and most healthy; and what adds to this general astonishment,
is, that having not the honor of approaching your Highness, and there being so
vast a distance between a Prince of Conde, and the Terminus of all indisposed
and bed-ridden people, his affection should be so violent toward him, as if he
had the perpetual satisfaction of seeing and admiring him. This indeed is a
thing meets with as much difficulty of credit, as your Highnesses Victories,
and yet is no less certain. And if your Highness could but be induced to
believe it upon my own word, you would happily afford the ardency of my zeal a
kind reception, and be the more convinced of my being, beyond any Person in the
World,

Your Highnesses most humble, most obedient, and most passionate Servant, S.

LETTER IV.
To the Countess of Brienne.
Madam,
SInce you have had the curiosity to see me, as the Queen of Sweden had before
you, it is but just, you should, as she did, give me leave to fall in Love with
you, and to give you the Honor of a thing, which it may be is already past
depending on your consent. If you imagine I ask any thing of you, which you
ought not to grant me, and that I undertake more than I am able to perform, I
am content to be reduced into the number only of your Friends, and to conceal
from you, what other more advantageous relation I might be capable of. For
without your condescending to that, there will be no occasion of my waiting on
you, which will be an extraordinary affliction to me; for I was extremely
desirous to use the utmost of my endeavors and abilities to give you
satisfaction. After such a discovery, as this is, of my intentions to you, I
refer it to your own imagination, whether any thing in the World would tempt me
to disappoint you. I shall therefore, with much sincerity, give you an account
of the good and bad qualities of the Person, whom you are to look on as your
humble Servant, as long as he lives. His Body, indeed, as you might have
observed, is very irregular, insomuch that he is thought a dangerous spectacle
to Women with Child. As to the Soul, he is so well content with his own, that
he would not make an exchange with any in the World, but your self. When he
loves, he does it with such violence, that he is sometimes ashamed of it; and
since you must know all, though he be very punctual in acquitting himself of
the obligations and devoirs of Friendship, yet in one particular he is
defective, to wit, that of writing to his Friends. But it is to be considered
withal, that he speaks advantageously of them upon all occasions, expressing
himself with a kind of fury, and sometimes is so importunate, as to weary out
his Auditors; and when he is obliged to vindicate some person whom he loves, he
can hardly be distinguished from a Lion. If you like me upon these
qualifications, I am, Body and Soul, at your service. In the mean time,
expecting your resolution, in order to your acceptance or rejection of me, I
am, nay will be, however you treat me,

Madam, Your most transported, and most humble Servant. S.

LETTER V.
To the same Countess.
Madam,
IT is possible indeed, that you may have never permitted any one to make a
discovery of love to you; but that never any durst presume to do it, as it is
not a thing dependent on you, so you must give me leave to doubt of it, at
least, till you have laid your absolute commands upon me to believe it.

Were you a Beauty of a lower rate,
By one coy look you might betray your hate,
To teach a daring Lover greater caution,
And smother his aspiring Inclination.
But you once seen, placed in the noblest Sphere,
Who so reserved, as can from Love forbear?
Or who once having loved can be so tame,
As to conceal so violent a flame?
So true it is, Love, in a high degree,
Will soon trangress the rules of secrecy.
Let us therefore be sincere, Madam, and acknowledge that we have not been so
ingenious, as we should, one toward another, at our first correspondence by
Letters, and that, if it be impossible, any should ever presume to entertain
you with a discourse of Love, being so transcendently beautiful as you are, it
is no less, on my side, that having so great a discerning faculty as I am
Master of, I should be tamely content with a reduction into the number of your
friends, as I had told you. If the end of your Letter approach sincerity, as
much as the beginning seems to be distant from it, the sentiments you promise to
have for me will happily produce very dangerous effects about the Court, and you
will find there will be a certain emulation among some, to cripple themselves.
But for my part part, I shall be the Prince of them, since my work is already
done, and therefore shall think my self obliged, answerably to my Quality, to
transcend all others in the impetuosity of my Passion, since I have the
pre-eminence, of being first admitted,

Madam, The humblest of your most humble, and most Obedient Servants, SCARRON.

LETTER VI.
To Monsieur Sarrazin.
Sir,
I See you are not under any pressure of Affairs in your Kingdom of Bourdeaux,
since you have so much leisure as to write to me; or that Mademoiselle de Viger
sticks any thing close to your Heart, when you amuse your self in giving me a
particular relation of all the noble exploits, she is able to perform either in
Peace or War. If the description you have made of her be free from flattery, I
must confess, I had rather have broken a leg, than ever have known her, nay
though it were such, as that I might venture it at the dancing of a Ball; and I
do advise you not to be too familiar with her, since you have not so much time
to squander away. But is there, in earnest, any more in it, than that you,
having little to do, yet desirous to be doing, have given me an ingenious
draught of your own imaginations of Beauty, and attributed them all to the
Person you were most conversant withal? For you tell me so many things of her,
that I should believe but little, were it not for this reflection, that you
would not have written me so excellent and so long a Letter, without some
design. For, at Paris, it was never believed till now, that there was any
person at Bourdeaux, whose attractions might raise a Love in Monsieur Guyonet.
But upon the reading of your Letter, I am easily induced to a persuasion, That
if ever Mademoiselle de Viger shall make all the advantages she can of her
power, the number of those whom she shall make slaves, will equal that of those
whom Guyonet had made unhappy; and she will be fully revenged on the poor
unhappy men, for all the devastations which that dangerous Guyennian has
committed upon those of her Sex. But dear Sir, consult your own Conscience, and
deal sincerely, Is not that serenity and indisturbance of Mind, which you
magnify above all things, somewhat concerned in the case, when you make an
open profession of having so violent Inclinations for her? For my part, were I
still, as you say, Qualis eram bonae
Sub regno Cynarae.
and were, as I now imagine you to be, on the Banks of the Garonne, where it
kindly contributes to the production of so many Flowers to strew your Walks, it
would cost me at the least two or three thousand disturbances, seven or eight
hundred jealousies, some handfuls of the hair of my head, and a quart or two of
warm tears; for I have now lately received the gift of tears as well as you,
and I dare compare with you for matter of weeping, though it be known, you have
been as remarkable for it, as the Prophet Jeremy. But to return to Mademoiselle
de Viger, it is a misfortune to be lamented, that she should be wiser then
Solomon. There are indeed some men would be guilty of a great extravagance for
her, as the Queen of Sheba was for him. For example, I my self, who am not so
wise as the Son of Barsabe, as she told you, and yet think her a more amiable
Person than that Queen of Ethiopia, would take Bourdeaux in my way, upon no
other design, then that of seeing her, if I go next Spring to Barages, as I
have some intentions to do. But my Dog of a Destiny will hurry me about a month
hence toward the West Indies: or rather, I am afraid to be should out of
Europe, into America, like a piece from one end of a Sheffle-Board to the
other, by a sort of importunate and insupportable persons, a sort of
Excrescencies of Paris, who call themselves, the Leigers of Wit and Drollery.
The Question among them, is not, Whether a man be well principled, well
inclined, or of an obliging deportment, and good carriage; but whether he be
one of the Leigers of Wit and Drollery. There are a certain number of persons
who would attempt to give them a shove; but they were told, the more ingenious
among them make it their bragg, That they are approved by a great Princess,
whose Perfections of Mind equal the transcendency of her Quality, and that they
are so vain, as to bring her name in, to countenance the gingling productions
of their Wit. Had it not been for this consideration, there would have been a
party ready to have risen up against them. And this is all the account, I can
give the most ingenious of my Europaean Friends, of my departure hence for
America. I have in order thereto put a Thousand Crowns into the hands of a new
Company designed for the Indies, which goes to plant a Colony within three
degrees of the Line, along the Rivers of Orillana and Orinoca. Farewell France;
Farewell Paris; Farewell Tygresses disguised in the shape of Angels* Farewell
Menagius's, Sarrazins, and Marignis. I renounce all future Commerce with
Burlesque Poetry, Comical Romances, and Comedies; I am now bound for a Country
where I shall not meet with any counterfeit Saints, nor Cut-purses of devotion,
no Inquisition, no Winter to rack me to death, no defluxion to cripple me, nor
War to starve me; but a perpetual freedom of Converse, sincerity of
acquaintance, and all the enjoyments of the Golden Age. And yet amidst all
these, I dare assure you, nothing shall debauch me into an oblivion of my
obligations to you; and that when I write to you next from my Palace in the
West Indies, I shall close with an acknowledgment of my being, as much as ever,

Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER VII.
To Mademoiselle D'Aubigne.
Mademoiselle,
I Am very much obliged to a certain thing called Instinct; for that would be
always suggesting to me that the little Lady, whom I saw coming into my
Chamber, about six months since, in a garment somewhat of the shortest, in
respect of the mode now regnant, and who presently fell a crying, I know not
upon what occasion, was no less ingenious, than her countenance gave her out.
The Letter you have written to Mademoiselle de Saint Hermant, is so highly
ingenious, that it argues a great decay of Wit in me, not to have observed soon
enough the accomplishment of it in you. To be sincere with you, I could never
have imagined, that in the Islands of America, or among the Nuns of Niort, any
should be taught the Rules of writing so excellently well; and I am extremely
put to it, to find some colorable pretense, why you should make it your
business to conceal ingenuity, when others are so over-forward to make all the
discoveries they can of it. Now therefore that you are known, you should make
as little difficulty of writing to me, as you have done to Mademoiselle de S.
Hermant. I shall use my utmost endeavors, to write a Letter comparable to
yours, and you will have the satisfaction to see, that, if I come short of you
in point of Wit, I will not of any other, in being

Mademoiselle, Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER VIII.
To Madam de Sevigny, the Widow.
Madam,
YOur satisfaction has cost me abundance of misery; for what Recipes, and
Diet-Drink, and Physical Directions have I been the Butt of, only out of a
compliance with the Command you had laid on me, not to dye, till you had seen
me! And yet, Madame, all this strictness, all my patient obedience to those who
exercised their absolute power of life and death upon my body, hinders not my
being still in a dying condition, out of an impatience to see you. Had you
taken an exact measure of your own forces and mine, this would not have
happened. You Ladies of prodigious merit imagine there is no more to be done,
but to command. We indisposed persons have not so much the disposal of our
Lives. Be therefore satisfied to occasion their death who see you sooner then
they would, without prolonging their lives, who see you not so long as you wish
they should; and blame none but your self, if I obey not the first command you
ever laid upon me, since you have hastened my death, and that there is great
likelihood, that, to please you, I should have been as willing to have lived a
hundred years, as any other man. But is it not in your power to change the
manner of my death? I should not be a little obliged to you. All these deaths
of impatience and love are not for my turn, much less suitable to my humor;
and if I have wept a hundred times for persons who have died upon that account,
though I knew them not, imagine what I shall do for my self, who ever made
account to have a little of my own humor at my death. But it is impossible for
a man to elude his destiny; and so I am convinced, that, whether you be near
me, or at a great distance from me, you are the occasion of my death. All the
comfort I have, is, that, if I had seen you, the very thought of it would have
added to the torment of my dissolution. They say you are a dangerous Lady, and
that they who look not on you with a certain circumspection, are presently
taken sick, and carried away within a short time. I therefore submit to the
death you have assigned me, and I heartily forgive you. Farewell Madam, I die
your most humble Servant; and I pray Heaven, the divertisements you expect to
find in Britany, be not disturbed, by a remorse, of having been the executioner
of a person, who had never offended you:

-- And then, but then, too late
My cruel One will think, that, if I die,
Ere I see her, I am not to be blamed.
The last Verse should have rim'd to one of the other two; but at the point of
death, a man's thoughts are more taken up with dying well, than riming well.
And so being ready to expire, I have only time to -- recommend -- my self --

LETTER IX.
To Madam de Villarceaux.
Madam,
IT was no hard matter for me to find by your Letter, that I had written a very
impertinent one to you: but it was not the first that ever I writ, when I and
my Wits were at some distance; and I am not so highly conceited of my own
Prudence, as to presume it will be the last that I shall write while I live.
The first time I ever come abroad, I will endeavor to crawl for your pardon:
Mean time, Madam, you may assure Mademoiselle Meusnier, that though she has
said of me a hundred false things, which have brought me to the knowledge of
many true ones concerning her, I am ready to put the Maidservant she complains
of, into the hands of the Magistrate, and, what you will hardly believe, that
this wicked Maid, whom she charges to have sold what she could justly call her
own, is more forward to appear before the Judges, than she her self. But,
Madam, I am somewhat afraid that I shall be taken at my word; yet shall I not
retract what I have said. She may present her Petition when she pleases; if the
Maid be guilty, I shall be the first to solicit against her. For your self,
Madam, as you are good, and generous, you cannot forbear pitying a Mother that
has lost her Daughter, or rather that was desirous to have lost her: And for
her, if her Neighbors speak truth, she could do no less then surprise you.
And, for my part, Madam, I shall give you no further trouble, but that of
assuring you how infallibly I am,

Madam, Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER X.
To the Marquess of Villarceaux.
My Lord,
FOr the discharge of my own tender Conscience, I must needs tell you, That you
know not what you do, when you make me a proffer of your Friendship, and are so
desirous, as you seem to be, of mine Though it be habitual in you to do good
actions, yet that of wishing well to a person so discarded to misfortune, as I
am, requires a generosity, which you will find more dangerous in the exercise
of it, than you imagine. I find little for you to hope from it, and much to
fear, and therefore I advise you not to undertake it, how great soever my
advantages be thereby. This heretofore cost Armentieres his life; and not long
since, poor Haucourt run the same fate; not to mention to you diverse others,
whom I could name to you, not of your acquaintance, and whom Death would not
happily have snatched away so soon hence, had they not been overforward to express
their love to me. Must I yet give you more examples, to assure you that my
misfortune is contagious? Let these few suffice. Cardinal Richelieu died within
a month after my being known to him, and that I was thought so happy as to
please him. The Prince of Orange had no sooner discovered his desires of making
me some Present, but he fell sick of the Small Pox, and died. The President de
Mesme did not long outlive the Visit he made me, in a Chamber three Stories
high. In fine, my acquaintance, if it come to any degree of Friendship, is so
sure a losing cast to those who have it, and of so sudden a Disastre, that it
is beyond my apprehension, how the Cardinal de Retz has got into that
Eminency, against Wind, Water, and Weather, at a time when it was the general
persuasion, that he had a certain esteem for me. After all these deterring
examples, if your heart courageously persist in its resolution, I am, Body and
Soul, yours. I am not so deeply besotted as to refuse my good fortune, and the
Friendship of a Person, whom I passionately love, as well upon the account of
his merit, as my own natural inclination. Yet can I not disburthen my self of a
compassion for the hazard you run into; for I once more tell you, That I am a
Mail, which opened, you will find stuffed only with misfortune; and
consequently how fatal may prove to you being,

Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER XI.
To the Queen of Sweden.
Madam,
TO offer your Majesty a Comedy, and that of my Composure, is to make you a
Present infinitely below your Worth and Quality: Only* I have this plea, That
every one ought to be taxed according to his abilities, for the payment of the
Tribute due to you, from all those who make it their concern to write in the
present age. In that of Augustus, men paid in Verse and Prose the same Tribute
to the Patron of the Virtuosi, the deceased Mecenas, whom your Majesty knows,
better than I, by the general consent of all the Poets, to have been a very
gallant Person. But how highly soever his Name may have been celebrated in the
World, all the advantage he now has of your Majesty, is only that of
Precedence; and I would confidently venture all the little estate I have in the
Kingdom of Parnassus, that your Majesty would have defeated all his Designs,
and forced him to exasperation, as your Father the Great Gustavus would have
done his Master Augustus, had they been to dispute the Empire of the Universe.
But, Madam, if it be pardonable in a Person so much the object of pity, upon
the account of Misery, as I am, to put questions to a great Queen, as you are,
I would know, whether it be not sometimes incommodious to your Majesty to be so
highly a Heroine as you are? Extraordinary Merit has also its inconveniences,
and all these Dedicatories of Books, which we Poets would have to pass for
Incense, with those whom we pretend to Heroify, are not always of the same
value, nor have the same effect. There are some of those Drugs cast forth but
little perfume, though much smoke; and I my self am in suspense, whether what I
offer your Majesty, will pass in your Court for Spanish Balls, or common ones.
The late Prince of Orange made use of them heretofore, and was never the worse
for it: if your Majesty think them worth your approval in any degree, be not
sparing of them; since all I have now left is only for Her, whom all the World
unanimously acknowledges to have surpassed in Merit all the Princes of past
Ages, to eclipse all of the present, and to be an Example to those of the
future. And this is as true, as it is true, that I passionately am,

MADAME, Your Majesty's most, etc. S.

LETTER XII.
To (...).
My Lord,
I Leave it to such as can, make greatest braggs of Health, and are most
concerned in your Affairs, to be more joyful than I am, at the recovery of your
Liberty. I thought once to have said, That your Eminency could not have been
more glad of it than I am; but that had been an extravagant expression. For the
different traverses of Fortune make no disturbance in the Calmness and Serenity
of your Mind; and if Adversity find you always on your Feet, Prosperity does
not force you to go ever the faster. In fine, you are now, my Lord, got out of
that obscure Dungeon, where you were so inconveniently lodged; and methinks
(not derogating from the respect I owe those in whose power it is to assign
such Lodgings) they are not well read in the Ceremonies of Entertainment, since
they bring you out with a much greater respect and complement, then they had
conducted you into that enchanted Palace. The applauses they receive for the
latter will happily raise in them an inclination of receiving often the like:
Heaven grant it be so, and me the happiness to see your Eminency at a place,
where I may be heard, from my own Chair to yours, assuring you, that I am more
than ever,

Your Eminencies most, etc. S

LETTER XIII.
To (...)
Madam,
I Hear of your falling ill of a Tertian, if it come to a Quartan Ague, we
shall have work enough for a whole Winter; for you are not to question, but it
will be as much a torment to me, as it is to you. I pray let me know how many
fits you have had already, and what account your Physicians give of it, since
you are like to see them first; and certainly it is a very extraordinary
accident, that you know some things of me, four or five days before I hear them
my self. I must needs have a great confidence of my strength, racked with
affliction as I am, when I concern my self in, and participate of yours. I know
not whether it had not been more prudently done of me, to have been distrustful
of you, the first time that ever I saw you. I should have done so, and judged
of it by the event: but what likelihood was there, that a young Maid should
disturb the quiet Impotency of an old Batchelour, or ever fall under a
suspicion of having given me so great a temptation, as that I should regret my
not being in a condition to revenge my self? But away with flattery; I know you
are sick, but not, whether you are so carefully attended as you should be. This
very disquiet adds much to the trouble and affliction it is to me, that I am
forced to love, and at the same see that it is the greatest madness in the
world to do so? Ever and anon an humor takes me to venture on a Journey into
Poitou, through all the present extremity of weather, and many briars and
thorns by the way, which if it can be effected in me otherwise than by
Witchcraft, I shall side with the Modern Scepticks and Deists, and believe
there never was any such thing. Return then, in the Name of God, return hither,
and think it high time, when I am come to that degree of distraction, as to
regret absent Beauties. I should have understood my self better, and
considered, that I endure pain and torment enough, to become an absolute
Crippple from head to foot, without being possessed of that diabolical grief,
called The Impatience to see you. It Is one of the most cursed sort of evil
spirits. Do I not see how he torments poor Monsieur (...) upon no other
account, then that he sees not you, as often as he would, though he does it
daily? The Letters he writes to us discover the despairing condition he is in,
and I dare at this present lay a Wager on his damnation, not upon the score of
his being a Heretic, but that of his loving you. Yet methinks you should
discover some moderation in your conquests and think of some cessation of your
hostility:

Command, I say, your murdering eyes,
To be less cruel then they were;
Or I shall call you Cockatrice,
And not, as I was wont, my Dear.
But why should I bring in my self as one of the Martyrs of your Cruelty? Be
not so fond as to imagine any such thing, but rather that you are happy not to
have ought to do with me. You will happily laugh at my menaces: but know,
scornful Beauty, that there will be found some gallant Men, to engage in a
service wherein the Public is concerned. Tell me, my darling, Have you
renounced Christianity, and embraced Mahumetisme, that you seem to make the
destruction of Mankind your divertisement? It must certainly be so; and yet
there is one Humor remarkable in the more civilized and religious part of the
Turks, which is, that they are much addicted to Alms; but you are far from it,
and have not the least charity in the world even for those who love you. You
are therefore of no value, though you are made up of an intermixture of good
and bad things. You verify the Proverb beyond any one, That all is not Gold
that glisters; and now it may be said, That all Devils are not black. And yet
(see the Prerogative of Beauty) I cannot forbear acknowledging my self, more
than any other,

Madam, Your most humble, and most obedient Servant, S.

LETTER XIV.
To (...)
My Lord,
I Have understood from Monsieur du Pin, how kindly you have solicited his
Majesty on my behalf, and what good offices you have endeavored to do me at
Court, where your influence being so great, no doubt what you attempt will
prove accordingly successful. All I have to offer to your consideration in this
particular, is that you may find the opposing of my cross fortune a harder task
than at first sight you imagine; since I cannot but fear it will give you the
dissatisfaction of not compassing, once in your life, what your generosity had
engaged you to undertake. Yet, however you come off, my obligations to you will
be as transcendent, as they can possibly be in a Person who has hardly the
honor of being known to you, who never did you any service, who is incapable
of doing any, and whom nevertheless you will needs take into your protection.
Should I not be highly sensible of these surprising kindnesses, there were no
colorable excuse to be made for me, but that the wretchedness of my condition
had reduced me to a more than ordinary stupidity. On the contrary, I am a great
admirer of such persons as you are, and I begin to be troubled, that the
approaching period of my life, will prevent my full knowledge of yours, which I
should study with as much satisfaction, as I have done all those of the most
Illustrious Men. Though I was never guilty of any natural inclination to be a
great Courtier, yet am I one of those persons in the World, to whom some of the
greatest in the Kingdom have many times made promises, and for the most part
broken them. But that misfortune, attended by many others, shall not hinder by
being content with my Fortune, if you are satisfied how entirely I am,

Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER XV.
To the Lord Bishop of Man's.
My Lord,
I Am not dead, as the other eight Canons are, whose Prebendaries you have
lately disposed of, and yet you have also given away mine. I should be much
troubled, if they were no otherwise dead than I am; not but that I have a
sufficient charity for my Neighbor; but if they had not been dead, Monsieur
Costard, and Monsieur de l'Eslee, who happily are yet my Friends, would not have
been Archdeacons and Canons. I know not how I came to put in that word happily;
happily I had not used it, if I had considered what I was doing. If ever I have
the honor to write to you again, I will send you the first draught of my
Letter, lest I put any thing into it offensive to my Conscience. But to return
to my Prebendary, since you have disposed of it, you ought to give me another
for it, though it were only to make me some requital, for the time I have lost,
in relying on the promises of your deceased Uncle, of happy Memory, and little
mindfulness of his word. You know well enough what you have to do; but if I
were in your condition, I should bestow a Benefice on a Person that were in
mine. And indeed you have a sure Expedient to procure a vacancy, without
burden to your Conscience, or injury to good Manners, as was done by a Regular
Eunuch named Mortier, Abbot of Marmoustier, and Uncle to the Abbot of Euron.
This Master-Monk took occasion to poison a score of Priors at one Dinner; which
Accident occasioned the publishing of a Book, entitled, The Method of
procuring a Vacancy of Benefices, written by the Reverend Father in God etc.
It Is a palpable sign that Old Age steals upon me, since I fall into the humor
of telling little Stories. But it is in the Night time, and the Clock has
struck Twelve, and the Laverdins, who are great Talkers, are no lovers of those
who are so liberal of that Talent as themselves; and for my part, I am one of
the greatest talkers of any within the compass of my acquaintance. It seems
also, by this Letter, that I am liberal enough in that of writing, and that I
think the reckoning of my Cenfession will not be much enflamed, by this
dallying with one of the higher degrees of Reverence. Yet there is one thing I
must not at this time forbear minding you of, now that you are in the Kingdom
of your Fathers. It is, that you are to remember, my Friend Menagius, with all
his great worth, has very little advantage from the Revenues of the Church,
and that you ought to procure his participation thereof. I am by this minded
also of an oblivion of my own in this Letter, which is, that I have not
scattered, My Lord, in several places of it, a complement due to a Prelate, as
you are. But I shall not hereafter be chargeable with that omission, and if
ever I write to you, I shall do it with all requisite Ceremonies, assuring you
in the mean time, that I am,

My Lord, Your most humble and most obedient Servant, and, what is more, Canon,
SCARRON.

LETTER XVI.
To his Eminency the Cardinal de Retz.
My Lord,
YOu have made me rich in despite of Fortune, by compassing your advancement
to the Cardinal's Hat, with the defeating of all their Projects, who envied you
that Grandeur. I have hazarded all my Estate in Wagers that you would attain
that Dignity; it must therefore be mightily improved, if I have to do with
Persons of Honor and tender of their engagements. It Is my humble Suit to
Heaven, That yours may have the like augmentation, according to what disposal
the Divine Providence shall think most convenient. Nor is it likely to be
tedious in giving this Promotion of yours its full accomplishment, and that
your new Dignity will be completed with all the additional dependencies
consequent thereto, for the conviction of all the World, that the Hand which
made the Cardinals of Amboise and Richelieu, had not yet shown all it could
have done. Mean time, I only beg your assurance, that whether in France, the
Indies, or what Climate soever my unhappy Destiny disposes of me, I shall ever
passionately be,

Your Eminency's most humble, etc. S.

LETTER XVII.
To the Duke de Retz.
My Lord,
IT may be you conceive a great self-satisfaction, when you reflect on your
generosity. Dislodge that fond imagination; it is the most incommodious quality
an Eminent Person can be guilty of, when he is so imprudent as to spin out his
divertisement, in the company of such a Wretch as I am. We Writers are a
strange sort of people; for where we are once obliged, we are importunate all
the days of our lives after. You bestowed on me some days since the Works of
Monsieur de Voiture; I am now to beg of you a thing of greater importance. I
am acquainted with some Lords, whose countenances would change at these last
words of my Letter; but they are not so terrible, as to frighten or startle a
Duke de Retz; and I durst be sworn, he is as impatient to know what I desire of
him, as I am assured of obtaining it. It Is this: A young Gentleman, whose name
I find in the Catalogue of my choicest Friends, and one who at the age of
twenty years has been concerned in twenty engagements, as noble as that of the
Horatij and Curiatij, and has as great a reputation of Prudence as Gallantry,
has killed a vapouring Braggadochio, by whom he was forced to a Duel. He
cannot procure his Pardon any where but in Paris, and he would fain be in
safety there, merely out of a repugnance he has, to the severing of his head
from the shoulders. I could prevail for his reception into the Palace of a
great Prince; but for his entertainment there, as to provision, I can promise
nothing; and I think starving a greater misfortune, than to be in fear of
having ones Throat cut by an Officer appointed for that purpose. But if you
afford him the Sanctuary of your Roof, he will be in a condition to defy both;
and you will have no small satisfaction, in taking into your protection a young
Gentleman so much deserving it. Besides, you will have the greatest pleasure in
the World, in seeing Candles snuff'd with Pistol-bullets, as often as you shall
think fit to be a spectator of that Divertisement: And I question not, but you
will give me thanks, being as you are, the most generous of all Dukes, for
finding you out so noble an occasion to exercise your Generosity; and I for my
part, promise to supply you with the like as often as I can, and that, as soon
as you have granted me what I now desire, I shall importune you daily, to
employ your interest and that of your Friends, to procure the pardon of mine.
The Burlesque Muse will not be silent upon the obtaining of this favor, but
will acquit her self well enough of an acknowledgment thereof; though hitherto
she has been little put to it upon a subject of this nature. I beg your pardon
a thousand times for the tediousness of my Letter, and as often kiss your
hands, remaining,

My Lord, Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER XVIII.
To the Count de Vivonne.
My Lord,
WHile you are taking your diversions in the Country, and happily killing Horses,
in the pursuit of Hares, we have wanted your good wishes at a Wedding; which
has united two Warlike Nations, between whom the height of the Apennines made
not so great a distance, as the difference of their Humors. I needed not to
have sent you this News, since it is not to be imagined, but you know it
already; yet since there is a necessity of my writing to you, I thought it not
improper to begin with that great piece of Intelligence, merely out of this
reflection, that, if all other Records fail, Posterity may find the time of so
remarkable an occurrence by the date of my Letter to you. Your next observation
will be, that, notwithstanding this strange revolution, the City of Paris is
much at the same rate as when you left it; that, for one rational person, there
are a hundred thousand that are not such, nor ever will be; and that this is as
true of the Women, as the Men. There is another inconvenience consequent to the
removal of the Court; which is, That they who smell of their dirty Shops where
ere they go, presume to take the Wall of all they meet, and plead the
prerogative of Birth and Breeding in the greatest City in the World. No Quarter
of it, but has a Poet, good or bad; nor House, where Company has access, but
is pestered with vain and superfluous Talkers. Of these, mine has the
precedence, and I must bear all, without any other remedy than that of
bemoaning my self, to see the afflictions of my Mind bear some proportion to
the infirmities of my Body. For my part, the decaies of my condition are daily
more and more observable, and I feel my self towed to my end faster than I
could wish. I have a thousand pricking pains, or rather a thousand Legions of
Devils in my Arms and Legs, and yet in that condition, I cannot reproach my
self with any remission in the love I bear you. I know not how far it may
contribute to that of my pain; but this I am certain of, that you owe me a
great measure of Esteem and Friendship, and that, if you do me Justice, I shall
have this to bragg of, that, toward the period of my days, I have made so
advantageous an acquaintance as yours. I might very well think this a fair
acquest, for a Person who cannot stir from the place where he is set, and give
a check to all further ambition; but you have given me so excellent a Character
of Monsieur Manchini, that I shall never acquit you of the promise you have
made me of the honor to be known to him. Yet must it be with this precaution,
That he be not a man of many complements; for when I am forced to make any my
self, or to receive them from others, I cannot forbear weeping, and am put out
of countenance, to think what a loss they also are at, who will needs display
their Eloquence, when they have to do with the object of universal compassion.
In a word, I have as great an aversion for Complements, as most people have for
Serpents, and Toads; and to assure you it is so, I shall conclude my Letter
without making you any, and put a short period to a long Letter, by telling you
that I am,

My Lord, Your most humble and most obedient Servant, S.

LETTER XIX.
To Monsieur Marigny.
Sir,
I Must acknowledge my self orepress'd by the weight of so great an honor as
that of being so much in the remembrance of a Prince; and that though I am the
most wretched, and the most froward person that ever was, yet there have been
general observations made of my alacrity, since I have received your
assurances, that his Highness found some diversion in the reading of my
Letters. I must impute it to a strange hazard, that they should be thought
pleasant at Brussels,; for he who writ them at Paris is a Person the most apt
to be out of humor of any in the world. And who, with a mischief could be
otherwise, placed in the same circumstances as I am? True it is, that some
express a certain esteem for me; many take occasion to compassionate the
hardness of my Fortune; but how few endeavor to alleviate it? In the mean time

Gray hairs, affliction, discontent,
Poison all my divertisement;
Past ills, the present, those to come,
Hasten my course to my long home.
WHen I bethink my self, that I was once handsome enough to deserve the
respects of the Bois-Roberts of my time; when I reflect that I have been
healthy enough till the Twenty seventh year of my age, to have drunk after the
rate of a German; that I am still as sound within, as that I can drink of all
Liquors, and eat of all sorts of Meat, with as much unreservedness and
indifference, as the greatest Epicureans; when I bethink my self, that my
apprehensions are not faint, pedantick, or impertinent; that I am free from
ambition and avarice, and that if Heaven had continued me the use of those
Legs, which have performed their part well in a Dance, and those hands which
have been well skilled in Drawing, and playing on the Lute; and in fine a very
straight Body; so that I might have lived a happy, though somewhat an obscure
life; I assure you, my dear Friend, that if it had been lawful for me to have
been my own Executioner, I had long since wafted my self in a Socratick draught
into the other World. Nay I am somewhat of a persuasion, that I must come to it
in time.

Orewhelm'd with sadness, grief, and misery,
Far beyond all support of Constancy,
Admitting not the hope of any rest,
But what in a deep grave may be possessed;
My restless thoughts continually dilate
Themselves on the disasters of my Fate.
But what avail imprudent exclamations?
It Is vain with Heaven to make expostulations.
For if the Powers above do so decree,
To punish my licentious Poetry,
That, from the fatal minute of my birth,
I should be wretched, till I Am turned to earth;
Far be it from me, their Orders to oppose,
But court their favor in submissive Prose.
This shall be the last sally of my Poetic vein, it lay so heavy on my heart,
that I could not be at ease, till I had disburthen'd my self of it. And to make
you further reparation for the trouble I give you by the peevishness of this
Letter, I send you six Stanza's which I have added to the Baronade. The News
spread abroad of the Spanish Paralytick, who is to challenge me upon the score
of reputation, has found those whom I have acquainted with it very good sport.
There has not yet been 50000 Livers bestowed in Spanish Grammars, as you say,
though the Spanish Tongue was never so corrupted as it has lately been at
Paris. I am extremely obliged to you for the pains you take to supply me with
Spanish Comedies. I wish, etc.

LETTER XX.
To the same Monsieur Marigny.
Sir,
NEver was two-legged or two-handed Creature hurried into such a degree of
exasperation as I am at this time, that, when you thought I might find his
Highness the Prince some divertisement, my clawlike hand is grown so
rebellious, that I cannot command it to write. For, as if all my other
afflictions were not torment enough to me, I must make what shift I can to tell
you, that for above a month now past, I have had a continual conflict with the
Gout, which like Prometheus's Vulture has fed upon me without the least
remorse, or consideration of my other infirmities. And what do you imagine I
can do amidst the racking twitches it gives me? Or how should I resent the
malicious visit it makes me at this time, when the Prince himself is exposed to
the jerks of the same inexorable disease? All I can do, is to fancy to my self,
that I come not behind Job in miseries, though I may do it in patience. It
makes me so inventive in the faculty of swearing, that I think, without
ostentation, I could out-swear any man in France; though at other times, I
place that amongst the most superfluous Transgressions, and I must acknowledge
it to be so now, for any thing I am the better for it. Certainly, if the
greatness of the torment which occasions it, does not expiate the crime, as I
can hear, so shall I in the next World be the most wretched of all Mankind. For
sometimes my furious transports are so like those of a damned Soul, that if a
commanded party of Devils were coming for me, I think I should endeavor to
meet them halfway. I doubt they are coming, for I begin to feel the first
accesses of a dreadful fit, and therefore must take a short leave of you, and
leave you to imagine the rest with etc.

LETTER XXI.
To the same.
SIR,
YOur writing to me has given me the greatest satisfaction I could have
expected. My generous Friends are all the Estate I have in this World; and when
you assure me that you are of that number, I cannot forbear assuring you again,
That you give me a greater occasion of rejoicing, than I shall derive from the
General Peace, which is now so near its conclusion. The comparison will
possibly, at first sight, seem weak to you, and I must acknowledge, that the
Affairs of Europe might change face a hundred times, ere ever mine look any
better. But I am over head and ears in desires, to see your Prince once more in
France, though it were only for this reason, That France is this Year but
poorly furnished with Princes, and yet there are as many as ever there were,
and the subsequent years will happily prove no better than this: and if I have my
satisfaction in that, I shall have it also, in embracing my tall, my corpulent,
and my fat Monsieur (...). For I question not, but strong Beer has made some
additionals to his former bulk. But is it possible, the great and Heroic Conde
should know, that I am yet among the living? My Friend Guenault told me so, and
that he had seen lying upon his Table the Second Part of my Comical Romance. It
put me into such an humor, as I never was in twice before; I was so
transported with Heroic thoughts of my self, and if my Diseases had not
fastened me to my Chair, I would have stolen upon him to see how he would have
been frighted at the monstrous appearance of the Author. These Heroes are an
odd sort of people, and would be worth the whistling after, if they could but
be brought to love the indigent part of Mankind, as well as the others love
them. As for yours, he seems to have heroify'd himself a hundred times over,
since he has taken upon him the Conduct of our Invincible Troops; and it may be
said of him, That if he were a great Prophet in his Country, where the
Scripture says that no man is, he proved much more such a one in a strange
Country. If he take the pains to read any thing of the five Epistles, in Verse,
which you receive herewith, be pleased to let me know what he says of them.
The Melancholy Invective comes piping hot out of my Study, the others were the
last Years productions. It Is pity the Person who is the subject of it had not
been some more notorious Rascal. But this is only a damned Tax-gatherer, who
owes me six hundred Pistols, and would conscientiously chowse me of that small
Sum. You tell me of a Lady that is fallen in love with me, I entreat you to
give her timely notice, that my Diseases have rendered me of so irregular a
Figure, that Women with Child are forbidden access to me, for fear of Monstrous
Births, and Miscarriages. But for your part, I adjure you to be kind to

Your Lazarillo di Tormes.

LETTER XXII.
To the Mareschall D'Albret.
My Lord,
YOu are not to be so much bemoaned by others, as you imagine to your self,
since that if your absence, or exile, or what else you pleased to call it, were
not voluntary, you might easily find an occasion to quit the Campaign: But it
is to be feared, that some beautiful Eyes at Xaintonge have made a conquest
over yours, and you have the ambition to have your Military Trophies interwoven
with Points de Venize. Your Friends therefore here are much more to be bemoaned
than you are, and their complaints are more pressing. For my part, I am clearly
dashed out of all countenance. When you were pleased to honor me with your
Visits, I thought it the greatest happiness I could make by braggs of. The
appearance of your Coach at my little door rendered it venerable to all the
Inhabitants of the Street I live in; and I am told, that it procured me the
envy of several great Gates, whose Owners think themselves better accommodated
to entertain Persons of your Quality. Nay, the standing of Rincy's Coach at the
same place some time since, does still keep my Neighbors in awe: but it is to
be feared, that they will forget themselves again, if some Courtiers make not a
speedy return to Paris, and, till yours happen, keep up our glory and repute,
which, for want of such Visitants, is much eclipsed. But though it should be so
darkened, as that I might never recover ought of my former luster, yet is it
possible, that a man may be comforted with a little Philosophy. But the case is
quite otherwise, when a man is forced to be Six months together without seeing
the persons he loves. Were it not for the kindness of your writing to me
sometimes, I should soon make it known to all the World, by a generous act of
despair, that my Heroes are not such Idols, as a fantastical humor, or Time
can destroy; that Madam Scarron speaks against her Conscience, or knows not
well the internal concerns of a man, with whom she spends the best part of her
life, when she tells you, that my affection to you will not last above Six
Months. That will be tried by the effect. But now I speak of Heroes, you tell
me, that Monsieur the Surintendant, who is also one of my Heroes, and which is
more, my only Benefactor, will take his way through Pons. I question not but
you will recommend to him the concerns of your humble Servant, and the
conclusion of his fatal Affair. There never was a more favorable opportunity
for the settlement of it; Julian Colas the most insolent person that ever got
his livelihood by the retayling of Bread and Wine, and one that would prefer
the most despicable Carman, or Porter, before the greatest Virtuoso in the
Kingdom, and the only person who obstructed the establishment of my affair, has
taken his last draught in this mortal life. The Unloaders are as desirous to
see it established, as I am my self. But Monsieur the Surintendant has told our
Friend Pelisson, that it could not be completed till after the return of the
Court. It Is possible, his late being there may have somewhat advanced it, and
that the most wretched person, of all those to whom he has shown any kindness,
will soon be at some ease in his Mind, and will find himself out of danger of
dying, for want of employment for his Jaws. Madam Scarron has been at St.
Mande's. She is extremely pleased with the Civil Entertainment she received
from Madam the Surintendant's Lady; and I find her so smitten with her
attractions, that there is some suspicion there might be a little touch of
impurity in the interview. But that danger must be the less, since she cannot
wait upon her as often as she wishes, because, for want of a Coach, she cannot
go abroad, but when her Friends are pleased to take her along with them. I am
forced to write things to you that have no relation to your Concerns, for want
of something that has. When I meet with any more worthy your knowledge, you will
hear further from

My Lord, Your most Submissive of all your Adorers, S.

LETTER XXIII.
To the same.
My Lord,
WE must needs be extremely exhausted of Advertisements, when we cau only tell
you, That Bon-coeur, and Charleval are still in Normandy, and that Madam de
Martel, and her Daughter, returned hither but yesterday. Yet is there a
necessity, that I should send you a large Letter, and that I should give some
assurance, at least by the endeavors I shall use to divert you, as far as one
of my Letters can do it, that it is not altogether my fault, if I do not stand
you in some stead. You must therefore give me leave to catch at any thing that
offers it self: and though the spectacles of the violent dissolutions which are
seen at the Greve, are not things that can be recommendably communicated to the
knowledge of a Person of your Quality, yet shall I not stick, out of pure
sterility of matter, to give you an account of what has happened there. There
has been lately, for several days together, so much hanging, and breaking of
persons on the Wheel, that the common Executioner himself is weary of his
Office, Madam (...) who, next to Monsieur (...) is not so much pleased at any
sight, as that of public Executions, begins to be cloyed with the
divertisement, and will hardly be seen this good while in the Greve again. The
Martyrs are all of the true Parisian breed, most of them the Sons of that kind
of Cooks, who sell only Roast-meat, because they have no convenience for any
other way of Cookery. They were convicted of the robbing of Coaches and Sedans,
and other Crimes ordinarily committed in the Nightime, and many of other
denominations in the faculty of Stealing, are in great danger of dying in the
Air. I am to tell you, by way of Digression, That the Cockneys of Paris, my
Countrymen, are valiaut enough, more apt to steal, then beg, as being of a very
patibulary inclination. But now I am fallen upon the subject of violent Deaths,
I cannot forbear giving you the relation of one, which was not so ignominious,
as that of the foresaid Criminals, yet was not less cruel. Before I come into
the Story, you are to understand, by way of preadvertisement, that the next
subsequent days after Sundays, and Festival days, there is a great scarcity of
all Provisions at Charenton, and particularly of new bread above all things.
'Twas upon a Monday, not long since, that the Impetuous Du Rincy, the Eloquent
Pelisson, the Incomparable Scudery, and the Discreet Madam Bocquet, about half
an hour past Ten in the Morning, sent a Messenger express to the beautiful
Izar, who some days before had retired to Charenton, for the Air's sake, to
tell him, that they would dine with him that day, and that he should not give
himself the trouble of getting any thing but a good Potage and a Dessert, for
as to Meat they would bring it along with them from the Cooks. Izar, and a
certain Advocate of the Counsel, named Du Mas, whom he had taken for his
Country-Companion, during that retreat, beset and bestir themselves for the
more splendid Reception of so great a Party of Illustrious Persons, for we do
not every day see four such together. To give a greater fortification to the
Potage, they put in three Pullets, and a considerable quantity of green Pease;
and while a certain person is sent away Post to Bagnolet, for Raspices, they
employ the most experienced Pastry-Cooks of Charenton, in the making of Tarts
and Cakes. The Cloth is laid in the Garden, and to take away the scent of the
Lavender, wherein the Linen had long lain, the Table, Cloth, and Napkins, are
all bestrew'd with such Flowers newly gathered as the Garden afforded. About
Noon the Quintescence of all that dare assume to themselves the title
Ingenious, or Virtuoso, arrive at Charenton. Du Rincy, as soon as he was got
out of the Coach, went directly into the Kitchen, where he is little satisfied
with the Potage, much less with the diligences and solicitude of Izar and Du
Mas, in all the preparations they had made, and speaks thereof with so great
indignation, superciliousness, and authority, that Du Mas began thereupon to
respect and to fear him. They who had a mind to wash their hands, did so; and
all sat down. Du Rincy slighting the Country-Soupe, would have broke one of
the Loaves; but finding it hard and stale, he flings it at an Apricock Tree
that stood near him, and renders it incapable of bearing fruit any more, having
bruised the greater branches of it. He goes to break a second loaf, which he
finds of the same date of baking, and consequently as far from being new as the
other, and with the same vigor and promptitude he flings it at another Tree.
In short, with six or seven loaves, which he found equally hard and stale, he
lames so many Fruit Trees, to the great discontent of the Mistress of the
house, who made extraordinary clamours at the desolation of her Garden. Du
Rincy, in the mean time, was not in the least concerned at it, save only that
he protested, no body should eat, till he had new bread brought him. They sent
to all the Bake-houses about the Town, till at last they came to one, where
they were taking the bread out of the Oven, which was brought to du Rincy,
piping hot, and smoking, so that the rest of the Company went and gathered up
the loaves amongst the bruised branches, which were more eatable than the new
bread, which burnt their Lips. The brisk deportment of Du Rincy, both as to
action and discourse, extremely surpised the Advocate Du Mas, and the
imperious Air of his Countenance was no less dreadful to him. From that very
time, he always had Du Rincy in his imagination. He never slept without
turbulent Dreams, and those Dreams were never without Du Rincy. In fine, the
very fright he took at the demeanor of du Rincy put him into a Fever, and
that Fever proved so violent, that it carried him off in less than fifteen
days, and he died in a raving and distracted condition, talking perpetually of
Du Rincy. And this, my Lord, is all the account of our Concerns, that I can
send you at the present. Madam Scarron says, that she cannot find any
inclination in her self to write to you, till she meets with something that is
divertive in your Letters. That reflection makes me think, that if you are as
much afflicted at Pons, as you were at Paris, my Letter will be impertinent,
and most unseasonable. But Time, yet much more your own Reason, will ere this
have wrought their ordinary effect, upon an affliction that admits of no
remedy. I send you my second Epistle. The Areopagus of good Judges in this
Profession, will have it to be better than the former: but I am not of their
opinion. I am still in expectation of the effects of Monsieur the
Surintendant's fair promises.

Postscript.
IT were very unseasonable at this time to speak to you of a thing which I
should wish that you had forgotten. Yet can I not forbear telling you, that I,
certainly, am, of all the World, the person who has been most concerned at the
misfortune that has happened to you; and, upon that occasion I found, that I
have for you all the sentiments which I ought to have, for the most generous
Person in France, and one to whom I am the most obliged.

LETTER XXIV.
To the same.
My Lord,
AFter the Pastey you were pleased to send me, I have also received your
excellent Cheeses. I am apt to imagine, that you have made it your design, to
sustain us with the best things that can be made, in their kind. Your
Liberality has been communicated to all my Fellow-Commoners, who are not the
most inconsiderable persons in the World, upon the score of their good
qualities. At the consumption of your Present, we liberally drunk the health of
our grand Benefactor. As for the Pastey, it was as good as ever came out of
Oven, and the Cheeses were such as the best Dairy in the World, and that
ordered by the most experienced Dairy-Woman in the World, could have afforded.
For my part, without any diminution of the Commendations which your noble
Presents deserve, give me leave, to recreate my self upon the Letter you were
pleased to honor me with, and to tell you, that there is not any thing in that
kind could have been more gallant, or more ingenious. Among other passages,
that, where you tell me, that you leave to those of transcendent Wits the care
of diverting mine, and that you make it your business, only to divert my gust.
I leave it to the most expert in the Chimistry of Complements to write more
smartly upon such a subject. By this may it be seen, my Lord, that you have an
insatiable ambition, and that not being content with the Military Glory you
have acquired during the War, you would also in the times of Peace carry away
from us poor Pensioners of the Pen, the Trophies of Literature. I wish I had
somewhat of News to write to you. All the talk about Paris is, that Meneville's
sickness is very dangerous, and that all the Courtiers are like to return to
Paris, save only the Marshall de Villeroy. As Soon as I have any thing worth
the writing to you, I shall make it appear, by that only small service which I
am capable to render you, how much I am,

My Lord, Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER XXV.
To the same.
My Lord,
I Have no certain account of your reception of a Letter of Eight and twenty
Pages, which I writ to you by the last Ordinary: however, you will excuse me,
if this be so much the shorter. And because it is so, it comes to you attended
by my Epigrams against B (...), and tells you withal, that I shall send the
Baronade by the next Post. I now send you also a Ballad, which may pass Muster;
some Verses of M. Benserade's, being a Continuation of those he made upon the
Peace; and a Sonnet of Exultation, made by a young Lass of Nineteen years of
age, whose name is (...). It Is to be lamented that she is not as pretty, as I
think her well inclined. I expect, with as much impatience as the Jews do the
Messiah, the effects of M. the Surintendant's promises. A man may languish,
while he hopes: nay sometimes he may suffer; and delays in such affairs never
come to any good, but are for the most part dangerous and prejudicial. But, it
was never yet my fortune to obtain any thing of happiness, without the conquest
of incredible obstructions. Be pleased to pardon this melancholy reflection, in
a wretched person who is ready to starve. Threescore and sixteen days have I
been in continual hostility with a hard Frost. The Duke of Orleans is out of
all hopes of recovery. Yesterday morning, the Duke of Lorrain took Post for
Blots. Villarceau is still a Prisoner in the Bastile, though the Mareschals of
France, who conducted him thither, had put him in hopes, that he should only
make a Visit to the place, and come out again. This is all I have to say to you
at the present. If there be any of my Letters which have not been employed in
the lighting of fire, or put to some other culinary use, I desire you would
send them to me. I shall find some fragments therein, which may be ornamental
to the Collection I am now putting into the Press. I am,

Your, etc. S

LETTER XXVI.
To (...)
My Lord,
IT belongs only to those of your House to make the highest demonstrations of
kindness and generosity that can be made. Monsieur the Procurator General, your
Brother, has settled a Pension upon me, without the least application, or so
much as a previous desire on my side, for his so doing; and you were pleased to
give me a visit, without any person's Solicitation on my behalf, to induce to a
guilt of so great a consideration. What can I do less then acknowledge my self
your humblest Captive, upon a favor done me with so great a surprise? I would
make you a greater present then that of my self, were it in my power; but you
must be content with that, since I make it with so good a heart, that you must
needs have a very hard one of your own, if you do not vouchsafe it a reception,
and give me leave withal, while I am in this World, to let it know, that it is
not without reason I assume the quality of

My Lord, Your most humble, etc. SCARRON.

LETTER XXVII.
To Monsieur Procurator-General, and Surintendant of the Finances.
My Lord,
IT argues, at the first blush, a great indigence of civility, in a person so
insignificant and superfluous in the World as I am, to importune you, who are
perpetually employed about the public concerns, to do me a kindness. But I
conceive my my self to be already in a fair way of receiving somewhat of that
nature, and you have already given me so many assurances of the kindness you
have for me, and the compassion, which the misfortunes under which I groan,
have raised in you, that without using the Mediation of those Persons who are
most dear to you, and are pleased to honor me with their good wishes; I am
sufficiently presumptuous, upon the interest I have in you my self, to beg a
favor of you. It is one of those which you sometimes grant, as you will find
by the Petition you receive herewith, and which I desire you will be pleased to
look upon a person with all the favor you can. It is for a Relation of my
Wifes, remarkable for his constant fidelity to his Majesty's Service, and one
who is of an obstinate persuasion, that you have a respect for me. It will ly
upon you, my Lord, to let him know, that he is not mistaken; and upon me, to
make all France sensible, that you are not only the most experienced Person of
this Age in State Affairs, but have also that more endearing quality, of being,
of all men, the most generous, particularly to

My Lord, Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER XXVIII.
To the same.
My Lord,
I Heard not till yesterday of the great loss that has happened to you; and
yet, considering the short time I have had to be afflicted thereat, I have
acquitted my self as well as those who had the knowledge of it much more sooner
than my self. I have great reason to charge Monsieur de Chaulne, with his
negligence in not giving me a more timely advertisement thereof, that I might
have had the advantage of being one of the first, to make a discovery, how much
I am concerned in whatever relates to you. This no doubt is a mischievous turn,
which my implacable ill fortune has done me, always endeavoring to render me
deficient iu the duty I owe you, purposely to make me unworthy of the
assistances I receive from you, which are such as I never received from any
other. Monsieur des Mares, who yesterday honored me with a Visit, will, if he
please, assure you of the affliction it was to me, that I should be ignorant of
what all the World knew. He put me into the confidence of writing an
extemporary Sonnet, which I made some difficulty to send you, out of a fear of
renewing your grief. But, at last, I chose rather to run the hazard of doing a
thing unseasonably, than that of seeming indifferent in an affliction, whereof
you must needs be so sensible I am,

My Lord, Your, etc.

LETTER XXIX.
To the same.
My Lord,
I Was but too true a Prophet, to my sorrow, when I heretofore writ to you,
that my misfortune could not be overcome by any person of generosity and
prevalence not equivalent to yours. It still stands out against you, though it
be a considerable time since you first took it into task. Some eight days
since my Lord Chancellor was pleased to strike out my Fatal Affair, the
Proposals made by Mons. Doublet, conceiving happily, that it would be a new
grievance upon the People. It was concerning those Persons that should be
empowered to oversee the unloading of Carts; and it would have been an easy
matter, if some would have taken the pains to do it, to make it appear to him,
that the function of Unloaders or Dischargers is so far from being a charge or
grievance, that it is a public convenience, and has established it self, time
out of mind; that without it, a thousand Carts and Wagons would remain at the
Gates of the City without getting in, because it is not thought fit that the
Waggoners should be trusted with the Money due for their entrance, and that the
Dischargers should pay, and be answerable for them, and conduct them to the
Houses of Merchants and Citizens, whose habitations the others are ignorant of,
and discharge the Commodities at their own perils; That the money which is given
them, is not exacted, but voluntarily given, as a kind of Largess, bestowed
only by those that are willing, without any obligation forcing them thereto;
And, in short, that it passed at the Guild Hall of the City, as soon as the
Provost of Merchants, who, before had opposed it, for want of thoroughly
examining the affair, was fully satisfied, that there was a necessity of
creating those functions into Offices, and that they ought to be exercised, by
Persons who had settled habitations, and took their Oaths before him, for the
due execution of their Charges, because people of all conditions employed
themselves therein, even to Soldiers of the Foot-Guards; and that while those
Rascals were quarrelling at the Gates, to get the custom one from the other,
and went a League out of Paris, to prevent one the other's getting of it, the
Wagons remained at the Gates, without either being discharged, or getting into
the City, to the prejudice of Waggoners, and the Merchants. And now, my Lord, I
think you are as well instructed in the Affair of the Unloaders, as I am my
self; and I would to God, my Lord Chancellor had had the same account of it. I
should have sufficiently satisfied him therein, if I had had but notice of what
has happened, or rather, if I had not been afraid to have my name mentioned in
that affair, contrary to my intention. My Lord, I beg your pardon for the
tediousness of the relatiion I am forced to make you, since you might have done
well enough without it: but it is always observable, that when a miserable
person has some affair wherein he is deeply concerned, he derives a privilege
from that misery, to be talking of it. This is the last hope of my Wife and my
self; and I must needs tell you, that I should hardly admit of any consolation,
if I did not represent to my self, that I serve a Master, whose promises are
inviolable, and one who is able to do me right. Yet can I not stave off the
discontent, occasioned by so sensible a disappointment. For, my Lord, if you
but imagine what will become of us, if this Affair miscarries, you would not be
much astonished at the despair of Mons. Vissins and my self, since there will
be a great probability that our mouths may be sowed up. By this, you may
measure how long I shall be,

My Lord, Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER XXX.
To the same.
My Lord,
I Cannot imagine to my self a better way to requite Monsieur Pelisson for his
kindness in speaking to you concerning my Affair, and in giving me an account
of the obliging answer you were pleased to make him, then in communicating to
you the short Complement he has written to me upon it. He therein so handsomely
discovers the true sentiments he has for you, that I think, I do him a very
kind office, by telling you so, without his knowing any thing of it; and yet
happily he would be glad that you knew it, provided it were done without his
hazarding himself to tell you so. It is a difficult matter to speak of you,
even though it were done to your self, without falling into your praises; and
it is as difficult to give you any without displeasing you, and yet much more
difficult to forbear giving them. I should therefore wish, as to my own
particular, that some body would do so much for me, as to tell you, that you
are the most generous Person in the World, and that all the Favors you do me,
go infinitely beyond the entreaties I make for them. But will not your Lordship
suspect the good office which I think to do my Friend, may not have the
tincture of some concern to my self? And will you not be apt to imagine, that
to show you his Letter, and give it the great Commendations I do, is, in some
sort, a dextrous way of making use of his reflections, that I might the better
express my own, without running the hazard of doing any violence to your
modesty? I must acknowledge there is something of that in the wind; but since it
has not been in my power to conceal it from you, be pleased to imagine, by this
ingenuous confession, the sincerity of my Soul, and assure your self, that I
am, above all others,

My Lord, Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER XXXI.
To the same.
My Lord,
I Am uncertain, whether you will be in a condition to read my Letter. The last
time I sent to enquire of your health, the account I received was, That you
were no fully recovered of an indisposition which had, for some time, confined
you to your Chamber. It will be no hard matter for you to imagine, what alarms
that ill news must bring to a man, who at the present is obliged to you for all
he has in the World, and who, without you, would be more wretched than he is,
though his misfortunes be in a manner beyond all example: Those who have
honored me with their love, as you have done, may have been themselves fully
satisfied, that my affection for them has been very great, and it is not to be
thought, that I should now begin to be ungrateful, toward the most generous
Person of all those who ever had pity on me. I think every hour a thousand,
till I get to Paris, to take my Oath of fidelity to you, which I have not yet
done. Mean time, I humbly beseech you to complete the Favor, whereof you have
made a beginning in the business of the Wagons, and to procure that Justice be
done to those, to whom that Affair has been confirmed. Monsieur Poncet will
make a Report of it on Saturday next, if the Council sits. They who are
prosecuted are fully convinced, that there are above four thousand Livers due
to the King; and it is a concern that may extend much further, as you will find
by the account which the Bearer of this Letter is able to give you of it. I am,

My Lord, Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER XXXII.
To the same.
My Lord,
IF there be not some great self-satisfaction in obliging people, I know not
upon what grounds you should do me any kindness. I am not a person any way
useful to you, and I dare not wish that I were, lest I should make a wish that
might be disadvantageous to you. Nor am I so fondly conceited of my self, as to
hope that I can contribute much to your divertisement, since I cannot have the
honor of coming near you, or making my self otherwise known to you, then as
all others know me, to be, even in this life, not much inferior in torments,
to a damned Soul, and sometimes by the making of Books, that is (by the
permission of God Almighty) by being one of the greatest inconveniences that
can happen to Mankind. But though I should be Master of some Qualities that
were more considerable, and though a particular acquaintance of many years
standing should have brought me into some favor with you, and that I should
cultivate that favor by a constant Commerce of Letters; yet would all this
amount to little, if the Affairs of the public Ministry be so pressing upon
you, as that you cannot afford them the reading. Well, my Lord, these
Reflections give me a great deal of trouble, as often as the remembrances of
your Liberality raise them in me; and I am extremely out of countenance, to
think that I cannot preserve my self in your memory, otherwise then by the
miserable Productions of a Mind, which, by reason of a Body much more
miserable, and a Destiny yet more miserable than that ruined Body, must not
ever expect much tranquillity. But, now I speak of those Productions of the
Mind, am I to believe, that you liked my Fable of Hero and Leander? Monsieur de
Chaulne would persuade me to believe it; but possibly, it was only his kindness
to flatter an indisposed person. I humbly beg your Lordships condescension so
far, as to give me under your own hand an approbation of it, which I shall
prefer before that of all the Academists in the World, or that by your Censure
thereof, I may so much the better know my self. Howere it happen, I am,

My Lord, Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER XXXIII.
To the same.
My Lord,
THe favor you were pleased to do me, in not slighting the Comedy which I
dedicated to you, was enough to induce me to be absolutely at your disposal,
without any necessity of your having engaged me further by a new obligation. I
think it one way to give you my thankfulness for it, when I acknowledge, that I
cannot sufficiently do it; and that I more fully express my resentment by that
confession, than by all the Complements in the World. I am,

My Lord, Your, etc. S.

LETTER XXXIV.
To the same.
My Lord,
I Am so far from deserving the kindness you have lately done me, that I should
have been much surpised thereat, if I had not already received other
assurances of your Liberality, or if I were the only person in the Nation who
knew not, that you are continually obliging all the World. All I desire at
present is, to conjure you into a persuasion, that the resentments I have
thereof, are the greatest I am capable of. But, my Lord, if, on the one side, I
am overjoyed to see that all the Affairs of State, the management whereof lies
upon your shoulders, divert you not from thinking of mine; so, on the other, it
is no small affliction to me, that I can neither forbear speaking of your
munificence, without ingratitude, nor publish it without raising a certain
jealousy, that it is not so much out of inclination, as interest, that I have
ever been, and ever shall be,

My Lord, Your, etc. S.

LETTER XXXV.
To the same:
My Lord,
WE never saw any Surintendant in France beloved and esteemed, as you are; and
the reason is, that we have not seen any so generous and obliging, as you are:
but I doubt you pay dearly for it, and that cannot acquire so noble a
reputation, without the enduring of great importunities. For my part, it would
be a continual remorse to me, that I have been importunate through the whole
course of my life, and that I am not in a way to reform, if I did not at the
same time see the wealthiest persons, and those of the highest quality, beg
favors of you with less reservedness and caution than I do, though they have
not so much right to pretend to your kindnesses, as such an unfortunate man as
I am, whom you have promised to give his Mind some tranquillity. That, my Lord,
is an enterprise worthy your great Self, and that you may the sooner be
satisfied that you have completed it, I recommend to you my Concerns in the
Affair of the Debets. Your Lorship may be pleased to remember, that it was upon
my entreaty you granted the confirmation of it. The persons, for whom I
solicited your furtherance of it, proffered me a small part in the Affair;
but, when I consider that I am but slowly happy in all my undertakings, and
that I could not imagine it should come to what it now is, I chose rather to
content my self with the payment of six hundred Pistols, which they have
promised, by a writing to that purpose, out of the first money that shall be
received. I have now neither any concern in the affair, nor the money, which had
been promised me for the facilitation of it. If your Lordship will but
vouchsafe to speak one word to the Projector who is to have the benefit of it,
I shall have either the one, or the other, or both. I question not but you will
grant me that favor, since I am, more than any other,

My Lord, Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER XXXVI.
To the same.
My Lord,
I Take the liberty to make a request to you with as much confidence, as if,
after the courtship of many years standing, I had done you some service of
great importance. But persons of your quality, that is, such, whose generosity
is so transcendent as yours, are not only forward to oblige their Servants, and
their Friends, but their favors are extended also to all those that stand in
need thereof. They are the perpetual Sanctuaries and Protectors of the
Unfortunate, and the constant Repairers of their Breaches; and for your own
part, my Lord, I think there passes not a day, but some distressed Knight or
Lady comes to beg a Boon of you. I entreat you therefore, as an unfortunate
person, and one, who, of all the World has the greatest honor for you, to
grant me one. It Is only, this, my Lord, that you would use your persuasions to
the Provost of the Merchants, to forbear opposing the establishment of certain
Offices relating to good Government, of which Offices I have acquired the
propriety. It Is an Affair which would contribute highly to the establishment of
my Concerns, and supply me with four or five thousand Livers of annual Rent.
But my unhappy Destiny, which does not let slip the least occasion of doing me
an ill turn, has raised up a Polypragmatical fellow, who without any engagement
in the Affair himself, has prepossessed the Provost, and made him averse to the
design. I have employed, to solicit him, Monsieur the President de Guenegaut,
who had been so kind as to take along with him Monsieur de Franquetot, and my
Wife; but his recommendation of the business has proved less prevalent then a
bare Factum. I expect a quite different effect from the Letter, which I entreat
you to write to him, and to send by some one of your own Menial Servants. It
will be sufficient, if he does but know, that I have the honor of being known
to you, to raise in him a thought of my being a person worth obliging. But if
you will be farther pleased to tell him, That you look not on me with an
indifferent eye, he will make my affair his own, since he will conceive it in
some sort to be yours, and you will have this satisfaction thereby, that the
most zealous of your Servants will not be the poorest of that number, and
consequently, that it may spare you much of the future addresses, which you
must otherwise expect from,

My Lord, Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER XXXVII.
To the same.
My Lord,
THough, you are the most experienced person of all those that are now
entrusted with the management of State Affairs, yet you must give me leave to
tell you, that you did not thoroughly reflect on what you did, when you would
needs make me believe, and that by the most obliging Letter in the world, that
I had some place in your Affection. Unfortunate persons, such as I am, are many
times importunate, contrary to the bent of their own Inclinations; and generous
persons, such as you are, have sometimes occasion to repent of their being too
highly generous. After what you have already done for me, which was enough to
make me your most humble,...... most obedient...... most observant..... and
most obliged Creature, as long as I should continue in this wretched state of
mortality, (though the success should not prove answerable to my expectation) I
should not have had any ground to importune you any further, if the calamity of
my condition did not in some sort give me that privilege, or if I were not
encouraged thereto, by a consideration that your Generosity is not tired out.
But, my Lord, that has promised so much, that I cannot harbor the least fear
of my ever desiring too much of you; besides that the Affair, whereof I beg
your facilitation on my behalf, is one of those that seldom denied in Council.
It is contributory to good Government, it brings considerable Sums in a short
time into the Exchequer; and if it succeed, I shall have as great reason to
celebrate the greatness of your benefits, as I do already that of your
Civility. But whatere may happen to me, I must be the most ungrateful person in
the World, if, while I am, I am not,

My Lord, Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER XXXVIII.
To the same.
My Lord,
AM I not guilty of too much freedom and familiarity, to beg a great kindness,
of a great Person, in a short Note? I know there is a vast distance between a
Grandee, a Privy Councellor, a Minister of State, and poor Paul Scarron; and
yet, to make an ingenuous acknowledgment of my natural infirmity, I can as well
forbear breathing, as being somewhat jocose and familiar with those persons,
for whom I have a great affection, or continuing in a serious humor to the end
of a Letter, which I may have begun with MY LORD, or, MAY IT PLEASE YOUR
LORDSHIP, in Capitals. I would not therefore have you imagine, from what I have
said, that I am thrifty or forgetful of the respect I owe you; I shall ever
render what is due to your Character, answerably to my Abilities, and I know
how to make my Addresses to you in the sublimest kind of writing, when occasion
shall require it. But the very same man, who shall sometimes leave half a foot
distance between MY LORD, and the beginning of the Letter he is writing to you;
who shall drain the Academy of Complements to fill it with Rodomontades and
Hyperboles; and shall not omit the least of your Qualities, least the
superscription of it should not be sufficiently authentic, will, after all
that ceremony, fly out, and entertain you with trifles, and a little
dissuperciliate that serious countenance, which methinks you ought to have,
when you give a conclusion to some great Affair. In a word, he will endeavor
to uncatonize you, if I may presume to use that expression; but that must not
be, when the important Concerns of State are under deliberation; that is, when
you are Procurator-General, Surintendant of the Finances, and Minister of
State, such a Triumvirate of Offices, as none ever exercised so well before.
Monsieur de Chaulne will take a fitter opportunity, and will not suffer me to
appear before you, till you have divested your self of those Titles, and assume
the place of Monsieur Fouquet, I mean the most excellent Person in the World;
when you shine in your own proper luster, without borrowing that of your
Charges and Dignities; when having quitted the Consular Robe, you are at St.
Mandes, or Paris, in your withdrawing-Room, clad according to the ordinary mode
of private persons, and somewhat in the same equipage and humor, as Scipio was
in, when he gathered shells on the Seaside with his Friend Loelius. Could I
have the happiness, my Lord, to be admitted to you, at such a time, I should
make no difficulty to entertain you with any thing that came first into my
head, and be the frolickest person alive, as long as Heaven were pleased to
continue me in the humor. Yet should not that be, till I had first begged your
permission to be so, such as was given me by the late Cardinal of Lions, and
such as I took my self, without asking, with the Cardinal de Retz, when he lay
by me upon my little yellow Couch, and talked of things no way relating to the
Cabals of Paris. I dare boldly own it, that, in those two Eminences, I
triumphed over the Stoicisme, and serious temperament, which attends the red
Cap. Time was, when they would have it to be an Article of my Faith, that they
had a love for me; you may follow their example, and afford me a little of your
affection, without either blushing or disparagement, and by the extraordinary
care I took to deserve their caresses, imagine with what zeal I shall be
inclined to love you. You have a kindness for me, upon this particular score,
that I am a wretched person, and you have done me more in the space of fifteen
days, than the greatest part of the Peerage of France promised me, ever since
the time I was condemned to the posture of perpetual sitting. Of the last
Twenty years which I shuffled away of my weary life, there has not past one,
but some great Lord among those that come to see me at my Chamber, as people
went heretofore to see Elephants, and Estriches, or popp'd in thither to pass
away the afternoon, when they had made bilk Visits, or have nothing else to do;
there has not. I say, one year passed, but some one of those titulary Grandees,
and mountainous promisers of Friendship and all the conveniences consequent
thereto, has shamefully broke his word with me, and has as often proffered
either for my Friends or my self, what I desired not of them. And yet Monsieur
the First President, whom I never had the honor to see in my life, sent me
this last Year a considerable Present by the Abbot of Menagius, and that within
a very short time after I had dedicated a Book to him; whereas you your self,
who were ignorant of my being in the world, have honored me with your
kindnesses, and that after a manner yet more obliging, than those very
kindnesses. I think, my Lord, that I am not engaged to make a more particular
discovery of what I desire of you, whatever Command you have laid on me to do
it: I ought to receive the favors you shall do me with all the resentment of
gratitude that I am capable of; but I have not any right to prescribe them to
you, nor yet to demand any of you. Your own Generosity knows well enough what
it has to do. It is sufficient, for the quiet remainder of my life, that, from
the place where you are, you have cast an eye upon me in that where I am; and I
question not, after the obliging Note you were pleased to write to me, and
which I shall dearly keep, but that I may shortly say, when I speak of you, --
Deus nobis haec otia fecit. Mean time, to importune you no farther, I am,

My Lord, Your most humble, etc. SCARRON.

LETTER XXXIX.
To the same.
My Lord,
I Question not, but you may have heard, that I was as kindly entertained by
the late Queen of Sweden, Christina, as I could expect, when I was carried to
the Lowvre, to satisfy her Curiosity. Nor is it to be doubted, but that the
relation she made in her own Country, and the many others through which she has
once traveled, of that important Visit, was extremely divertive to all that
heard it. A good Sedan, and two lusty Fellows to carry it, and a third, to
convey my own great Chair, out of which I have dictated more Burlesquery, than
any other Author has done, might with as much ease bring me to your Palace,
that my Curiosity may be once satisfied with the sight of in seeing that
Person, to whom, of all the World, I am the most engaged. I should have already
satisfied the impatience I am in to do it, if my health had not obliged me to
take a little change of Air, at a place, about a League from Paris, where I
hope to put a period to a Comedy I have in hand. Mean time, I beg your
Lordships remembrance of the Promise you have made my Wife, concerning the
Marquisate of her Cousin de Circe, and to be pleased, that Monsieur Patriau may
make you a report of that affair. The favor we beg of you herein, is one of
the greatest; but, if I am not mistaken, I have already told you, That you
could not do small ones. And I once more protest to you, That if I were not
fully persuaded, that the Lands, for which we beg your final conclusion, are as
much our rightful Freehold, as any man's can be in France, I should not have
undertaken to speak to you of it, though all my Wife's Relations in Poictou
have importuned me to do it. I shall forbear further abusing your patience, and
remain,

My Lord, Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER XL.
To Monsieur Pelisson.
SIR,
AFter all the good Offices you do me with our Noble Patron, the Surintendant,
methinks you might well have taken the freedom to open the Letters he writes to
me, before they came to my hands; and I have some reason to complain, that you
had not the first reading of that which I received this day. It speaks so much
of Kindness intended to me, and that does so inflame my gratitude, and puts me
to so great a loss, that, if he often write me the like, he, I say, whom I
ought to love above all the World, I think I should come and run my self
through with a Stilletto at his feet, not knowing any thing else efficacious
enough fully to express a resentment so real and sincere as mine is. I send you
the Letter it self, that I may have your joynt-affirmation of its being the
most obliging Missive that ever was. When you have returned it, I will have it
put up amongst my greatest Rarities, as a Testimonial to all Posterity of the
Kindness, which the most Generous of all men is pleased to have for me. I
desire to know, Whether he were much diverted with my Epigrams, against
Monsieur B(...), among which there are two very pleasant ones. I am

Your, etc. S.

LETTER XLI.
To (...)
SIR,
IT is in a manner impossible for a man to be so transcendently obliging as you
are, and not be often importuned. For my part, I am very sensible, that I
importune you often; but I have this apology to make for my self, that
importunities are in some sort allowable in persons, remarkable for their
calamities as I am; and you would think it strange your self, if I should not
make the best advantage I can of the honor of your acquaintance, and the
kindnesses you have for me. Two days since, my Servant left at your house a
breviat, concerning the affair I may have with Monsieur le Tardif, who
doubtless would not deny you a thing of greater consequence, and whom I shall
satisfy, when he pleases, upon what I have grounded my pretensions. It is my
desire, Sir, that you would speak a word with him concerning it, and give me
leave to send some person to him, as if it were from your self to request of
him, what you will find in the Memorial which I now send you. It Is one of my
Friends of Dreux who has made the discovery of it, and is con^^nt that I should
make some advantage thereby, besides the satisfaction it will be to me, that I
have endeavored to serve him. I am,

Sir, Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER XLII.
To (...).
SIR,
IT has been extremely to my prejudice that I am not so well known to you, as
you are to me; I presume you would make no question, but that I should have for
yonr Generosity all the sentiments it deserves, and for the Obligations you
have laid on me, all the acknowledgments I am able to make. I am this day
advertised by Monsieur le Tardif, how earnestly you bestir your self to do me a
kindness, and I have thereupon acquainted him, how far those obliging
procedures of yours are free from all suspicion of any benefit or interest to
your self, since I am the most useless person in the World. Sir, it is my suit
to you, that you would continue them, and complete a work, which could not have
been undertaken by any man who had not a Soul of the same mold with yours. If
you will appoint a day for that purpose, I will give Monsieur le Tardif notice
of it. I am somewhat in haste to acknowledge my self indebted to you for my
tranquillity, not so much out of a desire to see my self in a short time well
established, as that of having a greater inducement, to assume the quality of

Sir, Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER XLIII.
To (...).
SIR,
IT was my fortune this day to be quite out of money, a thing not extraordinary
to me. I thereupon sent my Servant to Monsieur de Richemont, to entreat him to
advance one Quarters Rent of my Pension, eleven days before it became due.
Monsieur (...) happened to be there, a Person I have not the honor to be
acquainted withal, and I think it is not my fault. However, he took occasion to
reproach me with it, as a great misdemeanour, and most unmercifully sent me
word, that he knew me not; That I was acquainted only with Monsieur de Lorme,
and that I had never dedicated a Book to him. What say you to the brutality of
this gallant Person? But this is not the first affront I have received from
him. I would gladly have a particular Character of this unpolished Lord, and
know, how he stands in point of respect with a Master so eminent for civility,
as Monsieur the Surintendant. I am resolved to make my complaints to him
against a man so cruel and tyrannical to poor people. But if ever you see any
Dedicatory of mine to Monsieur (...), set me down for the greatest Rascal and
Scoundrel, not only of all the Province of Scarroneria, but also of all the
voluntary Rascals of fair France, the most fertile of all Countries in Persons
of that Qualification. I hope toward the end of the Week to have my Present
ready for Madam, the Surintendant's Lady. Mean time I remain,

Sir, Your humble Servant, etc. S.

LETTER XLIV.
To (...).
Sir,
I Would fain write a Letter which were worth the communicating to your noble
Patron, and such as might procure a second order to be given to Monsieur
Bruant. But is there any possibility of writing good Letters, when a man is
quite moneyless? I was never so much fallen out with prosperity as I am this
day. In three Lotteries it was my chance to meet with pure Blanks, and the two
silver bowls, which Madam Scarron has got, and which must not come into the
common stock, have only given me occasion to envy her good luck, and to detest
my own misfortune. Add to this that the Bois Roberts, and the Corneilles, to
whom your dear Patron has been manificent beyond all that ever were celebrated
by the name of Mecoenas, disturb my rest, as much as the Triumphs of Miltiades
did that of another Athenian. Could I have gone and come, as another man, you
had escaped the importunity of above twenty of my Letters, and I would have made
my Addresses to you in my own, I may say proper, but I must add withal, very
irregular figure.

But when poor Scarron thinks to wait
On that great Minister of State,
Thy Patron, who, with candid looks,
Deigns to peruse his worthless Books;
Nay when he thinks (so fair's the weather)
Himself now got near halfway thither;
For he by this time is 'ith'aire,
Truss'dup in his eternal Chair,
Supported by two lusty Fellows,
Who trudging make a noise like Bellows:
By sudden torment he is crossed,
And all precedent labor's lost.
For two hours had been idly spent,
To give his Carcass ornament,
That what before was execrable,
Might be among Grandees more passable;
But all the washing, rubbing, shaving,
Is spoiled by swearing, cursing, raving;
For he must do, as he was wont,
Though Heaven, and Hell, and all, lay on it.
Which made some say, alas! poor Scarron has
Expiring, now renounced the Christian Faith.
Now, in the Bigotian Dialect of the surcengled Tribe, what I have told you in
Verse, is called Being visited of the Lord. Nay, it has happened to me many
times, that some good Religious men have come purposely to congratulate the
happiness I had that the all-merciful God was pleased to visit me, oftener then
any other; and seemed to envy me a felicity, which I would have heartily
resigned to any of them, with all the advantages I had thereby, of promoting my
future welfare. For my part, I wish there were some less painful expedient
then those Visitations, for me to secure my salvation, and I find my self at a
great distance from that high degree of perfect resignation to the Lord's will.
For I must seriously acknowledge, that I languish and pine after what you have
put me in hopes to receive from Monsieur Bruant. I am willing to believe, as
you write to me, that he would oblige me; but I question whether he will do it
much. I believe also that he finds it some trouble to raise money at the
beginning of a Campaign; but there wants so small a sum for me to begin mine,
and what I expect from him would contribute so little to the distraction he is
in, that he might put a period to mine, without much augmenting his own. It is
your concern to solicit him herein, were it only that you may be delivered
from the persecution of my Letters. To excite you the more, I am to tell you,
that I was yesterday put into a great fright; word was brought me, that
Monsieur Meraut, Master of the Accounts, was desirous to see me. I was much
troubled to think what might be the consequence of my Landlord's visit. But his
discourse was only concerning the reparations of his house, the innundation of
the River Seine; and his last complement was, That, though unhappy in other
things, I was a happy man in being so ingenious. I am,

Sir, Your most humble, etc.

LETTER XLV.
To (...).
Sir,
I Have a story to tell you, which, if I mistake not, will find you some
diversion. Some three days since, I was fallen very low in the purse, an
accident which is very ordinary to me. I sent my servant to Monsieur Richemont,
of whom I receive every Quarter four hundred Livers, a Pension bestowed on me
by Monsieur the Surintendant. I desired him to do me the favor, to make me ten
days advance of the Quarter now current. There happened to be with him one
Monsieur (...). a person I know not, and he reproached me with it, as a great
fault, whereof I have yet but little thought to reform my self. This man
meeting with my servant, entertained him with this discourse. I know not your
Master; He knows none but Monsieur de Lorme, and never either dedicated to, or
presented me with any of his Books; tell him, that he shall not have his money
till the end of this month. You see, Sir, how that Poverty makes men
despicable; and though Queens, and Princes, and all the greatest persons of
quality in the Kingdom have had the curiosity to come and see me, honor me
with their Visits; and dispense with my rendering of any to them, I find an
unciviliz'd Lord in Monsieur (...). And you see also, Sir, that though you are
esteemed and beloved of all the World, yet is there an envious Brute, to whom
your noble repute gives some disturbance. I shall forbear giving further
occasion of grumbling, to the people of business, who wait in your Antichamber,
by amusing you any longer with the reading of a Letter of no great importance.
I am,

Sir, Your most humble, etc.

LETTER LXVI.
To (...).
Sir,
I Am much troubled to hear of the soarness of your Eyes: But what adds to the
trouble, is, that having a great likelihood of doing much mischief, they are
the less bemoaned by diverse other persons. It concerns you to examine whether
they have deserved what they endure, and so seek out, in your own virtue, for
all the patience, you now stand in need of. For my part, it is the greatest of
my afflictions, partly out of a consideration of my present interest, and
partly out of that of my future expectation. For since it has been known, that
you have honored me with your acquaintance, I find that I am more considerable
among several persons. The other day, I only took occasion to speak of you, as
I ought to do, before Monsieur de Scudery, and this day, I received from him
the Letter I now send you, by which you will see, that he hopes great things
from you, if you but ever so little promote the request which Monsieur Menagius
has made for him. No doubt but Monsieur Servient will tell you, that these
Briefs from Rome are very troublesome, and I am so more then any one, in
recommending two affairs to you, in the space of eight days. But when I
solicit for other persons, I am as fierce as a Lion, but for my self, I am so
bashful, that it is with the greatest repugnance in the World, I importune any
man with my concerns. Since my Letter is grown so long, I must tell you
further, that upon the first sight of Monsieur Servient, I conceived he would
be a person answerable to my inclination; his merit has since raised in me a
veneration for him; and the kindness he has expressed, in enquiring whether I
were alive, has made an absolute acquest of me to his service. This
protestation of mine is as sincere, as that of my being,

Sir, Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER XLVII.
To (...).
Sir,
I Send you the two Letters which I read to you yesterday, because I observed,
that you expressed a certain liking of them, with this promise, that I shall
cause some others to be transcribed for you, as also some Verses. But at the
present, the greatest part of my employment is the writing of Comedies, because
my principal subsistence depends on it. It Is a wretched kind of Labor, which
is not of any great advantage, though a man bestows much of his time in it,
and gains him but little reputation, when he makes too great expedition. The
others require a great repose and serenity of mind: and a man has but little of
either of them, when he is as much discomposed in his health, as in his
affairs. And for my part, I must acknowledge, that I find a great diminution of
that facetious humor, for which I am so remarkable, ever since I have been
reduced to a necessity of making verses for my livelihood, as a person damned
to a Trade. I am extremely at a loss, when I reflect, that if I express not my
thankfulness to Monsieur the Procurator General, as highly as my resentment of
his favors advises me to do, he may suspect, I have it not to the degree I
ought; and if I do thank him answerably to the desires I have to do so, he may
imagine, that I have a mean and mercenary soul. I am sufficiently satisfied
that he is so transcendently generous, as not to expect Complements from those
whom he obliges, and goes by this principle, that that is properly giving, when
a man gives to an useless person, such as I am; whereas to be liberal to one
from whom he may receive some service, implies somewhat of Commerce, rather
then the bestowing of a kindness. In a word, Sir, there is in this point a
certain nicety which I ought to observe, and which I desire to be instructed by
you, who have known him so well, and so long. I did not make account to have
written to you so seriously; but sometimes there rises a certain cloudiness in
a man's mind, which cannot presently be dispelled. I am,

Sir, Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER XLVIII.
To (...).
SIR,
I Make no question, but you have long since assigned me a place among your
Friends; how well I deserve it, will appear by the demonstration I now make of
the desires I have to serve you, in giving you the knowledge of a Son of Madam
Mongerons, and withal the opportunity to oblige a Lady of her merit, in the
person of her Son, a person highly meriting the Friendship I expect you should
have for him. You will thereby give some assurance of that which you have
promised me; and I expect great acknowledgments of the kindness I do you both,
at the end of the Campaign. Of all the good qualities which the Gentleman I
recommend to you is maker of, I shall only mention one, which he himself would
have concealed from you. It Is this, that he commands the Lute better then any
person of his quality, yet has not the time, he has spent in that exercise,
diverted him from persecuting all the others, nor yet his Studies, and Travels
into Spain, Germany, and Italy. I might have said more of him, but I leave it
to your own perspicacity, to find in him those accomplishments, whereof I shall
give you a farther account the next Winter. In the mean time, be jocund, O most
passionate of all men, and least punctual in all things, unless it be in the
Friendship you have for,

Sir, Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER XLIX.
To (...).
Sir,
I Am in some degree useful to you, since I find you the means of obliging an
excellent Person* concerning whom we had some discourse two days ago. It Is
Monsieur R. one who is as much my Friend, as I am desirous to be yours. I think
that I have hereby made a sufficient discovery of his being a person of more
then ordinary merit; For it will not be for your honor to suspect, that I
understand it not; I, who had at the first sight so perfect a knowledge of your
worth, and would have purchac'd your friendship at any rate you would have set
upon it, if I had had wherewithal to pay for it. Monsieur Rosteau will tell you
the rest.

Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER L.
To (...)
Sir,
MY wife has given me an account of the obliging designs you have for us.
These new demonstrations of your kindness have not added any thing to what I
already knew of it. During the short time I had the honor to see you, I had an
absolute persuasion, of what your precedent repute would have induced me to
believe; and I must make this protestation to you, that, though the hopes which
your Friendship and protection raise in me, should not be attended with that
good success which in all probability will follow, yet should I impute it
wholly to my own misfortune, and make never the less acknowledgments of your
Generosity. I have not the repute of an ungrateful person in the World, and I
cannot give a greater assurance of it, then by representing to you, that though
I am the most useless of all Men, yet is there a great number of Persons of
Quality and merit, who are my Friends, or pretend to be so. But I must withal
avow, that among those that seem to be most earnest and pressing to do me good,
there is not any that proffers the doing of it, in so obliging a manner as you
do. You bestow much less of your time on your self then you do on others, and I
should put you to expend too much of it, if I should set down here all that my
gratitude does inspire me withal. Till I can make a public declaration
thereof, be pleased to content your self with the sincere protestation you now
receive of my ever being, while I live,

Sir, Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER LI.
To (...)
Most Reverend Father,
I Have received an Advertisment from you, that Father Vavasseur had written a
Tract against the Burlesque Style. He has done well. I find in my self some
inclination to envy so Noble a Design; and you will do me a pleasure to afford
me the perusal of a Work, for which the Public ought to think it self obliged
to him. If I were to write against some inconvenience incident to Mankind, it
should be against the Burlesque Poesy: but you have an ill opinion of me, if
you think that I bear him the least ill will. Next to stinking Breaths, and
morose Company, I know not any greater inconvenience, than the Burlesque
Verses; and since I am in some sort the cause of the great overflux which has
happened of that kind of Poetry, I have no great occasion to quarrel at Father
Vavasseur's falling upon me. They, who told you, that I was incensed against
him, know me not, and I should still have been ignorant of his having written
against the Insects of Parnassus, if you had not informed me. The World is much
obliged to him, for having set forth a Work, which tends to the reformation of
so great an abuse. You might well have given me a sight of it, were it only to
make amends for the injury you have done me, in thinking me capable of so great
an impatience. Be pleased to let Father Vavasseur know, that I am his, and

Most Reverend Father, Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER LII.
To (...)
Madam,
I Must needs have a very advantageous conceit of Madam d' Aiguillon, for after
I have seen her, heard her, and read the Letter which you showed me of hers, I
cannot abate any thing of what I have said of her. For Godsake, Madam, let me
entreat you, to make it your serious business not to spoil my Verses, by
changing a word, without which they would be defective. Her act of humility
would make me commit one of injustice, and you may tell her from me, that it
has already had its effect toward God. I assure her of it, with as much
certainty, as many others might do, who think themselves better informed, than
I am, of what passes in the Celestial Court. She is but the second of those
Ladies, whom I have canonized before their death; but she is that of the two,
of whose Virtue I am most assured: and I dare affirm, that though she should,
during her life, leave a sum, to defray the charges of her Canonization after
her death, yet would it not be so much the effect of her presumption, as of her
wisdom. I will tell you more of it, when I shall have the honor to see you.
But though I am smitten with her merit, more than any other person ever was,
yet shall I believe more of her, then I shall tell you of her; I, who cannot
speak meanly of what I esteem, and who am the most tender of the interests of
persons that are like her, when they have gained me by their goodness. Oh! that
she had but some quarrels that were to be decided with Pen in hand, you should
see, how I would bestir my self in her service. I am, in the mean time,

Madam, Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER LIII.
To (...)
Sir
THe former Letters we received from you were so divertive, that we looked on
it as an argument of your, and Monsieur (...)'s being not only in health, but
also in a more than ordinary good humor: but there is so much discontent in
the last, as gives us occasion to fear, that now you are not in either. True it
is, that for your part, you have overcome your indisposition, nay I am apt to
think that you are not troubled with any, since you understand Raillery. But as
to Mons* (...)I would advise him to breath a Vein, and I promise him, not to
endanger the enflaming of his blood hereafter, by the satirical freedom of my
discourse. My raillery is always directed to my Friends, because it is my
presumption, that they are not displeased therewith; and I shall not take it
amiss, if they give me as good as I bring. I shall not therefore stick to tell
you, that as pleasant as your Friend (...) thinks me. I cannot pretend to be
half so pleasant as he; and that during the space of seven or eight months,
that he has made his residence at Paris, like a Rinegrave, and carrying on
Amors by Placets, Factums, and Letters of Recommendation, he has given the
World a greater diversion, than I shall do while I live, with all the Burlesque
and facetious humor that God has bestowed on me. He has further this advantage
over me, that it is with some violence to my self, that I am pleasant, whereas
he is naturally such, and without so much as thinking of it. But least my
Letter may seem as undivertive to you, as what he writ in yours, upon the
innocent raillery of his most humble Servant; I shall speak of something else.
I send you a Pourtraiture of Madam Bonneau, which I did upon the persuasion of
Madam Scarron. Some have thought it not unlike her, and written naturally
enough. Commendations do not divert much, and are but perpetual repetitions of
the same thing. The Baronade is finished; I shall send it you, as soon as I
have shown it to Monsieur the Procurator-General. I am much troubled concerning
Monsieur the Marshall d' Albret; it is the common report at Paris, that he lies
very sick, and some say, he is to be brought thither in a Letter. The loss of
so generous a Friend would not be one of the least misfortunes, of the most
unfortunate Person in the World.

Sir, Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER LIVE.
To (...)
Madam,
THough the affair I have proposed to you come to nothing, as to the success I
expected from it, yet should I prefer it before the most advantageous one I
could do, since it has procured me the reception of one of your Letters. It was
possibly your intention to write me only a Missive full of civility; but you
have done much more, insomuch, that I must acknowledge, Madam, that of the most
unhappy of all men, you have given me so great a satisfaction of my own
fortune, that I now think my self the object of envy, rather than compassion.
In short, the effort which your kindness has wrought in my mind, is my most
important Affair, and so takes up my thoughts, that I know not how I can speak
to you of that which I have in the hands of Monsieur de la Noue Renart: But,
since you enjoin me to do it, and that it is more just I should comply with
your desires, than follow the bent of my own inclination, I shall only tell
you, Madam, that if you do but satisfy M. de la Noue Renart, of Madam
Scarron's, and my being somewhat in your favor, it is impossible my affair
should prove unsuccessful in his hands, though he should oppose me, as much as
I find him disposed to serve you. In that expectation, or rather assurance, I
remain,

Madam, Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER LV.
To (...)
Sir,
I Know not whether you are as much lost to your other Friends, as you are to
me. I have no more sight of you, then if you were already admitted into the
Celestial Court, to which place you are making all the have you can. And yet it
was my opinion, that you were sufficiently accommodated, as to the concerns of
this lower World, and methinks twelve thousand Livers of an Annual Rent in
Spiritual Promotions, and eight hundred thousand Livers of Temporal Estate,
might have been a great temptation, for your making a longer abode amongst us
poor Mortals. But without any further Raillery, why are you no longer visible?
Is it that your fits of Devotion continue still, and that you would break off
all correspondence with so great a Sinner as I am? It were a Pharisaical action
in the highest degree, and you should rather think of promoting my Salvation,
as a thing of much difficulty, and not have forsaken me, till you had as much
security as this World could give you, of my happiness in the other: for you
will be much troubled, if we do not both receive the same blessed invitation at
the last day. Mean time I am,

Sir, Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER LVI.
To Monsieur de Segrais.
Sir,
HEr Highness does me a great honor in but thinking that I am in the World,
and it is no small one you do me, in believing me capable of drawing a
Pourtraiture well. But though I should be so fondly conceited of my self, as to
be persuaded of my ability as to that point, and that my earnest inclination to
please you, should give me that Painting; yet would the Pourtraitures which her
Highness has made, quite discourage me from making any. They are, as far as I
am able to judge of them, the noblest of all those that were ever yet made; and
the Virtuoso's of the present Age were to be bemoaned, that a Princess should
transcend them in the glory of writing well, if it were not highly to their
glory, to see her meddle with their Profession. There is a greater difficulty
in making a good Pourtraiture, then is imagined. A man should have a perfect
knowledge of what he is to draw; and methinks that commonly people know not any
well but themselves, and sometimes their intimate friends. Can any person of
excellent parts commend himself without much vanity? Or should one make a
discovery of his imperfections to any but his Confessor? In like manner, can a
man celebrate the accomplishments of friends, without importuning him? Or tell
them some truths without hazard of incurring their displeasure? Nor are the
inconveniences occurrent in the commending of indifferent persons less
considerable. For, as Portraitures ought to be made of subjects that are well
known, and that men are remarkable upon the score of their Quality and Merit;
so a man runs the risque of disobliging those persons to whom he owes respect
and esteem, if he gives them not the commendations they deserve; he must expect
the character of an impertinent person, if he gives them those that are not
truly applicable to them; and how cautiously soever commendations may be given,
it is my imagination, that there is not any thing more troublesome, to him that
receives them, to him that gives them, and to those persons who hear them
given. Besides these general reasons, upon which I have taken a resolution not
to make any Pourtraitures, I have some particular ones, which I question not
but you will approve. A wretched person, such as I am, who never goes out of
his chamber, has no exact knowledge of things, but what is had by the relations
of others. I doubt not but you will grant that to be a great defect in a
Painter, who ought to have his fancy fraught with a great number of Idaea's,
and apprehensions, which are not to be acquired otherwise then in the
conversations of the greatest persons; and I am sufficiently sensible, to my
great regret, that in process of time, a man may grow dull and rusty, in his
chamber, as much as if he were in the Country. A Man should have a smartness of
wit and discernment equal to that of so excellent a Princess, to make good
Pourtraitures, and be of a quality not inferior to hers, ere he shall be able
either to commend or dispraise, so as that there shall be no occasion to
quarrel at it. I am,

Sir, Your most humble, etc.

LETTER LVII.
To the Duke d'Elboeuf.
My Lord,
I Am not to be instructed what respect I owe so great a Prince, and so great a
Benefactor as you are, and it shall be my care not to abuse it: but it would be
withal impossible for me, to forbear exercising my jocose humor in a Letter,
though I begin it with MY LORD, and cannot avoid trembling for the first four
Lines. But at the present, you will be pleased to content your self with a
Million of humble Thanks, which I now send you, for the honor of your
remembrances of me, for all the excellent Pasties, which you ever sent me, and
particularly, for the last of them all, which is just now brought to the Table.
There are present at the opening of it, Messieurs de Vivonne, de Mata, d
Elbene, de Chastillon, not reckoning your humble Servant, to whom you were
pleased to send it. I question not but it will be a great satisfaction to you,
to find that the goodness of the Company is somewhat answerable to that of the
Pastey; and it is but just, that the Founder of so noble a Treat, should have
an account who are the Confounders of it. You may be assured also, that we
shall have more than one remembrance of your good health; and those
Commemorations will be a perfect comfort to me, for the absence of Madam
Scarron, whom Madam de Mont-chevreuil has carried away from me by main force. I
have apprehension, that that debauched Lady may occasion her being addicted
henceforth to Wine and Women. But for your part, my Lord, I shall presume to
give one word of good Counsel, as to the latter of those two enjoyments: which
is, that you be not so liberal of your radical moisture among the Provincial
Beauties of Picardy, as not to reserve a little of it, for the Coy Dames of
Paris, who in the mean time languish for your return. Of fall your most humble,
most obedient, most respectful, and most obliged Servants, I am the most
zealous,

Scarron.

LETTER LVIII.
To Monsieur de Villette.
Sir,
SInce the last you received from me, you were pleased to write to Madame
Scarron, and to Monsieur de Nossac. Those two Letters are admirable things,
worthy to be learnt by heart, and in a word, such as may well deserve the title
of Opera. A Person of excellent parts, whom you very well know, said, at the
reading of them, that you must needs be in an exquisite temperament, both as to
health, and affairs, when you could write so transcendently well. For my part,
were I not thoroughly acquainted with your accomplishments in the several kinds
of writing, I should say of those excellent works in Prose, which you daily
post up to Paris, what the same Monsieur d'Elbene sometime said very
pleasantly, of some persons, who make it their study to be of the first
magnitude in Company, that is, to be most conspicuous for their drollery, and
witty reparties; That indeed there was much reputation to be acquired by a
continual advancing of things remarkable and ingenious; but that the toil of it
much exceeded the pleasure; and he had observed, that persons of such an humor
were not long lived. I make it my earnest suit to that power which can do all
things, that it would be pleased to continue to you that great fecundity of
wit, and indefatigability of hand, which you have at present, and that, some
fifty years hence, I may be refreshed and satisfied with their happy
productions. But be this said only en passant; though fifty years will make no
great hole in eternity. In the mean time, Madam Scarron is very unfortunate,
that she has not a competent estate, and all the equipage and accommodations
requisite, to take her progress, when so great a felicity is proffered her, as
that of being wished at Brouage, by so great a Princess, as Mademoiselle de
Manchini.

Tyber's rich present, the Glory now of France.

But I hope she will recover that so great a loss, when the Court returns to
Paris, and that as soon as she shall have the honor to be known to that
incomparable Roman, she will allow her a place among those; for whom she has
some kindness. For my part, I would also offer her of my incense; for you know,
that we Poets must have some Divinity, on whom we may bestow it. But I am
distrustful of the merit of my Present, as much as I am persuaded, that she
deserves, above any person in the World, all the Hyperboles of the Poets; and
you know that our Ware is contemptible, when it is directed to any one, before
it be desired. The fullness of your Brouage causes a solitude here in Paris. Yet
can I not perceive any such thing in one little house; for the ambition of
being admitted into our small society, grows warmer and warmer, both in the
Court and the City. Not that we and our Paris would at the present enter into
any competition with your Divinities of Brouage; but their true Element is
Paris, or the Court; and when by their removal from Brouage they shall leave
you as naked as they found you, we can afford you no other quality, then that
of Provincialists, and wretched Islanders. Adieu; my hand grows weary, and I
can hardly tell you that I am,

Sir, Your most humble, etc. S.

LETTER LIX.
To the Count de Vivonne.
Sir,
I Have met with the first draught of the Letter, which I had written to you.
Upon second thoughts it seems to me very impertinent; but since you are so
desirous to see it, I send it you as it is. You have done me a singular
pleasure, in having me in your remembrance, and it is withal a great act of
justice; for you are so far obliged to a person who esteem you to the degree
that I do, as sometimes to think that he is in the World: and I must entreat
you to be assured, that your retirement at Roissy is not a greater affliction
to your self, than it is to me, who am apt to hope, that sometime or other you
would give me a Visit at my little Chamber, if your residence were at Paris.
This is to be understood, when you were disappointed of all other meetings and
assignations, and could not bestow your time elsewhere. The actions of our
Neighbors should be the Subject of our discourse; and many times we should
recreate our selves by some little circumventing tricks, without which, I
maintain, that all conversation must be lost in process of time. Mean time,
Monsieur d'Elbene and my self often remember you over a glass of Frontiac;
wishing you were here to do us reason. Monsieur de Mata is in Xaintonge; I wish
that he also were at Paris; his company would make your hours slide away
somewhat the more merrily, whenever you had the kindness to visit,

Your most humble servant. S.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by George Dawes at his Shop over against
Lincoln's Inn Gate in Chancery Lane.
THE History of the World in Five Books; The first Entreating of the beginning
and first Ages of the same from the Creation unto Abraham. The second of the
Times from the Birth of Abraham, to the Destruction of the Temple of Solomon.
The third from the Destruction of Jerusalem, to the time of Philip of Macedon.
The fourth from the Reign of Philip of Macedon, to the Establishing of that
Kingdom in the Race of Antigonas. The fifth from the settled Rule of
Alexander's Successors in the East, until the Romans (prevailing over all) made
Conquest of Macedon. Written by Sir Walter Raleigh Knight, in Folio.

The Second Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, containing the
Exposition of Magna Charta; and many Ancient and other Statutes. Written by the
Lord Chief Justice Coke. The 3d. Edition, with an Alphabetical Table; in Folio.

The Third Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England concerning High
Treason, and other Pleas of the Crown, and Criminal Causes. The Fourth Edition.
Written by the Lord Chief Justice Coke, in Folio.

The Fourth Part of the Laws of England concerning the Jurisdiction of Courts.
Written by the Lord Chief Justice Coke. The 4th Edition, with an Alphabetical
Table not heretofore Printed, in Folio.

Brief Animadversions on, Amendment of, and Additional Explanatory Records to
the Fourth Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England concerning the
Jurisdiction of Courts, by William Prynn Esquire; in Folio.

A Second Book of Judgments in Real, Personal, and mixed Actions, and upon the
Statute, all or most of them Affirmed upon Writs of Error; Collected out of the
Choice Manuscripts of Mr. Brownloe, and Mr. Moyle, sometimes Prothonotaries of
the Common Pleas. As also of Mr. Smither, formerly Secondary of the same Court.
Perused, Transcribed, Corrected and Tabled, with Addition of some Notes, by
George Townesend, Esquire; Second Prothonotary of the Common Pleas. Very use and
necessary for all Prothonotaries, Secondaries, Students, Clerks of Judgments,
and all sorts of Persons any way relating to the Law; in Quarto, price bound 5
s.

De Jure Maritimo et Navali: Or, a Treatise of Affairs Maritime, and of
Commerce. In three Books.

Modus Intrandi Placita Generalia: The Entering Clerks Introduction; Being a
Collection of such Presidents of Declarations and other Pleadings with Process
as well Mesne as Judicial, as are Generally used in every days Practice; With
Notes and Observations thereupon. Composed for the Benefit of the Students of
the common Law of England; as also of the Attorneys Entering Clerks and
Solicitors of the Courts of Common Pleas and Kings Bench, 'Acquainting them
with the Rudiments of Clerkship, and such General-Pleadings and Process as are
used at this day in the Courts of Record at Westminster; By William Brown,
Gent. Author of Formulae Been Placitandi; in Large Octavo. Price bound 5 s.

Jus Imaginis apud Anglos; Or, the Law of England, Relating to the Nobility and
Gentry. Faithfully Collected, and Methodically Digested for Common Benefit, by
John Brydall of Lincoln's Inn, Esque in Large Octavo. Price bound 12 d.

Parsons Law, or a View of Advowsons; Wherein is contained the Rights of
Patrons, Ordinaries, and Incumbents to Advowsons of Churches. Collected by
William Hughes of Grayes-Inn Esquire; The third Edition Reviewed and much Enlarged
by the Author in his Lifetime; in Large Octavo.

An Exact Abridgment in English of the Eleven Books of Reports of the Learned
Sir Edward Cook Knight, late Lord Chief Justice of England, and Composed by Sir
Thomas Ireland Knight, and Reader of the Honorable Society of Greys-Inn, in
Octavo.

Trials per Pais, or the Law concerning ^uries by Nisi Prius. By S. E. of the
Inner Temple Esquire; in Octavo.

Of the Office of the Clerk of the Market of Weights and Measures, and of the
Laws of Provision for Man and Beast, for Bread, Wine, Beer, Meal, etc. by
William Shepherd Esquire; in Octavo.

There may be had all sorts of Blank Bonds, and Blank Sheriffs Warrants.

FINIS.

