CIVIL MAGISTRACY BY DIVINE AUTHORITY, Asserted, and laid forth In a SERMON,
Preached at the Assizes holden at Winchester, for the County of South-Hampton,
on Thursday the 4th day of March, 1651/52.

Afterward, the same Subject much enlarged, and in some particulars more
cleared, and applied, on the like occasion, at Taunton in Somerset, on Sunday
in the Assize week, Aug. 22. 1652.

By WILLIAM SCLATER, Doctor in Divinity, Preacher of the Word of God in
Broadstreet, London.

ROMANS 13.1. Let every soul be subject unto the Higher Powers; for there is no
power but of God: the Powers that be are ordained of God. Non sine gravi
consilio Apostolus [abstractiva] locutione uti voluit, ut ostenderet Subditos
non debere ad Personas Imperantium respicere; sed ad ipsorum Officium, and ad
Potestatem, qua divini^us sunt instructi: Quos enim Apostolus hoc loco vocat
(...), eos Christus appellat (...), Luc. 22. ver. 25. Joh. Gerard. Loc. Com.
Tom. 6. cap. 1.. 8. LONDON, Printed by T. M. for George Treagle at Taunton: and
are to be sold at London by William Roybould, at the Unicorn in Paul's
Churchyard. 1653.

To the Worshipful JOHN TROTT, Of LAVERSTOKE Esquire; High Sheriff of the
County of Southampton, (A most accomplished Gentleman), A full Paradise of
Blessings.
SIR,
AS your Merits (attended with the Reputation and Honor of your Country) by
the guidance of the Supreme Providence, advanced you to that present Station,
wherein, as some new Beneficent Star arisen in that Hemisphere, you shine with
so amiable Luster, as it powerfully attracts the Gordiall Regards and Love of
all Eminent and Good men: So was it no mean Happiness to my self, that
(whilst I studiously served you) I found so fit an occasion, wherein to declare
my Zeal for Magistracy, a thing so acceptable to God, and so beneficial to
men: It pleased Heaven so far to favor my Endeavors this way, that my
Discourse gayning upon that Honorable Assembly, before whom it was uttered,
was by Authority requested (whereas it might have been enjoined) to the Press:
And being thus become more public and spreading, to whose name could I more
justly inscribe it, then to yours? whose Munificence may challenge it as a
Testimony of my Gratitude, and whose Superlative Endowments, both of Nature and
Grace (set off by so exquisite Education) win it Esteem and Acceptance abroad;
Surely, under such a Patronage, it cannot but be safe, and speed the better in
other hands and hearts.

Two principal things there are, which render you (above others) not
Commendable only, but Exemplary; the one is, that you are (...), (for Gods pure
Glory sake) a 1 John 4.19.
Lover of God; and the other, that you are (for pure Goodness sake) (...), a
Lover of Tit. 1.8.
Good men, and chiefly, of Able and Godly Ministers, the 2 Timothy 3.17.
Men of God: Both these conjoined, denominate you, without either Affectation
or Ostentation, an Israelite Joh. 1.47.
indeed. Your other Virtues of Temperance, Sobriety, Mansuetude, Affability,
Hospitality, Sweetness of Disposition, Candor, Liberality, Prudence, etc. all
which so intortelled as they are within each other, and within you, and so
indissolubly, as it were, concatenated together, they are as the Gold of Genesis
2.12.
Havilah, Good; but your Piety is as the Gold of Psalm. 45.9.
Ophir, eximious, and See Pro. 8.19
Very Good: And were I a Chrysostom, and flowed with all his golden Oratory,
wherein Elegantly, or copiously to embellish your due praises, I could not more
graphically express you, than under that your so genuine Character, of being
Psalm. 116 16. 2 Cor. 1.12.
Truly, and withal most Prove. 2.11. Psalm. 112.5.
Discreetly Religious; And as that Noble Emperor Theodosius, thought it a
greater Honor, to be Membrum Ecclesiae, then Caput Imperii, A Member of the
True Church, than Monarch of the World; even so you do; and may more solidly
cheer your heart in being Pious, than in being Opulent, though God has opened
both his hands, and powered forth his Prove. 8.18.
Blessings upon you: And that which farther augments the Value of all, is this,
that as the richest Carbuncles shine best in varyed lights, so your untainted
Virtues (whilst you keep your felf Jam. 1.27.
unspotted from the world) in this loose, inconstant and wavering Age, are
displayed in the brighter splendour.

How Happy then must your Father (to whose Encouragements, and Liberality I owe
many Acknowledgements) be esteemed in such a Son? being the staff and comfort
of his old Age: I may well hither apply that Apposite sentence of Prove. 20 7.
confer Psalm 112.2, 3.
Solomon, The just man walks in his Integrity, and his Children are blessed
after him: In him I cannot omit to mention one Grace (among many others
resplendent in him) remarkable, and that is, his singular 1 Timothy 6.16. Eccles.
5.18, 19
Contentation, accompanied with Temperance unto Admiration.

But, doubting least I have exceeded the measure of an Epistle, I now betake my
self to my most Fervent Devotions, for the accumulation of Heavens
Benedictions upon your Self, your Virtuous Consort, and your Hopeful Children
(enclosing also your worthy Parents) promising you to persevere what I am,

Sir, Yours, most Affectionately to Love and Honor you, WILLIAM SCLATER.

CIVIL MAGISTRACY BY Divine AUTHORITY.
2 CHRONICLES. 19.6, 7. And he said unto the Judges, Take heed what ye do: For ye
judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the Judgment:
Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, Take heed and do it.
I Shall not presume to deteyne you by any Impertinent Preface, or as Tertullus
the Orator, 1 Act. 24.1.
before Faelix the Governor, stand Courting your Ears this day, whereby to
gain upon your Clemency to hear me a few words on this Scripture; since both the
Text, and this Occasion, like Righteousness and Peace, do so sweetly embrace
and kiss each other: The Accommodation of the one being as Consonant to the
other, as sometimes was to the Coin of Caesar, the Mat. 22.20, 21
Image of Caesar; so that both the Importance, and withal the Seasonablenesse
of this Word (being like an Pro. 25.11
Apple of Gold in a Picture of silver) anticipates an Apology, and may well
promise me the Favor of your Noble Patience. And indeed, as Quintilian
observes, Where the Matter is Serious, and the Auditors indulgent, there a
Proaem is useless: Such, I am sure, is my Matter, and such, I trust, are my
Hearers: To my business therefore.

And now, as that Woman in the Gospel, first lighted her Luke 15.8.
Candle, e're she sought her Groat; So, before I come to present you with the
Jewels, I must first open the Cabinet wherein they are locked up; Lead you by
the Portall into the Inner Rooms; by the Circumstances of this whole Period of
Scripture, direct and light you to the main Materials of the Text.

Here are many Circumstances, and my Text like an Ingenuous Picture looks upon
all.

The first was the Occasion of this grave advice to the Judges; which was a
Solemn Reformation both of Church and State intended by King Jehoshaphat; in
the Diamonds of whose Crown, though there were some flawes, yet the sparkling
of the one, overblazed the duskishnesse of the other; for the good things found
in him, ver. 3, in his hands was now entrusted the Supreme Authority over the
Kingdom of Judah; which Kingdom, partly through his own Oscitancy or
Connivence; and partly also (as the Story foregoing intimates) through his
God-displeasing League with Ahab, that Sacrilegious, Idolatrous, and Wicked
Prince, having been lately ridden with but loose rains; He now (admonished by
Jehu the son of Hanani the Seer, ver. 2) resolves to give a check to his
foregone regardlessnesse, and by a speedy Expergefaction, to awaken both
Himself and his People to a discreet Regulation of all past Disorders.

And this he sets about in the right course, and after the best order: He
begins first with Himself; next with Religion; and then with Civil Justice, as
the strong Guard to both.

1. With Himself; And as the Prove. 30.28
Spider takes hold with her hands, and begins to mend her Web at the middle,
He prepared his [Heart] to seek God, ver. 3. By which Personal Reformation,
the Virtue of his Pious Example proved so Magneticall, that it attracted the
Observation of all his People; He went out again through the people, from
Beersheba to Mount Ephraim: The Ancients were wont to place the Statues of
their Kings by Springs or Fountains; to intimate, as one observes, that they
were the Fountains of Good or Ill in a Common Wealth; So was Jehoshaphat, here,
of good, to his Subjects. 2. Next to Himself, and his own Heart and Actions,
He takes care immediately for Religion, and the right Worship of the true God;
and surely, none so fit to restore that, as they who first have made their own
hearts as it were, the mould, wherein to cast Religion as in the proper Form;
and surely, thus did Jehoshaphat, as is abundantly manifest in the twentieth
Chapter ensuing, by his Fasting and Praying, and seeking of God; so that as
soon as his heart had Psalm. 45.1.
indicted so good a Matter, his tongue incontinently becoms as the pen of a
ready writer; By an effectual Invitation reducing his Exorbitant people from
their Adoration of Idols in their Groves, unto the Veneration of the True God
in Jerusalem; He brought them back unto the Lord God of their Fathers, ver. 4.
3. After himself and Religion, having so well entered with God; He then, and
not till then, provides for Civil Justice, and the due administration thereof,
according to the rules of Equity and Judicious Reason throughout the Land; and
this to be managed by such Persons, whose Learning and Experience in the Laws,
should give weight to their Proceedings, whose Age and Gravity win Reverence
and Honor to their Persons; such as these He set Judges in the Land,
throughout all the fenced Cities of Judah, City by City, ver. 5. and having
given them their Commission, and withal pondered the seriousness of the
Employment; He said to the Judges, Take heed what ye do, for ye judge not for
man, but for the Lord, etc.
And thus I have shown you the several Circumstances of this Scripture,
which, were it, happily, in a skilfuller hand, might yet be branched out
farther into more variety: But least I may seem to have hovered too long in the
Air of Generalities, I shall now fasten on those Substantial Materials which
are here before us in the Text.

Which Text is as the short abridgement, or Epitome of what concerns the
Magistrate, as such, in the discharge of that Function; insomuch, that
whatsoever lines of Paticularities can be drawn from the largest Circumference,
may be all here concentred in this Point: Yet for my Method in the present
Sermon, I observe out of it, these Heads of Discourse.

1. The Division
The Office it self, Ye Judge, or Judge ye. 2 The Authority or Commission by
which they execute that Office, Not for man, but for the Lord; Vices Domini
gerentes, as Junius notes, As God's Vicegerents. 3. The Discharge of that
Office, Do it, or Judge ye; Judicabitis, Ye shall Judge, so translated in the
Future, has, after the Hebrew Idiotisme, the Virtue of an Imperative. 4. The
due Caution or Circumspection to be heeded in that Discharge, Cavete, Take
heed; which is twice repeated, both in the Front, and in the Foot of the Text;
The one standing as an Ecce, prefixed, the other, as one of David's Selahs,
subjoyned; both which Notes, serve to set an Accent upon our Observation: The
former Cavete has relation to the Matter, Take heed what ye do. The later
Cavete has respect to the Manner, Take heed Now, let the fear of the Lord be
upon you. 5. The Motive to persuade the well accomplished discharge of the
whole, Vobiscum Jehovah in rebus Judiciariis; God is with you in the Judgment,
or in the matter of Judgment: Which phrase of Gods being [with them] is in
travel, as Rebekah, with a Twin of Interpretations; It denoting, either God's
presence, as a Spectator; or else God's pre-eminence, as a Protector of you in
the matter of Judgment; Which later seems by the last words of this Chapter to
be the most genuine, where he says, Deal courageously, and the Lord shall be
[with] the Good, to wit, for their Divine Assistance.
And these (at least as to my observation they occurr) are the proper parts of
this Scripture, the measures of my Sermon, and of your Christian Patience:
Please to favor me with the one, whilst I am, by Gods blessing, in the
dispatch of the other, I shall be as compendious as the Gravity of this matter,
and the great affairs ensuing shall allow in all.

And he said to the Judges, Take heed what ye do, etc. The first part


The first member of my Division mentioned, is the Office it self of
Magistracy, which I apprehend may well be couched under the Term or Style of
Judging, an eminent degree of the same: From whence the Point that I would
commend to you, is this, viz.

The Office and Benefit of Government, together with the mischief and misery of
Anarchy.

In speaking whereof, I shall use the same modest Apology, which Calv. Instit.
lib. 4. c. 20.. 9.
Mr. Calvin (that bright burning Taper of Geneva) did, being about to write
upon the same Subject: In Expounding (says he) the Magistrates Office, Non tam
Magistratus ipsos instituere consilium est, quam alios docere quid sint
Magistratus; It is not my intention to inform the Rulers, or Magistrates
themselves; but to instruct others of the people, who are to be Ruled and
Governed by them, What the Magistrates are, and for what good end and purpose
they are ordained of God himself: Not to inform them, this were for me (under
this Station) to exceed the activity of my own proper Orb, and to move in the
Excentricks; yea, this were after a sort to blend Professions, and to mingle
Civil Judicatures with Theological Doctrines; to fetch that into the Pulpit,
which is proper only, and adaequate to the Bench; my Office is to teach others
the great benefit, and good that God by the Ordinance it self of Magistracy
intends, and does; this, under favor (in a Spiritual notion) appertains to
our Ministry, the better to excite the people to their duty, both of Prayer and
Praises for them, and of constant fidelity to them.

Now, Two things there are that must come under this Head. First, the Office or
Government it self. Secondly, The Benesit, and Advantage of the same. These two
like 1 King. 7.21
Jachin and Boaz in Solomon's Temple, are the two main Pillars, supporting the
whole Fabric of my speech; and in my speaking of them, I shall of necessity so
twist my Discourse with the Benefit, that, as that Artificer wrought his own
name so cunningly in the Buckler of Minerva, that it could not be picked out,
without the dissolution of the whole Frame; so take out the name of Benefit
from Government, the most beautiful frame of any State may soon lie in the
dust.

The first thing that I shall endeavor is, to show you the nature of
Magistracy, what it is: and thus I shall describe it.

Magistracy is a public Power ordained of God, What Magistracy is.
for the preservation of Order, Discipline and Peace in a Common Wealth, by
Encouragement of the Good, and by the Punishment of Evil and Contumacious
Persons, according to Just Laws: This is Magistracy in it self.

1. Magistracy is a Power, so styled by the great Apostle, Romans 13.1. (...),
the word signifies, a Power of Right and Authority, which makes it to be (...)
High and Supereminent above others; so that the very term of Relation implies
the order of Superiority, and of Inferiority; High and Low, the Scripture
mentions, Psalm. 62.9. and 49.2. Small and Great, Act. 26.22. Rev. 20.12. The
one, in a rational apprehension, supposes the other; For, Par in parem non
habet protestatem; if amongst levelling Equals none may challenge to Rule the
rest, then the very name and nature of Government does enforce an inequality:
And indeed, without this, there could be nothing but confusion in the world;
For what is Bish. Davenant, quaest. 42. page 187, Edit. 1634. Cantabr.
Order? But Parium, impariumque sua cuique tribuens loca dispositio; A meet
disposition of Equals, and Unequalls, giving unto each their proper and due
places; and without such a moderate and meet Imparity, the (...). Aristot. l. 1
cap. 5. Polit.
Community will suffer: Government, it is as order to an army, which without it
were but a crowd; it is as an hedge to a Vineyard, which without it, would be
wasted by Wild Boars, and other spoiling Creatures; it is as an hemn to a
garment, which without it would ravell out; Hence was that known saying of
Greg. Naz. lib. 3. Theolog.
Nazianzene, (...), Anarchy is ever Disorder; And that freedom must of
necessity be most unfree, which under a Du Moulin, Defense of King James, Art.
22.
Title of Liberty introduces licentiousness, wherein whilst every one would
be chief, he becomes a slave to himself, and to every one: Now such impetuous
disorders, where ever they arise, if by any thing, will be by Government
removed, or at least overawed: This was not impertinently set forth by the
Ancients (says Ld. Verul. l. 1 Advancement of Learning.
one) in that feigned relation of Orpheus Theater, where all Birds assembling,
and forgetting their several appetites, some of Prey, some of Game, some of
Quarrel, stood all sociably together, listening unto the airs and accords of
the Harp; the sound whereof no sooner ceased, or was drowned by some louder
noise, but every beast returned to his own nature again. Wherein is aptly
described the nature and condition of men, who are full of Savage and
unreclaimable desires, of Profits, of Lust, of Revenge; which as long as they
give ear to Religious Precepts, and to good Laws, sweetly touched with
Eloquence, and Persuasion of the Makers, so long is Society and Peace
maintained; but if these Instruments be silent, or that Sedition and Tumult
make them not audible, all things dissolve into Anarchy and Confusion; We need
seek no farther for this, then the Book of Judges, where, under the want of
Government, every man did what was good in his own licentious eye; Judge. 17.6.
and 21.25.
and that, I am sure, was crooked in God's strict eyes: There was the
Corruption in Religion, in the making and worshipping of a Graven Image,
horrible Judge. 17.4, 5.
Idolatry, by Micah and his mother; there was Burglary, Robbery, and rifling of
Houses, yea, whole Cities of Harmless Poor people, and cutting all their
Judge. 18.27.
throats; abominable plundering, and lewdness by the men of Dan: There was (o
Prodigious Act!) the ravishing of a woman, and that to death, chap. 19. by the
men of Gilead, who also faced it out with impudence, and stood to maintain it;
upon the matter, there are no It was a saying under Nerva, It was better to
live where nothing, then where all things are lawful.
worse things in the world, then these were; yet all these were the issues of
Anarchy in those days: The people likewise in the Exodus 32.
absence of Moses the chief Governor, were as a ship wanting a Pilot at sea,
and so ran upon the rock of Idolatry, in making them an Idol the Calfe of
Egypt: And I marvel, were there no Sessions or Assizes, or Courts of
Judicature and Justice in our days, if the whole Land, like that of Egypt,
would not swarm with Exodus 10.5.
Locusts and Caterpillats, with Cutthroats, Robbers, Outrageous Vagabonds; and
Malefactors, which now (blessed be God) by the beesome of Circuit Justice are
swept off (what may be) from our earth.

Wherefore it was wittily observed by Hermes Trismegistus, or whosoever was the
Author of that Dialogue, which passes under his name; Hermes Trismegist.
Dialog. 9. ad Aesculap.
that by the Grecians, the world was styled, (...), that is, Fair: [(...)]
(...), For that God and Nature had so beautified and a dorned it, not only with
variety in the production of the Creatures, but in the comely order of
whatsoever was made, by a decent subordination of one unto the other.
Government was at first founded in Paradise immedately upon the Creation;
Dominamini, says the Lord to Adam, Genesis 1.28. Have dominion over every living
thing; yea, it is accorded by Vid. Joh. Gerard. loc. Commun. Tom. 6. cap. 2.
25.26 etc. S. Aug. de Civit. Dei l. 19. c. 15.
Divines most Orthodox, that however in the state of innocence there was not,
nor should not have been any despoticall, or Imperious coercive domination, as
is now since the Fall, of one man over another; so that, then, one should have
born the sway, cum libidine dominandi, with an ambitious lust or desire to
compel others as inferior; yet, even then, under that very state, there would
have been a fatherly, or oeconomicall subordination in Families, and Societies
of mankind, joined with a spontaneous, voluntary yeildance, as it were, through
an innate (...), or natural Instinct, to the mutual counselling and loving of
each other; as Husband and Wife, Father and Child, Neighbor and Neighbor, for
the Glory of God, and their own Beatitude. Thus the Schoolmen (among whose
Disputes, though there be found much Dross of Superstition, yet withal, some
Gold of precious and refined Wit) they directly pronounce thus, Fuisset in
statu innocentiae praelatio in officio consulendi, and diligendi, non Dominium
servituti oppositum, as Themas, Biel, and others to the same Effect, express
it: Yea, this may be yet read farther in the Book of the other Creatures
themselves, which are indeed half lost, if we only employ them, and learn
nothing of them; Totus mundus nihil aliud est, nisi Deus explicatus, says
Cusanus: The whole Macrocosm, or bigger world, is but a book unclasp'd, wherein
are the express characters of Gods Divine Wisdom shining in that order,
wherein he first created it; even that God, who by the great Apostle, who was
so much for decency and order in the Churches, is directly styled, not the
Author of Confusion, but the God of Peace, and order, 1 Cor. 14.33. Yea,
meditate but what is written of those, who never yet stained the honor of
their Primitive Creation, still keeping their first estate, not leaving their
own S. Jude ver. 6
Habitation; look upwards in Heaven, among the confirmed Angels, there are
Degrees: (...), says Damascen. lib. 2. Orthodox. Fid. cap. 3.
Damascen, according to their light and station, so is their Priority; There
are, says Paul, Mights and Dominions, Principalities and Powers, Ephesians. 1.21.
Romans 8.38. Yea, among that Sacred Hierarchy, Saint Jude assures us, ver. 9.
there is Michael an Archangel; to omit any farther enumeration of more orders
of them, after the Computation of Dionysius Areopagita, an Author, however said
to be suppositious, as reckoned among Saint Paul's Converts, Act. 17.34. yet
yielded to be of long antiquity. Again, from those Heavens, let us behold the
Starry Firmament, and there we discover two great Luminaries, as Psalm. 136.8, 9
Rulers of the times and Seasons, the Sun to rule the Day, and the Moon the
Night. Look yet below these into the Aetheriall Heavens, and there we find the
Horat.
Eagle soaring aloft and prevailing: Plin. l. 10. cap. 23. Not. Hist.
Pliny writes of Cranes, birds of a subordinate feather, Ducem quem sequantur,
eligunt, they select a guide: Upon the earth, among Beasts, the Lion; among
Trees, the Cedar overtops: If we go down to the Psalm. 107.23.
sea in ships, and occupy our business in the great waters, even there find we
a Psalm. 104.26.
Leviathan to take his pastime: In a word, Take view of the Microcosme, or
little world, man himself, (...), says Aristot. l. 1. c. 5. Polit.
Aristottle, the soul commands the body, and the mind in the soul it self, the
sensual appetite, and all the Inferior Powers in the same: Yea, I had almost
added, if we cast our eyes downwards, even in the pit of darkness, the Rev.
12.9.
Dragon has his Angels, and there are orders, and Mat. 12.24.
degrees, even in the Region of Confusion.

What should I say more? Wherefore, though my heart be much enlarged, and my
thoughts voluminous in this matter, yet being straightened in the bowels of the
time, as Homers Iliads were (once) presented to a great Potentate in a
nut-shel; so I must now be forced to epitomize my expressions in a word or two:
Take it in the Orators own lines, Omnem naturam, Cic. de Not. Dcor. lib. 2.
quae non est simplex, sed cum alio conjuncta, necesse est habere aliquem in se
principatum; that is thus much in the sense, Every created nature capable of
Society, of necessity, must have in it some Superiority. Forms of Government
(its undeniable) have been in several ages and revolutions of time, diverse in
the world, according to Gods own profound and providentiall Dispensations; and
withal, according as his own Divine Wisdom foresaw to be best for his own
Church and people; and under the (...), the very act of the time of mutation,
the alteration of Governments (yea or but the succession of Gorvernors) is,
says one, often times, like the removing of the world from one shoulder of Atlas
to another, which occasions Epilepsies, and shakings in the earth; nor is it
easy, at the first, for men to pronounce their Shibboleth of new Titles, and
names accompanying such alteration: For a long time the Government was
Patriarchall, or Fatherly, rather then Princely, as during all their staying in
Egypt, when yet they were grown into the body of a Nation numerous and mighty:
After that, even in Canaan, governed they were long by Judges, by advice of the
High Priest, and that about the space of four hundred and fifty years, as we
read Act. 13.20. until Samuel the Prophet: After that, God gave them Saul a 1 Samuel 8.
King, a man of Benjamin, in anger, and took him away in wrath, Hos. 13.11.
Briefly, the Aristot. lib. 8. Polit. cap. 10.
Form was sometimes Democraticall, sometimes Aristocraticall, other whiles
Monarchical: But (things here below being in a perpetual gyre of mutation)
does the Crown endure to every generation? Prove. 27.24. Even the most lasting
Kingdoms have had their See B. Hall, Sermon. on Psalm. 107.34. p 10.
Period; and of the most settled Government, Gods hand writing upon the wall
goes so far, as to say, Mean, Mean, Thy days are numbered: That Psalm. 75.6, 7.
God, he who alone it is that puts down one, and sets up another, Psalm.
59.13.
Rules in Jacob, and even unto the ends of all the earth, sitting upon the
circle thereof, as the Prophet expresses it, Isai. 40.22. and as we read Dan.
2.45. that the stone cut out of the mountains without hands brake in pieces the
Gold, and the Silver, the Brass and the Iron in the great Image, that is
Christ, the Ephesians. 2.20.
Head stone of the corner, born, unusually, of an incontaminate Virgin,
overcame by the Scepter of his power, the four great Monarchies of the world.
Assyrian, Persian, Grecian, Roman, and shall do the Papal also; and the same
Prophet again, Dan. 4.17. The living must know, that the most High rules in
the Kingdom of men, and he gives it to whomsoever he will: This is the Lords
doing and it is mavelous in all men's eyes. But yet, (which is the total of
what I aim at) in the great change of times and Seasons, in the alteration of
various forms, nevertheless the God of order upholdeth the State or
Government it self, which (as I noted in the first branch of the Description)
was a Power, and that an High and Supereminent Power; and those Powers that
are, (...), in present, actual being, the same are not without Gods own
ordination, as I shall forthwith demonstrate; and to those present Powers in
act (commanding lawful things) men must be subject, even for conscience of
God, Romans 13.1.5.

But ere I go on to that, I may not omit the Epithet, or (if you will call it
so) the Adjunct of this Supereminent Power: It is not a private, but a public
Power; that is, a Power Authorized by a Lawful Commission to execute, as the
Lords avengement of sin, S. Augustine. contr. Faust. Manich. l. 22. and 77. c
70. Ille abutitur gladio, qui nulla Superiori, ac legitima potestate vel
jubente, vel concedente, in sanguinem alicujus armatur -- Nam utique Dominus
jusserat, ut ferrum Discipuli ejus ferrent, sed non jusserat, ut ferirent. Vid
Rayner. de Pisis Pantheol. tom. 1.2. and Thom. 2a, 2ae, Qu. 40. Art. 1.
Justice and Judgment upon arraigned and convicted Malefactors; for otherwise,
as our Savior said to Peter, all they that take the sword, shall perish with
the sword, Mat. 26.52. that is, as all Orthodox Divines expound it, All they
who take the sword to smite withal, out of their own voluntary, private
motion, to satisfy their own private revenge, these so sinning without
Authority, shall for that sin be smitten by the public sword: which, by just
Authority, is put into the hands of Lawful Magistrates, as God's Vicegerents
upon earth, to execute and repay God's Just and Public revenge upon Offenders:
In Genesis 9.6. we read, Who so sheddeth man's blood (to wit, by a private sword,
that makes it Murder) by man shall his blood be shed, namely, by a public
sword of the Magistrate, who bears it not in vain, but to be unsheathed and
used, which makes it Justice; Magistrates are not Homicidae, but Malicidae, as
Bern. de Milite, fol. 109. m. Object.
Bernard wittily.

If any list to object the Act of Phineas a Priest, and no Civil Magistrate,
commended for his Zeal in slaying Zimri and Cosbi, under their sin, Numb. 25.8.
as likewise the example of Samson, by suicide, destroying himself, and with
himself, both his own, and Gods enemies, Judge. 16.30. Yet he is numbered among
the faithful, Heb. 11.32. and so capable of imitation?

Answ. To this the Resolution is, Motus Heroici non sunt in imitationem
trahendi, those Heroical motions, as (for distinction sake) Divines do style
them, were Personal Dispensations, daigned out of singular Privilege, and so
are restrictive to them alone, and such as are guided, upon like assurance, by
like warrantable instinct from God, and so not to be drawn into ordinary
imitation. The examples even of Saints themselves Contra datam legem, if they
do not (as) Saints, but deviate from the general Rule, must be declined: now,
the known rule is, Deuteronomy. 32.35 Romans 12.19.
Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it, says the Lord Himself, who executes
the same by the sword, put into the hand of his own Ordinance, the Public
Magistrate, The Higher Powers.

By this time I presume, the beams of Order and Government it self, by
Arguments drawn both from Nature and Grace, from Reason and Religion, shine
clearly upon all bright and solid understandings: And yet (woe is me!) I cannot
dissemble what black and pitchy Clouds have been interposed between this serene
light, and the minds, at least, the refractary wills of some, whom I cannot
better compare, then to loose teeth in a man's head, being often more
troublesome, then useful to Civil Society: However, with 3 Ep. Job. 9.
Diotrephes, they may desire pre-eminence, and would be some body in the
trouble, who (it may be) were as no body in the peace of the Church.

Thus they pretend, 2 Pet. 3.16.
Peter speaks, to their own hurt, (...), dealing like Chymicks, who labor to
torture nature, for the extraction of such spirits, as were never inherent in
the thing: Its said, Gal. 3.28. and Col. 3.11. There is neither bond nor free,
Jew nor Greek, but all are one, under the New Testament, in Christ Jesus, who
is all, and in all?

But for answer: Jews must be no Jews, nor Grecians, Grecians. In short, the
right meaning is this; In respect of Spiritual state and Title to Christ, all
are one, Servants as well as Masters, small as well as great, they have
obtained the [like precious] faith, 2 Pet. 1.1. and share together in the
[common] faith, Tit. 1.4. Because Faith and Piety, and such graces are inward
matters of the soul, tending to the better life (and in such Gratuities there
cannot be said to be properly any partiality in God, or any Romans 2.11.
Respect of persons on Gods part) yet in respect of civil and outward
condition, remains the ancient difference of Rulers and Obeyers, of Master and
Servant; or if there be any other external thing, whereby they are
distinguished one from the other: Besides, that Christian Liberty, whereby
Christ has made us free from the rigorous exaction of the Gal. 5.1.
Law, and from the power of sin and Satan, does not at all entrench upon that
Order, and those Civil Degrees which he has most comely established in the
world: A Politic Inaequality is not against a Spiritual Aequality; Onesimus
(says a Worthy Mr. Josiah Shute, the Chrysostom of his time, page 132. Ser^on
Genesis 16
Divine now with God) was as good as Philemon in Christ; yet, for all that,
Onesimus was Philemon's servant. Wherefore, amongst other gifts given to the
Church, these are some, (...), 1 Cor. 12.28. Governments; that is, gifts
enabling to govern, to the intent they may be exercised; God and Nature do
nothing in vain, neither does he gift a man for any thing unlawful, nor would
so many Godly men have taken on them the managing of that Office, had it been
other then such as was, and is allowed by God.

Beloved Christians, give me leave to speak my mind freely to you, (and I 1
Cor. 7.40.
think also, that I have the Spirit of God directing me herein) It is to be
suspected, that all such Samsons, who would thus Judge. 16.9.
tear the withs of Government asunder, and attempt the exauctorating all Civil
Magistracy, do it only, that with the more security they may cocker the
wanton Delilah's of their own corrupt Natures, that chafe most under the bit,
fretting at what may bridle or curb the carnality of the same; in their lives;
some of them are as unclean lepers as ever sore ran upon. Such ulcers (or
rather, plaguesores) brake out, and, I am sure, ran with the pernicious
infection of many in Germany, not above an Age past, that as Sleidan l. 5. and
10. Commentar.
Sleidan, Bullinger Contra Anabap.
Bullinger, Calvin, and others record the luxury of their reaking Conversation,
it appears, that they were, of all men, such as had most need of Government:
However, till the Justice of Heaven stopped them, they Psalm. 2.3.
threw off the yoke of the Laws, and following the float of their own Jude
ver. 8.
filthy dreams, they turned the grace of God into S. Jude ver. 4.
wantonness, despised 2 Pet. 2.10.
Dominion, and spoke evil of Dignities; those ambitious Nimrods, who would
have pulled down Sion, to build up Babel.

But leaving this jarring Discourse about such vain 1 Timothy 1.6.
janglers as those were then, (and if any are found of the same
misse-inclinations now) to wallow 2 Pet. 2.22.
in their own mire, till their abominable wickedness be Psalm. 36.2.
found out to be hateful: I shall now set the strings of my speech to a more
pleasing tune, that it may sound with more harmony in your ears: Whilst, in
the next place, I shall present my Hearers with the great Benefits and
Advantages that by Government they may enjoy.

And these being in so multiplicious a variety, The Benefits of Government.
I must be forced to do as Lapidaries of rich Jewels are wont, show them only
in a short glance, and so lay them up again.

And now, What Hos. 12.10.
similitudes shall I borrow to illustrate this Blessing? We may sooner beggar
the whole Exchequer of Nature, or impoverish Wealth it self, then from thence
be able to fetch a meet comparison for its complete embellishment. Lo! The
Char. lib. 1. c. 49.. 1.
State, that is to say, Rule, Dominion, or a certain order in Commanding and
Obeying, is the prop, the cement, and the soul of Humane things: it is the bond
of Society, which cannot otherwise subsist: it is the very vital spirit
whereby so many millions of men do breathe, and the whole Creation has a
wel-being. Tell me, What is it that clothes you in 2 Samuel 1.24.
Scarlet, with other delights, and puts on ornaments of gold upon your apparel;
is it not Government? What is it that clothes your Downs, your Pastures, your
Valleys with Flocks and Store, till they Psalm. 65.13.
shout and sing for joy; is it not Government? What is it that brings your Job
5.26. Prove. 3.10.
shocks of corn, in their seasons, into your barns and granaries; is it not
Government? By what is it that you are delivered from Violencies and
Plunderings, from Riflings, Robberies, and Rapine, but alone by this? and (that
which is indeed the Diamond set in the ring of this whole Encomium) by what is
your Religion guarded more then by this? all Godliness, as well as Honesty, is
preserved by this, 1 Timothy 2.1.2. Remove this, what but ataxyes and disorders,
more deformed then the first rude Chaos, break in upon you? as when the Sluices
are pulled up, the floods overflow, not to water, but to wash away the fruits
of the earth: or, as Heraclitus once said, If the Sun were wanting, it would
soon be night, for all the Stars; so, where, or when this is absent, Psalm.
137.2.
how are the Harpes hung up upon the Willowes? and how do men, as Augustus
sitting between Horace and Virgil, inter suspiria and lachrymas, the one given
to weeping, and the other to sighing, sit down under a night of sorrow and
lamentation? I have read of a Law among the Persians to this effect, (...),
That when their Chief Governor was dead, there should be no Laws in force,
for the space of five days together, upon which there ensued so Prodigions
Disorders, Violencies and Perturbations, that as sometime Rachel impatient of
her barren Womb, cried out, Genesis 30.1.
Give me children or else I die; so the people cried out, O give us Governors
to rule, or we die, we are all undone: They had learned by the want, to set a
price upon the enjoyment; as the Sea Psalm. 106 24, 25.
pettish Israelites, (a people seldom if ever, pleased with Gods present
Providencies) who Exodus 15.24.
murmured under Moses, though the Numb. 12.3.
meekest man alive, would yet, in all likelihood, had not God by some Angel
conveyed his body Deuteronomy. 34.6.
out of sight, Vid. S. Jude ver. 9.
(so prone were they also to Idolatry) have worshipped him for an Idol, after
he was dead. But I fear that I do all this while, but darken this so shining a
Topaze of Government, by my rude polishing; since to express the excellency
thereof, quils plucked from the wings of the Blessed Seraphims, or Cherubims
themselves, would be but competent: Wherefore, waving this humble kind of
Oratory; hearken a little, I beseech you, to what the inspired Amos 3.7.
Secretaryes of Heaven it self, the Sacred Penmen of the Holy Canon ( 2 Pet.
1.21.
over ruled therein by a Celestial direction) have un-erringly, under many
Resemblances, expressed of those persons who manage this great affair, and so
reflexively the splendour of the thing it self, may be the better displayed.

And out of so fair a Garden, adorned with so great Variety, I shall present
you with a Posie of the choicest flowers. In the eleventh Psalm and the third
verse, as also Micah 6.2. they are called metaphorically, The Foundations of
the earth; If the Foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do? that is,
as the most Orthodox expound it, Magistratus pessundati, If Governors, that
should be to God's people, as foundations are to the building, supports and
stays, if these are cast down, that is, either deprived of their Power, or
through sloth or tyranny so degenerate from what they should be, that an honest
man may look for no favor or succor from them; then, what shall the righteous
do? Directly implying, that whilst they remain as Foundations, unshaken and 2 Timothy 2.19.
firm, then may the righteous and the true Religion be sure both of
countenance and supportation; whence also, in a Title of Cognation, they are
styled, Psalm. 47.9. The Shields of the earth, to defend, and to safeguard from
Injuries and Wrongs.

In another Style, they are called Saviors; so is Othniel, who delivered
Israel, styled, Judge. 3.9. We read Genesis 41.45. that Pharaoh called Joseph, when
advanced to the chief Government over all Egypt, Zaphnath Paaneah, which, in
the Hebrew, signifies as much as a revaler of secret things, or a mysterious
Counselor, in regard of his Interpretation of Pharaoh's Dream: But, in the
Egyptian Language, as Beauximis in Harmon. Evangel.
Beauxamis acquaints us, it is by interpretation, A Savior of the world; in as
much as by his Providence, He saved so many besides his Fathers house, from
perishing by famine: and expressly: the Magistrates, Neh. 9.27. have the
appellation of Saviors, in respect of that outward incolumity and safety,
which they procure to such as are under their Governance and Protection: To
this same purpose is it, that Simon Maiolus. p. 347. de Bellor. Eventu.
Aristotle the Master, said to Alexander the Scholar, Governors were
appointed, not (...), but (...), not, by an Imperious Domination, to become
injurious, but, by a gracious Dignation, to become Luke 22.25.
Benefactors: So says Euripides likewise, That a good Magistrate was (...);
the same is also sweetly illustrated by that Vision offered to Nebuchadnezzar,
under the similitude of an high Tree, Dan. 4.11, 12. The leaves whereof were
fair, and the fruit thereof much, and in it was meat for all; the Beasts of
the field had shadow under it, and the fowls of the Heaven dwelt in the boughs
thereof, and all flesh was fed of it: Because the good Magistrates procure
sustentation, defense, and quiet Habitation to those that are under them.

Again, Under another Metaphor, they are resembled unto Pastors, or Shepherds;
So Cyrus, whom God unexpectedly raised up for a Deliverer to his people, Isai.
44.28. is called The Lords Shepherd: and Moses likens people without a
Governor, to sheep without a Shepherd, Numb. 27.17. And King David gives the
style of sheep unto his Subjects, 2 Samuel 24.17. So in ruling them, he is said
to [feed] Jacob the Lords people, and Israel his Inheritance, Psalm. 78.71, 72.
So Psalm 28.9. that word which is translated [Feed] thine inheritance, is in
the Original [Rule] thine inheritance; and that not unfitly, (...), says
Xenophon (...).
Xenophon, because the Offices of the one bear a kind of correspondence with
the other, in the suppeditation of wholesome pastures and provisions: And as it is
reported to have been the saying of Sucton in Tiber.
Tiberius, It is the care of a good Shepherd tondere pecus, non deglubere; to
fleece them, not to flay them: As in the great Charter of England, Theodoricus
rex admonuit Marcellum, Ne plus tribueret Fisco, quam Justitiae, Cassiodor.
lib. 1. Epist. 22.
Fines were imposed, salvo contenemento, in a gentle moderation.

Lastly, They are called Number. 11.12 Exodus 20.12
Fathers, (...): chiefly when good and godly, Isa. 49.23. By the Romans, their
Senators were called Patres conscripti; and Xenoph. l. 8. (...).
Xenophon approves the Title, (...), in regard of that providence and nutrition
they have and provide for their people. S. S. Hieron. l. 9. in Ezekiel.
Hierom observes, That, as the King of Egypt was successively called Pharaoh,
after one Name; so among the Philistims, the King was styled Abimelech, which
is a compound, signifying My Father King; Even as in the other sex, Deborah was
said, for counselling well, to be a Mother in Israel, Judge. 5.7. Joseph,
advanced to the Regiment over Egypt, says of himself, ( Genesis 45.8.) That the
Lord had made him a Father to Pharaoh: and by his command, the people (as he
rode in his Chariot of State, Genesis 41.43.) were to cry before him, Abrech, that
is, mild, or tender Father; as Hieron. in Tradit. Hebraicis, super Genesis tom. 3
page 390.
Hierom renders it, (from (...) and (...), Pater and mollis) however the LXX
take no great notice of the word) before whom all were to how the knee.

And now, after this so copious an amplification, both of the Office and
Benefit of Magistracy, or Government, It Is time, I presume, to hasten to an
Application of the Point.

And here (perhaps) it may be expected, on some hands, Judges themselves, and
put them in mind of their Duty: But I told you even now, [that] was none of my
purpose: It were more meet to 2 Samuel 13.24
beseech them as Number. 11.12 Exodus 20.12
Fathers, then to instruct them as Magistrates. I know the snuffers of the
Sanctuary were to be of pure Exodus 37.23
gold; and I am not of so good metal to take on me to do that; lest what here
Jehoshaphat insinuated to his Judges in the plural, may be returned upon me in
the singular, Caveto, Take heed what thou do. I shall therefore become as
some divine Proteus, to metamorphose an expected Exhortation into an humble and
cordial Congratulation, to magnify and bless God, that he has raised up so
eminent Worthies, whose Learning in the Laws, whose Sanctity and cleanness of
hands will altogether occasion judgment to run down as a river, and
righteousness as a mighty stream.

My Counsel that I have to subminister upon this occasion, must look on some
other objects; at such (I mean) who are under such Magistrates; even all
obsequious people who are Psalm. 35.20
quiet in the Land: Pliny tells us of some herbs, that however they be set in
the waters, yet will not grow so well absque imbribus supervenientibus, without
some showers from above: No more will this obedience, which I am now about to
press, without continual watering by good advice.

And the whole that I have to say to such, shall be reduced to these four
Heads, from whence, as from the Genesis 2.10
four Rivers in Paradise, shall be derived such streams as may Psalm. 68.9
refresh the inheritance of God.

First then, Let me mind you of that of the Apostle, very apposite to our
present purpose, Romans 13.7. Render to all their dues, Fear to whom fear, Honor
to whom honor. And to whom can there be of right and conscience justly more
due, then to those Higer Powers, who are ordained of God himself? It Is a quaere
in Politics, Whether a Ruler were better to be feared, or to be loved?
Sigismund the Emperor (as Panormitan. de dictis and factis Alphonsi, lib. 4.
cap. 35. Vid. Dieter. Dn. 23 post Trin. p. 841, 842, etc.
Panormitan acquaints us) wisely resolved it, That Superiors will be both
feared and beloved too: and indeed, both conjoined argue a reverence meet for
Authority. And surely, if they be Fathers (as ye heard but now) They must have
Honor, Mal. 1.6. This comes under the Fifth Commandment, To honor our Father;
Not only of our Bodies, but also of our Country: And this, 1. In Thought; by
carrying an awful and reverentiall esteem of them, in regard both of their
Persons, and Power; yea, of their Persons for their Power sake 2. In Word.
Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not revile the Gods, or the Judges, nor curse the
Rulers of they people, Act. 23.5. Let us not be too hasty in censuring actions
of Superiors; for we may see but one end of the staff: like as when a stick
is put into the water, that part above in the air is straight, though that
under the water seems crooked, yet is in it self straight still, though we
think it otherwise. Saint Peter makes it a note of such as Despise Government,
to be presumptuous, self willed, no way afraid to [speak evill] of Dignities, 2
Pet. 2.10. And usually it holds true, where detraction goes before, as Esau;
there sedition takes, it by the Genesis 25.26.
heel, as Jacob; Wherefore (as a Bish. Andrews Sermon. on Prove. 24.21. p. 950,
951.
Learned man observes) the same word in the Hebrew, (...) [Shonim] signifies
both Detractor, and also Seditious; properly, after the Hebrew Criticisme, they
are Biters, it comes of Shen, a tooth, they have teeth in their tongues. 3.
Honor them in Deed. Be so far from resisting the lawful Magistrate,
commanding lawful things (and good Rulers will be content that men should
serve God first, and them next) that rather, on the other side thou should
resolve to be molded, as it were Platonically, after all their Legal Idea's;
For they that resist, shall receive to themselves judgment, Romans 13.2. Pride
this way cannot climb so high, but Justice will sit above it.


Secondly, Honor, so also of your Prayers, and Supplications, and
Intercessions, even for all that are in Authority, (...), or in Eminent place,
That we may live a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty; for
this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3.
So Jeremy advised the Jews, even under Captivity, to pray for the peace of
that place where they were, Jer. 29.7. Praying a long Life, wise Counsels, safe
Government, valiant Armies, faithful People, quiet Times, or whatsoever else
may conduce to their welfare.

Thirdly, You must give them the Tribute of Obedience and due Homage, rather to
obey God, then man against God, Act. 5.29. after the example of Esth. 3.2.
Mordecai, and of the three Children, Dan. 3.8.) So the Apostle Paul, Romans
13.1. Let every soul be subject, even for conscience of Gods Ordinance, and
that, not Timore paenae, sed amore Justitiae, as S. Gregor. Mag. l. 35. c. 10.
Expos. Moral.
Gregory expounds it, Not for the servile fear of punishment, but out of the
charitative love of Justice. To the same purpose S. Peter in that famous Text,
1 Pet. 2.13, 14. and again S. Paul, Tit. 3.1. Put them in mind to be subject to
Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates: This will be a mean to keep a
City or a Common Wealth in Peace and Safety, if, as sometimes that wise
Lawgiver Solon, in Stobaeus c. 43 De Republ. p. 280.
Stobaeus, said, Cives obtemperent suis Magistratibus, Magistratus autem
legibus; The Citizens obey the Magistrate, and the Magistrate the Laws.

Fourthly, and lastly, Tribute and Custom, all subsidiary Supplies, Romans 13.7.
due to them for all their public care, Providence, Protection, Vigilance,
great Travel and Pains, which they undertake and undergo for the general good
of community. There is an old word made use of by some for money, in Latin,
Moneta, a Monendo, so called (says Dieter. qua supra, p 849.
one) from monishing men of their duty, due even by it to the public
Magistrate; some there be who love to desire the Magistrate, but they do not
desire to love the Magistrate; they care not how much the Magistrate does for
them, but they regard not how little they do for Him. Even our Savior Himself
with his parents submitted to the Tax of Augustus Caesar, who then swayed the
Empire, when he was born, Luke 2.4, 5. and afterward provided both for himself
and Peter (to avoid offense) a piece of Tribute Money, Matthew. 17.27. Now it is
not the meanest part of Religion to imitate him, whom thou worshippest in
things capable of imitation.

I shall not need many Eccles. 12.11
nails to fasten this persuasion upon you; since the consideration of the
greatness, not of the dignity, more then of the weight and burden of the
office it self, is enough: This appears by the same Title which Jethro gave it,
when he counseled Moses to join Assistants with him, to help to bear the [
Number. 11.11
Burden] of Judicature with him, Exodus 18.22. this Honos is also Onus: the
Naturalists observe, that the head is leaner then any part of the body, because
it takes care for all: The Governors empty themselves as it were of
themselves, to bestow themselves on the Public; yea, if they care for
themselves at all, they do it more for the Peoples sake, then for their own, as
if they thought themselves only ordained for their weal, often breaking their
own rest, that they may the better procure yours.

(...), Homer.

(...).
Briefly, without using more arguments, I well read in the hilarity of your
looks, the alacrity of your hearts, -- Super omnia vultus
Accessere boni. --


I discover your readiness to close with me in this serious intimation. Give
me leave then to interrogate and return answer to my self, as sometimes Act.
26.27.
Paul did on another occasion of Agrippa, King Agrippa, Beleevest thou the
Prophets? I know that thou beleevest: So, my Beloved and Christian Hearers, do
you, as Jeremy has expressed it, cap. 30.21. do you [engage] your hearts to
approach unto the Lord? I, as S. Paul, or as the Judge. 5, 29.
mother of Sisera, may return answer to my self, I know that you do engage your
hearts to approach unto the Lord; and withal to a willing subjection to those
Higher Powers of Magistracy, the great advantage and benefit whereof you have
thus far heard enlarged: Yea, as S. Paul said of Philemons readiness to give
entertainment to Onesimus upon his motion, I know that you will do Philem. v.
21.
more then I say; being, as the same Apostle said of Titus, in relation to
another Exhortation, 2 Cor. 8.17. more forward of your own accord: And indeed,
how can it be otherwise with you? if, in the next place, you seriously consider
the Commission, or Divine Authority of this Office, which we have here
presented to us in the second member of my Division; contained under these
words, Ye judge not for man, but for the Lord: Vices Domini gerentes, as Junius
glosseth it, as Gods Vicegerents, doing his business, and executing what he
himself commands.

Which now comes in order to be fully, but succinctly spoken of; on which I
shall so strive to husband my Discourse, as to lay it out in a due proportion
to the time. And he said to the Judges, Take heed what ye do, for ye judge not
for man, but for the Lord.

The Ordination of these Powers is Vide Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 20. Pertot.
and S. August. l. 4. c. 33. De Civ. Dci.
divine, The 2d Part
they are (...), Ordained of God himself, says the great Apostle, Romans 13.1.
By me, that is, by my own Paramount Authority, says the Lord, rule even all
the Judges of the earth, Prove. 8.16. [Per] me, [By] me, The nature of this
Praeposition is to note a Cause certain, and a certain Cause excludes Chance;
they be no Casualties, Forte fortuna, at hap hazard, Causalls they are, (said
Bish. Andrews Sermon. on Prove. 8.15 p. 935.
one, sometimes a great Ornament of this Church:) Casual they are not: Per me,
not Perse: it is worth the noting, that it is said, By me, not by, or from
themselves; it is not their own place they sit in, nor their own Power they
execute, it is derived to them from God himself; so that they may say of
themselves even in this regard, Ipse nos fecit, non ipsi nos, It is he that
has made us, Psalm. 100.3.
and not we our selves; and therefore the Judgment that they decree is Gods,
Deuteronomy. 1.17. Many seek the Rulers favor (says Solomon) but every man's
Judgment comes from the Lord, Prove. 29.26. And indeed, as Josephus expresses
it, (...), Without God it is utterly impossible that any such Power should
subsist in the world; considering the furious, and seditious Commotions that
Satan the Author of Confusion and Rebellion, is apt to raise up in the breasts,
to vent and foment in and by the actions of the sons of Belial, against all
Authority of Divine appointment. But it is Psalm. 144.2.
God who subdueth one man in subjection to the other, for the more uniforme
Composure, and Peace of the whole Universe: Wherefore when men offer to reject
that form of Government which is by providence cast upon them, in the language
and style of the Holy Ghost, they do not reject man, but they do reject God
himself, that he should not rule over them, 1 Samuel 8.7.

For this cause is it, that God himself (whose Vicegerents they are upon
earth) to grace, and honor their persons, and Authority the more, has given
them the Title of his own name, Psalm. 82.6. I have said, ye are (...)
Gods: and again, Exodus 22.28. which are not (...), Swelling words of vanity,
titles of complement, or of Adulation, but they are of Gods Royal imposition.
Nor is this Old Testament only, as some would have it, but our Blessed Savior
in the New Testament, comments upon these very same words, Joh. 10.34, 35.
where, not only the Title, but the word, that is, the Warrant and Commission
they receive from God is as a binding Law, which cannot be loosed. Now so they
are called, say S. Aug. Tract. 48. in John. and Lyra in Psalm. 82.
Austin and Lyra, by participation, Participando fiunt dii, tanquam lumina
illuminata, in regard of their derivative power, as lights enlightened from on
high: They are (...), called Gods, says Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 8.5. in respect of
their deputed power from God; (...), says Just. Mart. qu. ad Orthod. 142.
Confer. B. King page 166 on Jonah.
Justin Martin, that Use, or Office ceasing, the Title leaves them: For however
they be Gods with men, yet are they but men with God, who stands in the
Congregation of those Gods, Psalm. 82. ver. 1. and that, not only as a
spectator to behold them, which notes his presence; but also as a Judge above
them, which notes his pre-eminence; intending one day to take an account both
of them and all their proceedings, which under his Title, and by his Authority
they undertook.

Now Gods own proceeding in Judicature is presented to us in the glass of the
Scriptures, after this manner.

First, It Is Impartial, and without respect of persons: so here, ver. 7. There
is no iniquity with the Lord our God (says Jehoshaphat) nor respect of
persons; (...), as the Septuagint render it. So they who judge for God, though
they may have respect to the equity of the Cause; yet may not have of the
quality of the Deuteronomy. 16.19.
person, above the Cause. Deuteronomy. 1.17. the face of the poor man because he is
poor, must not be regarded; nor rich men's persons held in admiration, as Saint
Jude v. 16.
Jude speaks, for any advantage whatsoever: As was said of Anacharsis Laws,
they were like Spiders webs, which the bigger flies brake through, but the
lesser were taken and held fast therein: but as Phocylides has it, (...). Do
judgment, not for Vid. Episc. Davenant. page 966. Expos. in Coloss.
Favor, but for Justice sake. The Ancients (as we read in Scripture) held
their Judicatories in the Ruth. 4.1. and Genesis 34.20. Prove. 31.23.
gates of their Cities, for the more free and open access of all, as well
small as great: Justitia non novit Patrem, non novit Matrem, Veritatem novit,
says Dieter. Dn. 23 post Trin. page 840.
one; A Magistrate on the Bench should be like Melchizedek, without father,
without mother, (...), without Hebr. 7.3
descent, or kindred. As I have heardit reported of a Judge Popham.
Judge (sometime of this Western Circuit) when one arraigned before him,
alleged, that he was his kinsman, however then an offender before him (as
there are but few Families wherein some (as the grains in the fairest
Pomegranate) are not tainted; and as it is in the hebrew proverb, (...),
Vinegar may be the son of Wine) Are you so, said He? I must therefore never the
later condemn you, being convicted; I must deny my self, with all my relations,
to make Justice exemplary. A Judge must be (to use the word of Aul. Gel. noct.
Attic. l. 14. c. 4
Gellius) Inadulabilis, above flattery; or as Cic. l. 1. Tuscul. quest.
Tully expresses it, Inexorabilis, beyond entreaty, when the Cause expects it.
Plutarch in the life of Themistocles, reports of him, That when Simonides the
Poet of Chios desired a favor of him, beside what was just and equal, made
answer, As thou should be but an ill Poet, if thou should not observe
Numbers, and due Measures in thine Art; So neither can I be a good Praetor, in
case I do prefer any man's favor before the equity of the Laws.

2. And yet secondly, although God be impartial, in respect of the Person; yet
is he full of equanimity in respect of the execution of his Judgment, even
after conviction: In the Hab. 3.2
midst of judgment God remembers mercy; nor without incorrigible provocations
does he execute the fierceness of his anger, Hos. 11.9. Yea, though Justice
and mercy are Attributes both equally in God; yet quoad nos, in respect of us,
the manifestation of the acts of clemency seem to come more kindly from him,
then those of severity: The acts of mercy flow from God (the 2 Cor. 1.3
Father of mercies) as a stream running kindly, and derived clearly from a
sweet Spring or Fountain: but the acts of Justice, like liquor, or wine from
the grape, which is not without squeezing or Genesis 40.11
pressing forth: From God flows not more Mercy then Justice; yet [rather]
Mercy then Justice: And therefore when he proceeds to wrath, he is said by the
Prophet, Isa. 28.21. to do his work, a [strange] work; as if he had been
unacquainted with such an act: It is observed, That God was longer in
destroying one poor City Jericho, then he was in making the whole world; Josh.
6.16.
for he was [seven] days in destroying it, but Genesis 1.31. Exodus 20 11
six days only in creating the world; In the second Commandment we read of his
visitation of wrath but unto the third and fourth Generation of them that hated
him, but of his mercy unto [ Exodus 20.6.
Thousands] of them that love him. Its worth our Observation also, how our
Savior wrought no destructive miracles, but all salving, or restorative: We
read in the Gospel, that our Savior was once angry, but it was in an anger of
Zeal, not of Livor, when he saw his Fathers House (the House of Prayer) to
become, by buying and selling therein, a Den of Thieves, robbing God of his due
honor in that place; he then made a Joh. 2.15.
Whip of small cords to scourge those Money Changers out of the Temple; he made
a whip, to show his displeasure, but of [small] cords, to show the mitigation
of that displeasure; God sends his lightning with Psalm. 135.7.
rain, says the Psalmist; as the one affrights with fiery flashes, and
coruscations, so the other cooles, and comforts the inflamed air; yea, it is
observed by Ruffin. Hist. l. 2 c. 23.
Ruffinus in his Story, that the Ancients were wont to place upon the Statue of
their Jupiter, Modium, a certain measure, as an emblem of Moderation: And this
by way of Analogy, is imitated by those who are called Gods with men. Clemency
is that golden thread, which runs through all their actions of Judicature: They
will remember that of Chrysostom. Ser. De Mansuetud.
Chrysostom. That its better to give account to God the Heb. 12.23.
Judge of all, for showing mercy, rather then too much rigor or severity;
(...), says Isidor. Pelusiot. l. 3 cpist. 131.
Isidor Pelusiota, Extremeties prove often dangerous; There is more safety in
walking in the middle path, then upon the very brink of the River; if men do
all they may do, they may soon be apt to do (through humane Infirmities or
Passions) what they should not do; Moderation therefore, and a sweet 2 Cor.
10.1.
(...) (since the Law Maxim is, Justitia nescit irasci) may be like that water
observed by Anatomists in the Pericardium, which cooles the Ebullitions about
the heart; or like Minerva's golden bridle to the winged horse: it makes a good
Magistrate always to carry a Chancery in his own breast, and inclines him, like
the Master Be, to rule, but without a sting. And yet, let me not be mistaken
neither, for it is so sometimes, that Summa justitia proves to be Summa
misericordia, the extremity of Justice, the height of Mercy; it is, when
Justice is executed upon obstinate Malefactors, then mercy is shown to the
Country, which they spoil, tifle and depopulate. Bonis Nocet, quisquis
pepercerit malis, says Seneca, sen. 99.
Seneca: he hurts the Innocent, who spares the Nocent: In this case Justice
deals like Alcon, who espying a Dragon to clasp his child, so directed his
arrow, that he shot the Dragon, and preserved the child. In cutting off
unreclaimable Malefactors, Vice is destroyed, Virtue encouraged, and the
Country preserved: It was the saying of Ludovicus Divus, as is written in the
Annalls of France, Pietatis opus est, non saevitiae, justitiam facere. It was
an act of Piety, and not of cruelty to do Justice; so that, this
notwithstanding, Mercy like a refulgent beam of the orient Sun, may shine in
the midst of Judgment from the Seat of an upright Magistrate.

3. Jehoshaphat here, With the Lord our God there is no taking of gifts; yea,
covetousness is as Col 3.5.
Idolatry; and God Psalm. 10.8.
abhorrs both it, and the persons that bow down to it; (...); says Isidor
Pelusiot. l. 3. Epist. 337.
Isidor Pelusiota; it is for Vultures, not for Eagles, to prey upon garbadge:
Magistrates, like the woman clothed with the Sun, Rev. 12.1. that is, the
Church arrayed in the robes of the Lord Christ, the Sun of Righteousness (as he
is styled, Mal. 4.2.) they have the Moon under their feet, by which fickle and
dim Star, all the inconstant vanities of this Sublunary lower world (where,
with many, the present Possession is but the Possession of the present) are
resembled. Oh what a pure breast, and what clean hands had innocent Samuel (a
Prophet, and withal a Judge too in Israel) when bidding his last adieu to the
world, and putting off his Office with his earthly Tabernacle, he made a
challenge to all, saying, Whose Ox have I 1 Samuel 12.3.4
taken, or whose Ass (he means unjustly) or whom have I defrauded? and the
people answer him, as every 2 Samuel 23 3, 4
just Rulers conscience should to him, Thou have not defrauded: O the
tranquillity of a spotless breast! there is nothing to a man in Judicature
comparable to Samuels integrity, both to get, and to keep an inward, solid
peace: Who then would suffer his eyes by See Exodus 23.8. Deuteronomy. 16.19 Eccles.
7.7.
bribery or corruption, to be blinded, as old Tobits were, with the Swallows
dung of this earth; or end anger the whole ship of his soul for a little
ballast of gain? 1 Samuel 12.3.
Tob. 2.10.
Its said among the Poets, that the River Sic tibi cum fluctus subterlabere
Sicanos, Doris amara suam non intermisceat undam. Virgi.
Alpheus glides under the salt sea, yet still preserves it self untainted by
the brackish waters, till it salutes the sweet and limpid Fountain Arethusa;
so all Godly and Religious Governors keep themselves ( (...). Ho. mer.
above others) unspotted Jam 1.27.
of the world, till they drink of the well of Life in the new Jerusalem, I
mean, till their souls be refreshed with pure comfort in the Kingdom of Heaven.

And yet, perchance, though the Prophet will not be tempted, it is not
impossible, but there may be some 2 King. 5.20.
Gehazi, whom some shekels of Silver, or some changes of Raiment, may, though
to the hazard of a Leprosy to be entailed upon Posterity, secretly seduce: But
because I know none such in this Circuit to be tainted (and who can take a
fixed aim at a flying mark?) yet however I know men may be Gal. 6.1.
tempted, as Atalanta was stopped in the way by the Golden Apples: Wherefore
let me not be mistaken; thus think, My Speech is no Reproof which supposes a
Crime, but only as a Caution to forestall such Temptations, that like the sons
of Zerviah to David, may in some particulars, prove [ Sam. 3.39.
too hard] for them.

And so I come to the fourth and last Particular, Gods Judgment is not passed
without deliberation precedent: Hence its observable, That before sentence
passed upon Adam the Protoplast, and the very first man that sinned, God came
to him, not in the heat of any subitaneous Passion, but in the Genesis 3.8, 9.
cool of the day, and then reasoned with him, saying, Adam, Where art thou? Non
in quo loco, quaero, sed in quo statu, as S. Ambrose upon that Passage; I do
not ask, Where thou art in respect of Place, but where thou art, in respect of
Grace? First Convincing, before he Doomed him: So likewise read we, Isai. 1.18.
that though the sins of Israel were (in guilt) as red as Crimson or Scarlet,
that by their very hue called for a Judgment of the same color, as appears
ver. 20. yet before the sword was actually unsheathed, Come, says the Lord,
and let is: [reason] together, and debate the matter: In like sort, by
proportion and Analogy are the proceedings of these terrestiall Gods with men;
and indeed, so much is employed in Jehoshaphats Cavete here, Take heed what ye
do, Ne praecipitanter, sed cum magna deliberatione sententiam feratis, says
Lyra: Be not over hasty in Judgment. Your Commissions run (as I suppose) with
Oyer before Terminer, Hear, before you determine. Erasmus l. 4. Apotheg.
Alexand. 46.
Erasmus, among the Apothegmes that he collected of Alexander the Great, notes
this as a principal, He should always reserve one ear open to the Defendant,
as he has given the other to the Plaintiff; for else, praepossession may prove
a prejudice; Prove. 18.17.
He that is first in his own cause, says Solomon, though really most
obnoxious, yet often apparently makes his matter most specious, and feasible:
Surely, some Causes are very difficult, and hard, Deuteronomy. 1.17. So that, as
Agapetus said to Justinian, He needed to be (...), and to have many eyes
assisted by Caution and Circumspection; like those living Creatures which S.
Gregory mentions, which were in circuitu, S. Oregor. Mag. par. 3. Pastor. Cur.
Admon. 5.
and intus oculis plena, full of eyes within and without, well eying the
substance of the Cause within, and observing all the circumstances of it round
about; it may otherwise prove difficult to keep the Balance even, and justly to
decide it. I have read of a Spanish Judge, when a murder was committed in a
tumultuous crowd of people, he caused all their bosoms to be made bare, and so
feeling upon their breasts, discovered the guilty author by the palpitation and
panting of his heart; so will a prudent Magistrate by sharpness and acuity of
understanding, upon debate, so anatomize the very bowels of a Cause, that a
fair outside only, by virtue of some gaudy dress, may not carry the matter: He
that rules therefore (says the great Apostle) let him do it (...), with
diligence, Romans 12.8.

And thus I have done with my Analogies: Now, as the Apostle to the Heb. 13.22.
Hebrews, suffer, I beseech you, a word of Exhortation; I cannot tune it to a
better Harp, then to that of the sweet Singer of Israel, Psalm. 2.10.11. Be
learned ye Judges of the earth, serve the Lord with fear. Now, Judges serve God
two manner of ways, 1. As men; by Psalm. 50.23.
ordering their conversation aright, according to the Laws of the Lord. 2. And
S. August Epist. 50. ad Bonifac.
as Judges, in quantum Judges, when they do those things in, and for the
service of the Lord, which none can do but Judges, by virtue of their Office
and Commission, which is to execute Justice and Judgment, according to the
righteous Laws of the Land; and being in a right sense Custodes utriusque
Tabulae, to have the first regard to what concerns the right Religion, and the
next to the supportation of equability amongst men: so shall they show
themselves what they are by Divine Ordination, (...), Romans 13.4. The Ministers
of God for good to the Common Wealth: so shall they be (...), Living Laws. In
short, because I must hasten (as well knowing this to be none of Jeshuah's
days, wherein the Sun Josh. 10.13.
stood still) There is not in the world a more reasonable request then this,
namely; What you [would] be, that [to] be, to make good your name, to be as
Gods to men, in doing good; for God (for whom ye Judge) is good, and Psalm. 119
68.
does good; specially the common good to all: for so does God do, Psalm. 145.9.
this is the time and place for it; and so my wish is, that they may, and my
trust is, that they will do. Nor have I in all these intimations, done other,
then shown them a mirror of what they are already; as not needing, nor indeed
presuming to exhort them farther to what they should be: Themselves will take
notice of Jehoshaphat's doubled Cavete in the Text; since they judge not for
man, that is, as some interpret, they may not please any man in his sin, nor
may they sin (in Prove. 18.5.
Judgment) to please any man: But they judge for God, and for his glory; who,
upon so doing, is with them in the Judgment; With them as a Spectator, which
notes his presence; With them as a Mighty Protector, which notes his
Pre-eminence; God is thus with them, thus judging; Wherefore now, if ever, Let
the fear of the Lord be upon them, take heed, and do it.

And thus, after my measure, as I could, though not after my wishes, as I would
(in a meet correspondence to such an Auditory), I have dispatched my main
intentions for this time. There are yet more parts of my first Division
remaining; but the time and the weighty affairs ensuing command me to dismiss
the larger handling of those at the present.

I shall humbly crave the favor only to press even with a Laconical brevity,
this Exhortation of Jehoshaphat, in the close of the Text, in a latitude, or
larger extension unto all in general: and I shall only, as Jonathan did the
Honey, touch all but as with the 1 Samuel 14.27.
tip of my staff, or dip in it the end of my rod; and may the same hand that
gave this opportunity, add also a success to this business. Now, Let the fear
of the Lord be upon you all.

An Exhortation, though at all times useful, yet at this time very opportune,
and seasonable; since we are fallen into those last days of which the Prophecy
was, That in them Mat. 24.12.
Iniquity should abound; and wherein the wounds of the Church seem so wide,
that none but Heavens Chyrurgery can cure them; and if it should be said now to
me, what the Lord did sometime to the Prophet, Son of man, What Jer. 1.11.
see thou? Surely, I must return answer (which I do also, Non exclamantis
studio, but dolentis affectu; not out of a desire to declaim on the dismembered
condition of these broken times, but only to declare my zealous sorrow for
them) I say, I must return answer, I see a world of Atheism and Ungodliness
in most sorts of men to superabound; Sin, with more spots then the Jer. 13.23.
Leopard has upon him, in all kind of variety, flows to the height of full
sea, whilst purity of Religion, and manners, keeps for the most part, at a low
water mark; so little, or no Romans 3.18.
fear of God is there upon earth, or Luke 18.2.
reverence of good men: and from this great depravation in manners, proceeds so
great corruption in Judgment; (...), says the Aristot. Eth. l 6. c. 5.
Arch Philosopher, Wickedness in practice corrupts even the very principles of
reason, and of Religion both; as, on the other side, a Psalm. 111.10.
right understanding, and the Psalm. 25.14. and Prove. 3.32.
secret of the Lord, is with them that fear him: we find that that same (...),
the Reprobate, and in-judicious mind arises from vile affections, and from an
unseemly conversation, Romans 1.24, 28. Hence spring those monsters of opinion
vented in speeches, and in Pamphlets, whereby many have taken pains (the more
is the pity) to destroy those principal spurs and motives unto all Virtue, to
wit, the providence of God, the Resurrection of the dead, the immortality of
the soul, the Joys of a future Local Heaven, and the pains of a future Local
Hell, the Radical cause (says Learned Hooker Eccl. Polit. l. 5. p. 188
Hooker) of their Atheism, and the miserable See Bish. King upon Jon. p. 62.
and 275.
scandal of the Christian Religion: O take heed what ye do, and (if there be
any here within this audience, this day, who secretly harbor such thoughts
bordering upon blasphemy) O serve the Lord with fear, and with trembling; For
this let me tell all such, without fear of their faces, or blushing in mine
own, whether they will hear, or whether they will Ezekiel. 2.5.
forbear; either they shall serve to the building, if their hearts be sound or
straight; or if hollow and crooked, to the burning: serve they must all, one
way or other.

But I am, thus, too general; I now come in order to make a more particular
Application, according to this occasion. I have Vid. Joh. Gerard. loc. Com.
tom. 6. p. 447.. 7. De Magistratu Polit.
read, that of old, men were wont to build their Villages nigh to some one
common Fountain, which in the Greek tongue is (...), and in the Dorick Dialect
thereof, (...), from whence all of the Vicinity were denominated Pagani, living
in open buildings without any wall to compass them; and yet all that water in
that common Fountain, could not advantage any, unless every one for himself
had brought thither his own Pitcher, and had drawn up, and drank it for his own
particular refreshing: In like manner, I shall now strive to 2 Timothy 2.15.
divide to every one his proper Luke 12.42
portion.

And first of all, Advice to Mr. High Sheriff, Mr John Trot Esquire, of
Laverstoke.
I shall crave leave to present my desires to Mr. High Sheriff, whose merits
(being so transcendent as they are) have betimes won him the regards and high
Reputation of this Country, and whose fidelity inclined the State to promote
him to this present Station: I shall request him to be but like himself (for as
Juno said of Hercules in Seneca, Quaeris Alcidae parem? Nemo est nisi ipse; If
he will contend with an equal, he must strive with himself): I shall beseech
him but to do as he does do, so piously, so prudently, so munificently, and he
shall stop the mouth of all contradiction; yea, his name and praise is already
mounted upon the wings of honor, and carried throughout his Country.

Next, Advice to the Grand Jury.
Take heed what ye do, and Let the fear of the Lord be upon you also, Gentlemen
of the Grand Inquest; Your Wisdom and Providence, like to a well drawn
Picture, must look upon every corner of your Country: God, by you, makes Psalm.
9.12.
Inquisition for Blood, that it may be cleansed; for Sabbath Breakers, that
they may be avenged; for Blasphemers of Gods Name, or Ordinances; for when you
are tender of God's 1 Samuel 2.30.
Honor, God will be of your safety: For Antichristian Popery, and
Superstitious Idolatry, that it may be purged; for Jesuiticall Impostors, those
who carry Jesus in their Names, but Rev. 9.11.
Abaddon and Apollyon in their hearts; those Mat. 7.15.
Wolves in sheeps clothing, those Serpents, that 2 Timothy 3.6.
creep unawares into secret Chambers, beguiling 2 Timothy 3.6.
unsettled, and 2 Pet. 3.16.
unstable souls; whether under the habit of Carpenters, of Seamen, of Butchers,
of Cooks, of Coach men, or any sort of Mechanics, or indeed of what not, so be
they may gain Mat. 23.15.
Proselytes, and make them ten times more the children of Hell, then they were
before; most Pernicious Incendiaries, not only in a Church, but in a State; and
believe it, brethren, if the Magistrate do not early root out them (so soon as
they may be unmasked and detected) they will, if possible, extirpate the
Magistrate; Sunt Homines multorum nominum, sed non boni nominis, they are men
of many names, as may best advantage their occasions, but really of no good
name or repute. In a word, Deal faithfully for God, for the true Religion, and
for the quiet of your Country, by preserving it from Rapines, Robberies,
Adulteryes, or whatever else may defile the Land: Take heed, and do it.

And for all you Jurers of a subordinate Rank, Advice to the Pe^ty Jury and
Witnesses.
Take heed what you do; and now, let the fear of the Lord be upon you; be not
like Ostriches, to swallow down Iron; bring your hearts to the temper of
Josiah's be 2 King. 22.19
tender in the matter of swearing, and learn to Eccles 9.2. 1 Samuel 14.26.
fear an Oath; Remember who said, The land mourns because of Oaths, Jer: 23.10.
When so me unadvisedly, others continually, and as it were by custom, make an
Oath an Interjection of filling of all their speeches, and to serve to close up
the empty hiatus of their broken sentences; Yea, which thereby come, as one
expresses it, to a Diabetica passio of swearing, so that Oaths run from them,
and they feel them not: Joshuah, who had the Authority, chose out Josh. 3.12.
and 4.2.
twelve worthy men out of the twelve Tribes, to serve their Country; have
regard that there be no Job. 6 70.
Judas among your twelve; he bore the Joh. 12.6.
Bag, and for silver Mat. 27.4.
betrayed Innocent Blood; let there be none like Jezabels Knights of the Post,
1 King. 21.8, 9, 10. who by Impudent Perjury, through the wicked Subordination
of a queen, occasioned the shedding of Innocent Blood, and the Injurious
Usurpation of another Inheritance: If any particular has been discovered in
this kind, shake him off from your company, as Paul did the Act. 28.5.
Viper off from his hand; Qui semel malus fuit, semper praesumitur esse malus,
in eodem genere, says the Civil Law; He is no more to be trusted, in the same
kind: In short, Let not that, which is appointed of God to decide and Heb 6.16.
end Controversies among your Neighbors, be made, by any secret, malevolent,
or revengefull intentions, the beginning of a greater Hos. 4.1.
Controversy, between God, and your own souls: Take heed, let the fear of the
Lord be upon you; Tremble to contest the Joh. 21.17.
Omniscient, soul-fearching Psalm. 44.21. Psalm. 7.9. Act. 1 24. Rom 8.27
God to a falsity; that God whom you so provoke, will not hold you Exodus 20 7.
guiltless: bring not then the Zech. 5.3, 4.
curse of God upon your souls, or into your houses, by Zech. 8.17.
false or by Eccles. 5.2.
rash swearing, Wherefore endeavor rather to be like to the Sun, and Moon in
the Heavens, as Psalm. 89.36, 37.
faithful Witnesses, Take heed, and do it.

Thirdly, Advice to the Lawyers.
I might say also to you Lawyers, Take heed what ye do, and let the fear of
the Lord be upon you: Open your mouth, and plead the cause of the poor and
needy, Prove. 31.9. Let the Job 31 20.
Loins of the desolate Widow, and the Bowels of the Lam. 5.3.
Fatherless Orphan, bless you, Psalm. 82.3, 4. A Widow by your Law, is called
Relicta, one left and exposed to Injury, (...), says the Greek Proverb, When
the Oak (the man) falls, every one will be fetching of wood, and (...), says
Hesychius, is from (...), one in the dark, or, under clouds, or, as Photinus,
(...), one that has no helper; wherefore do you defend both: And yet I may not
conceal, but that there have been some, who because S. Paul (1 Cor. 6.) forbade
the Corinthians to go to Law one with another, and to wrangle about trifles,
being Christians, before Hoc loco non simpticiter vetat judicio contendere
propter res temporarias, sed Corinthios reprchendit, quod impatientes essent
nimium, ac insupe malas causas in judicia [Ethnicorum] afferrent, and in cis
ita se gererent, ut magnam praeberent occasionem Ethnicis vituperandi
Evangelium. Bullinger. advers. Anabapt. lib. 5. cap. 4.
Infidel Judges, whereby the Apostle meant only the Correction of a disorder,
and the avoiding of scandal; would yet, by a distortion of that Text, from a
false Topic of the abuse, have the whole profession it self totally abolished;
not pondering the mean while, the hazard of what they possess by that
Precipitant, and (I had almost said) Whimsicall wish; not considering the
excellency of our English Laws, tempered with so great equanimity, that on the
one side, they be not like Draco's Laws, written in blood, and altogether
savouring of cruelty; nor on the other side, Illusory, and light, savouring of
vanity. O, say such Rooters, if the Client prove not a Gerund in Do, the Lawyer
will soon become a Gerund in Dum: They deal by their Clients as Musicians do by
their Sackbuts, contract or distend their Causes, as the Fee strengthens the
breath; and in snarling language compare them to those Creatures, that having
swallowed one gobbet, stare again in your faces, as if they had received none
at all; like the Prove. 30.15.16.
grave or the barren womb, they still cry, Give, Give, and yet are not
satisfied; and as they say of Bears, there is no such deformed lump, but with
their tongues they can lick it into some fashion, and can easily smooth even
the roughest stone: Such, and the like are the flowers of these men's Rhetoric,
or rather the purulent excreations of their corrupt lungs, fittest for them to
resume, who first disgorged them: for my self, I might well blush under such
kind of Oratory, lest you might regest upon me, as they did, Luke 11.45.
Master, thus saying, thou reproachest us also: But it is not for me to turn an
Exhortation into a Satyr, or to express my self in the style of the stage:
the times require a Character of Love, not of any such indiscreet, or
intemperate Zeal; I should rather vindicate your Honor, (chiefly if you plead
for ours, and our rights) then asperse that Noble Profession, which is of that
Job 9.21.
age, that its well able to speak for it self: Go on then, and Psalm. 45.4.
prosper; up, and be 1 Chronicles. 22.16
doing good, that your Country, and your Act 13.36.
Generation may 1 Chronicles. 22.16
praise you; Take heed, and do it. Zeph. 3.19.


Fourthly: Advice to the Clergy.
and lastly, As in that Marriage Feast, where Christ himself was a guest, at
Cana in Galiee, the Joh. 2.10.
good wine was kept till last; Deuteronomy. 32.2.
I shall, in all Reverentiall modesty crave the favor to drop a word or two
upon my reverend brethren of the Ministry: For, blessed be God,
(notwithstanding the interposition of some S. Jude ver. 12
clouds without water) we yet see some shining lights standing in their Mat.
5.14, 15
Candlesticks, and it were a thousand pities, but it should be so still: We
read, that there were Exodus 37.23.
Snuffers in Gods Tabernacle, that where the lights did burn but dimly, they
might be amended; but I find no mention there made of Extinguishers. And here,
as John Baptist said, in an humble renuence to our Savior, I have need to be
baptized of thee, Mat. 3.14.
and come thou to me? So I being more fit to take, then to give counsel this
way; for I know the Schools determine, that an Angel of an Inferior Hierarchy
cannot illuminate one of a Superior; Therefore, I would not presume to inform,
but only desire to inflame my Reverend Brethren. Let us take heed what we do,
and let the fear of the Lord be upon you: Learning is, or has been of late
years, in the very Tropic of Cancer, but when the Sun is at the highest, it is
observed by Philosophers, that the Fountains below are coldest: There is often
more affectation of knowledge in the brain, then any zealous fervent, 2 These.
2.10.
Affection in the heart; even as it was at the first, the Tree of Genesis 3.6.
Knowledge, was preferred to the Tree of Life: I shall not enlarge on this
occasion, only let us keep to the proper motion of our own Orbs: then shall we
with Authority speak what we do, when we do what we speak: Let us be heard
often, and seen seldom, and when we are seen, appear as some Rare and
Beneficent Stars; and because the Eye anticipates the Ear among the inconstant
Vulgar, (with whom its Mat. 21.9.
Hosanna one day, and Mark 15.13, 14 and Luke 23.21.
Crucify another, Neutrum modo, mas modo vulgus) Let our Lives dazzle, whom our
Doctrine will not enlighten: Its possible, soon to make our selves too cheap,
since we find it in experience, how too much airing, like some fair colored
Silks, makes us lose our gloss: and men will be apt to tell us, that we are
like Barbars, who snip off the James 1.21.
Superfluities of others naughtiness, whilst we suffer our own locks to
overgrow, and to deform our selves: In one word, If we pour the box of Piety,
as of Precious Psalm. 133.2.
Ointment, upon our own heads first, it may from thence distill, and trickle
down to the very skirts of our garments, to the very meanest of our Hearers.
And thus, Let us take heed to our selves, and do.

To conclude this whole Exhortation: To all this people in general let me say
as the Scripture does, Psalm. 34.14. 1 Pet. 3.11.
Eschew evil, and do good, seek not death in the error of your lives, but
Deuteronomy. 30.19.
choose the ways of life, in pursuing your peace with God; which is a Dicotomy,
that makes up the Plerophory of a good Christian: Labor to be (...), Every one
to be 2 Cor. 1.12. Col. 3.23.
Entire in his Affections, Psalm. 119.6, 7.
Universal in his Obedience; Let every one be what he seems, or else seem what
he is; and, as the Church is said Cant. 2.11. to have made her Borders of Gold,
with studs of Silver, have the best side inwards.

Stand fast in that Christian Gal. 5.1.
Liberty, wherewith Christ has made you free, only use it not as a 1 Pet.
2.16.
Cloak of Maliciousness, or as an Gal. 5.13.
occasion of the flesh; but by love serve one another: Take heed of 1 Timothy 4.1.
Seducing spirits, especially of the White Devil, who sometimes transformes
himself into an 2 Cor. 11.14.
Angel of Light; beware of those S Jude ver. 13.
Wandering Stars, whose faint blazes, shall never be able to out shine the
Ancient and Pure Light of the Mal. 4.2.
Sun of Righteousness, or that Faith which was (...) S. Jude ver. 3.
once for all delivered to the Saints. Give not the Right Hand of Gal. 2.9.
Fellowship to such who would withdraw you from the Ordinances of Christ,
making a Religion of wax, depending only upon the train of their own
affairs; such as those who fit Religion to their Wills, not their Wills to the
true Religion; not bringing their froward Consciences to the Gal. 6.16. and
Phil. 3.16.
Rule of the Word Orthodoxly expounded but often, the Word mistaken, if not too
much 2 Pet. 3.16.
wrested, to their own misinformed Consciences: O lean not to your own Prove.
3.5.
Understandings, and ever suspect that Doctrine which tends to cherish the Gal.
5.13. S. Jude ver. 4. Psalm. 53.1. Ezekiel. 20 44.
Corruptions of Nature; which is all for the Promises and Privileges, but
nothing at all for the Precepts of the Gospel; all for Comfort, but for Psalm. 2
3. Luke 17.10.
Duty not at all: Who dimidiate Christ, would have him only by halfes, to be
Jesus for a Savior, but reject him from being a Lord and a King, to Rule or
Luke 19.27.
Reign over them: Such as they reason much from the Power of God: what he [can]
do, namely, without the ordinary means; not from his Rom 12.2.
Will revealed, the sole Phil. 3.16. and Gal. 6.16.
Canon of all our Actions: A mere Paralogisme, and groundless kind of
reasoning. Who questions, but that God [can] give wings to men to fly withal,
for he has done it unto Eagles? but [will] God do it unto men? this were to
pervert the Order and Beauty of his Creation, which God (the 1 Cor. 14.33.
God of Order) will not do; no nor ordinarily bring any to the end, which is
Salvation, without the precisest use of the ordinary means, which is
Sanctification: And indeed, if there be any, who think themselves too good for
the means; the means (in Gods formidable Judgment) may, in the Event, become
too good for them, Amos 8.11. Matthew. 21.43. The sum of all that I have now to
say, amounts to this; So live, and strive for Holiness, as if thou had no
mean of Salvation but that; and yet so rest and rely upon the Merits of Jesus
Christ, as if thou had no holiness at all: And thus let the fear of the Lord
be upon you all, Take heed, and do it.

I have no more to add, save only to assure you (thus doing) of a most ample
and glorious Remuneration of all your Gracious Endeavors, by the 2 Timothy 4 8.
and Gen 18.25.
Righteous Judge of all the world; no man's Righteous Heb. 6.10.
Labor was ever in 1 Cor. 15.58
vain in the Lord, or went Genesis 15.1.
Psalm. 19.11. and 31.19 and 58.11 Prove. 24.14. Isal 40.10. and 62.11 Mat. 5.12.
Col. 3.24. 2 Ep Joh. 8. Rev 22.12.
unrewarded; Yea thus doing, ye shall be advanced, not only to a more near
Communion with God in the Beatificall Vision, but also unto a most precellent
honor before the world, being to sit on the Throne with Christ himself, judging
the world, yea Angels, as ye read 1 Corinthians. 6.2, 3. though not Authoritatively
(that Phil. 2.9, 10.
Exaltation being given by God the Father, to his Son Christ, as Man, as the
Recompense of his Humiliation, John 5. ver. 22, 27) Yet as Assessors, and
Approvers of that Just Sentence, which by Joh. 5.27.
Commission from God, the Lord Christ shall then Mat 25.34.
pronounce upon the world. I shall cite only one single Text very apposite to
this purpose, and so close up all: It is extant in the nineteenth Chapter of
Saint Matthew, verse the twenty eighth, compared with Luke 22.30. And Jesus
said unto them, Verily I say unto you, that ye which have followed me; In the
Regeneration, when the Son of Man shall sit in the Throne of his Glory, ye
also shall sit upon Twelve Thrones, judging the Twelve Tribes of Israel. A
short Paraphrase, upon which words shall now terminate both my Sermon, and (as
I fear) your wearyed Patience.

Ye which have followed me] that is, all ye, not my Twelve Apostles only, but
all other sincere Nathaneels, and Joh. 1.47.
Israelites indeed. Which have followed me, to wit, in things capable of
imitation: Not in the Acts of Mediatorship, which no mere Creature, and only
Christ himself could do, nor in acts of Omnipotence, Infiniteness, or of
miraculous Nature, and such like. But in the Moral Actions of obedience. In
the Regeneration] Which word is not, as Hilar. Can. 26 in Matthew.
Hillary, and some others mistook, to be expounded in this particular Text of
that Spiritual Regeneration, by which we are born again of water, and of the
Holy Ghost, Joh. 3.5. begun in this life, because it is said here, That the
Apostles and Saints shall sit upon Thrones judging, which we read not of at all
in this world, where they were rather themselves judged: But this (...), or
Regeneration, is to be understood of the Act. 3.21.
Restoration of all things, in the general Resurrection. Sic enim caro nostra
regenerabitur, per incorruptionem, quemadmodum est anima nostra regenerata per
Fidem, as Saint S. Aug. l. 20. c. 5. De Civ. Dei
Augustine elegantly: For our flesh is, as it were, Regenerate from the grave,
by Incorruptions; as our soul is regenerate from the state of nature, by Faith
and Holiness: So that this Expression apperatains not, as Joh Gerard Tom. 8.
loc. com. c. 1.
Gerard well interprets, to this description of the Subject, or of the Manner
and Form, How the Apostles and Saints do follow Christ; but to the
Determination of time, which is added to the Predicate, and shows when the
Retribution of Glory shall be given unto the Saints; Namely, then, when the Son
of Man shall sit upon the Mat. 25.31.
Throne of his Glory. By Twelve Thrones, and Twelve Tribes, putting a certain
number for an uncertain (as is not unusual in Holy Writ) are meant the whole
number of those who shall be Judges, and also be judged; for else the Twelve
Apostles only should be Judges, and none but Jews of the Twelve Tribes be
judged; whereas Saint Paul affirms, that all other Saints shall likewise Judge
(in the sense but now named) even all the world: O Heavenly Dignity! O Honor
Incomprehensible!

So then, my Dearly Beloved, and Phil. 4.1.
longed for in the Lord, let now but the fear of the Lord be upon you, in this
Kingdom of Grace here; then may you even when the last 1 Cor. 15.52
Trump shall sound, and the dead shall rise incorruptible, lift Luke 21.28.
up your heads with joy in the Kingdom of Immortal Glory hereafter, unto all
Eternity.

Which God of his Infinite mercy grant unto us all, for the sake of the Son of
his Love, Jesus Christ the Righteous, for whom our souls do bless Thee, O
Heavenly Father; and on whom we anchor all our Hopes, and to whom with Thee and
thy ever Blessed Spirit, Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, be rendered and
ascribed, as is most due, from the bottom of all our Hearts, all possible
Praise, and Glory, from henceforth and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

