A LETTER Written to the JEWS

By Rabbi Moses Scialitti

A JEW of FLORENCE Baptized June 14. 1663.

Declaring the Reasons of his Conversion, and exhorting them to embrace the
CHRISTIAN FAITH.

LONDON, Printed 1663.

BRETHREN,
THE grace of God the Father, the love of his only begotten Son, Redeemer of
the world, and the influence of the Holy Ghost, which has enlightened my
understanding, and mollified the hardness and obstinacy of my heart, and
brought me to the truth of the Holy Gospel, and lively Faith in Jesus Christ
our blessed Savior. The same love, the same grace, and the same lively Faith
in Christ I so much the more desire by you, by how much the more I see my self
come out of darkness into light; from lies to the truth, from the dreadful
wrath of God, which hangs over the heads of unbelievers, to the true and
eternal enjoyment promised to the faithful. (...) If ye shall be willing and
obedient, Isa. 1.19, 20.
ye shall eat of the good of the land, and if ye shall refuse and rebel ye
shall be devoured with the sword. Open therefore the eyes of your
understanding, my brethren, and embrace, own, and believe in this Christ the
true Messiah, the true and only Son of the Eternal Father, true God become man,
only to satisfy his justice for mankind, the true cause of our salvation; and
lest ye should believe, that this resolution made by me, (through the grace of
God and his only Son Jesus Christ, whose Faith I embrace) were a mere madness
or fancy, or a vain resolution, either out of despair, covetousness, ambition,
or to procure unto me the favor of some great Prince; truly no it is a mere
motive of truth, so much the more clear, by how much the sun is above darkness,
the light above obscurity: and I tell you, that I find my self in this Truth so
satisfied, as if I were returned from death unto life. The which I shall prove
unto you my Brethren, not only by the Faith which I have in Jesus Christ, not
only by the Law of love and life of promise, which he has lest unto us, (the
which makes manifest unto all the world, that it can not be but a divine Law)
but so purely and so clearly I promise to demonstrate it unto you (...) by the
Law of Moses by the Prophets, and by the words of (...) of the Rabbis, that I
am certain that ye shall not be able to forbear confessing him, unless by the
hardness of your hearts ye be hindered: pray therefore unto God that he grant ye
that which he has promised by the Prophet, (...) And I will take away the
stony heart out of your flesh, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.
and I will give to you an heart of flesh, etc. and cause you to walk in my
statutes, etc. to the end that ye may understand and apply your selves unto the
light brought unto you by me with evident reasons; and I hope in this, my good
Christ, the true comfort of my soul, he will give me his grace that my words
may prove effectual in you; for I know ye shall not be able to answer, neither
will ye have any starting hole to step or fly from the arguments which I shall
allege unto you, which shall be grounded all of them on the (...) of (...) the
Law of Moses, as aforesaid, or by Rabinical Texts unto which ye give so much
credit, that ye say (...) who shall not observe their words deserves death; let
us come then to the point.

The knowledge which from the Prophecies is discovered of the coming and Faith
of Christ would require much time and place to explain them, by reason of the
difficulty of the matter; therefore we will touch only some part (deferring the
enlargement to the Book which I am making, of the Exaltation of the Faith of
Christ in the Religion of the Catholic Church) by the proper place of the
Rabbis and Caballists: first I will prove to you how the (...) of (...) Law of
Moses was to have an end, and not be eternal; and this I prove unto you out of
Deuteronomy, (...) The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the
midst of thee, Dan. 18.15.
of thy Brethren, like unto me, unto him you shall hearken. Tell me Brethren,
have not ye that (...) that there has not been in Israel a Prophet like Moses;
thus then do I frame my argument, God promises that there shall be one Prophet
(shall rise up) an affirmative word as Moses (like unto me) there has not been
any of the Prophets of his degree, as the Rabbis say in the Talmud. (...) All
the Prophets have prophesied in a looking-glass as in the dark, and Moses has
prophesied in a looking-glass as in the light, setting forth the quality of
Moses, and that there has been no Prophet so great as he. Then if he has not
been, he was to be, for to keep the Divine promise, and who was it? Christ, And
therefore he says (...) like to me; (...) like to me in giving Law. As I give
you Law, so he is to give you Law, and therefore now I command you, (...) and
to him you shall hearken. And not only this, but proceeds saying, (...) That
whosoever will not hearken unto my words, Verse 19.
which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him. Observe, my Hebrew
Brethren, that in the keeping of the first Law, the text says (...) Cursed be
he who confirms not the words of this Law to do them. Deuteronomy. 18.15.
And not doing them he lies under a curse. But by this change and new Law, it
is not enough to ly under a curse; but the text says moreover, I will require
it of him (...) where ye see clearly proved to any body of understanding, that
this change of Law was to be. By your own Rabbis (though amongst Christians it
be taken but for a slender authority) I will prove it unto you, by what they
say (...) because the Hogg is called (...) (which is derived from the Verb
(...), which signifies to return) only because its end is to return; a time is
to come that it will be lawful to eat it. O how, according to your selves
Brethren, who so much believe the sayings of your Rabbis, has this Rabbie
spoken prophetically, saying, a time will come, that although a Hogg be, by a
clear Text of the Sacred Scriptures of the Old Testament, Lev. 11.9.
not to be eaten, as he says (...) and the Swine, etc. of their flesh shall ye
not eat; yet that it will be lawful to eat of it. And what else will it
signify, only that by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Law is by him
renewed, grounded upon the first precept, given by God unto Noah, which says
(...) Even as the green herb have I given you all things. Genesis 9.3.
All is lawful for ye to eat; the Hogg returned once again unto its former
condition; that it should be lawful to eat it. Where it is seen, that as well
by the sacred Text, as by the sayings of the Rabbis, his Law was to have a
change, and a renewing. The third proof, that not only it was to be changed in
corporal things, but also in divine and spiritual; I will prove it unto you by
(...) the Rabbis, when they say, (...) They have demanded of the divine Law
what deserves a sinner, what punishment must he have? Answer, that he bring a
sacrifice, and he shall be pardoned. They have demanded of God himself what
deserves a sinner, what punishment must he have? Answer, nothing else, only
repentance, and he shall be pardoned, proving of it from the Verse which David
said, Man and beast shall God save: (...) What else can be declared by your
Rabbis themselves, but that a Time was to come, Psalm 36.
that there should not be any need at all of sacrifices of beasts or animals,
for the remission of sins, but only bare repentance, since that sacrifice was
nothing else but the Figure and Type of the sacrifice of Christ (as I refer to
an other place the particular explanation thereof.) It suffices hitherto to
have proved unto you by reasons evident, powerful and clear, that this your
(and my former) Law was to be changed. Therefore if it be true (as I proved)
that this change must be, it cannot be by any other than by this second Law of
Charity and Grace, of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the true Messiah, and God,
and the Son of God, in one and the same person. But first I will prove unto
you, the qualities that the Messiah is to have, that not only he is to be man
born of a woman, but God himself in essence, and his Son by generation; and
this with brevity, that I may not be tedious (deferring the full enlargement of
the same to my next work) that he must be God himself, I prove it unto you, the
Prophet says, speaking of the Messiah (...) And this is his name whereby he
shall be called, Jer. 23.9.
the Lord our Righteousness, and in another place, Cap. 33.16.
(...) And this is the name wherewith he shall be called, the Lord our
Righteousness. Well, ye know, my Heb. Brethren, that this name of Jehovah, that
is (...) Lord, can not be given, nor is it ever given, nor is it found written,
but for the proper divine Essence (as your Cabalists do say) i. e. the (...)
vein and sourse of all sacred and divine names; and is called by them (...) a
proper name, and essential name, and others they call them (...) surnames which
may be found written with profane significations, as Eloim (...) which may
signify Idols or Judges, or else Adonai written in this manner (...) which may
be interpreted profanely for, my Lords, but yet when this name is written with
this word (...) Jehovah, it cannot be allowed otherwise than Sacred, Holy, and
for Divine Essence it self. Then if the Messiah is called with this title of
(...) Jehovah, he must be God himself, and not an ordinary man. I observe also,
Brethren, that the Prophet Isaiah speaking of the Messiah, and of the names by
which he is to be called, says (...) And his name shall be called wonderful,
Isa. 9.6.
Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. O
grand Titles among the rest (...) the mighty God, spirituality (...) God, and
Humanity conjoined (...) (deriving from the name (...) which signifies Man.)
Observe that ye shall not find in all the sacred Scriptures any particular
person entitled (...) God (with this word) only the Messiah, which was to come,
for whom had been spoken all the Prophecies which have been in him fulfilled; thus
then the Messiah is not only to be corporeal, as ye believe, but corporeal and
spiritual both, (...) as if (...), God and man. And it was reason, Brethren,
that it should be so: for if we shall go about to consider the work that this
Messiah came to do, and whence it proceeds, we shall see, that it was not
expedient that he should be mere man; for this Messiah proceeds only, as well ye
know, by occasion of the curse given by God unto our first Father Adam, for the
sin of the fruit, having said unto him (...) for ye well know where it is
spoken duplicately, by dying thou shall die, its interpreted by your own very
Rabbis, that it treats always of two deaths, that is death spiritual, and
death corporeal or temporal; so that to the end that the world should not
perish for this great sin, the mercy of God has found the means for to appease
his justice, and to save the world from this (...) diabolical serpent; for ye
know well what the Rabbis say, (...) He is the serpent, he is the wicked
temptation, he is the Devil, he is the Ambassador of death, he comes down and
tempts, he rises and accuses, he descends and takes the soul. So that this
serpent is nothing else but diabolical temptation, for God promises to put
hatred betwixt this serpent and the seed of the woman, insomuch that he says
(...) He shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel: what else can
this clearly signify, with the foundation, as I have expressed unto you, of
spiritual death to which Adam was condemned, the which as ye know must cease with
the coming of the Messiah, as your Rabbis say, (...) In the time to come the
Divine Majesty will take the wicked temptation, and behead it before the
righteous, to the end there may be no more temptation nor spiritual death; but
the remedy of all the evils, as well temporal as spiritual which flow from sin
might be obtained by the coming of the Messiah, and for these so great effects
a mere man was not sufficient, and therefore he was to be God and man. And the
benefits of his coming were not to be extended to the Hebrews alone, but to
other nations also; that all the world might be united in the union of one Law
and one faith, and attain salvation thereby, according to the Prophet Isaiah
(...) The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light. Chap 9.2.
They that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them has the light
shined, ver. 6.
and then it follows, (...) for unto us a child is born, which ye know well to
be a prophecy of the Messiah, as I have already declared. And according unto
your account of (...) the mystical sense ye know the Rabbines say that (...)
There is one signification in the writing, and there is one signification in
the reading, ver. 7.
which being granted, let us consider the following verse (...) Of the increase
of his Government and peace there shall be no end. This word (...) of the
increase must be observed, that the Mem ((...)) finalis is in the midst of it,
an extraordinary unusual thing, and never allowed by any rule. Let us observe
then that this Mem is a numerical letter denoting the number 600. And from the
time of this Prophecy of Isaiah to the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ are just
600. years according to the following computation: Uzziah reigned 52. years,
Jotham 16. Ahaz 16. Hezekiah 29. Manasseh 55. Ammon 2. Josiah 31. Jehoiakim 11.
Zedekiah 11. The captivity of Babylon lasted 70. years, and the second temple
420. which are in all 713. Now if we take away 40. years for the former part of
the reign of Uzziah before Isaiah began to Prophecy, and 33. years for the
time in which our Savior lived upon earth, and 40. years more for the time
from his passion to the destruction of the Temple, the number to be subtracted
from 713. will be 113. and the remainder 600. So then the Mem finalis was put
on purpose in the midst of this word, to signify that this Messiah, this
child to whom the Prophet gives such honorable titles, and in whom this
increase of Government was to be fulfilled should be born just 600. years after
the date of the prophecy, as Jesus of Nazareth the true Messiah indeed was. By
whose coming also was fulfilled that Prophecy of Jeremiah, which says, (...),
Jer. 31.31, 32, 33.
Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the
house of Israel, and with the house of Judah. Not according to the covenant
that I made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand, to
bring them out of the land of Egypt, (which my covevenant they brake, although
I was an husband unto them, says the Lord.) But this shall be the covenant
that I will make with the house of Israel, etc. What other thing brethren can
this change of Covenant mean, but only the abolishing of the Law of Moses which
was the covenant ratified in the day that our Fathers went out of the land of
Egypt, and the substituting in the room of it the Law of Christ, which is a new
and a better covenant, the benefit whereof, according to the following words of
this Prophecy, is a more distinct and general knowledge of God, which is
contained in the knowledge of this Messiah God and man, as is before declared.
You know also that the Messiah at his coming must through this general
knowledge of God, take away all Idolatry, as from many places I could prove, if
it were not already confessed by you without any contradiction; if then this
Messiah must be God and man, if he must redeem the world, if he must take away
all Idolatry, it remains only for us to prove that this Jesus is that Messiah,
that ye may not say, it is true indeed the Messiah is of that essence, and shall
unite to his Divinity the humane nature, and must perform those works which you
have spoken of, but all this will come to pass hereafter, he is not yet come.
To which I answer, that as the Law of Moses is received for the sake of an
universal Tradition generally acknowledged in every nation, and consequently
the history of the miracles there recorded is worthy of belief. So also is the
Law of Christ: for since the first publication of his Gospel, it has been
generally acknowledged, and without contradiction, that in such a certain time
Jesus Christ lived and died, and soon after his Gospel was written and
proclaimed by his Disciples; who neither wrote nor preached it for gold nor
silver, nor compliance with any Prince, but on the contrary thereby exposed
themselves to many sorrows and a cruel death. Now ye know the rule of the
Rabbines, (...) A man sins not but for himself, it is not imaginable that one
man should sin for another without the expectation of some profit or gain, but
on the contrary an apparent certainty of persecution, and death: It is
therefore a sign and evident proof of the true h of their relation, that they
suffered themselves to be put to death, rather then conceal the doctrine which
they were commanded to publish. Some heathen Authors also have made remarkable
mention of Christ, and some of the circumstances of his life and death, the
substance of whole story remains to this day uncontradicted by any writer of
those times. Ye know also the common rule (...) the voice is true which is not
stopped. Now if the History of Christ be (...) a voice which is not stopped, it is
necessary by your own rule to confess that it is true. Now let us add to this
acknowledged truth the consideration of the time, when the fulfilling of the
prophecies concerning the Messiah was expected, and we shall see how the coming
of Jesus of Nazareth did fully consort therewith, which has in part been
proved already from the 9. of Isaiah, and may be further explained in the
interpretation of the following Prophecies, of which the first shall be that of
Daniel concerning (...) the seventy weeks, Dan. 2.24.
etc. in which the time of the Messiahs coming is clearly intimated; for from
the beginning of the captivity of Babylon to the destruction of the second
Temple, are just seventy (...) weeks of years, that is, seventy times seven,
viz. four hundred and ninety years, the captivity lasted 70. and the second
Temple, 420. years, the destruction of which concluded the first coming of
Christ the Messiah, the Savior, of the world. It is necessary therefore to
confess that this Jesus is the true Messiah of whom the Prophets spoke so long
before, because his coming does thus exactly agree with the time allotted in
this Prophecy (according as I have explained it) for the coming of the
Messiah. Now as the foregoing Prophecy is exactly accomplished in the end of
our Saviors first coming, so also are the two following prophecies of the same
Daniel plainly fulfilled in the beginning of the first coming of Christ at his
conception and nativity. Dan. 7.25.
The first is (...) until a time and times, and the dividing of time (...) a
time is the greatest age of a man 100. years (according to (...) Pizke Aboth
where the rules of life are proportioned to every age till 100. years, beyond
which if a man live, his time is no more accounted then if he were dead, (...)
after a hundred years he is as one dead and gone, and annihilated from the
world) and two times consequently 200. years, and the dividing of time 50.
years, which are in all 350. according to the same account in an other
prophecy of the Messiah (...) that it shall be for a time, Dan. 21.7.
time, and an half. Now from the building of the second temple to the Nativity
of our Lord, are about 350. years, and accordingly at that time the Prophecies
were both fulfilled. In him also were accomplished that death and passion which
it behoved the Messiah to suffer, according to the Prophet Isaiah (the
particular explication whereof I reserve to the Treatise already promised) In
him was fulfilled the Prohecie of Haggai (...) The glory of this latter house,
Chap. 52.53.
Chap. 52.
shall be greater then of the former. In what my Brethren did this superiority
consist? Ye know that in the second temple was neither Prophecy nor (...)
celestial fire for sacrifices nor several of those other excellencies wherewith
the first was magnified. But here was the advantage of the second Temple; that
whilst it remained, This Messiah, This Son of God was to come and redeem
mankind, and erect a spiritual temple in the souls of believers in all parts of
the world for God to inhabit, instead of that visible temple at Jerusalem,
therefore this house is called (...) the last and not (...) the second, to
signify that after the destruction of this, there should be no more material
fabrics, neither would God any longer dwell in temples made with hands. The
coming of this Messiah has also made apparent the truth of that Prophecy of
Zachariah (...) The Lord shall be King over all the earth, Zech. 14. v. 9.
that is the world shall cease from Idolatry, and come to the acknowledgment of
the true God, (...) Jehovah shall be one, and his name one, that is, The
Messiah (who is called Jehovah, as I have proved before) is together with God
the Father, one in name and one in nature, substance and essence: and,
Brethren, let not this mystery of the blessed Trinity (which I know is your
greatest quarrel with the Christian Religion) seem so strange; seeing the
manner of all things relating to the Godhead is inexplicable, ye also have two
(...) Articles which at first view seem inconsistent and hardly to be
accomodated to our understanding: and yet your selves hold it necessary to
believe them both, viz. (...) Divine prescience, and (...) that freedom of will
which makes a man capable of (...) punishment or reward, and the great Rabbi
Maimon esteems it enough for the removing of this difficulty to say that (...)
Divine knowledge is not as ours, that we cannot conceive how the prescience of
God is because it is not distinct from, but the same thing with the divine
Essence, and consequently Gods Essence would not be incomprehensible, if his
prescience were not so. Whereupon your Doctors say in the explication of the
aforecited words of (...) Maimon, that we ought to believe those Articles
though we are not able to conceive the manner how they consist together; which
answer if you admit as true and sufficient in the case of prescience and
free will, by the same reason it ought to be accepted so far in the Article of
the Blessed Trinity as not to conclude it therefore impossible to be true
because it is incomprehensible, especially seeing your (...) Cabbalists in
several places affirm as hard things in effect, and not unlike to those which
the Christian faith teaches concerning the Trinity, viz. That the three first
(...) celestial Orders which are (...) Crown, Knowledge, Intelligence,
(signified by the word (...) Jah (which is derived from the name (...) Jehovah
(cannot suffer any (...) separation, that they are three, yet but one essence;
and how difficult soever this matter may seem to you, I doubt not to prove it
from your own books, and particularly from plain and clear Allegations out of
(...) Zoar.

I will not enlarge my discourse further in the explication of all the
Prophecies which make mention of the Messiah, how they are accomplished in
Christ our Savior, because it is an argument already insisted on by many
excellent writers, and I my self also purpose with the assistance of God to
treat more fully of it hereafter.

I conclude them with an observation now commonly known; but originally taken
from (...) the Lectures of the College of Eliah, viz. (...) The world is to
continue six Thousand years, Two thousand empty, Two thousand Law, Two thousand
the days of the Messiah. That there were two thousand years from the Creation
of the world to (...) the giving of the Law is agreed on all hands; and of the
remaining four thousand which according to your Rabbis were to be equally
divided betwixt the Law of Moses and the Messiah, three thousand and six
hundred are already past, and you are still expecting the Messiah, and will not
yet allow the second period of this threefold division to be complete and ended.

The sum of all in few words is this.

The Law of Moses was to be changed.

The expected Messiah was to come in such a prefixed time.

He was to be God and Man in one person.

He was to suffer and die.

He was to be the Redeemer of the world.

He was to take away Idolatry.

All which according to the clearest evidence of Scripture, History and
Tradition, are so fulfilled in the person of Jesus of Nazareth as to leave it
without controversy that he is the true Messiah, whose coming was foretold by
Moses and the Prophets.

TO him therefore my earnest desire and prayer is, that after this long and
almost invincible obstinacy of our nation, the truth which I have embraced may
be believed and acknowledged by you all, that ye may be delivered from the
curses to which unbelievers are liable, and may receive a reward with the soul
of the faithful at our Saviors Second Coming.

ALthough ye are not ignorant with what solemn professions and vows men are
admitted and received into the Church of Christ, yet that ye may know what
further satisfaction to the Christian world is justly expected from them, who
live so long in obstinacy and infidelity, I will here add that Renunciation of
my former errors, and that profession of my belief, which I made in the
presence of diverse honorable persons, and a great multitude of witnesses,
according to the questions proposed unto me immediately before my Baptism.

Q. What is your desire?

A. I desire to be admitted into the Communion of the Catholic Church of
Christ, by the holy ordinance of Baptism, that I may live under the Government
and may enjoy the blessings and privileges of the kingdom of God for my
Comfort in this world, and my Salvation in the world to come.

Q. Do you sincerely acknowledge (as you hope for the mercy of God at the day
of judgment) that the Lord Jesus (in whom the Christians believe) is the
eternal Son of God, the true Messiah and Savior of the world, and that no
other Messiah is to be looked for?

A. Yes, as I hope for mercy from God, whom I desire to deal with me in this
world, and that to come, as I heartily believe it.

Q. What arguments persuaded you to this belief?

A. The Prophecies mentioned in the old Testament concerning the Messiah, and
fulfilled in the person of our Savior the Lord Jesus Christ.

The Miracles wrought by him and his Disciples.

The holiness of his life, his purity, and humility.

The excellency of his doctrine.

The miseries in which the Jewish nation has been involved these 1600. years
for crucifying the Lord Jesus, and rejecting his Law.

Q. Do you renounce the errors of Judaism, and with all your heart embrace the
doctrine of Christianity?

A. Yes verily.

Q. Have you a firm resolution to conform your life and manners to the purity
and holiness of that rule which the Catholic Church observes?

A. I will do so by the help of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Q. Will you be received into the Covenant of the Gospel, and be consecrated to
the observance of it, by the holy water of Baptism?

A. That is my most earnest desire.

Q. What benefit do you expect from this Baptism?

A. To be purged from my sins in the blood of Christ, by which he has appeased
the anger of God.

To be justified by his righteousness.

To be reconciled unto God by his mediation and intercession.

To be cleansed from the guilt both of original and actual transgression, and
obtain the grace of Regeneration, to destroy the power of sin, and enable me to
live in righteousness and true holiness, that I may be a member of the mystical
body of Christ, which is his Church, and that I may be a child of God and an
heir of the kingdom of heaven.

Q. Upon what terms do you expect these graces and benefits?

A. Upon the terms of true repentance for all my sins past, of a living faith
and universal obedience to the commandments of Christ.

Q. Are you heartily sorry for your sins and trespasses, and for the errors
and obstinacy of your nation, whereby they approve the malice of their
forefathers, and are guilty of the death of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ?

A. Yes verily, I am truly sensible of their sins, and my own, and am heartily
sorry for them.

Q. Do thou renounce the Devil and all his works, the vain pomp and glory of
the world, with all covetous desires of the same, and the carnal desires of the
flesh, so that thou will not follow, nor be ed by them?

A. I renounce them all.

Q. Do thou believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth?
And in Jesus Christ his only begotten Son our Lord? And that he was conceived
by the holy Ghost; born of the Virgin Mary; that he suffered under Pontius
Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried; that he went down into Hell, and also
did rise again the third day; that he ascended into Heaven, and sits at the
right hand of God the Father Almighty; and from thence shall come again at the
end of the world to judge the quick and the dead? And do thou believe the
holy Ghost; the holy Catholic Church; the Communion of Saints; the remission
of sins; the Resurrection of the flesh; and everlasting life after death?

A. All this I steadfastly believe.

Q. Will thou be baptized in this Faith?

A. That is my desire.

Q. Will thou then obediently keep Gods holy will and Commandments, and walk in
the same all the days of thy life?

A. I will endeavor so to do, God being my helper.

After these answers I was received to the holy Sacrament of Baptism, and the
promise made to our forefathers was (by divine grace) fulfilled in me, (...),
Then will I Sprinkle clean water upon you, Ezekiel. 36. v. 26.
and ye shall be clean from all your filthiness, and from all your idols will I
cleanse you, a new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put
within you.

FINIS.
Paul Colend Scialitti.

This solemnity was performed June 14. 1663. on the Feast of the Blessed
Trinity, at St. Margarets Westminster, by the Reverend Dr. Warmestre Dean of
Worcester.

And the Right Reverend Father in God, George Lord Bishop of Chester, and
Samuel Collins Dr. in Physic, were Godfathers; and the right honorable the
Countess of Huntingdon, was Godmother.

Imprimatur.

Ex Aed. Sabaud. Junii 18. 1663. Geor. Stradling S. T. P. Rever. in Christo
Pat. D. Gilbert. Episc. Land. a sac. Domestic.


